[1a]
^
GREAT BOOKS OF THE WESTERN WORLD
£52?-
28. GILBERT
GALILEO
HARVEY
29. CERVANTES
30. FRANCIS BACON
31. DESCARTES
SPINOZA
32. MILTON
33. PASCAL
34. NEWTON
HUYGENS
35. LOCKE
BERKELEY
HUME
36. SWIFT
STERNE
37. FIELDING
38. MONTESQUIEU
ROUSSEAU
39. ADAM SMITH
40. GIBBON I
fcAaAa^aAa^S^^.^^TA^^^^Ti5^^g^^

[1b]
41. GIBBON II
jSjpv^^Spp^pS
42. KANT
tt*>i*3iyjz£7£??
iv^^^£jj
55*S£^?5H
43. AMERICAN STATE
PAPERS
THE FEDERALIST
J. S. MILL
?^^^55^55^3
44. BOSWELL
45. LAVOISIER
tt&Z£ZZ>
FOURIER
FARADAY
46. HEGEL
47. GOETHE
48. MELVILLE
49. DARWIN
50. MARX
ENGELS
51. TOLSTOY
52. DOSTOEVSKY
53. WILLIAM JAMES
54. FREUD

[2a]
GREAT BOOKS
OF THE WESTERN WORLD
ROBERT MAYNARD HUTCHINS, EDITOR IN CHIEF
4 MM* MMMMMMMMMMIMM
MM MMMMMMM M M MM M M M»M MMMM M MMMMM M MM^MM M MM M M M>
S4FREUD
«)M<M»<M<>tMM>MtM»IM>MHM»<MMMMM<MMItlMMM»MMIIMMI>MMMMMMtMtMMMMMIMMMM4MH
Mortimer J. Adler, Associate Editor
Membersofthe Advisory Board: Stringfellow Barr, Scott Buchanan,John Erskine,
Clarence H. Faust, Alexander Meiklejohn,JosephJ. Schwab, Mark Van Doren.
Editorial Consultants: A. F. B. Clark, F. L. Lucas, Walter Murdoch.
Wallace Brockway, ExecutiveEditor

[2b]


[3a]
MMMMMMMMMMMMMM+MMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMM»MMti
William Benton, Publisher
ENCYCLOPEDIA BRITANNICA, INC.
CHICAGO • LONDON • TORONTO • GENEVA
»»»MMM«MMMMMM*MMM«MMMM««MMM*MMMM*MMMMMMMMM«M»»M«MMMMM«MMMMMM»«»IMMMMM«

[3b]


[4a]
a
'
^
The following works in this edition are reprinted
by arrangement with the publishers listed below:
The American Journal of Psychology, for The Origin And Development
Of Psycho-Analysis.
George Allen & Unwin Ltd., London, for The Interpretation Of Dreams.
Liveright Publishing Corporation, New York, and George Allen & Unwin
Ltd., London, for A General Introduction To Psycho-Analysis.
Copyright,
1920, 1935, by Edward L. Bernays.
The Hogarth Press, London, for Beyond The Pleasure Principle; Group
Psychology And The Analysis Of The Ego; The Ego And The Id; Inhibitions,
Symptoms And Anxiety;
Civilization And Its Discontents, Copyright, 1930,
by Jonathan Cape and Harrison Smith; and the following chapters from
Collected Papers, Vol. II: The Sexual Enlightenment Of Children, The Future
Prospects Of Psycho-Analytic Therapy, Observations On "Wild" PsychoAnalysis: Vol. IV: On Narcissism, Instincts And Their Vicissitudes, Repres
sion, The Unconscious, And Thoughts For The Times On War And Death.
W. W. Norton & Company, Inc., New York, and The Hogarth Press, London,
for New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis. Copyright, 1939, by
Sigmund Freud.
Selected Papers on Hysteria
Copyright, 1919, by Dr. William A. White.
Renewed, 1947, by Dr. A. A. Brill.
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO
The Great Books
ispublished with the editorial advice of thefaculties
of The University of Chicago
1952
by Encyclopedia Britannica, Inc.
Copyright under International Copyright Union
All Rights Reserved under Pan American and Universal Copyright
Conventions by Encyclopedia Britannica, Inc.

[5a]
f-" 17*
J
H25
13
BIOGRAPHICAL NOTE
Sigmund Freud, 1856-1939
Freud was born May 6, 1856, at Freiburg in
what is now Czechoslovakia. When he was four,
the family moved to Vienna, and his father
continued his trade as a small merchant. While
following the usual course of studies at the
Gymnasium, where for seven years he was first
in his class, Freud was attracted by Darwin's
theories to the study of science. Although he
had no "particular predilection for the career
of a physician," Freud later noted that "it was
upon
hearing
Goethe's
beautiful essay
On
Nature . . . just before I left school that I
decided to become a medical student." In 1873
he entered the University of Vienna, where, he
records in his autobiographical sketch, he ex
perienced the effects of anti-Semitic prejudice.
While pursuing his medical studies, Freud
began experimental investigation by studying
the nervous system of the fish in the physio
logicallaboratory of Ernst Brucke. After taking
his medical degree in 1881, financial reasons
compelled him to become an interne at the
General Hospital. With the little spare time he
had as an interne, he pursued research at the
Institute of Cerebral Anatomy on the subject
of nervous diseases. The publication of several
monographs on cerebral paralysis in children
won him the post of lecturer in neuropathology
at the university, and in 1885 he was awarded
a traveling fellowship to advance his studies.
Having become interested the previous year
in Breuer's treatment of hysteria by hypnosis,
during which the patient was induced to rec
ollect his past, Freud now chose to pursue
such investigation under Charcot, the neurol
ogist, at the Sorbonne. Freud studied with him
several months and was strengthened in his de
termination to take the then revolutionary step
of investigating hysteria from a psychological
point of view. Before returning home in 1886,
he spent a few months at a children's clinic in
Berlin and made extensive observations of the
nervous disorders of children.
Upon his return to Vienna, Freud married
and to provide for a rapidly increasing family,
established himself as a specialist in nervous
; \diseases. In the first years of his practice his
principal technique "aside from haphazard
psycho-therapeutic
methods"
was hypnotic
I

[5b]
suggestion. He resumed his
friendship with
Breuer and in collaboration with him published
in 1895 the Studies in Hysteria. The partner
ship was dissolved after the book was com
pleted, and soon afterwards Freud took the
decisive step of replacing hypnotism by the
method of
"free association." Largely as a
result of his
extensive clinical practice, he
turned to the analysis of dreams, and in 190a
provided the first statement of his doctrine in
the Interpretation of Dreams.
Except
for
his
brief
collaboration
with
Breuer, Freud for more than a decade "stood
completely isolated" from the medical world,
and his theories, when not completely ignored,
were the object of ridicule. It was not until
1902 that several young doctors began to gather
around him with the intention of learning and
practising psycho-analysis, and from this group
grew
the Viennese Psycho-Analytic Society.
Although his
Psychopathology
of Everyday
Life (1904)
received more favorable public
notice, the opposition to his theories increased
as soon as he began publishing his views on the
sexual life of children. His work, however, soon
began to receive international attention from
the medical profession. The Burgholzli Clinic
in Zurich, in 1906, was the first institution
outside of Austria to adopt the
method of
psycho-analysis. By 1908 Freud had colleagues
throughout
Europe,
including
Adler,
Brill,-,
Ferenczi,
Ernest
Jones,
Jung,
Sadger,
and
Stekel, and in that year the first International
Congress of Psycho-Analysis was held at Salz
burg. In the following year, at the invitation
of Clark University, Freud visited the United
States and gave five lectures on his discoveries,
which were later published as the Origin and
Development of Psycho-Analysis.
With the
establishment
of
the
International PsychoAnalytic Association in 1910 Freud devoted his
efforts with increasing success to the develop
ment of the psycho-analytic movement. Dis
agreement later led to a severance of relations
between Freud and several of his closest as
sociates, including Adler, Stekel, Rank, and
Jung, but Freud was the acknowledged founder
of psycho-analysis and the leader of the move
ment.

[6a]
VI
Biographical Note
After 1912 Freud gave most of his time to
directing the Psycho-Analytic Society, editing
its various journals, and writing many mono
graphs. Although his clinical practice was not
as extensive as in previous years, he still re
mained active as an analyst, and his records of
the case-histories of his patients cover almost
fifty years. At the University of Vienna during
the two winter sessions between 1915 and 1917,
he again explained his theories before a general
public, as he had in the United States, in lec
tures afterwards published as the General In
troduction to Psycho-Analysis.
Until the end of the first World War Freud
was mainly occupied with special problems
concerning the unconscious, and it was not
until 1920 that he began to deal with the more
general problems raised by his studies, par
ticularly with the factors making for what he
called repression. In 1920 he published Beyond
the Pleasure Principle, and three years later
the Ego and the Id. As early as 1913 Freud had
attempted in Totem and Taboo "to make use of
the newly discovered findings of analysis in
order to investigate the origin of religions and
/

[6b]
morality." He now "returned to the cultural
problems which had fascinated me long before,"
and
published
The
Future
of
an Illusion
(1927), Civilization andits Discontents (1929),
and Moses and Monotheism (1939), which was
his last book.
With the award of the Goethe Prize in 1930,
when he was also given the freedom of the city
of Vienna, Freud reached what he described as
"the climax of my life as a citizen." But soon
afterwards, Freud notes, "the boundaries of our
country narrowed, and the nation would know
of us no more." Upon the. Nazi invasion of
Austria in 1938, Freud's books were burned,
the Psychoanalytische Verlag, directed by his
son, was destroyed, and his
passport con
fiscated. For years Freud had lived in virtual
seclusion, largely because of the development
of a cancer of the mouth which caused him
great pain. He was finally allowed to leave
Austria in 1938 after the payment of a large
ransom.
With his wife, a nephew,
and
his
daughter, Anna, he went to England, where
another of his sons lived. He died on September
23, 1939, in Hampstead, London.

[7a]
General Contents
Biographical Note, p. v
The Origin and Development of Psycho-Analysis (i9io),p. i
Translated by Harry W. Chase
—<-—
Selected Papers on Hysteria (Chapters 1-10) (1893-1908), p. 25
Translated by A. A. Brill, Ph.B., M.D.
The Sexual Enlightenment of Children (1907), p. 119
Translated by E. B. M. Herford
The Future Prospects of Psycho-Analytic Therapy (1910), p. 123
Translated by Joan Riviere
Observations on "Wild" Psycho-Analysis (1910), p. 128
Translated by Joan Riviere
The Interpretation of Dreams (1900), p. 135
Translated by A. A. Brill, Ph.B., M.D.
On Narcissism (1914), p. 399
Translated by Cecil M. Baines
Instincts and Their Vicissitudes (1915), p. 412
Translated by Cecil M. Baines
Repression (1915), p. 422
Translated by Cecil M. Baines
The l^£Qj£§£ious (1915)? P- 428
Translated by Cecil M. Baines
A General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis (1915-17), p. 449
Translated by Joan Riviere
Beyond the Pleasure Principle (1920), p. 639
Translated by C. J. M. Hubback
Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego (1921), p. 664
Translated by James Strachey
The Ego and the Id (1923), p. 697
Translated by Joan Riviere
Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety (1926), p. 718
Translated by Alix Strachey
Thoughts for the Times on War and Death (1915), p. 755
Translated by E. Colburn Mayne
Civilization and Its Discontents (1929), p. 767
Translated by Joan Riviere
New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis (1932), p. 807
Translated by W. J. H. Sprott

[7b]


[8a]
The Origin and Development
of Psycho-Analysis
FIRST LECTURE1
Ladies and Gentlemen : It is a new and some
what embarrassing experience for me to appear
as lecturer before students of the New World. I
assume that I owe this honour to the association
of my name with the theme of psycho-analysis,
and consequently it is of psycho-analysis that I
shall aim to speak. I shall attempt to give you in
very brief form an historical survey of the ori
gin and further development of this new meth
od of research and cure.
Granted that it is a merit to have created psy
cho-analysis, it is not my merit. I was a student,
busy with the passing of my last examinations,
when another physician of Vienna, Dr. Joseph
Breuer, made the first application of this meth
od to the case of an hysterical girl (1880-82).
We must now examine the history of this case
and its treatment, which can be found in detail
in Studien uber Hysterie later published by Dr.
Breuer and myself.
But first one word. I have noticed, with con
siderable satisfaction, that the majority of my
hearers do not belong to the medical profession.
Now do not fear that a medical education is nec
essary to follow what I shall have to say. We
shall now accompany the doctors a little way,
but soon we shall take leave of them and fol
low Dr. Breuer on a way which is quite his own.
Dr. Breuer's patient was a girl of twenty-one,
of a high degree of intelligence. She had devel
oped in the course of her two years' illness a se
ries of physical and mental disturbances which
well deserved to be taken seriously. She had a
severe paralysis of both right extremities, with
anaesthesia, and at times the same affection of
the members of the left side of the body; dis
turbance of eye-movements, and much impair
ment of vision; difficulty in maintaining the po
sition of the head, an intense Tussis nervosa,
nausea when she attempted to, take nourish
ment, and at one time for several weeks a loss of
the power to drink, in spite of tormenting thirst.
1 These lectures were delivered at Clark University
in 1909.

[8b]
Her power of speech was also diminished, and
this progressed so far that she could neither
speak nor understand her mother tongue; and,
finally, she was subject to states of "absence,"
of confusion, delirium, alteration of her whole
personality. These states will later claim our at
tention.
When one hears of such a case, one does not
need to be a physician to incline to the opinion
that we are concerned here with a serious injury,
probably of the brain, for which there is Httle
hope of cure and which will probably lead to the
early death of the patient. The doctors will tell
us, however, that in one type of cases with just
as unfavourable symptoms, another, far more
favourable, opinion is justified. When one finds
such a series of symptoms in the case of a young
girl, whose vital organs (heart, kidneys) are
shown by objective tests to be normal, but who
has suffered from
strong emotional disturb
ances, and when the symptoms differ in certain
finer characteristics from what one might logi
cally expect, in a case like this the doctors are
not too much disturbed. They consider that
there is present no organic lesion of the brain,
but that enigmatical state known since the time
of the Greek physicians as hysteria, which can
simulate a whole series of symptoms of various
diseases. They consider in such a case that the
life of the patient is not in danger and that a res
toration to health will probably come about of
itself. The differentiation of such an hysteria
from a severe organic lesion is not always very
easy. But we do not need to know how a differ
ential diagnosis of this kind is made; you may
be sure that the case of Breuer's patient was
such that no skillful physician could fail to diag
nose an hysteria. We may also add a word here
from the history of the case. The illness first ap
peared while the patient was caring for her fa
ther, whom she tenderly loved, during the severe
illness which led to his death, a task which she
was compelled to abandon because she herself
fell ill.
So far it has seemed best to go with the doc
tors, but we shall soon part company with them.

[9a]
You must not think that the outlook of a patient
with regard to medical aid is essentially bettered
when the diagnosis points to hysteria rather than
to organic disease of the brain. Against the seri
ous brain diseases medical skill is in most cases
powerless, but also in the case of hysterical af
fections the doctor can do nothing. He must
leave it to benign nature, when and how his
hopeful prognosis will be realized.1 Accordingly,
with the recognition of the disease as hysteria,
little is changed in the situation of the patient,
but there is a great change in the attitude of the
doctor. We can observe that he acts quite dif
ferently toward hystericals than toward patients
suffering from organic diseases. He will not
bring the same interest to the former as to the
latter, since their suffering is much less serious
and yet seems to set up the claim to be valued
just as seriously.
But there is another motive in this action.
The physician, who through his studies has
learned so much that is hidden from the laity,
can realize in his thought the causes and altera
tions of the brain disorders in patients suffering
from apoplexy or dementia, a representation
which must be right up to a certain point, for
by it he is enabled to understand the nature of
each symptom. But before the details of hyster
ical symptoms, all his knowledge, his anatomi
cal-physiological and pathological education,
desert him. He cannot understand hysteria. He
is in the same position before it as the layman.
And that is not agreeable to any one, who is in
the habit of setting such a high valuation upon
his knowledge. Hystericals, accordingly, tend to
lose his sympathy; he considers them persons
who overstep the laws of his science, as the or
thodox regard heretics; he ascribes to them all
possible evils, blames them for exaggeration and
intentional deceit, "simulation," and he punish
es them by withdrawing his interest.
Now Dr. Breuer did not deserve this reproach
in this case; he gave his patient sympathy and
interest, although at first he did not understand
how to help her. Probably this was easier for
him on account of those superior qualities of the
patient's mind and character to which he bears
witness in his account of the case.
His sympathetic observation soon found the
means which made the first help possible. It had
been noticed that the patient, in her states of
"absence," of psychic alteration, usually mum-
*I know that this view no longer holds today, but in
the lecture I take myself and my hearers back to the
time before 1886. If things have become different since
that time it has been largely due to the work the history
of which I am sketching.

[9b]
Sigmund Freud
bled over several words to herself. These seemed
to
spring from associations with which her
thoughts were busy. The doctor, who was able
to get these words, put her in a sort of hypnosis
and repeated them to her over and over, in order
to bring up any associations that they might
have. The patient yielded to his suggestion and
reproduced for him those
psychic creations
which controlled her thoughts during her "ab
sences," and which betrayed themselves in these
single spoken words. These were fancies, deep
ly sad, often poetically beautiful, day dreams,
we might call them, which commonly took as
their starting point the situation of a girl beside
the sick-bed of her father. Whenever she had re
lated a number of such fancies, she was, as it
were, freed and restored to her normal mental
life. This state of health would last for several
hours, and then give place on the next day to a
new "absence," which was removed in the same
way by relating the newly created fancies. It
was impossible not to get the impression that
the psychic alteration which was expressed in
the "absence" was a consequence of the excita
tions originating from these intensely emotion
al fancy-images. The patient herself, who at this
time of her illness strangely enough understood
and spoke only English, gave this new kind of
treatment the name "talking cure," or jokingly
designated it as "chimney sweeping."
The doctor soon hit upon the fact
that
through such cleansing of the soul more could
be accomplished than a temporary removal of
the constantly recurring mental clouds. Symp
toms of the disease would disappear when in
hypnosis the patient could be made to remem
ber the situation and the associative connexions
under which they first appeared, provided free
vent was given to the emotions which they
aroused. "There was in the summer a time of in
tense heat, and the patient had suffered very
much from thirst; for, without any apparent
reason, she had suddenly become unable to
drink. She would take a glass of water in her
hand, but as soon as it touched her lips she
would push it away as though suffering from hy
drophobia. Obviously for these few seconds she
was in her absent state. She ate only fruit, mel
ons and the like, in order to relieve this torment
ing thirst. When this had been going on about
six weeks, she was talking one day in hypnosis
about her English governess, whom she disliked,
and finally told, with every sign of disgust, how
she had come into the room of the governess,
and how that lady's little dog, that she abhorred,
had drunk out of a glass. Out of respect for the

[10a]
Origin and Development of Psycho-Analysis
conventions, the patient had remained silent.
Now, after she had given energetic expression to
her restrained anger, she asked for a drink,
drank a large quantity of water without trouble,
and woke from hypnosis with the glass at her
lips. The symptom thereupon vanished perma
nently." *
Permit me to dwell for a moment on this ex
perience. No one had ever cured an hysterical
symptom by such means before, or had come so
near understanding its cause. This would be a
pregnant discovery if the expectation could be
confirmed that still other, perhaps the majority
of symptoms, originated in this way and could
be removed by the same method. Breuer spared
no pains to convince himself of this and investi
gated the pathogenesis of the other more serious
symptoms in a more orderly way. Such was in
deed the case; almost all the symptoms origi
nated in exactly this way, as remnants, as pre
cipitates, if you like, of affectively toned expe
riences, which for that reason we later called
psychic traumata. The nature of the symptoms
became clear through their relation to the scene
which caused them. They were, to use the tech
nical term, determined (determiniert) by the
scene whose memory traces they embodied, and
so could no longer be described as arbitrary or
enigmatical functions of the neurosis.
Only one variation from what might be ex
pected must be mentioned. It was not always a
single experience which occasioned the symp
tom, but usually several, perhaps many similar,
repeated traumata cooperated in this effect. It
was necessary to repeat the whole series of path
ogenic memories in chronological sequence, and,
of course, in reverse order, the last first and the
first last. It was quite impossible to reach the
first and often most essential trauma directly,
without first clearing away those coming later.
You will, of course, want to hear me speak of
other examples of the causation of hysterical
symptoms beside this of inability to drink on
account of the disgust caused by the dog drink
ing from the glass. I must, however, if I hold to
my program, limit myself to very few examples.
Breuer relates, for instance, that his patient's
visual disturbances could be traced back to ex
ternal causes, in the following way: "The pa
tient, with tears in her eyes, was sitting by the
sick-bed when her father suddenly asked her
what time it was. She could not see distinctly,
strained her eyes to see, brought the watch near
her eyes so that the dial seemed very large {macropia and strabismus conv.), or else she tried
iStudien iiber Hysterie, 2d ed., p. 26.

[10b]
hard to suppress her tears, so that the sick man
might not see them."2
All the pathogenic impressions sprang from
the time when she shared in the care of her sick
father. "Once she was watching at night in the
greatest anxiety for the patient, who was in a
high fever, and in suspense, for a surgeon was
expected from Vienna, to operate on the pa
tient. Her mother had gone out for a little while,
and Anna sat by the sick-bed, her right arm
hanging over the back of her chair. She fell into
a revery and saw a black snake emerge, as it
were, from the wall and approach the sick man
as though to bite him. (It is very probable that
several snakes had actually been seen in the
meadow behind the house, that she had already
been frightened by them, and that these former
experiences furnished the material for the hallu
cination.) She tried to drive off the creature,
but was as though paralyzed. Her right arm,
which was hanging over the back of the chair,
had "gone to sleep," become anaesthetic and
paretic, and as she was looking at it, the fingers
changed into little snakes with deaths-heads.
(The nails.) Probably she attempted to drive
away the snake with her paralyzed right hand,
and so the anaesthesia and paralysis of this
member formed associations with the snake hal
lucination. When this had vanished, she tried in
her anguish to speak, but could not. She could
not express herself in any language, until finally
she thought of the words of an English nursery
song, and thereafter she could think and speak
only in this language."3 When the memory of
this scene was revived in hypnosis, the paralysis
of the right arm, which had existed since the be
ginning of the illness, was cured and the treat
ment ended.
When, a number of years later, I began to use
Breuer's researches and treatment on my own
patients, my experiences completely coincided
with his. In the case of a woman of about forty,
there was a tic, a peculiar smacking noise which
manifested itself whenever she was labouring
under any excitement, without any obvious
cause. It had its origin in two experiences which
had this common element, that she attempted
to make no noise, but that by a sort of counterwill this noise broke the stillness. On the first
occasion, she had finally after much trouble put
her sick child to sleep, and she tried to be very
quiet so as not to awaken it. On the second oc
casion, during a ride with both her children in a
thunderstorm, the horses took fright, and she
2 Ibid., p. 30.
* Ibid., p. 31 [see also p. 25 below.]

[11a]
carefully avoided any noise for fear of frighten
ing them still more.11 give this example instead
of many others which are cited in the Stiidien
uber Hysterie.
Ladies and gentlemen, if you will permit me
to generalize, as is indispensable in so brief a
presentation, we may express our results up to
this point in the formula: Our hysterical pa
tients suffer from reminiscences. Their symp
toms are the remnants and the memory symbols
of certain (traumatic) experiences.
A comparison with other memory symbols
from other sources will perhaps enable us better
to understand this symbolism. The memorials
and monuments with which we adorn our great
cities are also such memory symbols. If you
walk through London you will find before one of
the greatest railway stations of the city a richly
decorated Gothic pillar—Charing Cross. One of
the old Plantagenet kings, in the thirteenth cen
tury, caused the body of his beloved queen Elea
nor to be borne to Westminster, and had Gothic
crosses erected at each of the stations where the
coffin was set down. Charing Cross is the last of
these monuments, which preserve the memory
of this sad journey.2 In another part of the city,
you will see a high pillar of more modern con
struction, which is merely called "the Monu
ment." This is in memory of the great fire which
broke out in the neighborhood in the year 1666,
and destroyed a great part of the city. These
monuments are memory symbols like the hys
terical symptoms; so far the comparison seems
justified. But what would you say to a Londoner
who today stood sadly before the monument to
the funeral of Queen Eleanor, instead of going
about his business with the haste engendered by
modern industrial conditions, or rejoicing with
the young queen of his own heart? Or to anoth
er, who before "the Monument" bemoaned the
burning of his loved native city, which long
since has arisen again so much more splendid
than before?
Now hystericals and all neurotics behave like
these two unpractical Londoners, not only in
that they remember the painful experiences of
the distant past, but because they are still
strongly affected by them. They cannot escape
from the past and neglect present reality in its
favour. This fixation of the mental life on the
1 Ibid., pp. 43-46. [See also p. 25. below.] A selection
from this book, augmented by several later treatises on
hysteria, lies before me, in an English translation by
Dr. A. A. Brill, of New York. It bears the title, Selected
Papers on Hysteria and Other Psychoneuroses, 1909.
2Or rather the later copy of such a monument. The
name "Charing" is itself, as Dr. E. Jones tells me,
derived from the words chbre reine.

[11b]
Sigmund Freud
pathogenic traumata is an essential, and prac
tically a most significant characteristic of the
neurosis. I will willingly concede the objection
which you are probably formulating, as you
think over the history of Breuer's patient. All
her traumata originated at the time when she
was caring for her sick father, and her symp
toms could only be regarded as memory sym
bols of his sickness and death. They correspond
to mourning, and a fixation on thoughts of the
dead so short a time after death is certainly not
pathological, but rather corresponds to normal
emotional behavior. I
concede this: there is
nothing abnormal in the fixation of feeling on
the trauma shown by Breuer's patient. But in
other cases, like that of the tic that I have men
tioned, the occasions for which lay ten and fif
teen years back, the characteristic of this ab
normal clinging to the past is very clear, and
Breuer's patient would probably have developed
it, if she had not come under the "cathartic
treatment" such a short time after the trauma
tic experiences and the beginning of the disease.
We have so far only explained the relation of
the hysterical symptoms to the life history of
the patient; now by considering two further
factors which Breuer observed, we may get a
hint as to the processes of the beginning of the
illness and those of the cure. With regard to the
first, it is especially to be noted that Breuer's
patient in almost all pathogenic situations had
to suppress a strong excitement, instead of giv
ing vent to it by appropriate words and deeds.
In the little experience with her governess' dog,
she suppressed, through regard for the conven
tions, all manifestations of her very intense dis
gust. While she was seated by her father's sick
bed, she was careful to betray nothing of her
anxiety and her painful depression to the pah
tient. When, later, she reproduced the same
scene before the physician, the emotion which
she had suppressed on the occurrence of the
scene burst out with especial strength, as though
it had been pent up all along. The symptom
which had been caused by that scene reached
its greatest intensity while the doctor was striv
ing to revive the memory of the scene, and van
ished after it had been fully laid bare. On the
other hand, experience shows that if the patient
is reproducing the traumatic scene to the physi
cian, the process has no curative effect if, by
some peculiar, chance,. there is no development
of emotion. It is apparently these emotional
processes upon which the illness of the patient
and the restoration to health are dependent. We
feel justified in regarding emotion as a quantity

[12a]
Origin and Development of Psycho-Analysis
which may become increased, derived and dis
placed. So we are forced to the conclusion that
the patient fell ill because the emotion devel
oped in the pathogenic situation was prevented
from escaping normally, and that the essence of
the sickness lies in the fact that these impris
oned (eingeklemmt) emotions undergo a series
of abnormal changes.In part they are preserved
as a lasting charge and as a source of constant
disturbance in psychical life; in part they under
go a change into unusual bodily innervations
and inhibitions, which present themselves as
the physical symptoms of the case. We have
coined the name hysterical conversion for the
latter process. Part of our mental energy is, un
der normal conditions, conducted off by way of
physical innervation and gives what we call the
expression of emotions. Hysterical conversion
exaggerates this part of the course of a mental
process which is emotionally coloured; it corre
sponds to a far more intense emotional expres
sion, which finds outlet by new paths. If a
stream flows in two channels, an overflow of one
will take place as soon as the current in the
other meets with an obstacle.
You see that we are in a fair way to arrive at
a purely psychological theory of hysteria, in
which we assign the first rank to the affective
processes. A second observation of Breuer com
pels us to ascribe to the altered condition of
consciousness a great part in determining the
characteristics
of
the
disease.
His
patient
showed many sorts of mental states, conditions
of "absence," confusion and alteration of char
acter, besides her normal state. In her normal
state she was entirely ignorant of the pathogenic
scenes and of their connection with her symp
toms. She had forgotten those scenes, or at any
rate had dissociated them from their pathogenic
connection. When the patient was hypnotized, it
was possible, after considerable difficulty, to re
call those scenes to her memory, and by this
means of recall, the symptoms were removed. It
would have been extremely perplexing to know
how to interpret this fact, if hypnotic practice
and experiments had not pointed out the way.
Through the study of hypnotic phenomena, the
conception, strange though it was at first, has
become familiar, that in one and the same indi
vidual several mental groupings are possible,
which may remain relatively independent of
each other, know nothing of each other, and
which may cause a splitting of consciousness
along lines which they lay down. Cases of such
a sort, known as double personality (double
conscience)i occasionally appear spontaneously.

[12b]
If, in such a division of personality, conscious
ness remains constantly bound up with one of
the two states, this is called the conscious men
tal state, and the other the unconscious. In the
well-known phenomena of so-called post hyp
notic suggestion, in which a command given in
hypnosis is later executed in the normal state as
though by an imperative suggestion, we have an
excellent basis for understanding how the un
conscious state can influence the conscious, al
though the latter is ignorant of the existence of
the former. In the same way it is quite possible
to explain the facts in hysterical cases. Breuer
came to the
conclusion that the hysterical
symptoms originated in such peculiar mental
states, which he called hypnoidal states (hypnoide Zust'dnde). Experiences of an emotional
nature, which occur during
such hypnoidal
states, easily become pathogenic, since such
states do not present the conditions for a normal
draining offof the emotion of the exciting proc
esses. And as a result there arises a peculiar
product of this exciting process, that is, the
symptom, and this is projected like a foreign
body into the normal state. The latter has, then,
no conception of the significance of the hyp
noidal pathogenic situation. Where a symptom
arises, we also find an amnesia, a memory gap,
and the filling of this gap includes the removal
of the conditions under which the symptom
originated.
I am afraid that this portion of my treatment
will not seem very clear, but you must remem
ber that we are dealing here with new and diffi
cult views, which perhaps could not be made
much clearer. This all goes to show that our
knowledge in this field is not yet very far ad
vanced. Breuer's idea of the hypnoidal states
has, moreover, been shown to be superfluous
and a hindrance to further investigation, and
has been dropped from present conceptions of
psycho-analysis. Later I shall at least suggest
what other influences and processes have been
disclosed besides that of the hypnoidal states, to
which Breuer limited the causal moment.
You have probably also felt, and rightly, that
Breuer's investigations gave you only a very
incomplete theory and insufficient explanation
of the phenomena which we have observed. But
complete theories do not fall from Heaven, and
you would have had still greater reason to be
distrustful, had any one offered you at the be
ginning of his observations a well-rounded the
ory, without any gaps; such a theory could only
be the child of his speculations and not the fruit
of an unprejudiced investigation of the facts.

[13a]
SECOND LECTURE
Ladies and Gentlemen: At about the same
time that Breuer was using the "talking-cure"
with his patient, M. Charcot began in Paris,
with the hystericals of the Salpetriere, those re
searches which were to lead to a new under
standing of the disease.These results were,how
ever, not yet known in Vienna.But when about
ten years later Breuer and I published our pre
liminary communication on the psychic mech
anism of hysterical phenomena, which grew out
of the cathartic treatment of Breuer's first pa
tient, we were both of us under the spell of
Charcot's investigations. We made the patho
genic experiences of our patients, which acted
as psychic traumata, equivalent to thosephysi
cal traumata whose influence on hysterical pa
ralyses Charcot had determined; and Breuer's
hypothesis of hypnoidal states is itself only an
echo of the fact that Charcot had artificially re
produced those traumatic paralyses inhypnosis.
The great French observer, whose student I
was during the years 1885-86, had no natural
bent for, creating psychological.theories.. His
student, P. Janet, was the first to attempt to
penetrate more deeply into the psychicproces
ses of hysteria, and we followed his example,
when we made the mental splitting and the dis
sociation of personality the central points of our
theory. Janet propounds a theory of hysteria
which draws upon the principal theories of he
redity and degeneration which are current in
France. According to his view, hysteria is a
form of degenerative alteration of the nervous
system, manifestingitself in a congenital weak
ness of the function of psychic synthesis. The
hysterical patient is from the start incapableof
correlating and unifying the manifold of his
mental processes, and so there arises the ten
dency to mental dissociation. If you will permit
me to use a banal but clear illustration, Janet's
hysterical reminds one of a weak woman who
has been shopping, and is now on her way home,
laderr with: packages and bundles of every de
scription. She cannot manage the wholelot with
her two arms and her ten fingers, and soon she
drops one. When she stoops to pick this up, an
other breaks loose, and so it goes on.
Now it does not agree very well with this as
sumed mental weakness of hystericals that
there can be observed in hysterical cases, be
sides the phenomena of lessened functioning,
examples of a partial increase of functional ca
pacity, as a sort of compensation. At the time
when Breuer's patient had forgotten her moth

[13b]
SiGMUND Freud
er-tongue and all other languages save English,
her control of English attained such a level that
if a German book was put before her she could
give.a fluent, perfecttranslation of its contents
at sight. When later I undertook to continue on
my own account the investigations begun by
Breuer, I soon came to another view of the ori
gin of hysterical dissociation (or splitting of
consciousness). It was inevitable that my views
should diverge widely and radically, for my
point of departure was not, like that of Janet,
laboratory researches, but attempts at therapy.
Above everything else, it was practical needs
that urged me on. The cathartic treatment, as
Breuer had made use of it, presupposed that the
patient should be put in deep hypnosis, for only
in hypnosis was available the knowledge of his
pathogenic associations which were unknown
to him in his normal state. Now hypnosis, as a
fanciful, and so to speak, mystical, aid, I soon
came to dislike; and when I discovered that, in
spite of all my efforts, I could not hypnotize by
any means all of my patients, I resolved to give
up hypnotism and to make the cathartic method
independent of it.
Since I could not alter the psychic state of
most of my patients at my wish, I directed my
efforts to working with them in their normal
state. This seems at first sight to be a particu
larly senseless and aimless undertaking. The
problem was this: to find out something from
the patient that the doctor did not know and
the patient himself did not know. How could
one hope to make such a method succeed? The
memory of a very noteworthy and instructive
proceeding came to my aid, which I had seen
in Bernheim's clinic at Nancy. Bernheim showed
us that persons put in a condition of hypnotic
somnambulism, and subjected to all sorts of ex
periences, had only apparently lost the memory
of those somnambulic experiences, and that
their memory of them could be awakened even
in the normal state. If he asked them about
their experiences during somnambulism, they
said at first that they did not remember, but if
he persisted, urged, assured them that they did
know, then every time the forgotten memory
came back.
Accordingly, I
did this with my patients.
When I had reached in my procedure with them
a point at which they declared that they knew
nothing more, I would assure them that they
did know, that they must just tell it out, and I
would venture the assertion that the memory
which would emerge at the moment that I laid
my hand on the patient's forehead would be the

[14a]
Origin and Development of Psycho-Analysis
right one. In this way I succeeded, without hyp
nosis, in learning from the patient all that was
necessary for a construction of the connection
between the forgotten pathogenic scenes and the
symptoms which they had left behind. This was
a troublesome and in its length an exhausting
proceeding, and did not lend itself to a finished
technique. But I did not give it up without
drawing definite
conclusions from the data
which I had gained. I had substantiated the fact
that the forgotten memories were not lost. They
were in the possession of the patient, ready to
emerge and form associations with his other
mental content, but hindered from becoming
conscious, and forced to remain in the uncon
scious by some sort of a force. The existence of
this force could be assumed with certainty, for
in attempting to drag up the unconscious mem
ories into the consciousness of the patient, in op
position to this force, one got the sensation of
his own personal effort striving to overcome it.
One could get an idea of this force, which main
tained the pathological situation, from the re
sistance of the patient.
It is on this idea of resistance that I based my
theory of the psychic processes of hystericals.
It had been found that in order to cure the pa
tient it was necessary that this force should be
overcome. Now with the mechanism of the cure
as a starting point, quite a definite theory could
be constructed. These same forces, which in the
present situation as resistances opposed the
emergence of the forgotten ideas into conscious
ness, must themselves have caused the forget
ting, and repressed from
consciousness the
pathogenic experiences. I called this hypotheti
cal process repression (Verdrdngung) and con
sidered that it was proved by the undeniable ex
istence of resistance.
But now the question arose: what Were those
forces, and what were the conditions of this re
pression, in which we were now able to recognize
the pathogenic mechanism of hysteria? A com
parative study of the pathogenic situations,
which the cathartic treatment has made possi
ble, allows us to answer this question. In all
those experiences, it had happened that a wish
had been aroused, which was in sharp opposition
to the other desires of the individual, and was
not capable of being reconciled with the ethical,
aesthetic and personal pretensions of the pa*
tient's personality. There had been a short con
flict, and the end of this inner struggle was the
repression of the idea which presented itself to
consciousness as the bearer of this irreconcil
able wish. This was, then, repressed from con

[14b]
sciousness and forgotten. The incompatibility
of the idea in question with the ego of the pa
tient was the motive of the repression, the ethi
cal and other pretensions of the individual were
the repressing forces. The presence of the in
compatible wish, or the duration of the conflict,
had given rise to a high degree of mental pain;
this pain was avoided by the repression. This
latter process is evidently in such a case a de
vice for the protection of the personality.
I will,not multiply examples but willgiveyou
the history of a single one of my cases,in which
the conditions and the utility of the repression
process stand out clearly enough. Of course, for
my purpose I must abridge the history of the
case and omit many valuable theoretical consid
erations. It is that of a young girl, who was
deeply attached to her father, who had died a
short time before, and in whose care she had
shared—a situation analogous to that of Breu
er's patient. When her older sister married, the
girl grew to feel a peculiar sympathy for her
new brother-in-law, which easily passed with
her for family tenderness. This sister soon fell
ill and died, while the patient and her mother
were away. The absent ones were hastily re
called, without being told fully of the painful
situation. As the girl stood by the bedside of her
dead sister, for one short moment there surged
up in her mind an idea, which might be framed
in these words: "Now he is free and can marry
me." We may be sure that this idea, which be
trayed to her consciousness her intense love for
her brother-in-law, of which she had not been
conscious, was the next moment consigned to
repression by her revolted feelings. The girl fell
ill with severe hysterical symptoms, and, when
I came to treat the case, it appeared that she
had entirely forgotten that scene at her sister's
bedside and the unnatural, egoistic desire which
had arisen in her. She remembered it during the
treatment, reproduced the pathogenic moment
with every sign of intense emotional excitement,
and was cured by this treatment.1
Perhaps I can make the process of repression,
and its necessary relation to the resistance of
the patient, more concrete by a rough illustra
tion, which I will derive from our present situa
tion.
Suppose that here in this hall and in this au
dience, whose exemplary stillness and attention
I cannot sufficiently commend, there is an indi
vidual who is creating a disturbance, and, by his
ill-bred laughing, talking, by scraping his feet,
distracts my attention from my task. I explain
1 See Selected Papers on Hysteria, p. 53 below.

[15a]
8
Sigmund Freud
that I cannot go on with my/lecture under these
conditions, and thereupon several strong men
among you get up and, after a short struggle*
eject the disturber of the peace from the hall.
He is nowrepressed, aiid I can continue my lec
ture. But in order that the disturbance may not
be repeated, in case the man who has just been
thrown out attempts to force his way back into
the room, the gentlemenwho have executedmy
suggestion take their chairs to the door and es
tablish themselves there as a resistance, to keep
up the repression. Now,if you transfer both lo
cationsto the psyche, callingthis consciousness,
and the outside the unconscious,you have a tol
erably good illustration of the process of re
pression.
We can see now the difference between our
theory and that of Janet. We do not derive the
psychic fission from a congenitallack of capac
ity on the part of the mental apparatus to syn
thesizeits experiences, but weexplainit dynami
cally by the conflict of opposingmental forces,
we recognize in it the result of an active striving
of each mental complex against the other.
New questions at once arise in great number
from our theory. The situation of psychic con
flict is a very frequent one; an attempt of the
ego to defend itself from painful memories can
be observed everywhere, and yet the result is
not a mental fission. We cannot avoid the as
sumption that still other conditions are neces
sary, if the conflict is to result in dissociation. I
willingly concede that with the assumption of
repression we stand, not at the end, but at the
very beginning of a psychological theory. But
we can advance only one step at a time, and the
completion of our knowledge must await fur
ther and more thorough work.
Now do not attempt to bring the case of
Breuer's patient under the point of view of re
pression. This history cannot be subjected to
such an attempt, for it was gained with the help
of hypnotic influence.Only when hypnosis,is ex
cluded can you see the resistances and repres
sions and get a correct idea of the pathogenic
process. Hypnosis conceals the resistances and
so makes a certain part of the mental field free
ly accessible. By this same process the resis
tances on the borders of this field are heaped up
into a rampart, which makes all beyond inacces
sible.
The most valuable things that we have learned
from Breuer's observations were his conclusions
as to the connection of the symptoms with
the pathogenic experiences or psychic traumata,
and we must, not neglect to evaluate this result

[15b]
properly from the standpoint of the repressiontheory. It is not at first evident how we can get
from the repression to the creation of the symp
toms. Instead of giving a complicated theoreti
cal derivation, I will return at this point to the
illustration which I used to typify repression.
Remember that, with the ejection of the row
dy and the establishment of the watchers before
the door, the affair is not necessarily ended. It
may very well happen that the ejected man, now
embittered and quite careless of consequences,
gives us more to do. He is no longer among us,
we are free from his presence, his scornful laugh,
his half-audible remarks, but in a certain sense
the repression has miscarried, for he makes a
terrible uproar outside, and by his outcries and
by hammering on the door with his fists inter
feres with my lecture more than before. Under
these circumstances it would be hailed with de
light if possibly our honoured president, Dr.
Stanley Hall, should take upon himself the role
of peacemaker and mediator. He would speak
with the rowdy on the outside, and then turn to
us with the recommendation that we let him in
again, provided he would guarantee to behave
himself better. On Dr. Hall's authority we de
cide to stop the repression, and now quiet and
peace reign again. This is, in fact, a fairly good
presentation of the task devolving upon the
physician in the psycho-analytic therapy of neu
roses. To say the same thing more directly: we
come to the conclusion, from working with hys
terical patients and other neurotics, that they
have not fully succeeded in repressing the idea
to which the incompatible wish is attached. They
have, indeed, driven it out of consciousnessand
out of memory, and apparently saved them
selves a great amount of psychic pain, but in the
unconscious the suppressed wish still exists, only
waiting for its chance to become active, and
finally succeeds in sending into consciousness,
instead of the repressed idea, a disguised and
unrecognizable
surrogate-creation
(Ersatzbildung), to which the same painful sensations as
sociate themselves that the patient thought he
was rid of through his repression. This surrogate
of the suppressed idea—the symptom—is se
cure against further attacks from the defenses
of the ego, and instead of a short conflict there
originates now a permanent suffering. We can
observe in the symptomj besides the.tokens of
its disguise, a remnant of: traceable similarity
with the originally repressed idea;, the way in
which the surrogate is built up can be discov
ered during, the psycho-analytic treatment of
the patient, and for his cure the symptom must

[16a]
Origin and Development of Psycho-Analysis
be traced back over the same route to the re
pressed idea. If this repressed material is once
more made part of the conscious mental func
tions—a process which supposes the overcom
ing of considerable resistance—the psychic con
flict which then arises, the same which the pa
tient wished to avoid, is made capable of a hap
pier termination, under the guidance of the phy
sician, than is offered by repression. There are
several possible suitable decisions which can
bring conflict and neurosis to a happy end; in
particular cases the attempt may be made to
combine several of these. Either the personal
ity of the patient may be convinced;that he has
been wrong in rejecting the pathogenic wish,
and he may be made to accept it either wholly or
in part; or this wish may itself be directed to a
higher goal which is free from objection, by
what is called sublimation (Sublimierung):, or
the rejection, may be recognized as rightly rnptivatedj.and the automatic and therefore insuffi
cient mechanism of repression be reinforced by
the higher, more characteristically human, men
tal faculties: one,succeeds in mastering his
wishes by conscious thought.
Forgive me if I have not been able to present
more clearly these main points of the. treatment
which is today known as psycho-analysis. The
difficulties do notlie merely in the newness of
the subject.
Regarding the nature of the unacceptable
wishes, which succeed in making their influence
felt out of\ the unconscious, in spite of repres
sion ; and regarding the question of what subjec
tive and constitutional factors must be present
for such a failure of repression and such a sur
rogate or symptoni creation to take place, we
will speak in later remarks.
THIRD LECTURE
Ladies and Gentlemen: It is not always easy
to tell the truth, especially when one must be
brief, and so today I must correct an incorrect
statementthat I made in my last lecture.
I told you how, when I gave up using hypnosis,
I pressed my patients to tell me what came into
their minds that had to do with the problem we
were working on; I told them that they would
remember what they had apparently forgotten,
and, that the thought which irrupted into con
sciousness (Einfall) would surely embody the
memory for which we were seeking. I claimed
that I substantiated the fact that the first idea
of my patients brought the right clew and could
be shown to be the forgotten continuation of the
memory. Now this is not always so; I represent

[16b]
ed it as beingso simple onlyfor purposes of ab
breviation. In fact, it would only happen the
first time that the right forgotten material would
emerge through simple pressure on my part. If
the experience was continued, ideas emergedin
every case which could not be the right ones, for
they were not to the purpose, and the patients
themselves rejected them as incorrect. Pressure
was of no further, service here, and one could
only regret again having given up hypnosis,. In
this state of perplexity I clung to a prejudice
whichyearslater wasproved by my friend C> G,
Jung of the University of Zurich and his pupils
to have a scientific justification. I must confess
that it is often of great advantageto have preju
dices. I put a high value on the strength of the
determination of mental processes, and I could
not believe that any idea which occurred to the
patient, which originated in a state of concen
trated attention, could be quite arbitrary-and
out of all relation to the forgotten ridea that we
were seeking. That it was not identical with;the
latter could be satisfactorily explainedby the
hypothetical psychological situation, In the pa
tients whom I treated there were two opposing
forces: on the one hand the conscious striving
to drag up into consciousness the forgotten ex
perience which was present in the unconscious;
and on the other hand the resistance which we
have seen, which set itself against the emer
gence of the suppressed idea or its associates inr
to consciousness; In case this resistance was
nonexistent or very slight, the forgotten mate
rial could become conscious without disguise
(Enstellung). It wasthen a natural supposition
that the disguise would be the more complete,
the greater the resistance to the emergence of
the idea. Thoughts which broke into the pa
tient's consciousness, instead of the ideassought
for, were accordingly made up just like symp
toms; they were new, artificial, ephemeral sur
rogates for the repressed ideas, and differed from
these just in proportion as they had been more
completely disguised under the influence of the
resistances* These surrogates..must, however,
show a certain similarity with the ideas which
are the object of our search, by virtue of their
nature as symptoms; and when the resistance is
not too intensive, it is possible from the nature
of these irruptions to discover the hidden object
of our search. This must be related to the re
pressed thought as a sort of allusion, as a state
ment of the same thing in indirect:terms.
We know cases in normal psychology in which
analogous situations to the one which we have
assumed give rise to similar experiences. Such

[17a]
10
a case is that of wit. By my study of psycho
analytic technique I was necessarily led to a
consideration of the problem of the nature of
wit. I will give one example of this sort, which,
too, is a story that originallyappeared in Eng
lish.
The anecdote runs:1 Two unscrupulous busi
ness men had succeeded by fortunate specula
tions in accumulating a large fortune, and then
directed their efforts to breaking into good so
ciety.Among othermeansthey thoughtit would
be of advantage to be painted by the most fa
mous and expensive artist of the city, a man
whose paintings were considered as events.The
costly paintingswere first shownat a great soi
ree and both hosts led the most influential con
noisseur and art critic to the wall of the salon on
which the portraits were hung, to elicit his ad
miring judgment. The critic looked for a long
time, lookedabout as though in search of some
thing, and then merely asked, pointing out the
vacant space between the two pictures, "And
where is the Saviour?"
I see that you are all laughingover this good
example of wit, which we will now attempt to
analyse. We understand that the critic means to
say: "You are a couple of malefactors, like
those between whom the Saviour was crucified."
But he does not say this, he expresses himself
instead in a way that at first seems not to the
purposeand not related to the matter in hand,
but which at the next moment we recognize as
an allusion to the insult at which he aims, and as
a perfect surrogate for it. We cannot expect to
find in the case of wit all those relations that our
theory supposes for the origin of the irruptive
ideas of our patients, but it is my desire to lay
stress on the similar motivation of wit and ir
ruptive idea.Why doesnot the critic say direct
ly what he has to say to the two rogues? Be
cause, in addition to his desire to say it straight
out, he is actuated by strong opposite motives.
It is a proceeding which is liable to be danger
ous to offend people who are one's hosts, and
who can call to their aid the strong arms of num
erous servants. One might easily suffer the same
fate that I used in the previous lecture to illus
trate repression. On this ground, the critic does
not express the particular insult directly, but in
a disguised form, as an allusion with omission.
The same constellation comes into play, accord
ing to our hypothesis, when our patient pro
duces the irruptive idea as a surrogate for the
forgotten idea which is the object of the quest.
1See also Wit and Its Relation to the Unconscious.

[17b]
Sigmund Freud
Ladies and gentlemen,it is very useful to des
ignate a group of ideas which belong together
and have a common emotive tone, according to
the custom of the Zurich school (Bleuler, Jung
and others), as a complex. So we can say that if
we set out from the last memories of the patient
to look for a repressed complex, that we have
every prospect of discoveringit, if only the pa
tient will communicate to us a sufficient number
of the ideas which come into his head. So we
let the patient speak along any line that he de
sires, and cling to the hypothesis that nothing
can occur to him except what has some indirect
bearing on the complex that we are seeking. If
this method of discovering the repressed com
plexes seems too circumstantial, I can at least
assure you that it is the only available one.
In practising this technique, one is further
bothered by the fact that the patient often
stops, is at a standstill, and considers that he has
nothing to say; nothing occurs to him. If this
were really the case and the patient were right,
our procedure would again be proven inapplica
ble. Closer observation shows that such an ab
sence of ideas never really occurs, and that it
only appears to when the patient holds back or
rejects the idea which he perceives, under the
influence of the resistance, which disguises it
self as critical judgment of the value of the idea.
The patient can be protected from this if he is
warned in advance of this circumstance, and
told to take no account of the critical attitude.
He must say anything that comes into his mind,
fully laying aside such critical choice, even
though he may think it unessential, irrelevant,
nonsensical, especially when the idea is orie
which is unpleasant to dwell on. By following
this prescription we secure the material which
sets us on the track of the repressed complex.
These irruptive ideas, which the patient him
self values little, if he is under the influence of
the resistance and not that of the physician, are
for the psychologist like the ore, which by sim
ple methods of interpretation he reduces from
its crude state to valuable metal. If one desires
to gain in a short time a preliminary knowledge
of the patient's repressed complexes, without
going into the question of their arrangement and
associations, this examination may be conduct
ed with the help of the association experi
ments, as Jung2 and his pupils have perfected
them. This procedure is to the psychologist what
qualitative analysis is to the chemist: it may be
dispensed with in the therapy of neurotic pa2 Jung, C. G., Diagnostische Assoziationsstudien, vol,
i, 1906.

[18a]
Origin and Development of Psycho-Analysis
tients, but is indispensable in the investigations
of the psychoses, which have been begun by the
Zurich school with such valuable results.
This method of work, with whatever comes
into the patient's head when he submits to psy
cho-analytic treatment, is not the only technical
means at our disposal for the widening of con
sciousness. Two other methods of procedure
serve the same purpose: the interpretation of
his dreams and the evaluation of acts which he
bungles or does without intending to (Fehl-und
Zufallshandlungen).
I might say, esteemed hearers, that for a long
time I hesitated whether, instead of this hurried
survey of the whole field of psycho-analysis, I
should not rather offer you a thorough consider
ation of the analysis of dreams; a purely subjec
tive and apparently secondary motive decided
me against this. It seemed rather an impropriety
that in this country, so devoted to practical
pursuits, I should pose as interpreter of dreams,
before you had a chance to discover what sig
nificance the old and despised art can claim.
Interpretation of dreams is in fact the via regia to the interpretation of the unconscious, the
surest ground of psycho-analysis and a field in
which every worker must win his convictions
and gain his education. If I were asked how one
could become a psycho-analyst, I should answer,
through the study of his own dreams. With
great tact all opponents of the psycho-analytic
theory have so far either evaded any criticism of
The Interpretation of Dreams or have attempt
ed to pass over it with the most superficial ob
jections. If, on the contrary, you will undertake
the solution of the problems of dream life, the
novelties which psycho-analysis present to your
thoughts will no longer be difficulties.
You must remember that our nightly dream
productions show the greatest outer similarity
and inner relationship to the creations of the in
sane, but on the other hand are compatible with
full health during waking life. It does not sound
at all absurd to say that whoever regards these
normal sense illusions, these delusions and al
terations of character as matter for amazement
instead of understanding, has not the least pros
pect of understanding the abnormal creations of
diseased mental states in any other than the lay
sense. You may with confidence place in this lay
group all the psychiatrists of today. Follow me
now on a brief excursion through the field of
dream problems.
In our waking state we usually treat dreams
with as little consideration as the patient treats
the irruptive ideas which the psycho-analyst de-

[18b]
II
mands from him. It is evident that we reject
them, for we forget them quickly and complete
ly. The slight valuation which we place on them
is based, with those dreams that are not con
fused and nonsensical, on the feeling that they
are foreign to our personality, and, with other
dreams, on their evident absurdity and sense
lessness. Our rejection derives support from the
unrestrained shamelessness and the immoral
longings which are obvious in many dreams. An
tiquity, as we know, did not share this light val
uation of dreams. The lower classes of our peo
ple today stick close to the value which they set
on dreams; they, however, expect from them, as
did the ancients, the revelation of the future. I
confess that I see no need to adopt mystical hy
potheses to fill out the gaps in our present
knowledge, and so I have never been able to find
anything that supported the hypothesis of the
prophetic nature of dreams. Many other things,
which are wonderful enough, can be said about
them.
And first, not all dreams are so foreign to the
character of the dreamer, are incomprehensible
and confused. If you will undertake to consider
the dreams of young children from the age of a
year and a half on, you will find them quite sim
ple and easy to interpret. The young child al
ways dreams of the fulfilment of wishes which
were aroused in him the day before and were
not satisfied. You need no art of interpretation
to discover this simple solution, you only need
to inquire into the experiences of the child on
the day before (the "dream day"). Now it
would certainly be a most satisfactory solution
of the dream-riddle, if the dreams of adults, too,
were the same as those of children, fulfilments
of wishes which had been aroused in them dur
ing the dream day. This is actually the fact; the
difficulties which stand in the way of this solu
tion can be removed step by step by a thorough
analysis of the dream.
There is, first of all, the most weighty objec
tion that the dreams of adults generally have an
incomprehensible content, which shows wishfulfilment least of anything. The answer is this:
these dreams have undergone a process of dis
guise, the psychic content which underlies them
was originally meant for quite different verbal
expression. You must differentiate between the
manifest dream-content, which we remember in
the morning only confusedly, and with difficulty
clothe in words which seem arbitrary, and the
latent dream-thoughts, whose presence in the
unconscious we must assume. This distortion of
the dream (Traumentstellung) is the sameproc-

[19a]
12
ess which has been revealed to you in the inves
tigations of the creations (symptoms) of hys
terical subjects; it points to the fact that the
same opposition of psychic forces has its share
in the creation of dreams as in the creation of
symptoms.
The manifest dream-content is the disguised
surrogate for the unconscious dream-thoughts,
and this disguising is the work of the defensive
forces of the ego, of the resistances. These pre
vent the repressed wishes from entering con
sciousness during the waking life, and even in
the relaxation of sleep they are still strong
enough to force them to hide themselves by a
sort of masquerading. The dreamer, then, knows
just as little the sense of his dream as the hys
terical knows the relation and significance of his
symptoms. That there are latent dream-thoughts
and that between them and the manifest dreamcontent there exists the relation just described
—of this you may convince yourselves by the
analysis of dreams, a procedure the technique of
which is exactly that of psycho-analysis. You
must abstract entirely from the apparent con
nection of the elements in the manifest dream
and seek for the irruptive ideas which arise
through free association, according to the psy
cho-analytic laws, from each separate dream
element. From this material the latent dreamthoughts may be discovered, exactly as one di
vines the concealed complexes of the patient
from the fancies connected with his symptoms
and memories. From the latent dream-thoughts
which you will find in this way, you will see at
once how thoroughly justified one is in inter
preting the dreams of adults by the same rubrics
as those of children. What is now subtituted for
the manifest dream-content is the real sense of
the dream, is always clearly comprehensible, as
sociated with the impressions of the day before,
and appears as the fulfilling of an unsatisfied
wish. The manifest dream, which we remember
after waking, may then be described as a dis
guised fulfilment of repressed wishes.
It is also possible by a sort of synthesis to get
some insight into the process which has brought
about the disguise of the unconscious dreamthoughts as the manifest dream-content. We
call this process dream-work (Traumarbeit).
This deserves our fullest theoretical interest,
since here as nowhere else we can study the un
suspected psychic processes which are existent
in the unconscious, or, to express it more exact
ly, between two such separate systems as the
conscious and the unconscious. Among these
newly discovered psychic processes, two, con-

[19b]
Sigmund Freud
densation (Verdichtung), and displacement or
transvaluation, change of psychic accent (Ven
schiebung), stand out most prominently. Dreams
work is a special case of the reaction of different
mental groupings on each other, and as such is
the consequence of psychic fission. In all essen
tial points it seems identical with the work of
disguise, which changes the repressed complex
in the case of failing repression into symptoms.
You will furthermore discover by the analysis
of dreams, most convincingly your own, the un
suspected importance of the role which impres
sions and experiences from early childhood exert
on the development of men. In the dream life,
the child, as it were, continues his existence in the
man, with a retention of all his traits and wishes,
including those which he was obliged to allow to
fall into disuse in his later years. With irresisti
ble might it will be impressed on you by what
processes of development, of repression,, sub
limation, and reaction there arises out of the
child, with its peculiar gifts and tendencies, the
so-called normal man, the bearer and partly the
victim of our painfully acquired civilization. I
will also direct your attention to the fact that we
have discovered from the analysis of dreams
that the unconscious makes use of a sort of sym
bolism, especially in the presentation of sexual
complexes. This symbolism in part varies with
the individual, but in part is of a typical nature,
and seems to be identical with the symbolism
which we suppose to lie behind our myths and
legends. It is not impossible that these latter
creations of the people may find their explanar
tion from the study of dreams.
Finally, I must remind you that you must not
be led astray by the objection that the occur--
rence of anxiety-dreams (Angsttraume), con
tradicts our idea of the dream as a wish-fulfil
ment. Apart from the consideration that anxietydreams also require interpretation before judg
ment can be passed on them, one can say quite
generally that the anxiety does not depend in
such a simple way on the dream-content as one
might suppose without more knowledge of the
facts and more attention to the conditions of
neurotic anxiety. Anxiety is one of the ways in
which the ego relieves itself of repressed wishes
which have become too strong, and so is easy to
explain in the dream, if the dream has gone too
far towards the fulfilling of the objectionable
wish.
. l
You see that the investigation of dreams was
justified by the conclusions which it has given
us concerning things otherwise hard to under
stand. But we came to it in connection with the

[20a]
Origin and Development of Psycho-Analysis
n
psycho-analytic treatment of neurotics. From
what has been said, you can easily understand
how the interpretation of dreams, if it is not
made too difficult by the resistance of the pa
tient, can lead to a knowledge of the patient's
concealed and repressed wishes and the com
plexes which he is nourishing. I may now pass to
that group of everyday mental phenomena
whose study has become a technical help for
psycho-analysis.
These are the bungling of acts (Fehlhandlungen) among normal men as well as among neu
rotics, to which no significance is ordinarily at
tached; the forgetting of things which one is
supposed to know and at other times really does
know (for example, the temporary forgetting of
proper names); mistakes in speaking
(Versprechen), which occur so frequently; analo
gous mistakes in writing (Verschreiben) and in
reading (Verlesen), the automatic execution of
purposive acts in wrong situations (Vergreifen),
and the loss or breaking of objects, etc. These
are trifles, for which no one has ever sought a
psychological determination, which have passed
unchallenged as chance experiences, as conse
quences of absent-mindedness, inattention, and
similar conditions. Here, too, are included the
acts and gestures executed without being no
ticed by the subject, to say nothing of the fact
that he attaches no psychic importance to them;
as playing and trifling with objects, humming
melodies, handling one's person and clothing
and the like.1
These little things, the bungling of acts, like
the symptomatic and chance acts (Symptomund Zufallshandlungen) are not so entirely
without meaning as is generally supposed by a
sort of tacit agreement. They have a meaning,
generally easy and sure to interpret from the
situation in which they occur, and it can be dem
onstrated that they either express impulses and
purposes which are repressed, hidden if possible
from the consciousness of the individual, or
that they spring from exactly the same sort of
repressed wishes and complexes which we have
learned to know already as the creators of symp
toms and dreams.
It follows that they deserve the rank of symp
toms, and their observation, like that of dreams,
can lead to the discovery of the hidden com
plexes of the psychic life. With their help one
will usually betray the most intimate of his se
crets. If these occur so easily and commonly
among people in health, with whom repression
1 This subject is also discussed in The Psychopathology oj Everyday Life.

[20b]
has on the whole succeeded fairly well, this is
due to their insignificance and their inconspicu
ous nature. But they can lay claim to high the
oretic value, for they prove the existence of re
pression and surrogate creations even under the
conditions of health. You have already noticed
that the psycho-analyst is distinguished by an
especially strong belief in the determination of
the psychiclife. For him there is in the expres
sions of the psyche nothing trifling, nothing ar
bitrary and lawless, he expects everywhere a
widespreadmotivation, where customarily such
claims are not made; more than that, he is even
prepared to find a manifold motivation of these
psychic expressions, while our supposedly in
born causalneedis satisfiedwitha singlepsychic
cause.
Now, keeping in mind the means which we
possess for the discovery of the hidden, forgot
ten, repressed things in the soul life; the study
of the irruptive ideas called up by free associa
tion, the patient's dreams, and his bungled and
symptomatic acts; and adding to these the eval
uation of other phenomena which emerge dur
ing the psycho-analytic treatment, on which I
shall later make a few remarks under the head
ing of transfer (Vbertragung), you will come
with me to the conclusion that our technique is
already sufficiently efficaciousfor the solution of
the problem of how to introduce the pathogenic
psychic material into consciousness, and so to
do away with the suffering brought on by the
creation of surrogate symptoms.
The fact that by such therapeutic endeavours
our knowledge of the mental life of the normal
and the abnormal is widened and deepened can,
of course, only be regarded as an especial attrac
tion and superiority of this method.
I do not know whether you have gained the
impression that the technique through whose
arsenal I have led you is a peculiarly difficult
one. I consider that, on the contrary, for one
who has mastered it, it is quite adapted for use.
But so much is sure, that it is not obvious, that
it must be learned no less than the histological
or the surgical technique.
You may be surprised to learn that in Europe
we have
heard very
frequently
judgments
passed on psycho-analysis by persons who knew
nothing of its technique and had never practised
it, but who demanded scornfully that we show
the correctness of our results. There are among
these people some who are not in other things
unacquainted with scientific methods of thought,
who, for example, would not reject the result of
a microscopical research because it cannot be

[21a]
14
Sigmtjnd Freud
confirmed with the naked eye in anatomical
preparations, and who would not pass judg
ment until they had used the microscope. But in
matters of psycho-analysis circumstances are
really more unfavourable for gaining recogni
tion. Psycho-analysis will bring the repressed in
mental life to conscious acknowledgment, and
every one who judges it is himself a man who
has such repressions, perhaps maintained only
with difficulty. It will consequentlycallforth the
same resistances from him as from the patient,
and this resistance can easily succeed in disguis
ing itself as intellectual rejection, and bring for
ward arguments similar to those from which we
protect our patients by the basic principles of
psycho-analysis. It is not difficult to substanti
ate in our opponentsthe sameimpairment of in
telligence produced by emotivity which we may
observe every day with our patients. The arro
gance of consciousness, which, for example, re
jects dreams so lightly, belongs—quitegeneral
ly—to the strongest protective apparatus which
guards us against the breaking through of the
unconscious complexes,and as a result it is hard
to convince people of the reality of the uncon
scious, and to teach them anew what their con
scious knowledge contradicts.
FOURTH LECTURE
Ladies and Gentlemen : At this point you will
be asking what the technique which I have de
scribed has taught us of the nature of the patho
genic complexes and repressed wishes of neurot
ics.
One thing in particular: psycho-analytic in
vestigations trace back the symptoms of disease
with really surprising regularity to impressions
from the sexual life, show us that the pathogenic
wishes are of the nature of erotic impulse-com
ponents (Triebkomponente), and necessitate
the assumption that to disturbances of the
erotic sphere must be ascribed the greatest sig
nificance among the aetiological factors of the
disease. This holds of both sexes.
I know that this assertion will not willingly be
credited. Even those investigators who gladly
follow my psychological labors, are inclined to
think that I overestimate the aetiological share
of the sexual moments. They ask me why other
mental excitations should not lead to the phe
nomena of repression and surrogate-creation
which I have described. I can give them this an
swer; that I do not know why they should not
do this, I have no objection to their doing it, but
experience shows that they do not possess such
a significance,and that they merely support the

[21b]
effect of the sexual moments, without being able
to supplant them. This conclusion was not a the
oretical postulate; in the Studien ilber Hysteric,
published in 1895 with Dr. Breuer, I did not
stand on this ground. I was converted to it when
my experience was richer and had led me deeper
into the nature of the case. Gentlemen, there are
among you some of my closest friends and ad
herents, who have travelled to Worcester with
me. Ask them, and they will tell you that they
all were at first completely skeptical of the as
sertion of the determinative significance of the
sexual aetiology, until they were compelled by
their own analytic labors to come to the same:
conclusion.
The conduct of the patients does not make it
any easier to convince one's self of the correct^
ness of the view which I have expressed. Instead
of willingly giving us information concerning
their sexual life, they try to conceal it by every
means in their power. Men generally are not
candid in sexual matters. They do not show their
sexuality freely, but they wear a thick overcoat
—a fabric of lies—to conceal it, as though it
were bad weather in the world of sex. And they
are not wrong; sun and wind are not favourable
in our civilized society to any demonstration of
sex life. In truth, no one can freely disclose his
erotic life to his neighbor. But when your pa
tients see that in your treatment they may dis
regard the conventional restraints, they lay
aside this veil of lies, and then only are you in a
position to formulate a judgment on the ques
tion in dispute. Unfortunately, physicians are
not favoured above the rest of the children of
men in their personal relationship to the ques
tions of the sex life. Many of them are under the
ban of that mixture of prudery and lasciviousness which determines the behavior of most
Kulturmenschen in affairs of sex.
j
Now to proceed with the communication of
our results. It is true that, in another series of
cases, psycho-analysis at first traces the symp
toms back not to the sexual, but to banal trau
matic experiences. But the distinction loses its
significance through other circumstances. The
work of analysis which is necessary for the thor
ough explanation and complete cure of a case of
sickness does not stop in any case with the ex
perience of the time of onset of the disease, but
in every case it goes back to the adolescence
and the early childhood of the patient. Here
only do we hit upon the impressions and circum
stances which determine the later sickness. Only
the childhood experiences can give the explana
tion for the sensitivity to later traumata and

[22a]
only when these memory traces, which almost
always are forgotten, are discovered and made
conscious, is the power developed to banish the
symptoms. We arrive here at the same conclu
sion as in the investigation of dreams—that it is
the incompatible, repressed wishes of childhood
which lend their power to the creation of symp
toms. Without these the reactions upon later
traumata discharge normally. But we must con
sider these mighty wishes of childhood very gen
erally as sexual in nature.
Now I can at any rate be sure of your aston
ishment. Is there an infantile sexuality? you
will ask. Is childhood not rather that period of
life which is distinguished by the lack of the sex
ual impulse? No, gentlemen,it is not at all true
that the sexual impulse enters into the child at
puberty, as the devilsin the gospelentered into
the swine. The child has his sexual impulses and
activities from the beginning, he brings them
with him into the world, and from these the
so-called normal sexuality of adults emerges
by a significant development through manifold
stages.It is not very difficult to observethe ex
pressions ofthischildish sexual activity; it needs
rather a certain art to overlook them or to fail
to interpret them.1
As fate would have it, I am in a position to
call a witness for my assertions from your own
midst. I show you here the work of one, Dr.
Sanford Bell,publishedin 1902 in the American
Journal of Psychology. The authorwas a fellow
of Clark University, the same institution within
whose walls we now stand. In this thesis, en
titled "A Preliminary Study of the Emotion of
Love between the Sexes," which appeared three
years before my Three Contributions to the
Theory of Sex the author says just what I have
been saying to you: "The emotion of sex love
. . . does not make its appearance for the first
time at the period of adolescence as has been
thought." He has, as we should say in Europe,
worked by the American method, and has gath
ered not less than 2,500 positive observations in
the course of fifteen years, among them 800 of
his own. He says of the signs by which this am
orous condition manifests itself: "The unpreju
dicedmind, in observingthese manifestations in
hundreds of couples of children, cannot escape
referring them to sex origin. The most exacting
mind is satisfied when to these observations are
added the confessions of those who have as chil
dren experiencedthe emotion to a marked degree
of intensity, and whose memories of childhood
1Compare Three Contributions to the Theory of
Sex.

[22b]
Origin and Development of Psycho-Analysis
15
are relatively distinct." Those of you who are
unwilling to believe in infantile sexuality will be
most astonished to hear that among those chil
dren who fell in love so early not a few are of
the tender ages of three, four, and five years.
It would not be surprising if you should be
lieve the observations of a fellow-countryman
rather than my own. Fortunately, a short time
ago, from the analysis of a five-year-old boy
who was suffering from anxiety, an analysis un
dertaken with correct technique by his own fa
ther,2 I succeeded in getting a fairly complete
picture of the bodily expressions of the impulse
and the mental productions of an early stage of
childish sexual life. And I must remind you that
my friend, Dr. C. G. Jung, read you a few hours
ago in this room an observation on a still young
er girl who from the same cause as my patient
—the birth of a little child in the family—be
trayed certainly almost the same secret excite
ment, wish, and complex-creation. Accordingly,
I am not without hope that you may feel friend
ly toward this idea of infantile sexuality that
was so strange at first. I might also quote the re
markable example of the Zurich psychiatrist, E.
Bleuler, who said a few years ago openly that he
faced my sexual theories incredulous and be
wildered, and since that time by his own obser
vations had substantiated them in their whole
scope.3 If it is true that most men, medical ob
servers and others, do not want to know any
thing about the sexual life of the child, the fact
is capable of explanation only too easily. They
have forgotten their own infantile sexual ac
tivity under the pressure of education for civili
zation and do not care to be reminded now of
the repressed material. You will be convinced
otherwise if you begin the investigation by a
self-analysis, by an interpretation of your own
childhood memories.
Lay aside your doubts and let us evaluate the
infantile sexuality of the earliest years.4 The sex
ual impulse of the child manifests itself as a
very complex one, it permits of an analysis into
many components, which spring from different
sources. It is entirely disconnected from the
function of reproduction which, it is later to
serve. It permits the child to gain different sorts
of pleasure sensations, which we include, by the
analogues and connections which they show, un
der the term sexual pleasures. The great source
2 Analysis of a Phobia in a five-year-old boy, in
Collected Papers, Vol. III.
8 Bleuler, "Sexuelle Abnormitaten der Kinder," Jahrbuch der Schweizer Gesellschaft fitr Schulgesundheitspfiege, IX, 1908.
4 Three Contributions to the Theory of Sex.

[23a]
i6
Sigmund Freud
of infantile sexual pleasure is the auto-excita
tion of certain particularly sensitive parts of the
body; besides the genitals are included the rec
tum and the opening of the urinary canal, and
also the skin and other sensory surfaces. Since
in this first phase of child sexual life the satis
faction is found on the child's own body and has
nothing to do with any other object, we call this
phase after a word coined by Havelock Ellis,
that of auto-eroticism. The parts of the body
significant in giving sexual pleasure we call ero
genous zones. The thumb-sucking (Ludeln) or
passionate sucking
(Wonnesaugen) of very
young-children is a good example of such an au
to-erotic satisfaction of an erogenous zone. The
first scientific observer of this phenomenon, a
specialist in children's diseases in Budapest by
the name of Lindner, interpreted these rightly
as sexual satisfaction and described exhaustive
ly their transformation into other and higher
forms of sexual gratification.1 Another sexual
satisfaction of this time of life is the excitation
of the genitals by masturbation, which has such
a great significance for later life and, in the case
of many individuals, is never fully overcome.
Besides this and other auto-erotic manifesta
tions, we see very early in the child the impulsecomponents of sexual pleasure, or, as we may
say, of the libido, which presupposes a second
person as its object. These impulses appear in
opposed pairs, as active and passive. The most
important representatives of this group are the
pleasure in inflicting pain (sadism) with its pas
sive opposite (masochism) and active and pas
sive exhibition-pleasure (Schaulust). From the
first of these later pairs splits off the curiosity
for knowledge, as from the latter the impulse
toward artistic and theatrical representation.
Other sexual manifestations of the child can al
ready be regarded from the viewpoint of objectchoice, in which the second person plays the
prominent part. The significanceof this was pri
marily based upon motives of the impulse of selfpreservation. The difference between the sexes
plays, however, in the child no very great role.
One mayattribute to every child,without wrong
ing him, a bit of the homosexual disposition.
The sexual life of the child, rich but dissoci
ated, in which each single impulse goes about
the business of arousing pleasure independently
of every other, is later correlated and organized
in two general directions, so that by the close of
puberty the definite sexual character of the in
dividual is practically finally determined. The
single impulses subordinate themselves to the
1Jahrbuch f. Kinderheilkunde, 1879.

[23b]
overlordship of the genital zone, so that the
whole sexual life is taken over into the service
of procreation, and their gratification is now sig
nificant only so far as they help to prepare and
promote the true sexual act. On the other hand,
object-choice prevails over auto-eroticism, so
that now in the sexual life all components of the
sexual impulse are satisfied in the loved person.
But not all the original impulse-components are
given a share in the final shaping of the sexual
life. Even before the advent of puberty certain
impulses have undergone the most energetic re
pression under the impulse of education, and
mental forces like shame, disgust, and morality
are developed, which, like sentinels, keep the
repressed wishes in subjection. When there
comes, in puberty, the high tide of sexual desire
it finds dams in this creation of reactions and
resistances. These guide the outflow into the socalled normal channels, and make it impossible
to revivify the impulses which have undergone
repression.
The most important of these repressed im
pulses are coprophilism, that is, the pleasure in
children connected with the excrements; and,
further, the tendencies attaching themselves to
the persons of the primitive object-choice.
Gentlemen, a sentence of general pathology
says that every process of development brings
with it the germ of pathologicaldispositions in
so far as it may be inhibited, delayed, or incom
pletely carriedout. This holds for the develop
ment of the sexualfunction, with its many com
plications.It isnot smoothly completedin all in
dividuals, and may leave behind either abnor
malities or disposition to later diseases by the
way of later falling back, or regression. It may
happen that not all the partial impulsessubordi
nate themselves to the rule of the genital zone.
Such an impulse which has remained discon
nected bringsabout what we call a perversion,
which may replace the normal sexual goal by
one of its own.It may happen, as has been said
before, that the auto-eroticismis not fully over
come, as many sorts of disturbances testify. The
originally equal value of both sexes as sexual ob
jects may be maintained and an inclination to
homosexual activities in adult life result from
this, which, under suitable conditions, rises to
the level of exclusive homosexuality. This series
of disturbances corresponds to the direct inhibi
tion of development of the sexual function, it
includes the perversions and the general infan
tilism of the sex life that are not seldom met
with.
The disposition to neuroses is to be derived in

[24a]
Origin and Development of Psycho-Analysis
1-7
another way from ah injury to the development
of the sex life. The neuroses are related to the
perversions as the negative to the positive; in
them we find the same impulse-components as
in perversions, as bearers of the complexes and
as creators of the symptoms; but here they
work out from the unconscious. They have un
dergone a repression, but in spite of this they
maintain themselves in the unconscious. Psy
cho-analysis teaches us that overstrong expres
sion of the impulse in very early life leads to a
sort of fixation (Fixirung), which then offers a
weak point in the articulation of the sexual
function. If the exercise of the normal sexual
function meets with hindrances in later life, this
repression, dating from the time of develop
ment, is broken through at just that point at
which the infantile fixation took place.
You will now perhaps make the objection:
"But all that is not sexuality." I have used the
word hi a very much wider sense than you are
accustomed to understand it. This I willingly
concede. But it is a question whether you do not
rather use the word in much too narrow a sense
when you restrict it to the realm of procreation.
You sacrifice by that the understanding of per
versions; of the connection between perversion,
neurosis, and normal sexual life; and have no
means of recognizing, in its true significance, the
easily observable beginning of the somatic and
mental sexual life of the child. But however you
decide about the use of the word, remember that
the psycho-analyst understands sexuality in that
full sense to which he is led by the evaluation of
infantile sexuality.
Now we turn again to the sexual development
of the child. We still have much to say nere,
since we have given more attention to the so
matic than to the mental expressions of the sex
ual life. The primitive object-choice of the
child, which is derived from his need of help, de
mands our further interest. It first attaches to
all persons to whom he is accustomed, but soon
these give way in favor of his parents. The rela
tion of the child to his parents is, as both direct
observation of the child and later analytic in
vestigation of adults agree, not at all free from
elements of-sexual accessory-excitation (Miterregung). The child takes both parents, and es
pecially one, as an object of his erotic wishes.
Usually he follows in this the stimulus given by
his parents, whose tenderness has very clearly
the character of a sex manifestation, though in
hibited so far as its goal is concerned. As a rule,
the father prefers the daughter, the mother the
son; the child reacts to this situation, since, as

[24b]
son, he wishes himself in the place of his father,
as daughter, in the place of the mother. The
feelings awakened in these relations between
parents and children, and, as a resultant of
them, those among the children in relation to
each other, are not only positively of a tender,
but negatively of an inimical sort. The complex
built up in this way is destined to quick repres
sion, but it still exerts a great and lasting effect
from the unconscious. We must express the
opinion that this with its ramifications presents
the nuclear complex of every neurosis, and so
we are prepared to meet with it in a not less ef
fectual way in the other fields of mental life.
The myth of King (Edipus, who kills his father
and wins his mother as a wife is only the slight
ly altered presentation of the infantile wish, re
jected later by the opposing barriers of incest.
Shakespeare's tale of Hamlet rests on the same
basis of an incest complex, though better con
cealed. At the time when the child is still ruled
by the still unrepressed nuclear complex, there
begins a very significant part of his mental ac
tivity which serves sexual interest. He begins to
investigate the question of where children come
from and guesses more than adults imagine of
the true relations by deduction from the signs
which he sees. Usually his interest in this inves
tigation is awakened by the threat to his welfare
through the birth of another childin the family,
in whom at first he sees only a rival. Under the
influence of the partial impulses which are ac
tive in him he arrives at a number of infantile
sexual theories, as that the same male genitals
belong to both sexes,that children are conceived
by eating and born through the opening of the
intestine, and that sexualintercourse is to be re
garded as an inimical act, a sort of overpowering.
But just the unfinished nature of his sexual
constitution and
the gaps in his knowledge
brought about by the hidden condition of the
feminine sexual canal, cause the infant investi
gator to discontinue his work as a failure. The
facts of this childish investigation itself as well
as the infant sex theories created by it are of de
terminative significance in the building of the
child's character, and in the content of his later
neuroses.
It is unavoidable and quite normal that the
child should make his parents the objects of his
first object-choice. But his libido must not re
main fixed on these first chosen objects, but
must take them merely as a prototype and
transfer from these to other persons in the time
of definite object-choice. The breaking loose
(Ablosung) of the child from his parents is thus

[25a]
i8
Sigmund Freud
a problem impossible to escape if the social vir
tue of the young individual is not to be im
paired. During the time that the repressive ac
tivity is making its choice among the partial sex
ual impulses and later, when the influence of the
parents, which in the most essential way has
furnished the material for these repressions, is
lessened, great problems fall to the work of edu
cation, which at present certainly does not al
ways solve them in the most intelligent and eco
nomic way.
Gentlemen, do not think that with these ex
planations of the sexual life and the sexual de
velopment of the child we have too far departed
from psycho-analysis and the cure of neurotic
disturbances. If you like, you may regard the
psycho-analytic treatment only as a continued
education for the overcoming of childhood-rem
nants (Kindheitsresten).
FIFTH LECTURE
Ladies and Gentlemen : With the discovery of
infantile sexuality and the tracing back of the
neurotic symptoms to erotic impulse-compo
nents we have arrived at several unexpected
formulae for expressing the nature and tenden
cies of neurotic diseases. We see that the indi
vidual falls ill when in consequence of outer
hindrances or inner lack of adaptability the sat
isfaction of the erotic needs in the sphere of re
ality is denied. We see that he then flees to sick
ness, in order to find with its help a surrogate sat
isfaction for that denied him. We recognize that
the symptoms of illness contain fractions of the
sexual activity of the individual, or his whole
sexual life, and we find in the turning away from
reality the chief tendency and also the chief in
jury of the sickness. We may guess that the re
sistance of our patients against the cure is not a
simple one, but is composed of many motives.
Not only does the ego of the patient strive
against the giving up of the repression by which
it has changed itself from its original constitu
tion into its present form, but also the sexual
impulses may not renounce their surrogate satis
faction so long as it is not certain that they can
be offered anything better in the sphere of re
ality.
The flight from the unsatisfying reality into
what we call, on account of its biologically in
jurious nature, disease, but which is never with
out an individual gain in pleasure for the pa
tient, takes place over the path of regression,
the return to earlier phases of the sexual life,
when satisfaction was not lacking. This regres
sion is seemingly a twofold one, a temporal, in

[25b]
so far as the libido or erotic need falls back to a
temporally earlier stage of development, and a
formal, since the original and primitive psychic
means of expression are applied to the expres
sion of this need. Both sorts of regression focus
in childhood and have their common point in
the production of an infantile condition of sex
ual life.
The deeper you penetrate into the pathogenic
of neurotic diseases, the more the connexion of
neuroses with other products of human mental
ity, even the most valuable, will be revealed to
you. You will be reminded that we men, with
the high claims of our civilization and under the
pressure of our repressions, find reality general
ly quite unsatisfactory and so keep up a life of
fancy in which we love to compensate for what
is lackingin the sphere of reality by the produc
tion of wish-fulfilments. In these phantasies is
often contained very much of the particular
constitutional essence of personality and of its
tendencies, repressed in real life. The energetic
and successful man is he who succeeds by dint
of labour in transforming his wish fancies into
reality. Where this is not successful, in conse
quence of the resistance of the outer world and
the weakness of the individual, there begins the
turning away from reality. The individual takes
refuge in his satisfying world of fancy. Under
certain favourable conditions it still remains
possible for him to find another connecting link
between these fancies and reality, instead of
permanently becoming a stranger to it through
the regression into the infantile. If the individu
al who is displeased with reality is in possession
of that artistic talent which is still a psychologi
cal riddle, he can transform his fancies into ar
tistic creations. So he escapes the fate of a neu
rosis and wins back his connection with reality
by this roundabout way.1 Where this opposition
to the real world exists, but this valuable talent
fails or proves insufficient, it is unavoidable that
the libido, following the origin of the fancies,
succeeds by means of regression in revivifying
the infantile wishes and so producing a neurosis.
The neurosis takes, in our time, the place of the
cloister, in which were accustomed to take ref
uge all those whom life had undeceived or who
felt themselves too weak for life. Let me give at
this point the main result at which we have ar
rived by the psycho-analytic investigation of
neurotics, namely, that neuroses have no pecul
iar psychic content of their own, which is not
also to be found in healthy states; or as C. G.
1Cf. Otto Rank, Der Kunstler, Ausdtze zu einer Sexual-Psychologie, 56 pp., Heller & Co., Vienna, 1907,

[26a]
Jung has expressed it, neurotics fall ill of the
same complexes with which we sound people
struggle. It depends on quantitative relation
ships, on the relations of the forces wrestling
with each other, whether the struggle leads to
health, to a neurosis, or to compensatory overfunctioning (tfberleistung).
Ladies and gentlemen, I have still withheld
from you the most remarkable experience which
corroborates our assumptions of the sexual im
pulse-forces of neurotics. Every time that we
treat a neurotic psycho-analytically, there oc
curs in him the so-called phenomenon of trans
fer (Vbertragung), that is, he applies to the per
son of the physician a great amount of tender
emotion, often mixed with enmity, which has no
foundation in any real relation, and must be de
rived in every respect from the old wish-fancies
of the patient, which have become unconscious.
Every fragment of his emotive life, which can
no longer be called back into memory, is accord
ingly lived over by the patient in his relations
to the physician, and only by such a living over
of them in the transfer is he convinced of the
existence and the power of these unconscious
sexual excitations. The symptoms, which, to use
a simile from chemistry, are the precipitates of
earlier love experiences (in the widest sense),
can only be dissolved in the higher temperature
of the experience of transfer and transformed in
to other psychic products. The physician plays in
this reaction, to use an excellent expression of S.
Ferenczi,1 the role of a catalytic ferment, which
temporarily attracts to itself the affection which
has become free in the course of the process.
The study of transfer can also give you the
key to the understanding of hypnotic sugges
tion, which we at first used with our patients as
a technical means of investigation of the uncon
scious. Hypnosis showed itself at that time to be
a therapeutic help, but a hindrance to the scien
tific knowledge of the real nature of the case,
since it cleared away the psychic resistances
from a certain field, only to pile them up in an
unscalable wall at the boundaries of this field.
You must not think that the phenomenon of
transfer, about which I can unfortunately say
only too little here, is created by the influence of
the psycho-analytic treatment. The transfer
arises spontaneously in all human relations and
in the relations of the patient to the physician;
it is everywhere the especial bearer of thera
peutic influences, and it works the stronger the
1 S. Ferenczi, "Introjektion und U"bertragung," Jahrbuch f. Psychoanal.u. Psychopath,Forschungen. Vol.I,
No. 2,1909.
PALMER COLLEGE

[26b]
Origin and Development of Psycho-Analysis
19
less one knows of its presence. Accordingly, psy
cho-analysis does not create it; it merely dis
closes it to consciousness, and avails itself of it,
in order to direct the psychic processes to the
wished-for goal. But I cannot leave the theme of
transfer without stressing the fact that this phe
nomenon is of decisive importance to convince
not only the patient, but also the physician. I
know that all my adherents were first convinced
of the correctness of my views through their ex
perience with transfer, and I can very well con
ceive that one may not win such a surety of
judgment so long as he makes no psycho-analy
sis, and so has not himself observed the effects
of transfer.
Ladies and gentlemen, I am of the opinion
that there are, on the intellectual side, two hin
drances to acknowledging the value of the psy
cho-analytic viewpoint: first, the fact that we
are not accustomed to reckon with a strict de
termination of mental life, which holds without
exception, and second, the lack of knowledge of
the peculiarities through which unconscious
mental processes differ from these conscious
ones with which we are familiar. One of the
most widespread resistances against the work of
psycho-analysis with patients as with persons in
health reduces to the latter of the two moments.
One is afraid of doing harm by psycho-analysis,
one is anxious about calling up into conscious
ness the repressed sexual impulses of the pa
tient, as though there were danger that they
could overpower the higher ethical strivings and
rob him of his cultural acquisitions. One can see
that the patient has sore places in his soul life,
but one is afraid to touch them, lest his suffer
ing be increased. We may use this analogy. It is,
of course, better not to touch diseased places
when one can only cause pain. But we know that
the surgeon does not refrain from the investiga
tion and reinvestigation of the seat of illness, if
his invasion has as its aim the restoration of
lasting health. Nobody thinks of blaming him
for the unavoidable difficulties of the investiga
tion or the phenomena of reaction from the op
eration, if these only accomplish their purpose
and gain for the patient a final cure by tempo
rarily making his condition worse. The case is
similar in psycho-analysis; it can lay claim to
the same things as surgery; the increase of pain
which takes place in the patient during the treat
ment is very much less than that which the sur
geon imposes upon him, and especially negligi
ble in comparison with the pains of serious ill
ness. But the consequence which is feared, that
of a disturbance of the cultural character by the

[27a]
20
Sigmund Freud
impulse which has been freed from repression,
is wholly impossible. In relation to this anxiety
we must consider what our experiences have
taught us with certainty, that the somatic and
mental power of a wish, if once its repression
has not succeeded, is incomparably stronger
when it is unconscious than when it is con
scious, so that by being made conscious it
can only be weakened. The unconscious wish
cannot be influenced, is free from all strivings
in the contrary direction, while the conscious is
inhibited by those wishes which are also con
scious and which strive against it. The work of
psycho-analysis, accordingly, presents a better
substitute, in the service of the highest and most
valuable cultural strivings, for the repression
which has failed.
Now what is the fate of the wishes which have
become free by psycho-analysis,by what means
shall they be made harmless for the life of the
individual? There are several ways. The general
consequence is that the wish is consumed during
the work by the correct mental activity of those
better tendencies which are opposed to it. The
repression is supplanted by a condemnation car
ried through with the best means at one's dis
posal. This is possible, since for the most part
we have to abolish only the effects of earlier de
velopmental stages of the ego. The individual
for his part only repressed the useless impulse,
because at that time he was himself still incom
pletely organized and weak; in his present ma
turity and strength he can, perhaps, conquer
without injury to himself that which is inimical
to him. A second issue of the work of psycho
analysis may be that the revealed unconscious
impulses can now arrive at those useful applica
tions which,in the case of undisturbed develop
ment, they would have found earlier. The extir
pation of the infantile wishes is not at all the
ideal aim of development. The neurotic has lost,
by his repressions, many sources of mental en
ergy whose contingents would have been very
valuable for his character building and his life
activities. We know a far-more purposive proc
ess of development, the so-called sublimation
(Sublimirung), by which the energy of infantile
wish-excitations is not secluded, but remains
capable of application, while for the particular
excitations, instead of becoming useless, a high
er, eventually no longer sexual, goal is set up.
The components of the sexual instinct are es
pecially distinguished by such a capacity for the
sublimation and exchange of their sexual goal
for one more remote and socially more valuable.
To the contributions of the energy won in such

[27b]
a way for the functions of our mental life we
probably owethe highest cultural consequences.
A repression takingplace at an early period ex
cludes thesublimation oftherepressed impulse;
after the removal of the repression the way to
sublimation is again free.
We must not neglect, also, to glance at the
third ofthe possible issues. Acertainpart of the
suppressed libidinous excitation has a right to
direct satisfaction and ought to find it in life.
The claims of our civilization make life too hard
for the greater part of humanity, and so further
the aversion to reality and the origin of neuro
ses,without producingan excess of cultural gain
by this excess of sexual repression. We ought
not to go so far as to fully neglect the original
animal part of our nature; we ought not to for
get that the happiness of individuals cannot be
dispensed with as one of the aims of our culture.
The plasticity of the sexual-components, mani
festintheir capacityfor sublimation, may cause
a great temptation to accomplish greater cul
ture-effects by a more and more far reaching
sublimation. But just as little as with our ma
chines we expect to change more than a certain
fraction of the applied heat into useful mechani
calwork, just as little oughtweto striveto sep
arate the sexual impulse in its whole extent of
energy from its peculiar goal. This cannot suc
ceed, andif thenarrowing ofsexuality is pushed
too far it will have all the evil effects of a rob
bery.
I donot knowwhetheryouwillregard the ex
hortation withwhich I close as a presumptuous
one. I only venture the indirect presentation of
my conviction, if I relatean oldtale,whose ap
plication you may make yourselves. German lit
erature knows a town called Schilda,to whose
inhabitants were attributed all sorts of clever
pranks.The wiseacres, so the story goes, had a
horse, with whose powers of work they were
well satisfied, and against whom they had only
one grudge, that he consumed so much expen
siveoats.They concluded that bygoodmanage
ment they would breakhim of his bad habit, by
cutting down his rations by several stalks each
day, until he had learned to do without them al
together. Things went finely for a while, the
horse was weanedto one stalk a day, and on the
next day he would at last work without fodder.
On the morning of this day the malicious horse
was found dead; the citizens of Schilda could
not understand whyhe had died. We should be
inclined to believe that the horse had starved,
and that without a certain ration of oats no work
could be expected from an animal.
;\
C it } \:jO

[28a]
[página ilustrada]

[28b]
[página ilustrada]

[29a]
Contents: Selected Papers on Hysteria
i. The Psychic Mechanism of Hysterical Phenomena (1895)
25
2. The Case of Miss Lucie R (1895)
31
3. The Case of Miss Elisabeth von R (1895)
38
4. The Psycho-Therapy of Hysteria (1895)
59
5. The Defence-Neuro-Psychoses. A Tentative Psychological
Theory of Acquired Hysteria, many Phobias and Obses
sions, and Certain Hallucinatory Psychoses (1894)
81
6. On the Right to Separate from Neurasthenia a Definite
Symptom-Complex as Anxiety Neurosis (1896)
87
7. Further Observations on the Defence-Neuro-Psychoses
(1896)
97
8. On Psycho-Therapy (1904)
106
9. My Views on the Role of Sexuality in the Aetiology of the
Neurosis (1906)
in
10. Hysterical Fancies and Their Relations to Bisexuality
(1908)
115

[30a]
Selected Papers on Hysteria
CHAPTER 1
The
Psychic Mechanism of Hysterical
Phenomena1 (Preliminary Communication)
Actuated by a number of accidental observa
tions, we have investigated over a period of
years the different forms and symptoms of hys
teria for the purpose of discovering the cause
and the process which first provoked the phe
nomena in question, and which in a great many
of our cases frequently appeared years before.
In the great majority of cases we did not suc
ceed in elucidating this starting point from the
mere history, no matter how detailed it might
have been, partly because we had to deal with
experiences about which discussion was disa
greeable to the patients, but mainly because
they really could not recall anything. Often they
had no inkling of the causal connection between
the causative process and the pathological phe
nomenon. It was generally necessary to hypno
tize the patients and reawaken the memory of
the time in which the symptom first appeared,
but we thus succeeded in exposing that connec
tion in a most precise and convincing manner.
This method of examination in a great num
ber of cases has furnished us with results which
seem to be of theoretical as well as of practical
value.
It is of theoretical value because it has shown
us that, in the determination of the pathology
of hysteria, the accidental factor plays a much
greater part than is generally known and recog
nized. It is quite evident that in traumatic hys
teria it is the accident which evokes the syn
drome. Moreover, in hysterical crises, if the pa
tients state that in each attack they hallucinate
the same process which evoked the first attack,
here, too, the causal connection seems quite
clear. But the situation is more obscure in the
other phenomena.
Our experiences have shown us that the most
varied symptoms which pass as spontaneous, or,
as it were, as idiopathic attainments of hysteria,
stand in just as stringent connection with the
causal trauma as the transparent phenomena
1Written in collaboration with Joseph Breuer. Neurologische Zeniralblatt, 1893, Nos. 1 and 2; later pub
lished in Studien uber Hysterie, 1895.
25

[30b]
mentioned. To such causal factors we are able to
refer neuralgias as well as the different kind of
anesthesias, often of years' duration, contrac
tures and paralyses, hysterical attacks and epi
leptiform convulsions, which every observer has
taken for real epilepsy, petit-mal and tic-like af
fections, persistent vomiting and anorexia, even
up to the refusal of nourishment, all kinds of
visual disturbances, constantly recurring visual
hallucinations, and similar affections. The dis
proportion between the hysterical symptom oi
years' duration and the former cause is the same
as the one we are regularly accustomed to see in
the traumatic neurosis. Very often they are ex
periences of childhood which have established
more or less intensive morbid phenomena for
all succeeding years.
The connection is often so clear that it is per
fectly manifest how the causal event produced
just this and no other phenomenon. It is quite
clearly determined by the cause. Thus, let us
take the most banal example: if a painful af
fect originates while eating, and is repressed, it
may produce nausea and vomiting, and then
continue for months as an hysterical symptom.
The following examples will illustrate what we
mean:
A very distressed young girl, while anxiously
watching at a sick-bed, fell into a dreamy state,
had terrifying hallucinations, and her right arm,
which was at the time hanging over the back of
the chair, became numb. This resulted in a pa
ralysis, contracture and anaesthesia of that arm.
She wanted to pray, but could find no words,
but finally succeeded in uttering an English
children's prayer. Later, on developing a very
grave and most complicated hysteria, she spoke,
wrote, and understood only English, whereas
her native tongue was incomprehensible to her
for a year and a half.
A very sick child finally fell asleep. The
mother exerted all her will power to make no
noise to awaken it, but because she resolved to
do so, she emitted a clicking sound with her
tongue (hysterical counter-will). This was
later repeated on another occasion when she
wished to be absolutely quiet, and developed in
to a tic, which in the form of tongue clicking
accompanied every excitement for years.

[31a]
26
Sigmund Freud
A very intelligent man was present while his
brother was anaesthetized and his ankylosed hip
stretched. At the moment when the joint yield
ed and crackled, he perceived severe pain in his
own hip, which continued for almost a year.
In other cases the connection is not so sim
ple, there being only, as it were, a symbolic re
lation between the cause and the pathological
phenomenon, just as in the normal dream.
Thus, psychic pain may result in neuralgia, or
the affect of moral disgust may cause vomiting.
We have studied patients who were wont to
make the most prolific use of such symbolization. In still other cases, such a determination
is at first sight incomprehensible, yet in this
group we find the typical hysterical symptoms,
such as hemianaesthesia, contraction of the vis
ual field, epileptiform convulsions, and similar
symptoms. The explanation of our views con
cerning this group must be deferred for a more
detailed discussion of the subject.
Such observations seem to demonstrate the
pathogenic analogy between simple hysteria and
traumatic neurosis, and justify a broader con
ceptionof "traumatic hysteria." The active aeti
ological factor in traumatic neurosis is really
not the insignificant bodily injury, but the af
fect of the fright; that is, the psychic trauma.
In an analogous manner, our investigations
show that the causes of many, if not of all,
cases of hysteria can be designated as psychic
traumas. Every experience which produces the
painful affect of fear, anxiety, shame, or of psy
chic pain may act as a trauma. Whether an ex
perience becomes of traumatic importance nat
urally depends on the person affected, as well
as on the condition which will be mentioned
later. In ordinary hysterias we frequently find,
instead of one large trauma, many partial trau
mas, grouped causes which can be of traumatic
significance only when summarized, and which
belong together insofar as they form small frag
ments of the sorrowful tale. In still other cases,
a connection with a real efficacious event, or with
a period of time of special excitability, raises
seemingly indifferent situations to traumatic
dignity, which they would not have attained
otherwise, but which they retain ever after.
But the causal connexion of the causative
psychic trauma with the hysterical phenomena
does not mean that the trauma, as an agent pro
vocateur, would release the symptom, which
would then become independent and continue
as such. On the contrary, we must maintain
that the psychic trauma of the memory of the
same acts like a foreign body which even long

[31b]
after its penetration must be considered as an
agent of the present, the proof of which we see
in a most remarkable phenomenon, which at the
same time adds to our discoveries a distinctly
practical interest.
We found, at first to our greatest surprise,
that the individual hysterical symptoms imme
diately disappeared without returning if we suc
ceeded in thoroughly awakening the memories
of the causal process with its accompanying
affect, and if the patient circumstantially dis
cussed the process in the most detailed manner
and gave verbal expression to the affect. Recol
lections without affects are almost utterly use
less. The psychic process which originally
elapsed must be reproduced as vividly as possi
ble so as to bring it back into the statum nas^
cendi,1 and then thoroughly "talked out." If it
concerns such irritating manifestations as con
vulsions, neuralgias, and hallucinations, they
are once more brought to the surface with their
full intensity, and they then vanish forever.
Functional attacks like paralyses and anaesthe
sias likewise disappear, but naturally without
any appreciable distinctness of their momen^
tary aggravation.2
It would be quite reasonable to suspect that
one deals here with an unintentional suggestion.
The patient expects to be relieved of his suffer
ing and it is this expectation and not the dis
cussion that is the effectual factor. But this is
not so. The first observation of this kind, in
which a most complicated case of hysteria was
analysed and the individual causal symptoms
separately abrogated, occurred in the year
1881, that is, in a pre-suggestive period. It was
broughtabout througha spontaneous auto-hyp
nosis of the patient and caused the examiner
the greatest surprise.
In reversing the sentence: cessante causa cessat effectus,s we may conclude from this obser
vation that the causal process continues to act
1 Condition of birth. —Ed.
2The possibility of such a therapy was clearly rec
ognized by Delboeuf and Binet, as is shown by the ac
companying quotations. Delboeuf, Le magnStisme anu
mal (Paris, 1889):
"After this, one will understand
how the hypnotizer helps the cure. He puts the patient
back into the condition in which the disease mani
fested itself and fights by word the same disease as
it is being re-born." Binet, Les alterations de la personalite (1892), p. 243: ". . . Perhaps one will see
that by this mental trick taking the patient back to
the very moment when the symptom first appeared,
the patient is made more receptive to curative sugges
tion." In the interesting book of Janet, LfAutomatism
psychologique (Paris, 1899), we find the description
of a cure brought about in a hysterical girl by a proc
ess similar to our method.
8The cause stopping, the effect is stopped.

[32a]
in some way even after years, not indirectly by
means of a chain of causal links, but directly as
a provoking cause, just perhaps as in the wake
ful consciousness where the memory of a psy
chic pain may later call forth tears. In other
words: The hysteric suffers mostly from remi
niscences}
n
It would seem at first rather strange that
long-forgotten experiences should exert so in
tensive an influence, and that their recollections
should not be subject to the decay into which
all our memories sink. We will perhaps gain
some understanding of these facts by the fol
lowing examinations.
The blurring or loss of an affect of memory
depends on a great many factors. In the first
place, it is of great consequence whether there
was an energetic reaction to the affectful expe
rience or not. By reaction we here understand
a whole series of voluntary or involuntary re
flexes, ranging from crying to an act of revenge,
through which, according to experience, affects
are discharged. If the success of this reaction is
of sufficient strength, it results in the disappear
ance of a great part of the affect. Language at
tests to this fact of daily observation in such
expressions as "to give vent to one's feeling,"
to be "relieved by weeping," etc. If the reac
tion is suppressed, the affect remains unitedwith
the memory. An insult retaliated, be it only in
words, is differently recalled than one that had
to be taken in silence. Language also recognizes
this distinction between the psychic and physi
cal results, and designates most characteristic
ally the silently endured suffering as grievance.
The reaction of an injured person to a trauma
has really only then a perfect "cathartic" effect
if it is expressed in an adequate reaction like
revenge. But man finds a substitute for this ac
tion in speech through which help the affect can
well-nigh be ab-reacted (abreagirt) .2 In other
1We are unable to distinguish in this preliminary
contribution what there is new in
this content, and
what can be found in such other authors as Moebius
and Striimpell, who present similar views on hysteria.
The greatest similarity to
our theoretic and thera
peutic accomplishments we accidentally found in some
published observations of
Benedict,
which we shall
discuss later on.
2 The
German
abreagiren
has
no
exact
English
equivalent. It will therefore, be rendered throughout
the text by ab-react; the literal meaning is to react
away or to react off. It is the act of giving vent in
speech and action to repressed experiences, and thereby
disburdening one's self of their unconscious influences.
It has different shades of meaning, from defence re
action to emotional catharsis, which can be discerned
from the context.—Tr.

[32b]
Selected Papers on Hysteria
27
cases, talking in the form of deploring and giv
ing vent to the torments of the secret (confes
sion) is in itself an adequate reflex. If such.re
action does not result through deeds, words, or
in the most elementary case through weeping,
the memory of the occurrence retains above all
an affective accentuation.
The ab-reaction, however, is not the only
form of discharge at the disposal of the normal
psychic mechanism of the healthy person who
has experienced a psychic trauma. The memory
of the trauma, even where it has not been ab-re
acted, enters into the great complex of the as
sociations. It joins the other experiences which
are perhaps antagonistic to it, and thus under
goes correction through other ideas. For exam
ple, after an accident the memory of the dan
ger and (dimmed) repetition of the fright is
accompanied by the recollection of the further
course, the rescue and the consciousness of
present security. The memory of a grievance
may be corrected by a rectification of the state
of affairs by reflecting upon one's own dignity
and similar things. A normal person is in this
way capable of dissipating the accompanying
affect by means of association.
In addition, there appears that general blur
ring of impressions, that fading of memories
which we call forgetting, and which above all
wears out the affective ideas no longer active.
It follows from our observations that those
memories which become the causes of hysteri
cal phenomena have been preserved for a long
time with wonderful freshness and with their
perfect emotional tone. As a further striking
and a later realizable fact, we have to mention
that the patients do not perhaps have the same
control of these as of their other memories of
life. On the contrary, these experiences are ei
ther completely lacking from the memory of
the patients in their usual psychic state, or at
most exist in greatly abridged form. Only after
the patients are questioned in the hypnotic
state do these memories appear with the undi
minished vividness of fresh occurrences.
Thus, one of our patients in a hypnotic
state reproduced with hallucinatory vividness
throughout half a year everything that excited
her during an acute hysteria on the same days
of the preceding year. Her mother's diary,
which was unknown to the patient, proved the
faultless accuracy of the reproductions. Partly
in hypnosis and partly in spontaneous attacks,
another patient lived through with hallucina
tory distinctness all experiences of a hysterical
psychosis which she went through ten years be-
/

[33a]
28
Sigmund Freud
fore, and for the greatest part of which she had
been amnesic until its reappearance. Also, some
individual memories of aetiological importance
showed surprising integrity and sentient force
of fifteen to twenty-five years' duration, and on
their return exerted the full affective force of
new experiences.
The reason for this we can seek only in the
fact that these memories occupy an exceptional
position in all the above-mentioned relations,
as far as vividness is concerned. For it was real
ly shown that these memories correspond to
traumas which were not sufficiently ab-reacted,
and on closer investigation of the reasons for
this hindrance, we can find at least two series
of determinants through which the reaction to
the trauma was omitted.
To the first group we add those cases in
which the patient had not reacted to psychic
traumas because the nature of the trauma pre
cluded a reaction, or because social relations
made the reaction impossible, or because it
concerned things which the patient wished to
forget and which he, therefore, intentionally
inhibited and repressed from his conscious mem
ory. It is just such painful things which are
found in the hypnotic state as the basis of
hysterical phenomena (hysterical delirium of
saints, nuns, abstinent women, and well-bred
children).
The second series of determinants is not con
ditioned by the content of the memories, but
by the psychic states with which the corre
sponding experiences in the patient have unit*-
ed. As a cause of hysterical symptoms, one
finds in hypnosis even ideas which are insignif
icant in themselves, but which owe their preser
vation to the fact that they originated during
a severeparalyzing affect like fright, or directly
in abnormal psychic conditions, as in the semihypnotic twilight states of day-dreaming in
auto-hypnosis, and similarstates. Here, it is the
nature of these conditions which makes a reac
tion to the incident impossible.
To be sure, both determinants can naturally
unite, and, as a matter of fact, they often do.
This is the case when a trauma, in itself effec
tual, occurs in a state of a severely paralyzing
affect, or from a transformed consciousness.
But it may also happen that the psychic trau
ma evokes in many persons one of these abnor
mal states which in turn makes the reaction
impossible.
What is common to both groups of determi
nants is the fact that those psychic traumas
which are not adjusted by reaction are also pre
V-

[33b]
vented from adjustment by associative elabo
ration. In the first group it is the resolution of
the patient which strives to forget the painful
experiences and in this way, if possible, to ex
clude them from association; in the second
group the associative elaboration does not suc
ceed because between the normal and patho
logical state of consciousness, in which these
ideas originated, there is no productive associa
tive relationship. We shall soon have occasion
to discuss more fully these relationships.
Hence, we can say that the reason why the
pathogenically formed ideas retain their fresh
ness and affective force is because they are not
subject to the normal fading through ab-reaction and through reproduction in states of un*
inhibited association.
m
i
When we discussed the conditions which;
according to our experience, are decisive in the
development of hysterical phenomena from
psychic traumas, we were forced to speak of
abnormal states of consciousness in which such
pathogenic ideas originate, and we had to em
phasize the fact that the recollection of the ef^
fectual psychic trauma is not to be found in the
normal memory of the patient, but in the hyp
notized memory. The more we occupied our
selves-with these phenomena the more certain
became our convictions that the splitting of
consciousness,so striking in the familiar classi
cal cases of double consciousness, exists rudimentarily in every hysteria, and that the ten
dency to this dissociation, and with it the ap
pearance of abnormal states of consciousness
which we comprise as hypnoid, is the basic phe
nomenon of this neurosis. In this view we agree
with Binet and Janet, though we had no experi
ence with their remarkable findings in anaes
thetic patients.
Hence, to the often cited axiom, "Hypnosis
is artificial hysteria," we should like to add an
other: "The existence of hypnoid states is the
basis and determination of hysteria." These
hypnoid
states agree in all their diversities
among themselves and with hypnosis in the
one point, namely that the ideas arising in them
are very intensive, but are excluded from as
sociative relations with the rest of the content
of consciousness. These hypnoid states are associable among themselves, and their ideation
may thus attain various high degrees of psychic
organization. In other respects the nature of
these states and the degree of their exclusiveness differ from the rest of the conscious proc-

[34a]
Selected Papers on Hysteria
29
esses, as do the various states of hypnosis,
which range from light somnolence to somnam
bulism, and from perfect memory to absolute
amnesia.
If such hypnoid states have already existed
before the manifest disease, they prepare the
soil upon which the affect establishes the patho
genic memories with their resulting somatic
manifestations. This behavior corresponds to
hysteria, based on a predisposition. But our ob
servations show that a severe trauma (like a
traumatic neurosis)
or a severe suppression
(perhaps of a sexual affect) may bring about a
splitting of ideas even in persons without pre
dispositions. This represents the mechanism of
the psychically acquired hysteria. Between these
two extremes we have a series in which the fa
cility of dissociation in a particular individual
and the magnitude of the affective trauma vary
inversely.
We are unable to say anything new as to the
determination
of
the
predisposed
hypnoid
states. We presume that they often develop
from "reveries,"
which are so frequent even
in normal persons, for which, for example, fem
inine handwork offers so much opportunity.
The questions why "the pathological associa
tions" formed in such states are so firm, and
why they exert a stronger influence on the so
matic processes than other ideas, are ail indis^
solubly linked with the problem of the effec
tiveness of hypnotic suggestions in general. Our
experiences in this matter do not show us any
thing new; but they rather throw light on the
contradiction between the statement, "Hys
teria is a psychosis," and the fact that among
hysterics one may meet persons of the clearest
intellects, the strongest wills, greatest princi
ples, and of the subtlest minds. In these cases,
such characteristics hold true only in the per
son's waking thought; in his hypnotic state he
is alienated just as we all are in our dreams.
Yet, whereas our dream psychoses do not influ
ence our waking state, the products of hypnotic
states are projected into the waking state as
hysterical phenomena.
rv
Almost the same assertions that we have ad
vanced about hysterical symptoms we may also
repeat
concerning hysterical attacks.
As is
known,.we have Charcot's schematic descrip
tion of the major hysterical attack, which in
complete form showsfour phases: (1) The epileptoid, (2)
the major movements, (3)
the
attitudes passionelles
(hallucinatory phase),

[34b]
and (4) the concluding delirium. By shortening
or prolonging the attack, and by isolating the
individual phases, Charcot obtained all those
forms of the hysterical attack, which are really
observed more frequently than the complete
grande attaque.
Our tentative explanation refers to the third
phase, the attitudes passionelles. Wherever it is
prominent, it contains the hallucinatory repro
duction of a memory which was significant for
the hysterical onset. It is the memory of a ma
jor trauma, the
xo-t'
efrxhv
of the so-called
traumatic hysteria, or of a series of partial
traumas belonging together as they are found
at the basis of the ordinary hysteria. Or, finally
the attack may bring back those occurrences
which, because of their encounter with a factor
of a special predisposition, have become raised
to traumas.
But there are also other attacks which osten
sibly consist only of motor phenomena and lack
the passionelle phase. If it is possible during
such an attack of general twitching, cataleptic
rigidity, or an attaque de sommeil, to put one's
self en rapport with the patient, or still better,
if one succeeds in evoking the attack in a hyp
notic state, it will then be found that here,
too, the root of it is the memory of a psychic
trauma, or of a series of traumas which make
themselves otherwise prominent in an hallu
cinatory phase. Thus, a little girl had suffered
for years from attacks of general convulsions,
which could be, and were, taken for epilepsy.
For differential diagnostic reasons she was hyp
notized and she immediately lapsed into one of
her attacks. On being asked what she saw, she
said, "The dog, the dog is coming," and it act
ually turned out that the first attack of this
kind appeared after she was pursued by a mad
dog. The success of the therapy then verified
our diagnostic decision.
An official, who became hysterical as a result
of ill treatment by his employer, suffered from
attacks during which he fell to the floor raging
furiously without uttering a word or displaying
any hallucinations. The attack was provoked in
a state of hypnosis, and he then stated that he
lived through the scene during which his em
ployer insulted him in the street and struck him
with his,cane. A few days later he came to me
complaining that he had the same attack, but
it was shown in the hypnosis this time that he
went through the scene which was really conr
nected with the onset of his disease, it was the
scene in the court room, when he was unable to

[35a]
30
Sigmund Freud
get satisfaction for the ill treatment which he
received, etc.
The memories which appear in hysterical at
tacks, or which can be awakened in them, cor
respond in all other respects to the causes which
we have found as the basis of continuous hys
terical symptoms. Like these, they refer to
psychictraumas whichwerepreventedfrom ad
justment through ab-reaction or through asso
ciative elaboration; like these, they were ab
sent entirely or in their essential components
in the total memory of normal consciousness,
and showed themselves as parts of the ideation
content of hypnoid states of consciousness with
restricted associations. Finally they were also
amenable to the therapeutic test. Our obser
vations have often taught us that a memory
which has hitherto provoked attacks becomes
incapable of it when it is brought to reaction
and associative correction in a hypnotic state.
The motor phenomena of the hysterical at
tack can in part be interpreted as the memory
of general forms of reaction of the accompany
ing affect (like the fidgeting of the whole body
to which the infant already resorts), in part as
a direct motor expression of this memory, and
in other parts they, like the hysterical stigmata
in the permanent symptoms, elude this expla
nation.
A special estimation of the hysterical attack
is obtained if one also takes into account the
fact that in hysteria there are groups of ideas
which originated in hypnoid states, which are
excluded from associative activity with the rest,
but are associable among themselves and thus
represent a more or less highly organized rudi
mentary second consciousness, a condition seconde. A persistent hysterical symptom, there
fore, corresponds to an impingement of this
second state upon a bodily innervation other
wise controlled by the normal consciousness.
But an hysterical attack gives evidence of a
higher organization of this second state and, if
of recent origin, signifies a moment in which
this hypnoid consciousness has gained control
of the whole existence, that is, we have an
acute hysteria; but if it is a recurrent attack
containing a memory, we simply have a repe
tition of the same. Charcot has already given
utterance to the thought that the hysterical at
tack must be the rudiment of a condition seconde. During the attack, the control of the
whole bodily innervation passes over to the
hypnoid consciousness. As familiar experiences
show, the normal consciousness is not always
entirely repressed by it; it may even perceive

[35b]
the motor phenomenon of the attack while the
psychicprocessesof the same escape all knowl
edge of it.
The typical course of a grave hysteria, as is
well known, is as follows: At first an ideation is
formed in the hypnoid state, which, after suffi
cient growth, gains control in a period of acute
hysteria of the bodily innervation and the ex
istence of the patient, and creates permanent
symptoms and attacks, and with the exception
of some residuum then ends in recovery. If the
normal personality can regain the upper hand,
all that has survived the hypnoid ideation con
tent then returns in hysterical attacks, and now
and then it brings the person back into similar
states which are again amenable to influences
and eligible for traumas. Frequently a sort of
equilibrium is then established between the
psychic groups which are united in the same per
son; attack and normal life go hand in hand
without influencing each other. The attack
then comes spontaneously just as memories are
wont to come, but just like memories it can
also be provoked by the laws of association.
The provocation of the attack results either
through stimulating a hysterogenic zone
or
through a new experience which by similarity
recalls the pathogenic experience. We hope to
be able to show that there is no essential differ
ence between the apparently two diverse deter^
minants, and that in both cases a hyperaesthetic
memory is touched. In other cases, this equi4
librium shows a marked lability; the attack ap-j
pears as a manifestation of the hypnoidal rem4
nant of consciousness, as often as the normal
person becomes exhausted and functionally in?
capacitated. We cannot disregard the fact thai
in such cases the attack becomes stripped of its
original significance and may return as a contentless motor reaction.
It remains a task for future investigation to
discover what conditions are decisive in deter^
mining whether
an hysterical individuality
should manifest itself in attacks, in persistent
symptoms, or in a mingling of both.
We can now understand in what manner the
psycho-therapeutic method propounded by us
exerts its curative effect. It abrogates the effi
cacy of the original non-ab-reacted ideas by af
fording an outlet to their strangulated affects
through speech. It brings them to associative
correction by drawing them into normal con
sciousness (in mild hypnosis) or by eliminating
them through medical suggestion in the same

[36a]
Selected Papers on Hysteria
3i
way as in somnambulism with amnesia.
We maintain that the therapeutic gain ob
tained by applying this process is quite signi
ficant. To be sure, v/e do not cure the hysteria
insofar as it represents a predisposition, for we
really do not block the way for the recurrence
of hypnoid states. Nor is our procedure capable
of preventing the replacement of the laborious
ly abrogated phenomena by new ones. But once
this acute stage has run its course and its rem
nants continue as permanent hysterical symp
toms and attacks, our radical method can fre
quently remove them forever, and herein it
seems to surpass the efficacy of direct sugges
tion, as. practised at present by psycho-thera
pists.
If, by disclosing the psychic mechanisms of
hysterical phenomena, we have taken a step
forward on the path so successfully started by
Charcot with his explanation and experimental
imitation of
hystero-traumatic paralysis, we
are well aware that in so doing we have only
advanced our knowledge in the mechanisms of
hysterical symptoms and not in the subjective
causes of hysteria. We have grazed only the
aetiology of hysteria, and can only throw light
on the causes of the acquired forms, i.e., on the
significance of the accidental factors of the
neurosis.
CHAPTER 2
Case History of Miss Lucie R1
Towards the end of 1892, a friendly colleague
recommended to me a young lady whom he had
been treating for chronic recurrent purulent
rhinitis. It was later found that the obstinacy
of her trouble was caused by a caries of the
ethmoid. She finally complained of new symp
toms which this experienced physician could
no longer refer to local affections. She had lost
all perception of smell and was almost con
stantly bothered by one or two subjective sen
sations of smell. This she found very irksome.
In addition to this she was depressed in spirits,
weak, and complained of a heavy head, loss of
appetite, and an incapacity for work.
This young lady visited me from time to
time during my office hours—she was a govern
ess in the family of a factory superintendent
living in the suburbs of Vienna. She was an
English lady of rather delicate constitution,
anemic, and, with the exception of her nasal
trouble, was in good health. Her first state
ments concurred with those of her physician.
1 Breuer u.
Freud, Studien iiber Hysterie (1895),
Case III.

[36b]
She suffered from mild depression and lassi
tude, and was tormented by subjective sensa
tions of smell. Of hysterical signs, she showed
a quite distinct general analgesia without tac
tile impairment, the fields of vision showed no
narrowing on coarse testing with the hand. The
nasal mucous membrane was totally analgesic
and reflexless. Tactile sensation was absent, and
the perception of this sense organ was abol
ished for specific as well as for other stimuli,
such as ammonia or acetic acid. The purulent
nasal catarrh was just then in a period of im
provement.
On first attempting to understand this case
we felt that subjective sensations of smell must
represent recurrent hallucinations interpreting
persistent hysterical symptoms, that the mild
depression was perhaps the affect belonging to
the trauma, and that there must have been an
episode during which the present subjective
sensations were objective. This episode must
have been the trauma, the symbols of which
recurred in her memory as sensations of smell.
Perhaps it would have been more correct to
consider the recurring hallucinations of smell
with the accompanying depression as equiva
lents of hysterical attacks. For the nature of
recurrent hallucinations really makes them un
suitable for
the
role of chronic
symptoms,
which was hardly the question in this rudimen
tary case. But it was absolutely necessary that
the subjective sensations of smell should show
a specialization that could correspond to a very
definite and real objective origin.
This expectation was soon fulfilled, for on
being asked what odour troubled her most she
stated that it was an odour of burned pastry.
I could then assume that the odour of burned
pastry really occurred in the traumatic event.
It is quite unusual to select sensations of smell
as memory symbols of traumas, but it is quite
obvious why these were here selected. She was
afflicted with purulent-rhinitis, hence the nose
and its perceptions were in the foreground of
her attention. All I knew about the life of the
patient was that she took care of two children
whose mother died a few years ago from
a
grave and acute disease.
As a starting point of the analysis, I decided
to use the "odour of burned pastry". I will now
relate the history of this analysis. It could
have occurred under more favourable
condi
tions, but, as a matter of fact, what should
have taken place in one session was extended
over a number of them. She could only visit
me during my
office hours, during which I

[37a]
32
SlGMUND
could devote to her but little of my time. One
single conversation had to be extended for over
a week as her duties did not permit her to come
to me often from such a distance, so that the
conversation was frequently broken off and re
sumed at the next session.
On attempting to hypnotize Miss Lucie R,
she did not lapse into the somnambulic state. I,
therefore, was obliged to forego somnambu
lism, and the analysis was made while she was
in a state which did not perhaps differ much
from the normal.
I feel obliged to express myself more fully
about the point of the technique of my pro
cedure. While visiting the Nancy clinics in
1889, I heard Dr. Liebault, the old master of
hypnotism, say: "Yes, if we had the means to
put everybody into the somnambulic state, hyp
notism would then be the most powerful thera
peutic agent." In Bernheim's clinic it almost
seemed that such an art really existed, and that
it could be learned from Bernheim. But as soon
as I tried to practise it on my own patients, I
noticed that at least my powers were quite
limited in this respect. Whenever a patient did
not sink into the somnambulic state after one
or two attempts, I possessed no means to force
him into it. However, the percentage of som
nambulists in my experience was far below
that claimed by Bernheim.
Thus, I had the choice either to refrain from
using the cathartic method in most of the cases
suitable for it, or to venture the attempt with
out somnambulism by using hypnotic influence
in light or even doubtful cases. It made no
difference of what degree (following the ac
cepted scales of hypnotism) the hypnotism was,
which did not correspond to somnambulism, for
every line of suggestibility is independent of
the other, and nothing prejudices the evoca
tion of catalepsy, automatic movements, and
similar phenomena, for the purpose of facili
tating the awakening of forgotten recollections.
I soon relinquished the habit of deciding the de
gree of hypnotism, as in a great number of
cases
it incited the patient's resistance and
clouded the confidence which I needed for the
more important psychic work. Moreover, in
mild grades of hypnotism I soon tired of hear
ing, after the assurance and command, "You
will sleep, sleep now!" such protests as, "But,
Doctor, I am not sleeping." I was forced to
bring in the very delicate. distinction, saying,
"I do not mean the usual sleep, I mean the
hypnotic—you see, you are hypnotized, you
cannot open your eyes"; or, "I really don't

[37b]
Freud
want you to sleep." I am convinced that many
of my colleagues who use psycho-therapy know
how to get out of such difficulties more skil
fully than I, they can, therefore, act differently.
I, however, believe that if through the use of
a word one can so frequently become embarras
sed, it is better to avoid the word and the em
barrassment. Wherever the first attempt did
not produce either somnambulism or a degree
of hypnotism with pronounced bodily changes,
I dropped the hypnosis and demanded only
"concentration," I ordered the patient to lie
on his back and close his eyes as a means of at
taining this "concentration." With little effort
I obtained as profound a degree of hypnotism
as was possible.
But as I gave up the use of somnambulism;
I perhaps deprived myself of that prerequisite
without which the cathartic method seemed inapr
plicable. For the latter is based on the assump
tion that in the altered state of consciousness
the patients have at their disposal recollections
and associations which do not apparently exist
in their normal conscious state, and that whereever there is no somnambulic broadening of
consciousness, it must also be impossible to
bring about those causal relations which the
patient gives the doctor as something unknown
to him, that is, those pathogenic recollections
"which are lacking from the memory of the pa
tients in their usual psychic states or only exist
in a most condensed state" (Preliminary Com
munication).
My memory helped me out of this embarrass7
ment. I myself saw Bernheim demonstrate that
the
recollections of somnambulism are only
manifestly forgotten in the waking state and
can be readily reproduced by some urging, ac
companied by hand pressure, which is supposed
to mark another conscious state. He, for in-i
stance, imparted to a somnambulist the nega^
tive hallucination that he was no longer pres
ent,
and
then
attempted to
make
himself
noticeable to her by the most manifold and in
considerate
attacks,
but
was
unsuccessful]
After the patient was awakened, he asked her
what he did to her during the time that she
thought he was not there. She replied, very
much astonished, that she knew nothing, but
he did not stop there, he insisted that she would
recall everything, and placed his hand on her
forehead so that she should recall things, and
behold, she finally related all that she did not
apparently perceive in the somnambulic state,
and about which she ostensibly knew nothing
in the waking state.

[38a]
Selected Papers on Hysteria
33
This astonishing and instructive experiment
was my model. I decided to proceed on the
supposition that my patients knew everything
that was of any pathogenic significance, and
that all that was necessary was to force them
to impart it. Whenever I reached a point where
to my questions, "Since when have you had this
symptom?" or "Where does it come from?"
I received the answer, "I really don't know
this," I proceeded as follows:
I placed my
hand on the patient's forehead or took her
head between my hands and said, "Through the
pressure of my hands it will come into your
mind; the moment that I stop the pressure you
will see something before you, or something
will flash through your mind which you must
note; it is that which we are seeking. Well,
what have you seen or what came into your
mind?"
On applying this method for the first time
(it was not in the case of Miss Lucie R) I was
surprised to find just what I wanted, and I may
say that it has since hardly ever failed me; it
always showed me how to proceed in my in
vestigations and enabled me to
do all such
analyses without somnambulism. Gradually, I
became so bold that when a patient would an
swer "I see nothing," or "Nothing came into my
mind," I insisted that it was impossible, that
he probably had the right thought, but that he
did not believe it and repudiated it, that I
would repeat the
procedure as often as he
wished, and that every time he would see the
same thing. Indeed, I was always right; the
patients had not as yet learned to let their
criticism rest. They repudiated the emerging
recollection or fancy because they considered
it as a useless, intruding disturbance, but after
they imparted it, it was always shown that it
was the right one. Occasionally, after forcing
a communication by pressing the head three or
four times, I got such an answer as "Yes, I was
aware of it the first time, but did not wish to
say it," or, "I hoped that it would not be this."
By this method it was far more laborious to
broaden the alleged narrowed consciousness
than by investigating in the somnambulic state,
but it made me independent of somnambulism
and afforded me an insight into the motives
which are frequently decisive for the "forget
ting" of recollections. I am in a position to as
sert that this forgetting is often intentional and
desired, but it is always only manifestly suc
cessful.
It appeared to me even more remarkable
that apparently long-forgotten numbers and

[38b]
dates can be reproduced by a similar process,
thus
demonstrating an
unexpected faithful
ness of memory.
The insignificant choice which one has
in
searching for numbers and dates especially al
lows us to take to our aid the familiar axiom
of the theory of aphasia, namely, that recogni
tion is a lesser accomplishment of memory than
spontaneous recollection.
Hence, to a patient who is unable to recall in
what year, month, or day a certain event took
place, enumerate the years during which it
might have occurred as well as the names of the
twelve months and the thirty-one days of the
month, and assure him that at the right num
ber or name his eyes will open themselves or
that he will feel which number is the correct
one. In most cases the patients really decide on
a definite date and frequently enough (as in the
case of Mrs. Cecilia N) it could be ascertained
from existing notes of that time that the date
was correctly recognized. At other times and in
different patients it was shown from the con
nection of the recollected facts that the dates
thus found were incontestable. A patient, for
instance, after a date was found by enumer
ating for her the dates, remarked, "This is my
father's birthday," and added, "Of course, I
expected this episode (about which we spoke)
because it was my father's birthday."
I can only lightly touch upon this theme.
The conclusion which I wish to draw from all
these experiences is that the pathogenic im
portant experiences with all their concomitant
circumstances are faithfully retained in mem
ory, even where they seem forgotten, as when
the patient seems unable to recall them.1
^•As an example of the technique mentioned above^
that is, of investigating in a non-somnambulic state or
where consciousness is not broadened, I will relate a
case which I analyzed recently. I treated a woman of
thirty-eight
who
suffered
from
an
anxiety
neurosis
(agoraphobia, fear of death, etc.). Like many patients
of that type, she had a disinclination to admit that
she acquired this disease in her married state and was
quite desirous of referring it back to her early youth.
She informed me that at the age of seventeen when she
was in the street of her small city she had the first
attack
of
vertigo, anxiety, and
faintness,
and that
these attacks recurred at times up to a few years ago
when they were
replaced by her present disease.
I
thought that the first attacks of vertigo, in which the
anxiety was only blurred, were hysterical, and decided
to analyze the same. All she knew was that she had
the first attack when she went out to make purchases
in the main street of her city.—"What purchases did
you wish to make?"—"Various things, I believe it was
for a ball to which I was invited."—"When was the
ball to take place?"—"I believe two days later."-—
"Something must have happened a
few
days before
this which excited you and which made an impression
on you."—"But I don't know, it is now twenty-one
years."—"That does not matter, you will recall it. I

[39a]
34
Sigmund Freud
After this long but unavoidable digression, I
now return to the history of Miss Lucie R. As
aforesaid, she did not sink into somnambulism
when an attempt was made to hypnotize her,
will exert some pressure on your head and when I
stop it, you will either think of or see something which
I want you to tell me." I went through this procedure,
but she remained quiet.—"Well, has nothing come into
your mind?"—"I thought of something, but that can
have
no
connection
with
it."—"Just
say
it."—"I
thought of a young girl
who is dead, but she
died
when I was eighteen, that is, a year later."—"Let us
adhere
to
this.
What
was
the
matter
with
your
friend?"—"Her death affected me very much, because
I
was very friendly with her.
A
few
weeks before
another young girl died, which attracted a great deal
of attention in our city, but then I was only seventeen
years* old."—"You see, I told you that the thought
obtained under the pressure of the hands can be relied
upon. Well, now, can you recall the thought that you
had when you became dizzy in the street?"—"There
was no thought, it was vertigo."—"That is quite im
possible, such conditions are never without accompany
ing ideas. I will press your head again and you will
think of
it. Well, what came
to
your mind?"—"I
thought, 'Now
I
am
the third.' "—"What
do
you
mean?"—"When I became dizzy, I must have thought,
'Now I will die like the other two.' "—"That was then
the idea, during the attack you thought of your friend,
her death must have made a great impression on you."
—"Yes, indeed, I recall now that I felt dreadful when
I heard of her death, to think that I should go to a
ball while she lay dead, but I anticipated so
much
pleasure at the ball and was so
occupied with the
invitation that I
did not wish to think of this sad
event." (Notice here the intentional repression from
consciousness which caused the reminiscences of her
friend to become pathogenic.)
The attack was now in a measure explained, but I
still needed the occasional factor which just then pro
voked this recollection, and accidentally I formed a
happy supposition about it.—"Can you recall through
which street you passed at that time?"—"Surely, the
main street with its old houses, I can see it now."—
"And where did
your
friend live?"—"In the
same
street. I had just passed her house and was two houses
farther when I was seized with the attack."—"Then it
was the house which you passed that recalled your
dead friend, and the contrast which you then did not
wish to think about, that took possession of you."
Still, I was not satisfied; perhaps there was some
thing else which provoked or strengthened the hysteri
cal disposition in a hitherto normal girl. My supposi
tions were directed to the menstrual indisposition as
an appropriate
factor, and I
asked, "Do you know
when during that month you had your menses?"—
She became indignant: "Do you expect me to know
that? I only know that I had them very rarely and
irregularly. When I was seventeen, I only had them
once."—"Well, let us
enumerate the days,
months,
etc., so
as to
find
when it occurred."—She decided
with certainty on
a month and wavered between two
days preceding a date which accompanied a fixed holi
day.—"Does that in
any
way correspond with the
time of the ball?"—She answered quietly: "The ball
was on this holiday. And now I recall that the only
menses which I had had during the year occurred just
when I had to go to the ball. It was the first invita
tion to a ball that I had received."
The combination of the
events can now be readily
constructed and the mechanism of this hysterical at
tack readily viewed. To be sure, the result was gained
after painstaking labour. It necessitated on my side
full confidence in the technique and in the individual
leading ideas, in order to
reawaken such details of
forgotten
experiences
after
twenty-one
years
in
a
skeptical and really awakened patient. But then every
thing coincided.

[39b]
but lay calmly in a degree of mild suggestibil
ity, her eyes constantly closed, the features
immobile, the limbs without motion. I asked
her whether she remembered on what occasion
the smell perception of burned pastry origi
nated.—"Oh, yes, I know it well. It was about
two months ago, two days before my birthday.
I was with the
children (two girls) in the
schoolroom playing and teaching them to cook,
when a letter just left by the letter-carrier was
brought in. From its postmark and handwrit
ing, I recognized it as one sent to me by my
mother from Glasgow and I wished to open it
and read it. The children then came running
over, pulled the letter out of my hand and ex
claimed, 'No, you must not read it now; it is
probably a congratulatory letter for your birth
day and we will keep it for you until then/
While the children were thus playing, there was
a sudden diffusion of an intense odour. The
children forgot the pastry which they were
cooking, and it burned. Since then, I have been
troubled by this odour; it is really always pres
ent, but is more marked during emotional ex
citement."
"Do you see this scene distinctly before
you?"—"As
clearly as I experienced it."—
"What was there in it that so excited you?"—
"I was touched by the affection which
the
children displayed towards me."—"But weren't
they always so affectionate?"—"Yes, but I just
got the letter from my mother."—"I can't un
derstand in what way the affection of the little
ones and the letter from the mother contrasted,
a thing which you appear to intimate."—"I had
the intention of going to my mother and my
heart became heavy at the thought of leaving
those dear children."—"What was the matter
with your mother? Was she lonesome that she
wanted you, or was she sick just then and you
expected some news?"—"No, she is delicate,
but not really sick, and has a companion with,
her."—"Why then were you obliged to leave
the children?"—"This house had become un
bearable to me. The housekeeper, the cook, and
the French maid seemed to be under the im
pression that I was too proud for my position.
They united in intriguing against me and told
the grandfather of the children all sorts of
things about me, and when I complained to
both gentlemen, I did not receive the support
which I expected. I then tendered my resigna
tion to the master (father of the children),
but he was very friendly, asking me to recon
sider it for two weeks before taking any defi
nite steps. It was while I was in that state of

[40a]
Selected Papers on Hysteria
35
indecision that the incident occurred. I thought
that I would leave the house, but have re
mained."—"Aside from the attachment of the
children, is there anything particular which at
tracts you to them?"—"Yes, my mother is dis
tantly related to their mother, and when the
latter was on her death-bed, I promised her to
do my utmost to be a mother to them, and this
promise I broke when I offered my resignation."
The analysis of the subjective sensation of
smell seemed complete. It was once objective
and intimately connected with an experience, a
small scene, in which contrary affects con
flicted, sorrow at forsaking the children, and
the mortification which despite all, urged her to
this decision. Her mother's letter naturally re
called the motives of this
decision because
she thought of returning to her mother. The
conflict of the affects raised this factor to a
trauma, and the sensation of smell, which was
connected with it, remained as its symbol. The
only thing to be explained was the fact that out
of all the sensory perceptions of that scene,
the perception of smell was selected as the
symbol, but I was already prepared to use the
chronic nasal affliction as an explanation. On
being directly questioned, she stated that just
at that time she suffered from a severe coryza
and could*scarcely smell anything, but in her
excitement she perceived the odour of burned
pastry; it penetrated the organically motivated
anosmia.
As plausible as this sounded, it did not satisfy
me; there was no acceptable reason why this
series of excitement and this conflict of affects
should have led to hysteria. Why did it not re^-
main on a normal psychological basis? In other
words, what justified the conversion under dis
cussion? Why did
she not recall the scenes
themselves instead of the sensations connected
with them which she preferred as symbols for
her recollection? Such questions might seem
superfluous and irrelevant when dealing with
old hysterics in whom the mechanism of con
version is habitual, but this girl acquired hys
teria for the first time through this trauma, or
at least through this slight distress.
From the analysis of similar cases I already
knew that in the process of hysterical develop
ment one psychic determinant is indispensable;
namely, that some idea must intentionally be
repressed from
consciousness
and
excluded
from associative elaboration.
In this intentional repression I also find the
reason for the conversion of the sum of excite
ment, be it partial or total. The sum of excite

[40b]
ment which is not to enter into psychic asso
ciation more readily finds the wrong road to
bodily innervation. The reason for the repres
sion itself could only be a disagreeable feeling,
the incompatibility of one of the repressible
ideas with the ruling ideational-mass of the
ego. The repressed idea then avenges itself by
becoming pathogenic.
From this I
concluded that Miss Lucie R
had lapsed into that moment of hysterical con
version, which must have been one of the pre
requisites of that trauma which she intention
ally wished to leave in the dark, and which she
took pains to forget. On considering her attach
ment for the children and her sensitiveness to
wards the other persons of the household, there
remained but one interpretation which I was
bold enough to impart to her. I told her that I
did not believe that all these things were simply
due to her affection for the children, but that
I thought that she was rather in love with her
master, perhaps unwittingly, that she really
nurtured the hope of taking the place of the
mother, and it was for that reason that she be
came so sensitive towards the servants with
whom she had lived peacefully for years. She
feared lest they would notice something of her
hope and scoff at her.
She answered in her laconic manner: "Yes, I
believe it is so."—"But if you knew that you
were in love with the master, why did you not
tell me so?"—"But I did not know it, or rather,
I did not wish to know it. I wished to crowd it
out of my mind, never to think of it, and of late
I have been successful."1
"Why did you not wish to admit it to your
self ? Were you ashamed because you loved a
man?"—"Oh, no, I am not unreasonably prud
ish; one is certainly not responsible for one's
own feelings. I only felt chagrined because it
1 Another and better
description of this peculiar
state, in which one knows something and at the same
time does not know it, I could never obtain. It can ap
parently be understood only if one has found himself
in such a state. I have at my disposal a very striking
recollection of this kind which I
can vividly see. If
I make the effort to recall what passed through my
mind at that time my output seems very poor. I saw
at that time something which was not at all appropri
ate to my expectations, and I was not in the least di
verted from my definite purpose by what I saw when,
as a matter of fact, this perception should have de
flected me from my purpose. I did not become con
scious of this contradiction nor did I notice anything
of the affect of the repulsion which was undoubtedly
responsible for the fact that this perception did not
attain any psychic validity. I was
struck with that
blindness in seeing eyes, which one admires so much
in mothers towards their daughters, in husbands to
wards their wives, and in rulers towards their favour
ites.

[41a]
36
SlGMUND
was my employerin whose serviceI was and in
whose house I lived, and toward whom I could
not feel as independent as towards another.
What is more, I am a poor girl and he is a rich
man of a prominent family, and if anybody
should have had any inkling about my feelings,
they would have ridiculed me."
After this I encountered no resistances in
elucidating the origin of this affection. She told
me that the first years of her life in that house
were passed uneventfully. She fulfilled her du
ties without thinking about unrealizable wishes.
One day, however, the serious and very busy,
and hitherto very reserved master engaged her
in conversation about the exigencies of rearing
the children. He became milder and more cor
dial than usual, he told her how much he
counted on her in the bringing up of his or
phaned children, and looked at her rather pe
culiarly. It was in this moment that she began
to love him, and gladly occupied herself with
the pleasing hopes which she conceivedduring
that conversation. However, as this was not
followed by anything else, and, despite her
waiting and persevering, no other confidential
heart-to-heart talk followed,
she decided to
crowd it out of her mind. She quite agreed
with me that the look which she noticed during
the conversation was probably intended for the
memory of his deceased wife. She was also
perfectly convinced that her love was hopeless.
After this
conversation I expected a de
cided change in her condition, but for a time
it did not take place. She continued depressed
and moody—a course of hydrotherapy which
I prescribed for her at the same time refreshed
her somewhat in the morning. The odour of
burned
pastry did
not
entirely
disappear;
though it became rarer and feebler, it appeared-,
as she said, only when she, was very much
excited.
The continuation of this memory symbol led
me to believe that besides the principal scene
it also represented many smaller, side traumas
and I, therefore, investigated" everything that
might have been in any way connected with the
scene of the burned pastry. We thus passed
through the theme of family friction, the be
haviour of the grandfather and others, and with
that the sensation of burned odour gradually
disappeared. Just then there was a lengthy in
terruption occasioned by a new nasal affliction,
which led to the discovery of the caries of the
ethmoid^
j
On her return, she informed me that she re
ceived many Christmas presents
from both

[41b]
Freud
gentlemen as well as from the household serv
ants, as if they were trying to appease her and
wipe away the recollection of the conflicts of
the last months. These frank advances made
no impression on her.
On questioning her on another occasion about
the odour of burned pastry, she stated that it
had entirely disappeared, but instead she was
now bothered by another and similar odour like
the smoke of a cigar, This odour really existed
before; it was only concealed by the odour of
the pastry, but now it appearedas such.
I was not very much pleased with the suc
cess of my treatment. What occurred here is
what a mere symptomatic treatment is gen
erally blamed for, namely, that it removes one
symptom only to make room
for
another,
Nevertheless, I immediately set forth to re
move this new memory symbol by analysis.
This time I did not know,whence this sub
jective sensation of smell originated, nor on
what important occasion it was objective. On
being questioned, she said, "They constantly
smoke at home; I really don't know whether
the smell which I feel has any particular sig
nificance." I then proposed that she should try
to recall things under the pressure ofmy hands.
I have already mentioned that her recollec
tions were plastically vivid, that she was of
the "visual type." Indeed, under the pressure
of my hands a picture came into her mind—at
first, only slowly and fragmentarily. It was the
dining room in which she waited with the chil
dren
for the arrival of the gentlemen from
the factory for dinner.—"Now we are all at
the table, the gentlemen, the French maid, the
housekeeper, the children, and I. It is the same
as usual."—"Just, keep on looking at that pic
ture. It will soon become developed and spe
cialized."—"Yes, there is a.;guest, the chief
accountant, an old gentleman, who loves the
children like
his own grandchildren, but he
dines with us so frequently that it is nothing
unusual."—"Just have patience, keep on look
ing at the picture, something will
certainly
happen."—"Nothing happens. We
leave the
table, the children take leave and go with us
to
the
second
floor
as
usual."—"Well?"—
"There really is something unusual here. I now
recognize the scene. As the children leave, the
chief accountant attempts to kiss them, but my
master jumps up and shouts at him, 'Don't kiss
the children!' I then experienced a stitch in the
heart, and, as the gentlemen were smoking, this
odour remained in my memory."
This, therefore, was the second, deeper seated

[42a]
Selected Papers on Hysteria
37
scene, which acted as a trauma, and left the
memory symbol. But why was this scene so ef
fective? I then asked her which scene hap
pened first, this one or the one of the burned
pastry—"The last scene happened first by al
most two months."—"Why did you feel the
stitch at the father's interference? The re
proof was not meant for you."—"It was real
ly not right to rebuke an old man in such a
manner, who was a dear friend and a guest; it
could have been said more calmly."—"Then
you were really affected by your master's im
petuosity? Were you perhaps ashamed of him,
or did you think, 'If he could become so im
petuous towards an old friend and guest over
such a trifle, how would he act towards me if
I were his wife?' "—"No, that is not it."—"But
still it was
about his
impetuosity?"—-"Yes,
about the kissing of the children, he never liked
that." Under the pressure of my hands there
emerged a still older scene, which was the real
effective trauma and which bestowed on the
scene of the chief accountant the traumatic affectivity.
A few months before, a lady friend visited
the house and on leaving kissed both children
on the lips. The father, who was present, con
trolled himself and said nothing to the lady, but
when she left, he was very angry at the unfor
tunate governess. He said that he held her re
sponsible for this kissing; that it was her duty
not to tolerate it; that she was neglecting her
duties in allowing such things, and that, if it
ever happened again, he would entrust the edu
cation of his children to someone else. This oc
curred while she believed herself loved, and
waited for a repetition of that serious and
friendly talk. This episode shattered all her
hopes. She thought: "If he can upbraid and
threaten me on account of such a trifle, of
which I am entirely innocent, I must have been
mistaken; he never entertained any tenderer
feelings towards me, else he would have been
more considerate."—It was evidently this pain
ful scene that came to her as the father rep
rimanded the chief accountant for attempting
to kiss the children.
On being visited by Miss Lucie R two days
after the last analysis, I had to ask her what
pleasant things happened to her. She looked as
though transformed, she smiled, and held her
head aloft. For a moment I thought that after
all I probably mistook the situations, and that
the governess of the children had now become
the bride of her master. But she soon dissipated
all my suppositions by saying, "Nothing new

[42b]
has happened. You really da not know me. You
have always seen me while I was sick and de
pressed. Usually I
am
always
cheerful. On
awaking yesterday morning my burden was
gone and since then I have felt well."—"What
do you think of your chances in the house?"
—"I am perfectly clear about that. I know that
I have none, and I am not going to be unhappy
about it.'—"Will you now be able to
get
along with the others in the house?"—"I be
lieve so, because most of the trouble was due
to my sensitiveness."—"Do you still love the
master?"—"Certainly I love him, but that does
not bother me much. One can think and feel as
one wishes."
I now examined her nose and found that the
pain and the reflex sensations had almost com
pletely
disappeared.
She
could
distinguish
odours, but she was uncertain when they were
very intense. What part the nasal trouble played
in the anosmia, I must leave undecided.
The whole treatment extended over a period
of nine weeks. Four months later I accidental
ly met the patient at one of our summer re
sorts—she was cheerful and stated that her
health continued to be good.
EPICRISIS
I would not like to underestimate the afore
said case
even though it only represents a
minor and light hysteria with but few symp
toms. On the contrary, it seems to me instruc
tive that even such a slight neurotic affliction
should require so many psychic determinants,
and, on more exhaustive consideration of this
history, I am tempted to put it down as an
illustration of that form of hysteria which even
persons not burdened by heredity may acquire,
if they have the suitable experiences for it. It
should be well noted that I do not speak of a
hysteria which may be independent of all pre
disposition; such form probably does not ex
ist, but we speak of such a predisposition only
after the person became hysterical, as nothing
pointed to it before. A neuropathic disposition
as commonly understood is something different.
It is determined even before the disease by a
number of hereditary burdens, or by a sum of
individual psychic, abnormalities. As far as I
know, none of these two factors could be demon
strated in the case of Miss Lucie R. Her hysteria
may, therefore, be called acquired, and fey and
large presupposes nothing more than a very
marked susceptibility to acquire hysteria, a
characteristic about which we know scarcely
anything. In such cases the greatest emphasis

[43a]
38
SlGMUND
lies in the nature of the trauma and naturally
in connection with the reaction of the person
to the trauma. It is an indispensable condition
for the acquisition of hysteria that there should
arise a relation of incompatibility between the
ego and an idea that comes in contact with it.
I hope to beable to show in another place how
a variety of neurotic disturbances originate
from the different procedures which the ego
pursues in order to free itself from that in
compatibility. The hysterical form of defence,
for which a special adaptation is required, con
sists in a conversion of the excitement into
physical innervation. The gain brought about
by this process consists in the crowding out of
the unbearable idea from the ego consciousness,
which then contains instead the physical rem
iniscences producedby conversion—in our case
the subjective sensation of smell—and suffers
from the affect which more or less distinctly
connects itself with these reminiscences. The
situation thus produced can no longer be
changed, for the resistance which would have
striven for the adjustment of the affect was
eliminated through repression and conversion.
Thus, the mechanism producing hysteria cor
responds on the one hand to an act of moral
faintheartedness, on the other hand it presents
itself as a protective process at the command
of the ego. There are many cases in which
it must be admitted that the defence against
the increased excitement through the production
ofhysteria mayactually havebeenmostexpedi
ent, but more frequently one will naturally
come to the conclusion that a greater measure
of moral courage would have been of more
advantage to the individual.
Accordingly, the real traumatic moment is
that in which the conflict thrusts itself upon
the ego and the latter decides to banishthe in
compatible idea. Such banishment doesnot an
nihilate the opposing idea, but merely crowds
it into the unconscious. When this process oc
curs for the first time, it forms a nucleus, or a
point of crystallization, for the formation of a
new psychic group, separated from the ego,
around which, in the course of time, everything
collects which is in accord with the oppos
ing idea. The splitting of consciousness in such
cases of acquired hysteria is thus desired and
intentional^ and is often initiated by at least
one arbitrary,act. But as a matter of fact, some
thing different happens than the individual ex
pects; he would like to eliminate an idea as
though it never came to pass, but he only suc
ceeds in isolating it psychically.

[43b]
Freud
The traumatic factor in the history of our
patient correspondsto the scene created by her
master on account of the kissing of the chil
dren. For the time being this scene remained
without any palpable effects, perhaps it initi
ated the depression and sensitiveness, but I
leave this open; the hysterical symptoms, how
ever, commenced later in moments which can
be designated as auxiliary, and which may be
characterized by the fact that in them there
was a simultaneous inter-fusion of both sep
arated groups just as in the broadened som
nambulic consciousness. The first of these fac
tors in which the conversion took place in Miss
Lucie R was the scene at the table when the
chief accountant attempted to kiss the chil
dren. The traumatic memory helped along, and
she acted as though she had not entirely ban
ished her attachment for her master. In other
cases we find that these different factors coa
lesce and the conversion occurs directly under
the influence of the trauma.
The second auxiliary factor repeated almost
precisely the mechanism of the first. A strong
impression transitorily re-established the unity
of consciousness, and the conversion took the
same route that was opened to it the first time.
It is interesting to note that the symptom which
occurred second concealed the first, so that the
latter could not be distinctly perceived until
the former was eliminated. The reversal of the
succession of events, to which also the analysis
had to be adapted, seemed quite remarkable.
In a whole series of cases I
found that the
symptoms which came later covered the first,
and only the last thing in the analysis con
tained the key to the whole.
|
The therapy here consisted in forcing the
union of the dissociated psychic groups with the
ego consciousness. It is remarkable that the
success did not run parallel with the accom
plished work, the cure resulted suddenly only
after the last part was accomplished.
CHAPTER 3
Case History of Miss Elisabeth von R1 !
In the fall of 1892 I was requested by a friend
ly colleague to examine a young lady who had
been suffering from pains in her legs for over
two years, so that shewalked badly.He also add
ed to his request that he had diagnosed the case
as hysteria, though none of the usual symp
toms of the neurosis could be found. He stated
that he knew very little of the family, but that
1 Breuer u. Freud, Studien uber Hysterie (1895),
Case V.

[44a]
the last few years had brought them much
misfortune and little pleasure. First the pa
tient's father died, then the mother underwent
a serious operation on her eyes, and soon there
after a married sister succumbed to a chronic
cardiac affection following childbirth. Our pa
tient had taken an active part in all the afflic
tions, especially in the nursing of the sick.
I made no further progress in the case after
I had seen the twenty-four-year-old patient for
the first time. She seemed intelligent and psy
chically normal, and bore her affliction with a
cheerful mien, thus vividly recalling the belle
indifference of hysterics. She walked with the
upper part of her body bent forward, but with
out any support; her walk did not correspond
to any known pathological gait, and it was in
no way strikingly bad. She complained only
of severe pains and of early fatigue in walking
as well as standing, so that after a brief pe
riod she had to seek rest in which the pains
diminished, but by no means disappeared. The
pain was of an indefinite nature—one could as
sume it to be a painful fatigue. The seat of the
pain was quite extensive, but indefinitely cir
cumscribed on the superficial surface of the right
thigh. It was from this area that the pains radi
ated and were of the greatest intensity. Here,
too, the skin and muscles were especially sen
sitive to pressure and pinching, while needle
pricks were rather indifferently perceived. The
same hyperalgesia of the skin and muscles was
demonstrable not only in this area, but over
almost the entire surface of both legs. The
muscles were perhaps more painful than the
skin, but both kinds of pains were unmistak
ably most pronounced over the thighs. The
motor power of the legs was not diminished,
the reflexes were of average intensity, and, as
all other symptoms were lacking, there was no
basis for the assumption of a serious organic
affection. The disease developed gradually dur
ing two years and changed considerably in its
intensity.
I did not find it easy to determine the diag
nosis, but for two reasons I concluded to agree
with my colleague. First, because it was rather
strange that such a highly intelligent patient
should not be able to give anything definite
about the character of her pains. A patient
suffering from an organic pain, if it is not
accompanied by any nervousness, will be able
to describe it definitely and calmly; it may
perhaps be lancinating, appear at certain in
tervals, and extend from this to that location,
or in his opinion it may be evoked by this or

[44b]
39
that influence. The neurasthenic1 in describing
his pain gives the impression as being occupied
with some difficult mental problem, something
far beyond his powers. His features are tense
and distorted as though under the domination
of a painful affect, his voice becomes shriller,
he struggles for expression, he rejects all desig
nations that the physician makes for his pains,
even though they are undoubtedly afterwards
found to be correct. He is ostensibly of the
opinion that language is too poor to give ex
pression to his feelings. These sensations are
something unique, they never existed before,
so that they cannot be exhaustively described.
It is for this reason that he never tires of con
stantly adding new details, and, when he has to
stop, he is distinctly controlled by the impres
sion that he was unsuccessful in making himself
understood to the physician. All this is due to
the fact that his pains absorb his whole atten
tion. In the case of Miss von R, we had just
the opposite behaviour, and we had to conclude
from this that she attributed sufficient signifi
cance to the pain, but that her attention was
concentrated on something else of which the
pains were only the accompanying phenomena,
perhaps on thoughts and sensations which were
connected with pain.
A still greater determination for the con
ception of the pain must, however, be found
in a second factor. If we irritate a painful area
in a patient suffering from an organic disease
or neurasthenia, his physiognomy will show a
definite expression of discomfort or of physical
pain, the patient winces, refuses to be exam
ined, and assumes a defensive attitude. But if
anyone pinched or pressed Miss von R's hyperalgesic skin or muscles of her legs, her face
assumed
a
peculiar
expression
approaching
nearer pleasure than pain, she cried out and—
I had to think of a perhaps pleasurable tick
ling—her face reddened, she threw her head
backward, closed her eyes, and her body bent
backward; all this was not very distinct, but suf
ficiently marked so that it could only agree with
the conception that her affliction was a hys
teria and that the irritation touched a hyster
ogenic zone.
Her mien was not adequate to the pain, which
the pinching of the muscles and skin were sup
posed to excite. It probably harmonized better
with the contents of the thoughts which were
behind the pain and which were evoked in the
patient through a stimulation of those parts of
1A hypochondriac afflicted with anxiety neurosis.
Tr.

[45a]
40
Sigmund Freud
the body associated with them. I have repeated
ly observed similar significant expression from
stimulation of hyperalgesic zones in unmistak
able cases of hysteria. The other gestures evi
dently corresponded to the slightest suggestion
of an hysterical attack.
We could not at that time find any explana
tion for the unusual localization of the hyster
ogenic zone. That the hyperalgesia chiefly con
cerned the muscles, gave material for reflection.
The most frequent affliction which could pro
duce diffuse and local pressure sensitiveness of
the muscles is rheumatic infiltration, or com
mon chronic muscular rheumatism; of its apti
tude to mask nervous ailments I have spoken.
The consistency of the painful muscles in Miss
von R did not contradict this assumption, as
there were many hard cords in the muscle mas
ses, which seemed to be especially sensitive.
There was probably also an organic change in
the muscles, in the assumed sense, upon which
the neurosis leaned, and the significance of
which was markedly exaggerated by the neu
rosis.
The therapeutic procedure was, therefore,
based on the assumption of a mixed affection.
We
recommended
systematic
massage
and
faradization of the sensitive muscles, regardless
of the pain it produced, and in order to remain
in contact with the patient, I treated her legs
by means of strong Franklin sparks. To her
question whether she should force herself to
walk, we answered decidedly in the affirmative.
We thus attained a slight improvement. She
particularly liked the painful shocks of the "in
fluence machine," and the stronger they were,
the more they seemed to remove her pains.
My colleague, meanwhile, prepared the soil for
the psychic treatment, and, when after four
weeks of this sham treatment I proposed it
and explained to the patient the procedures
and its effects, I found a ready understanding
and only a slight resistance.
The work which I then began turned out to
be the most arduous undertaking that ever fell
to my lot, and the difficulty of giving an ac
count of this work ranks well with the obstacles
that had to be overcome. For a long time, too,
I
did not understand the connection between
the history of the disease and the affliction,
which should really have been caused and de
termined by this series of events.
When one undertakes a cathartic treatment,
he at first asks himself whether the patient
understands the origin and cause of her suffer
ing. If that is so, one does not need any spe

[45b]
cial technique to cause her to reproduce the
history of her ailment. The interest shown in
her, the understanding which we foreshadow,
the hope of recovery extended to her, all these
induce the patient to give up her secrets. In the
case of Miss Elisabeth, it seemed probably
right from the very beginning that she was
conscious of the reasons for her suffering, that
she had only a secret but no foreign body in
consciousness. On looking at her one had to
think of the poet's words: "That mask indicates
a hidden meaning."1
At first I could, therefore, dispense with hyp
nosis, reserving it,
however, for future use
should conditions arise in the course of the
confession for which explanation the memory
would not suffice. Thus, in this first complete
analysis of an hysteria which I had under
taken I attained a process of treatment which
I later raised to a method and intentionally
used as a process of clearing stratum by stra
tum
the pathogenic psychic material, which
we were pleased to compare with the technique
of excavating a buried city. At first I let the
patient relate what was known to her, paying
careful attention wherever a
connection
re
mained enigmatic, or where a link in the chain
of causation seemed to be lacking. Later, I
penetrated into the deeper strata of memory
by using for those locations hypnotic investiga
tions or a similar technique. The presupposi
tion of the whole work was naturally based on
the expectation that a perfect and sufficient
determination
could
be
demonstrated.
The
methods of the deeper investigation will soon
be discussed.
The history which Miss Elisabeth gave was
quite dull and was woven of manifold painful
experiences. During this recital she was not in
a hypnotic state; I merely asked her to lie down
and keep her eyes closed. I, however, made no
objection if from time to time she opened her
eyes, changed her position, or sat up. Whenever
she entered more deeply into a part of her his
tory, she seemed to lapse spontaneously into a
condition resembling a hypnotic state. She then
remained motionless and kept her eyes firmly
closed.
I shall now reproduce the results of the most
superficial stratum of her memory. As the
youngest of three daughters she spent her youth
with her parents, to whom she was devotedly
attached, on their estate in Hungary. Her moth
er's health was frequently disturbed by an af
fliction of the eyes, as well as by a nervous ail1 It will be shown that I was, nevertheless, mistaken.

[46a]
Selected Papers on Hysteria
ment. It thus happened that she became espe
cially and devotedly attached to her jovial and
broadminded father, who was wont to say that
his daughter took the place of both a son and
friend with whom he could exchange thoughts.
As much as the girl gained in mental stimula
tion in consequence of this intercourse, it did
not escape the father that her psychic constitu
tion deviated from that ideal which one so much
desires to see in a girl. Jocosely he called her
"pert and disputatious." He warned her against
being too confident in her judgments, against
her tendencies to tell the truth regardless of
everybody, and expressed his opinion that she
would find it difficult to get a husband. As a
matter of fact, she was very discontented with
her girlhood;
she was filled with ambitious
plans, she wished to study or to obtain a mu
sical education, and revolted at the thought of
being forced to give up her ambitions and sacri
fice her freedom of judgment for the sake of
marriage. Meanwhile, she was proud of her
father, of the regard and social position of her
family, and jealously guarded everything con
nected with these matters. The indifference with
which she treated her mother and older sisters,
as will be shown, was considered by her parents
to be due to the blunter side of her character.
The age of the girls impelled the family to
move into the metropolis, where for a time
Elisabeth enjoyed a richer and gayer social
life. But then came
the calamity which de
stroyed the happiness of the home. The father
either concealed or overlooked a chronic cardiac
affection, and one day he was brought home in
an unconscious state after the first attack of
oedema of the lungs. This was followed by an
illness of one and a half years, during which
Elisabeth took the
most prominent part in
nursing him. She slept in her father's room,
awoke at night at his call, watched over him
faithfully during the day, and forced herself
to appear cheerful while he went through a
hopeless condition with
amiable resignation.
The beginning of her affection must have been
connected with this period of her nursing, for
she could recall that during the last half year
of this care she had to remain in bed on one
occasion for a day and a half on account of
severe pain in her right leg. She maintained,
however, that these pains soon passed away and
excited neither worry nor attention. As a mat
ter of fact, it was not before two years after
the death of her father that she began to feel
sick and unable to walk on account of pain.
The void which her father left in the life of

[46b]
41
this family consisting of four women, the social
solitude, the cessation of so many relations
which promised stimulation and pleasure, the
increased infirmity of the mother, all these be
clouded the patient's emotional attitude, but
simultaneously aroused a warm desire that the
family might soon find a substitute for the lost
happiness, and impelled her to concentrate her
entire devotion and care on the surviving moth
er. At the end of the year of mourning, the eld
est sister married a talented and ambitious man
of notable position, who seemed to have been
destined for a great future by virtue of his
mentality, but who, however, soon developed a
morbid sensitiveness and egotistic persevera
tion of moods, and dared to show his disregard
for the old lady in the family circle. That was
more than Elisabeth could endure. She felt it
her duty to take up the cudgels against her
brother-in-law whenever he gave occasion for
it, whereas the other women took lightly the
outburst of his excited temperament. She felt
it a painful disillusionment that the reconstruc
tion of the old family happiness could be im
peded by such a disturbance, and she could not
forgive her married sister because, due to femi
nine docility, the latter firmly avoided espous
ing either cause. Thus, a whole series of scenes
remained in Elisabeth's memory which were
connected with a number of partially unuttered
grievances against her first brother-in-law. But
her greatest grievance against him was the fact
that for the sake of a prospective promotion he
moved his small family to a distant city in Aus
tria, and thus helped to increase her mother's
isolation. On this occasion Elisabeth distinctly
felt her inability and helplessness to afford her
mother a substitute for her lost happiness, as
well as the impossibility of following out the
resolution she made on the occasion of her
father's death.
The marriage of the second sister seemed
more promising for the future welfare of the
family. The second brother-in-law, although
not of the same mental calibre as the first, was
a man after the heart of delicate ladies, and his
behaviour reconciled Elisabeth to the institu
tion of marriage and to the sacrifices it en
tailed. What is more, the second couple re
mained near her mother, and the child of this
brother-in-law and the second sister became
Elisabeth's pet. Unfortunately, the year during
which the child was born was clouded by an
other event. The visual affliction of the mother
demanded many weeks' treatment in a dark
room, in which Elisabeth participated. Follow-

[47a]
42
Sigmtjnd Freud
ing this, an operationproved necessary and the
excitement connected with this occurred at the
same time as
the first brother-in-law made
preparations to move. Finally, the operation,
having been skilfully performed, proved suc
cessful, and the three families met at a sum
mer resort. There Elisabeth, exhausted by the
worries of the past months, had the first oppor
tunity to recuperate from the effects of the suf
fering and anxiety to which the family had been
subjected since the death of her father.
But just during this sojourn in the summer
resort, Elisabeth became ill with pain and
weakness. These pains, which had been notice
able for a short while some time previously,
manifested themselves severely for the first
time after taking a warm bath at a small spa.
A long walk, actually half a day's hike a few
days previously, was thought to have had some
connection with the onset of the pains, so that
it was quite easy to gain the impression that
Elisabeth at first became "fatigued," and then
"caught cold."
From now on Elisabeth became the patient
in the family. Following the advice of the phy
sician, she spent the rest of the summer in Bad
Gastein, whither she went with her mother, but
not without having a new worriment to think
about. The second sister was again pregnant,
and the information as to her condition was
quite unfavorable, so that Elisabeth could hard
ly decide to take the journey to Gastein. After
barely two weeks at Gastein both mother and
sister were recalled because things were not well
with the patient at home.
An agonizing journey, which for Elisabeth
was full of pain and anxious expectations, was
followed by certain signs at the railroad sta
tion which forbode the worst, and then, on
entering the sickroom, they were confronted
with the reality—that they had arrived too
late to take leave of the dying one.
Elisabeth not only suffered from the loss of
this sister, whom she dearly loved, but almost
as much from the thoughts instigated by her
death, and from the changes which it entailed.
The sister had succumbed to heart trouble,
which was aggravated by the pregnancy.
The idea then came to her mind that heart
trouble was the paternal inheritance of the
family. It was then recalled that in her early
girlhood the deceased went through an attack
of chorea with a slight heart affection.
The
members of the family then blamed themselves
and the physicians for permitting the mar
riage, and they could not help reproaching the

[47b]
unfortunate widower for endangering his wife's
health through two successive pregnancies with
out any pause. The sad thought that, after the
rare conditions for a happy marriage had been
found, this happiness should have terminated
in this way, constantly occupied Elisabeth's
mind. Moreover, she again saw everything go
to pieces that she had planned for her mother.
The widowed brother-in-law was inconsolable
and withdrew from his wife's family. It seemed
that his own family, from whom he was es
tranged during his short and happy married
life, took advantage of the opportunity to draw
him back into their own circle. There was no
way of maintaining the former union; out of
regard for his unmarried sister-in-law, it would
have seemed improper to live together with his
mother-in-law, and as he refused to relinquish
his child, the only legacy of the deceased to the
two ladies, they accused him for the first time
of heartlessness. Finally, and this was not the
least painful, Elisabeth received some definite
information concerning a disagreement between
the two
brothers-in-law, the cause of which
she could only surmise. It seemed that the widf
ower made some financial demands, which the
other brother-in-law considered unjustifiable;
indeed, in view of the mother's recent sorrowhe could only designate it as a wicked extor
tion. This then was the history of the ambitious
and lovable young woman. Resentful of heir
fate, embittered over the failure of her little
plans to restore the family lustre; of those
dear to her, some were dead, some away, and
some estranged—without any inclination to
seek refuge in the love of a strange man, she
lived thus for a year and a half away from al
most all social relations nursing her mother
and her pains.
i
If one could forget greater suffering, and
wished to read one's self into the psychic life
of a girl, one could hardly deny Miss Elisabeth
a sincere human sympathy. But what about the
physician's interest in this sorrowful tale and
its relation to her painful and weak gait; what
about the prospects of explaining and curing
this case by the knowledge which we may per
haps obtain from these psychic traumas?
For the physician the confession of this pa
tient was at first a great disappointment. For,
to be sure, it was a history composed of banal
mental shocks, from which we could neither
explain why the patient became afflicted with
hysteria, nor how the hysteria assumed the
form of the painful abasia. It explained neither
the causation nor the determination of the hys-

[48a]
Selected Papers on Hysteria
43
teria in question. We could perhaps assume that
the patient had formed an association between
her psychically painful impressions and bodily
pains, which she accidentally perceived simulta
neously, and that now she utilized in her mem
ory the physical sensation as a symbol for the
psychic. What motives she had for this substi
tution and in what moment this came about re
mained unexplained. To be sure, these were
questions whose nature "was not hitherto fa
miliar to physicians. For it was customary to
content one's self with the information that the
patient was constitutionally hysterical, and that
under the intensive pressure of any kind of ex
citement she coulddevelophystericalsymptoms.
This confession offered even less for the ex
planation than for the treatment of the case.
One could not conceive what beneficial influ
ence Miss Elisabeth could derive from recount
ing sad, familiar family experiences of the past
years to a stranger, who could give her in re
turn only moderate sympathy, nor could one
observe any improvement after the confession.
During the first period of the treatment the
patient never failed to repeat to her physician:
"I continue to feel ill, I have the same pains as
before," and when she accompanied this by a
crafty and malicious glance, I could perhaps
recall the words which old Mr. von R
was
wont to say about his favourite daughter: "She
is frequently pert and disputatious," but after
all I had to confess that she was right.
Had I given up the patient at this stage of
the psychic treatment, the case of Miss Elisa
beth von R would have been of no importance
whatever for the theory of hysteria. But I con
tinued my analysis because I felt sure that an
understanding of the causation, as well as the
determination,
of
the
hysterical
symptoms
could be gained from the deeper
strata of
consciousness.
I, therefore, decided to put the direct ques
tion to the broadened consciousness of the pa
tient as to what psychic impression was con
nected with the origin of the pain in the legs.
For this purpose the patient should have
been put into deep hypnosis. But fortunately I
was forced to realize that all my procedures in
that direction could not put the patient in any
other state of consciousness than that in which
she gave me her confession. Still, I was very
pleased that this time she abstained from tri
umphantly remonstrating with the words: "You
see I really do not sleep. I cannot be hypno
tized." In such despair I conceived the idea of
making use of the trick of pressing the head,

[48b]
the
origin of which I have
thoroughly dis
cussed in the preceding observation of Miss
Lucie. This was done by requesting the patient
unfailingly to inform me of whatever appeared
before her mind's eye or flashed through her
memory at the moment of the pressure. She
was silent for a long time, and then admitted
that on my pressure she thought of an evening
in which a young man had accompanied her
home from some social affair, of the conversa
tion that passed between them, and of her feel
ings on returning home to nurse her father.
With this first mention of the young man a
new shaft was opened, the content of which I
then gradually brought out. We dealt here
rather with a secret, for, with the exception of
a mutual friend, no one knew anything of the
relationship and the hopes connected with it.
It concerned the son of an old friendly family,
who formerly lived in the neighbourhood.
The young man, being an orphan, attached
himself with great devotion to her father, who
guided him in his career, and this veneration
for the father was naturally extended to the la
dies of the family. Numerous reminiscences of
joint readings, exchange of views, and remarks
which had been repeated to her, marked the
gradual growth of her conviction that he loved
and understood her, and that a marriage with
him would not impose upon her the sacrifice
that she feared. Unhappily, he was only slightly
older than she, and as yet far from independ
ent. She, however, firmly resolved to wait for
him.
With the serious illness of her father, and the
necessity of nursing him, these relations be
came less frequent. The evening, which she re
called first, really marked the height of her
feelings, but even then there was no exchange
of ideas between them on the subject. It was
only at the urging of her family that she con
sented to leave the sick-bed that evening and
attend the social affair where she was to meet
him. She wished to hasten home early, but she
was forced to remain, and only yielded on his
promising to accompany her home. At no time
had she entertained such a tender regard for
him as during this walk, but after returning
home at a late hour in this blissful state and
finding the condition of her father aggravated,
she bitterly reproached herself for having sac
rificed so much for her own amusement. It was
the last time that she left her sick father for a
whole evening, and thereafter she saw
her
friend only rarely. After the death of her father,
he seemed to hold himself aloof out of re-

[49a]
44
spect for her sorrow, and business affairs later
took him to other regions. Gradually, she came
to the realization that his interest in her was
suppressed by other feelings and that he was
lost to her. This failure of her first love pained
her as often as she thought of it.
In this relationship and in the above men
tioned scene to which it led, I had to seek the
causation of the first hysterical pain. A conflict,
or a state of incompatibility, arose through the
contrast between the happiness which she had
not at that time denied herself and the sad con
dition in which she found her father upon her
arrival home. As a result of this conflict, the
erotic ideas were repressed from the associa
tions and the affect connected with them was
utilized in aggravating or reviving a simultane
ously (or somewhat previously) existing physi
cal pain. It was, thus, the mechanism of a con
version for the purpose of defence, as I have
shown circumstantially in another place.1
To be sure, we have room here for all kinds
of observations. I must stress the fact that I
did not
succeed in demonstrating from her
memory that the conversion took place at the
time of her returning home. I therefore investi
gated for similar experiences which might have
occurred while she was nursing her father, and
Ievoked a number of scenes, among which was
one during which she had to jump out of bed
with bare feet in a cold room to respond to the
repeated calls of her father. I was inclined to
attribute to this factor a certain significance,
for in addition to complaining of pain in her
legs, she also complained of tormenting sensa
tions of coldness. Nevertheless, here, too, I
could not with certainty lay hold of the scene
which could be designated as the scene of con
version. This led me to admit that there was
some gap in the explanation, until I recalled
that the hysterical pains in the legs were really
not present at the time she nursed her father.
From her memory she recalled only a single at
tack of pain lasting a few days, to which at
that time she paid no attention. I then directed
my attention to the first appearance of the
pains. Here I was successful in awakening a
definite memory. Just at that time a relative
visited her; she could not receive him because
she was ill in bed, and he had the misfortune
to find her ill on another occasion two years
later. But the search for the psychic motive of
these first pains failed as often as it was re
peated. I believed that I could assume that
1"The Defence-Neuro-Psychoses" (1894), p. 81 ff.
below.

[49b]
Sigmund Freud
these first pains were due to a slight rheumatic
attack and really had no psychic basis, and I
could also discover that this organic trouble
was the model for the later hysterical imita
tion, at all events that it occurred before the
scene of being accompanied home. That these
mild organic pains should have continued for
some time without her paying much attention
to them was quite possible, when we consider
the nature of the situation. The obscurity re
sulting from this,
namely, that the analysis
pointed to a conversion of psychic excitement
into bodily pain at a time when such pain was
certainly not perceived and not recalled—this
problem I hope to be able to solve in later con
siderations and by other examples.2
With the discovery of the motive for the
first conversion, we began a second more fruit
ful period of the treatment. In the first place,
very soon afterward, the patient surprised me
with the statement that she now knew why the
pains always radiated from that definite loca
tion on the right thigh, and were most painful
there. This was the exact place upon which her
father's leg rested every morning while she
changed the bandages of his badly swollen leg.
That occurred hundreds of times, and, strange
to say, she did not think of this connection un
til today. She thus gave me the desired explana
tion for the origin of an atypical hysterogenic:
zone. Furthermore, during our analysis, her
painful legs always "joined in the discussion.?'
I mean the following remarkable state of af
fairs: The patient was as a rule free from pain
when we began our work, but as soon as I
evoked some recollection by question or by
pressure of the head, she at first reported some
pain, usually of a very vivid nature, and then
winced and placed her hand on the painful area.
This awakened pain remained constant as long
as the patient was dominated by the recollec
tion, reaching its height when she was about to
utter the essential and critical part of her com
munication, and disappeared with the lastwords
of the statement. I gradually learned to use
this awakened pain as a compass. Whenever she
became mute, but still claimed to have pains,
I knew that she had not told me everything,
and urged her to continue the confession until
the pain was "spoken away." Then only did I
awaken a new recollection.
During this period of "ab-reaction" the pa
tient's condition showed such a striking im
provement both somatically and
psychically
2 I can neither exclude nor prove that this pain,
especially of the thighs, was of a neurasthenic nature.

[50a]
Selected Papers on Hysteria
that I used to remark half jokingly that during
each treatment I carried away a certain num
ber of pain motives, and that when I had
cleaned them all out, she would be well. She
soon reached a stage during which she had no
pain most of the time, she consented to. walk a
great deal and to give up her hitherto self-im
posed isolation. During the analysis, I followed
up now the spontaneous fluctuations of her con
dition, and now some fragments of her sorrow
ful tale, which I felt was not sufficiently ex
hausted. In this work I made some interesting
discoveries, the principles of which I
could
later verify in other patients.
In the first place, it was found that the spon
taneous fluctuations never occurred unless pro
voked associatively by the events of the day.
On one occasion she heard of an illness in the
circle of her acquaintances, which recalled to
her a detail in the illness of her father. On an
other occasion the child of her deceased sister
visited her, and its resemblance to its mother
recalled many painful incidents. On still an
other occasion it was a letter from her absent
sister showing distinctly the influence of the
inconsiderate brother-in-law, and this awak
ened a pain which made her crave to relate a
family scene not reported before.
As she never reproduced the same pain mo
tives twice, we seemed to be justified in the ex
pectation that the stock would in time become
exhausted, and I did not in any way prevent
her from getting into situations conducive to
evoking new memories which had not yet come
to the surface. Thus, for example, I asked her
to visit the grave of her sister, or I urged her
to go in society where she was apt to meet her
youthful friend, who happened to be in the
city.
In this manner I obtained an insight into the
mode of origin of a hysteria, which could be
designated as monosymptomatic. I found, for
example, that the right leg became painful dur
ing our hypnosis when we dealt with memories
relating to the nursing of her father, to her
young friend, and to other things which oc
curred during the first part of the pathogenic
period; while the pain in the left leg appeared
as soon as I evoked the memory of her lost
sister, of both brothers-in-law, in brief, of any
impression relating to the second half of the
history. My attention having been called to this
by this constant behaviour, I went further in
my investigations and gained the impression
that the detailization went perhaps still further
and that every new psychic cause of painful

[50b]
45
feeling might have some connection with a dif
ferently located pain area in the legs. The orig
inal painful location on the right thigh referred
to the nursing of her father, and as the result
of new traumas the painful area then grew by
apposition, so that, strictly speaking, we had
here not one single physical symptom connected
with multiform psychic memory complexes, but
a multiplicity of similar symptoms which on
superficial examination seemed to be fused into
one. To be sure, I have not followed out the
demarcations of the individual psychic causes
corresponding to the pain zones, for I found
that the patient's attention was turned away
from these relations.
But my interest was further directed to the
mode of construction of the whole symptomcomplex, of the abasia, upon this painful zone,
and with this view in mind, I asked such ques
tions as this: "What is the origin of the pains
in walking, standing, or lying?" She answered
these questions partially uninfluenced, partially
under the pressure of my hand. We thus ob
tained two results. In the first place, she grouped
all the scenes connected with painful impres
sions according to their occurrence, sitting,
standing, etc. Thus, for example, she stood at
the door when her father was brought home with
his cardiac attack, and in her fright remained as
though rooted to the spot. To this first quota
tion, "fright while standing" she connected
more recollections up to the overwhelming scene
when she again stood as if pinned near the
death-bed of her sister. The whole chain of
reminiscences should justify the connection of
the pains with the standing up and could also
serve as an association proof, except that one
must be mindful of the fact that in all these
events another factor must be demonstrated,
that
which had directed
the attention—and
consequently the conversion—precisely, to the
standing (walking, sitting, etc.). The explana
tion for this direction of attention could hardly
be sought in other connections than in the fact
that walking, standing, and lying are connected
with functions and conditions of those members
which here bore the painful zones; namely, the
legs. We could then easily understand the con
nection between the astasia-abasia and the first
scene of conversion in this history.
Among the scenes which, according to this
review, had made the walking painful, one be
came most prominent. It referred to a walk she
had taken in a large company at the watering
place, which apparently lasted too long. The
deeper circumstances of this occurrence re-

[51a]
46
Sigmtjnd Freud
vealed themselves
only hesitatingly and left
many a riddle unsolved. She was in an espe
cially good humour and gladly joined the circle
of friendly persons; it was a lovely day, not
too warm; her mother remained at home, her
older sister had already departed, the younger
one felt indisposed, but did not wish to mar
her pleasure. The husband of the second sister
at first declared that he would remain at home
with his wife, but finally went along for her
(Elisabeth's) sake. This scene seemed to have
a great deal to do with the first appearance of
the pains, for she recalled that she returned
home from the walk very fatigued and with
severe pains. She could not, however, say defi
nitely whether she had perceived the pains be
fore this. I took for granted that if she had
suffered any pain she would hardly have re
solved to enter upon this long walk. On being
questioned whence the pains originated on this
walk, she answered rather indefinitely that the
contrast between her solitude and the married
happiness of her sick sister, of which she was
constantly reminded by the behaviour of her
brother-in-law, was painful to her.
Another scene, closely related to the former
in point of time, played a part in connection
with the pains on sitting. It was a few days
later, her sister and brother-in-law had already
departed and she found herself in a tense and
longing mood. She arose in the morning and
ascended to the top of a small hill, which they
were frequently wont to visit together, and
which afforded a very pretty view. There she
sat down on a. stone bench and gave free play
to her thoughts. Her thoughts again revolved
on her lonesomeness, the fate of her family, and
she now frankly admitted that she entertained
the eager wish to become as happy as her sister.
After this morning's meditation, she returned
home with severe pains. In the evening of the
same day she took the bath after which the
pains definitely appeared and continued per
sistently.
We could further ascertain with great cer
tainty that the pains on walking and standing
diminished in the beginning on lying down. Only
after she heard of her sister's illness and left
Gastein in the evening, spending a sleepless
night in the sleeping car, tormented simultane
ously by worrying over her sister and by violent
pains—it was only then that the pains ap
peared for the first time while she was lying
down, and throughout that time, lying down
was
even
more
painful
than
walking
or
standing.

[51b]
In this
way the painful sphere grew by
apposition, first, because every new pathogenically affecting theme occupied a new region of
the legs; second, every one of the impression
able scenes left a trace because it produced
lasting, always more cumulative, cathexes1 of
the different functions of the legs, thus con
necting these functions with the sensations of
pain. There was unmistakably, however, still a
third mechanism which furthered the produc
tion of atasia-abasia. When the patient finished
the recitation of a whole series of events with
the plaint that she then perceived pain
on
<(standing alone," and when in another series,
referring to the unfortunate attempt of bring
ing about new conditions in the family, she was
not tired of repeating that the painful part of
it was the feeling of her helplessness, the sen
sation that she "could make no headway," I
then had to think that her reflections, too, in
fluenced the formation of the abasia, and J
had to assume that she directly sought a sym*
bolic expression for her painfully accentuated
thoughts and had found it in the aggravation of
her pains. That somatic symptoms of hysteria
could originate through such symbolization we
have already asserted in our preliminary comr
munication, and I shall give some examples of
conclusive evidence in the epicrisis to this, his
tory. In Miss Elisabeth von R, the psychic
mechanism of the symbolization was not in the
foreground, it had not produced the abasia, but
everything pointed to the fact that the already
existing abasia had in this way undergone a
considerable reinforcement. Accordingly, this
abasia, as I encountered it in the stage of dejvelopment, could not only be compared to a
psychically associative paralysis of function,
but also to a symbolic paralysis of function.
Before I continue with the history of my
patient I will add something about her be
haviour during the second period of the treatjment. Throughout this whole analysis I made
use of the method of evoking pictures and
ideas by pressing her head, a method, therefore,
which would be inapplicable without the full
cooperation and voluntary attention of the pa
tient. At times her behaviour left nothing to
be desired, and at such periods it was really
surprising how promptly and how infallibly the
individual scenes belonging to one theme suc
ceeded each other in chronological order. It
was as if she read from a large picture-book,
the pages of which passed in review before her
1 Cathexis means a sum of energy or affect which
invests an idea or an act.

[52a]
eyes. At other times there seemed to be in
hibitions, the nature of which I could not at
that time surmise. When I applied pressure,
she maintained that nothing came into her
mind; I repeated the pressure and told her to
wait, but still nothing would come. At first,
when such obstinacy manifested itself, I de
termined to discontinue the work and to try
again later, as the day seemed unpropitious.
Two
observations,
however,
caused
me
to
change my procedure. Firstly, because such
failure of this method occurred only when I
found Elisabeth cheerful and free from pain
and never when she had a bad day; secondly,
because she frequently made assertions, of see
ing nothing after the lapse of a long pause
during which her tense and absorbed mind be
trayed to me some inner psychic process. I,
therefore, decided to assume that the method
never failed, that under the pressure of my
hands Elisabeth had each time perceived some
idea or had seen some picture, but that she
was not always ready to impart it to me and
attempted to suppress what was conjured up.
I could think of two motives for such conceal
ment; either Elisabeth subjected the idea that
came to her mind to an unjustified criticism,
thinking it not sufficiently important or unfit
as an answer to the question, or she feared to
say it because that statement was too dis
agreeable to her. I, therefore, proceeded as if I
were perfectly convinced of the reliability of
my technique. Whenever she asserted that
nothing came into her mind, I did not let that
pass. I assured her that something must have
come to her, but that perhaps she was not at
tentive enough, that I was quite willing to re
peat the pressure. I also told her not to enter
tain any doubts concerning the correctness of
the idea which presented itself to her mind, be
it suitable or not, and I ended by saying that
I knew well that something did come which
she concealed from me and that, as long as she
would continue to do so, she would not get rid
of her pains. Through such urging I came to
the realization that no pressure remained un
successful. I then had to assume that I correctly
recognized the state of affairs, and, indeed,
I won perfect confidence in my technique
through this analysis. It often happened that
she did not make a statement until after the
third pressure, and then added, "Why I could
have told you that the first time."—"Indeed,
why did you not say it?"—"I thought that it
was not correct," or "I thought that I could
avoid it, but it recurred each time." During

[52b]
Selected Papers on Hysteria
47
this difficult work I began to attach a profounder significance to the resistance1 which
the patient showed in
the
reproduction of
her recollections, and I carefully noted these
occasions in which
it
was
especially strik
ing.
I now come to the description of the third
period of our treatment. The patient felt bet
ter; she was psychically unburdened and less
restrained in her behaviour; but the pains were
manifestly not removed, and reappeared from
time to time with the old severity. The imper
fect
cure went hand in hand with the im
perfect analysis; as yet, I did not know in
what.moment and through what mechanisms
the pains originated. During the reproduction
of the most manifold scenes of the second
period and the observation of the patient's
resistance
towards the
reproduction,
I
had
a definite suspicion which I did not dare use
as a basis for my action. An accidental ob
servation turned the issue. While working with
the patient one day, I heard the steps of a
man in the adjacent room and a rather pleas
ant voice asking some questions. My patient
immediately arose, requesting me to discon
tinue the treatment for the day because she
heard her brother-in-law, who had just arrived,
asking for her. Before this disturbance she was
free from pains, but now she betrayed by her
mien-and gait, the sudden appearance of vio
lent pains. This strengthened my suspicion, and
I
decided to elicit the decisive explanation.
I therefore questioned her again concerning
the circumstances and causes of the first ap
pearance of the pains. Her thoughts were di
rected to the summer resort in that watering
place where she had been before making the
journey to Gastein. A number of scenes were
reproduced which had already been treated less
exhaustively. They recalled her frame of mind
at that time, the exhaustion following the
worriment about her mother's vision, and the
nursing of her mother during the time of the
operation, and her final despair at being unable
as a lonesome girl to enjoy or accomplish any
thing in life. Until then she felt strong enough
to dispense with the help of a man, but now
she was overcome by a feeling of her womanly
weakness, a yearning for love in which, to put
it in her own words, her "obdurate self began
to soften." In such humour, the happy marriage
of her younger sister made the profoundest
xThe mechanisms of resistance, which the author
now counts among the great pillars of psycho-analytic
technique, are mentioned here for the first time.—Tr.

[53a]
48
Sigmund Freud
impression on her. She thought how affection
ately he cared for her, how they understood
each other by a mere glance, and how sure
they seemed to be of each other. It was truly
regrettable that the secondpregnancy followed
so closely upon the first; her sister knew that
this was the cause of her suffering, but how
willingly she endured it, and all because he
was the cause of it. The brother-in-law did not
at first wish to participate in the walk which
was so intimately connected with Elisabeth's
pain; he preferred to remain home with his
sick wife, but the latter urged him with a glance
to go because she thought that it would give
Elisabeth pleasure. Elisabeth remained with
him throughout the whole walk; they spoke
about the most varied and intimate things;
she found herself in thorough accord with all
he said, and she became overwhelmed with a
desire to possess a man like him. This was
followed by a scene a few days later, when,
on the morning after their departure, she vis
ited the point commanding the beautiful view
which had been their favourite walk.
There
she
seated herself upon a stone and
again
dreamed of her sister's happiness and of a man
like her brother-in-law who could engage her
affections. When she arose, she had pains which
again disappeared, and only in the afternoon
after having taken the warm bath did they
reappear, remaining ever since. I attempted to
investigate the thoughts which occupied her
mind while taking the bath, but all 1 could ob
tain was that the bathroom recalled her absent
sister because she had lived in the same house.
For some time the state of affairs must have
been clear to me. The patient seemed absorbed
in painfully-sweet recollections, so that she
was wholly unconscious of the drift of her
thoughts and continued to reproduce her remi
niscences. She spoke of the time in Gastein, the
worry connected with the expectations of the
letter, finally the information of her sister's
illness, the long wait until the evening when she
could finally leave Gastein, the journey with
its tormenting uncertainties during a sleepless
night—all these remarks were accompanied by
a violent aggravation of the pain. I asked her
if during the journey she thought of the sad
possibility which she afterward found realized.
She answered that she carefully avoided the
thought, but that in her opinion, her mother ex
pected the worst from the very beginning. This
was followed by the reminiscences of her ar
rival in Vienna—the impressions which she re
ceived from the relatives at the station, the

[53b]
short journey from Vienna to the neighbouring
summer resort where her sister lived, the ar
rival in the evening, the hasty walk through
the garden, to the door of the little garden pa
vilion—the silence in the house, the oppressive
darkness, the fact of not having been received
by the brother-in-law. She then recalled stand
ing before the bed seeing the deceased, and in
the moment of the awful certainty that the
beloved sister had died without having taken
leave of them and without having her last days
eased through their nursing—in that very mo
ment another thought flashed through Elisa
beth's brain, which now peremptorily repeated
itself. The thought, which flashed like dazzling
lightning through the darkness, was, "Now he
is free again, and I can become his wife."
Of course, now everything was clear. The
analyst's effort was richly repaid. The ideas of
defence against an unbearable idea, the origin
of hysterical symptoms through conversion of
psychic into physical excitement, the format
tion of a separate psychic group by an act of
the will, which led to the defence—all these
were in that moment palpably presented before
my eyes. Thus, and thus alone, did things hapr
pen here. This girl entertained an affectionate
regard for her brother-in-law, against the ac
ceptance of which into her consciousness her
whole moral being struggled. She succeeded in
sparing herself the painful consciousness that
she was in love with her sister's husband by
creating for herself instead bodily pains, and at
the
moment when
this
certainty wished to
thrust itself into her consciousness (while she
walked with him, during that morning reverie,
in the bath, and before her sister's bed) her
pains originated through a successful converr
sion into the somatic. At the time she came
under my care, the isolation from her aware^
ness of the group of ideas referring to thi$
love affair had already been accomplished, else
I believe that she would never have agreed tb
this mode of treatment. The resistance with
which
she repeatedly opposed the reproduc
tion of the traumatically effective scenes really
corresponded to the energy with which the un
bearable idea had been crowded out from the
associations.
For the therapist there now came a sorry
time. The effect of the resumption of that re
pressed idea was crushing for the poor child.
When I summed up the whole situation with
these prosaic words: "You were really for a
long time in love with your brother-in-law,"
she complained of the most horrible pains; she

[54a]
Selected Papers on Hysteria
49
face life, however, was somewhat impaired
made another despairing effort to reject the ex
planation, saying that it was not true, that I
suggested it to her, it could not be, she was
incapable of such baseness, and that she would
never forgive herself for it. It was quite easy
to prove to her that her own information al-.
lowed no other interpretation, but it took a
long time before the two reasons that I offered
for consolation, namely, that one is not re
sponsible for one's feelings, and that her be
haviour,
her
sickness
under
those
circum
stances, was sufficient proof of her moral nature
—I say it took a long time before these con
solations made an impression on her.
I was now forced to pursue more than one
course in order to alleviate the patient. In the
first place, I wished to give her the opportunity
to rid herself by ab-reaction of the material
long since accumulated. We investigated the
first impressions of
the relations
with her
brother-in-law, the beginning of those uncon
sciously kept affectionate regards. We found
here all those little indications and forebodings
which on retrospection showed a fully devel
oped passion. In his first visit to the house, he
mistook her for his destined bride and greeted
her before he
greeted her older and more
homely sister. One evening they entertained
each other so vivaciously and seemed to under
stand each other so well that the bride inter
rupted them with this half serious remark:
"You
two, indeed, would have suited each
other very nicely." On another occasion, while
at a social gathering where none knew of the
engagement, the conversation drifted to the
young man, and a young lady indiscreetly re
marked about a blemish in his figure, a juve
nile joint affliction. The bride herself remained
calm, while Elisabeth flew into a passion, and
with an ardour which even she herself could
not
afterwards
understand,
defended
the
straight form
of her
future brother-in-law.
While we worked our way through these rem
iniscences, it became clear to Elisabeth that
her affection for her brother-in-law had slum
bered in her for a long time, perhaps since the
beginning of their relations, and had concealed
itself so long under the mask of a mere kins
manlike affection, as only her very delicate
family feeling would allow.
This ab-reaction benefited her much, but I
was able to give her still more relief by taking
a friendly interest in her present state of af
fairs. With this object in view I sought an inter
view with Mrs. von R, whom I found to be an
intelligent and refined lady, whose courage to

[54b]
through the
last
misfortunes.
From her
I
learned that the accusation of rude extortion,
which the
older brother-in-law had brought
against the widower, and which was so painful
to Elisabeth, had to be retracted on closer in
vestigation. The character of the young man
remained untarnished; it was merely a mis
understanding, an
easily conceived difference
of opinion concerning the valuation of money
that could arise between the merchant, to
whom money is only a working tool, and the
official—that is all there was to this seemingly
so painful incident. I begged the mother to give
Elisabeth all explanations that she might here
after need, and to offer her in the future that
opportunity for unburdening her mind to which
I had accustomed her.
Naturally I was also anxious to know what
chance there
was for
the fulfilment of the
girl's present conscious wish. Here things were
less favourable!
The mother stated that for
some time she had had an inkling of Elisabeth's
affections for her brother-in-law; of course,
she did not know that it had existed during
the lifetime of her sister. Whoever saw them
both in friendly intercourse—of late, to be
sure, only seldom—could entertain no doubt
of the girl's anxiety to please him. However,
neither she, the mother, nor the advisers of the
family, showed any particular inclination to
bring about a matrimonial union between the
two. The health of the young man had not been
very good and had received a setback through
the death of his beloved wife, and it was not
at all certain that he had sufficiently recovered
from the shock to enter into a new marriage.
It was quite probable that this was the reason
for his reserve, perhaps also because he was
not sure of his position and wished to avoid all
obvious gossip. With such a reserve on both
sides, the solution for which Elisabeth was
yearning was likely to fail.
I informed the girl of everything that I had
heard from her mother and had the satisfaction
of seeing her benefited by the explanation con
cerning the money affair. On the other hand,
I urged her to bear calmly the uncertainties
of her future which could not be dismissed.
The advancing summer forced us to bring the
treatment to an end. She now felt better, and,
since we had discussed the causes to which the
pain could be traced, she no longer complained
of pain. We both felt that the work had been
finished, although I felt that the ab-reaction
of the suppressed love was really not as com-

[55a]
j0
SlGMTJND
plete asit should have been. I regarded heras
cured and urged her to continue independently
the solutionafter the way had been cleared for
it, to which she agreed. She left with her
mother for a summer resort where they were
to join the older sister and her family.
I still have something more to report about
the further course of Miss Elisabeth von R's
disease. A few weeks after our parting I re
ceived a despairing letter from her mother, in
forming me that, at the first attempt to draw
Elisabeth into a conversation about her love
affairs, she became veryexcited andrefused to
talk, and since then had suffered from violent
pains. She was very indignant at my having
betrayed her confidence and was perfectly in
accessible, so that the treatment seemed a com
plete failure. She wished to know what was to
be done, for of me she would hear nothing.
I made no reply. It was to be expected that
after she had been relieved from my discipline
she would make another attempt to reject her
mother's interference and return to her re
serve. I was,however, quite certain that every
thing would adjust itself, and that my efforts
had not been in vain. Two months later they
returned to Vienna and the colleague to whom
I was grateful for the case informed me that
Elisabeth was perfectly well, and that her be
haviour was normal although occasionally she
had slight pains. Since then she has repeatedly
sent me similar messages, each time promising
to visit me, which she has never done. This is
quite characteristic of the personal relation
ship formed during such treatment. My col
league assuredme that she couldbe considered
cured. The relation of the brother-in-law to the
family had not been changed.
In the spring of 1894 I was informed that
she would be present at a private ball to which
I could gain access. I did not let the oppor
tunity escape me and saw my former patient
gliding along in a rapid dance. Since then, fol
lowing her own inclination, she
married a
stranger.
EPICRISIS
I have not always been a psycho-therapist,
but like other neuro-pathologists I was edu
cated to methods of focal diagnoses and elec
trical prognosis, so that even I myself am
struck by the fact that the case histories which
I am writing read like novels and, as it were,
dispense with the serious features of the scien
tific character. Yet, I must console myself with
the fact that the nature of the subject is ap-

[55b]
Freud
parently more responsible for this issue than
my own predilection. Focal diagnosis and elec
trical reactions are really not important in
the study of hysteria, whereas a detailed dis
cussion of the psychic processes, as one is wont
to hear it from the poet, and the application of
a few psychological formulae, allows one to
gain an insight into the course of events of
hysteria. Such case histories should be con
sidered like psychiatrical ones, but they have
the advantage over the latter in the fact that
they give the intimate connection between the
history of the disease and the morbid symp
toms, a thing for which we are still looking in
vain in the histories of other psychoses.1
With the description of the treatment I en
deavoured to interweave the explanations which
I gave about the case of Miss Elisabeth von R,
and it will perhaps not be superfluous to sum
marize here the essential features. I have dis
cussed the character of the patient and the
features which repeat themselves in so many
hysterics, and which we really cannot consider
as degenerative. I mentioned the talent, the
ambition, the moral sensitiveness, the immense
yearning for love, which found its gratification
in the family, the independence of her nature
reaching beyond
the womanly ideal, which
manifested itself largely in
obstinacy, pugnaciousness, and shut-in-ness. According to the
information of my colleague, no hereditary
taints could be shown on either side of the
family. Her mother, to be sure, suffered for
years from some indefinite neurotic depression,
but her brothers and sisters, her father and his
family, belonged to the even-tempered and not
to the nervous, type. There was no serious case
of psychosis in any near relatives.
Her nature was influenced by painful emo
tions, the foremost of which was the debili
tating influence of a long attendance upon her
beloved sick father.
!
That nursing of the sick plays such a signi
ficant role in the histories of hysterias has its
good reasons. A number of effective factors,
which one finds here, are quite obvious; thus,
the disturbance of the physical health through
interrupted sleep, neglect of nourishment, and
the reaction of a constantly gnawing worriment on the vegatative functions. The most im
portant factor, however, is in my estimation to
be found elsewhere. He whose mind is occupied
1 This
situation no
longer obtains in
present-day
psychiatry. Beginning with the
Zurich School under
the stimulation of Bleuler, the descriptive psychiatry
of Kraepelin long ago gave way to the interpretative
psychiatry of the present.—Tr.

[56a]
Selected Papers on Hysteria
with the
hundred different tasks of nursing
which succeed each
other continuously for
weeks and months, gets into the habit, on the
one hand, of suppressing all signs of his own
emotions, and on the other hand, his attention
is soon turned away from his own impressions
because
he
has
neither
the
time
nor
the
strength to do them justice. Thus, the nurse
accumulates in himself an overabundance of
affective impressions which he or she barely
perceives clearly enough; at any rate, they are
not dissipated by ab-reaction; that is, he or
she
creates for himself the
material
for
a
retention hysteria. If the patient recovers, these
impressions naturally lose their value, but if
he.die&and one goes into a period of mourning
during which only that which refers to the
deceased seems of value, the impressions wait
ing for discharge appear in turn, and, after a
brief pause of exhaustion, the hysteria, the
germ of which originated during the nursing,
bursts forth.
The same fact of subsequent adjustment to
traumas accumulated during nursing is occa
sionally also encountered where the general
impression of being sick does not ensue, but
where the mechanism of hysteria, nevertheless,
can be noticed. Thus, I have known a highly
gifted but slightly nervous lady whose whole
personality suggests the hysteric, yet she never
became a burden to the doctor and was never
forced to interrupt the exercise of her duties.
This lady had nursed three or four of her dear
ones until they died, which caused her each
time a complete physical exhaustion, yet these
sad duties have never made her sick. How
ever, shortly after the death of the patient she
begins her work of reproduction, in which she
reviews the scenes of the disease, and of the
death. Each day—one might say, at her leisure
—she goes over again every impression, crying
over it, and consoling herself. Such adjustment
continues through her daily occupations with
out any confusion of the two activities. Every
thing passes before her chronologically. Wheth
er the memory work of one day precisely cor
responded to a day of the past, I am unable to
say. I presume that it depends on the leisure
which is left to her by the current affairs of
the household.
Aside from this "after crying," which follows
these demises after short intervals, this lady
periodically observed the anniversaries of the
various catastrophies, and here her vivid visual
reproductions and her affective manifestations
follow faithfully the dates. Thus, for example,

[56b]
Si
I found her in tears, and, on sympathetic in
quiry as to what occurred on that day, she half
irritably remarked, "Nothing on that day ex
cept that Professor N was again here and gave
us to understand that things were hopeless—
at that time I had no time to cry." She re
ferred to the last illness of her husband, who
died three years before. It would have been
very interesting to know whether she always
repeated the same scenes on these recurring
anniversaries, or whether, as I suppose, in the
interest of my theory, other details presented
themselves each time for ab-reaction. I was,
however, unable to find anything definite about
this; the wise and courageous woman was
ashamed of
the intensity with which, those
reminiscences acted upon her.1
I repeat that this woman was not sick and
that subsequent ab-reaction, despite all resem
blance,is still not a hysterical process; onemay
ask why after one nursing there results a hys
teria and after another none. It cannot lie in
^•To
my surprise, I once discovered that such sub
sequent ab-reaction—through other impressions than
nursing—may form the content of an otherwise enig
matic neurosis. It was the case of a pretty girl of
nineteen, Miss Matilda H, whom I first saw with an
incomplete paralysis of the legs, and months later I
was again called because her character had changed.
She was depressed and tired of living, lacked all con
sideration of her mother, and was irritable and un
approachable; The whole picture of the patient did not
seem to me to
be that of an ordinary melancholia.
She could easily be put into a somnambulic state, and
I made use of this peculiarity to impart to her each
time commands and suggestions to which she listened
in
her
profound sleep
and
responded with profuse
tears, but which, however, caused but little change
in her condition. One day while hypnotized she be
came talkative and informed me that the reason for
her depression was the breaking of her betrothal many
months before. She stated that, on closer acquaintance
with her fiance, the things displeasing to her and her
mother became more and more evident in him. On the
other hand, the material advantages of the engage
ment were too tangible to make the decision of a rup
ture easy;
thus, both of them hesitated for
a long
time. She then lapsed into a condition of indecision
in which she allowed everything to pass apathetically
and finally her mother pronounced for her the de
cisive "no." Shortly afterwards she awoke as from a
dream and began to occupy herself fervently with the
thoughts about the broken betrothal, she began
to
weigh the pros and cons, a
process which she con
tinued for some time. She continued to live in that
time of doubt, and entertained daily the moods and
the thoughts, which would have been appropriate for
that day. The irritability against her mother could
only be explained by circumstances that existed at
that time. Next to this mental activity she found her
present life a mere phantom, just like a dream. I did
not again succeed in
getting the girl to talk—I con
tinued my exhortations during deep somnambulism.
I saw her each time burst into tears without, however,
receiving any answer from her. But one day, it was
near the anniversary of
the engagement, the whole
state of depression disappeared. This was attributed to
the success of my great hypnotic cure.

[57a]
52
Sigmund Freud
the personalpredisposition, for the lady whom
I have here in mind showed it in the most
prolific manner.
I now return to Miss Elisabeth von R. While
nursing her father, there occurred for the first
time an hysterical symptom in the form of a
pain in a definite location on the right thigh.
The mechanism of this symptom is fully ex
plained on an analytic basis. It occurred in a
moment during which the ideas of her duties
towards her sick father came into conflict with
the content of her erotic yearning, which she
then entertained. Under vivid self-reproach,
she decided in favour of the former and created
for herself the hystericalpain. According to the
conception explained by the theory of conver
sionin hysteria,the process couldbe described
as follows: She repressed the erotic idea from
her consciousness and changed the sum of the
affect into somatic sensations of pain. Whether
this first conflict occurred only once, or re
peated itself, is not clear. The latter is more
probable. Quite a similar conflict—of a higher
moral significance, and even better demon
strated by the analysis—repeated itself after
years and led to the aggravation of the same
pain and to its dissemination beyond its origi
nal limits. Again, it was an erotic idea which
came into conflict with all her moral concep
tions, for her affection for her brother-in-law,
both during the life and after the death;of her
sister, and the thought that she should yearn
just for this man,wasvery disagreeable to her<
This analysis gives detailed information about
this conflict which represents the pivotal point
in the history of her malady. The patient's
affection for her brother-in-law might have be
gun to germinate long ago, but in favour of
its development was the physical exhaustion
from the recent nursing, and her moral exhausr
tion from years of disillusionment, which then
began to breakdown herreserve and caused her
to confess to herself the need of the love of a
man. During a relationship which extended
over weeks (in that summer resort), this erotic
desire attained full development simultaneously
with the pain, and analysis shows that during
that time the patient was in a special psychic
state, which, in conjunction with the desire and
pain, seems to afford an understanding of
the
process in the sense of the conversion theory.
I must place reliance on the statement that
the patient's affection for her brother-in-law,
intensive as it was, was not clearly known to
her except on certain rare occasions, and then

[57b]
only momentarily. If that were not so, she
would have become conscious of the incompati
bility between this desire and her moral ideas,
and would have had to endure the same mental
agonies which I saw her suffer after our anal
ysis. Her reminiscences gave us no information
concerning such suffering (these she spared
herself), and as a result, the love itself did not
become clear to her. At that time, as well as
during the analysis, her love for her brotherin-law existed in the form of a foreign body in
her consciousness without entering into any re
lationship with her other ideation. In reference
to this love there existed the peculiar condiT
tion of knowing and simultaneously not know
ing; it was the condition of the split-off psychic
group. When we assert that this love was not
clearly known to her, we mean exactly what we
say. We do not mean a lower quality or a lesser
degree of consciousness, but a separation of the
free associative mental process from the rest
of the ideational content.
{
How did it happen that such an intensively
accentuated group of ideas could be kept so
isolated? For generally the role of an idea in
the associations actually increases with the size
of its affect.
This question can be answered if we take
into account two facts which, we can use as if
proven: (i) That the hysterical pain originated
simultaneously with the formation pf
these
separate psychic groups, (2) that the patienj;
exerted great resistance against the attempt to
bring about the association between the sep
arate psychic groups and the rest of the con
tent of consciousness, and, when the union was
nevertheless effected, she felt excessive psychic
pain, Our conception of hysteria brings together
these two factors with the fact of the split
ting of consciousness, by asserting that (2) con
tains the indication of the motive for the split
ting of consciousness, while (1)
shows the
mechanism of the same. The motive was that
of defense, or the striving of the whole ego tb
get into harmony with this ideation group, and
the mechanism was that of conversion; that is,
instead of psychic pains which she spared her
self, there appeared physical pains. A transfor
mation was thus initiated which resulted in a
gain insofar as the patient had escaped an un
bearable psychic state; to be sure, this gain
was obtained at the cost of a psychic anomaly,
a splitting of consciousness and physical suffer
ing, the pains, upon which an astasia-abasia was
constructed.

[58a]
Selected Papers on Hysteria
55
To be sure, I can give no directions as to
how one can produce in himself such a conver
sion. Apparently it is not done as one inten
tionally performs an arbitrary action; it is a
process which takes place in a person under
the impulse of the motive of defense, if he has
a tendency for it in his organization, or if it is
brought about by temporary modifications.
One has the right to examine the theory more
closely and ask: "What is it then that becomes
transformed into physical pains?" The cau
tious reply will be: "Something out of which
psychic pains could have and should have been
formed." If one wishes to venture further and
attempt a kind of algebraic formulation of the
ideational mechanism, one might perhaps at
tribute to the ideational complex of this de
sire (which remained unconscious) a certain
amount of affect and designate the latter qual
ity as the thing converted. A direct deduction
of this conception would be that through such
conversion the "unconscious love" forfeits so
much of its intensity that it becomes reduced
to a weak idea, and its existence as a separate
psychic group is made possible only through
this weakening. However, the present case is
not capable of throwing light on this delicate
matter. It probably corresponds only to an
imperfect
conversion. From
other
cases it
seems quite probable that there are also per
fect conversions, and that in these the unbear
able idea actually becomes repressed, as only
an idea of very little intensity could be re
pressed. After an associative union has been
reestablished, the patients assure us that since
the origin of the hysterical symptoms their
unbearable ideas
had
never occupied
their
minds.
I have stated above that on certain occa
sions, though only transitorily, the patient con
sciously recognized the love for her brotherin-law. Such a moment occurred when, for ex
ample, at the death-bed of her sister the thought
flashed through her mind, "Now he is free and
I can become his wife." I must discuss the sig
nificance of these factors for the conception
of the whole neurosis. However, I think that
in the assumption of a defence hysteria there
is already the requisite that at least one such
moment should have occurred. For conscious
ness really does not know in advance when
such an unbearable idea will present itself. For
the unbearable idea, which is later excluded
with its appendage for the formation of a sep
arate psychic group,,must have been originally
in the mental activity, else there would have

[58b]
been no conflict, to lead to its exclusion.1 Just
such moments should be designated as trau
matic. It is in them that the conversion takes
place and results in the splitting of conscious
ness and the hysterical symptoms. Everything
tends to show that in Miss Elisabeth von R
there were a number of such moments (the
scenes
of
the walking, morning meditation,
bath, and at the bedside of her sister), and
perhaps new moments of this kind also oc
curred during the treatment. The multiplicity
of such traumatic moments is made possible
by the fact that an experience, similar to the
one which first initiated the unbearable idea,
introduces new emotions to the separated psy
chic groups and thus transitorily abolishes the
success of the conversion/The ego is forced to
occupy itself with this suddenly reinforced
and flared-up idea, and must later restore the
former state through new conversions. Miss
Elisabeth, who was in constant relation with
her brother-in-law, must have been particu
larly exposed to the appearance of new trau
mas. A case whose traumatic history has been
finished in the past would have been more de
sirable for this discussion.
I must now occupy myself with the point
which I have designated as a difficulty for the
understanding of this case history. On the an
alytical basis, I assumed that the first conver
sion took place in the patient while she nursed
her father, at the time when her duties as a
nurse came into conflict with her erotic yearn
ings, and that this process was the model for
the later ones which led to the outbreak of the
disease in the Alpine spa. But, according to the
patient's statement, she had not at all suffered
from any pains and weakness at the time of
the nursing and the period following it, which
I designated as the first period. To be sure,
during the illness of her father she was once
bedridden for a few days with pains in her
legs, but it is doubtful whether this attack al
ready belonged to the hysteria. A causal rela
tion between these first pains and any psychic
impressions could not be demonstrated by an
alysis; it is possible, even probable, that at
that time we dealt with a common rheumatic
muscular pain. But if we should assume that
this first attack of pain was the result of an
hysterical conversion in
consequence of the
rejection of erotic thoughts which,then existed,
the fact, nevertheless,. remains that the pains
1 It is different in a hypnoid hysteria. Here the con
tent of the separate psychic groups may never have
been in the ego consciousness.

[59a]
54
Sigmund Freud
disappeared after a few days, so that the pa
tient actually behaved differently than she
seemed to show during the analysis. During
the reproduction of the so-called first period,
all her statements concerning the illness and
death of her father, the impressions relating
to her first brother-in-law, etc., all these were
accompanied by manifestations of pain, while
at the time she really experienced these im
pressions she felt no pains. Is this not a con
tradiction which is likely to diminish consid
erably the confidence in the explanatory value
of such an analysis?
I believe that I can explain the contradic
tion by assuming that the pains—the product
of the conversion—did not originate while the
patient experienced the impressions during the
first period, but subsequently, that is, in the
second period when the patient reproduced
these impressions,in her mind. The conversion
did not follow the fresh impressions, but the
memories of the same. I even believe that such
a process is not at all unusual in hysteria and
regularly
participates in
creating
hysterical
symptoms. Nevertheless, as such an assertion
does not seem plausible, I
shall attempt to
make it more credible by citing other experi
ences.
During a similar analysis, it once happened
that a new hysterical symptom was formed
during the treatment, so that I could attempt
its removal on the day after its origin.
I will describe the essential features of the
history of this patient. They are simple, but
not without interest.
Miss Rosalia H, twenty-three years old, who
for a number of years made great efforts to
educate herself as a singer, complained that
her beautiful voice did not obey her in certain
notes. She felt choking and tightening sensa
tions in the throat, so that the tones sounded
strained, and her teacher could, therefore, not
yet permit her to appear in public. Although
this
imperfection
affected
only her middle
notes, it could not be explained on the basis
of a defect of her vocal organs, for at times
this disturbance did not show itself and her
teacher was very pleased with her, but at other
times, the slightest excitement, seemingly with
out provocation, evoked the choking sensation,
and prevented free expansion of the voice. It
was not difficult to recognize in this annoying
sensation an hysterical conversion. Whether
there
was
really
a
contracture
of
certain
muscles of the vocal chords could not be veri-

[59b]
fied.1 In the hypnotic analysis, which I under
took with this girl, I found out the following
concerning her vicissitudes and the ailments
occasioned
through
them.
She
became
an
orphan at an early age and was brought up by
her aunt, who had many children and she had
to share the life of a most unfortunate family
existence. The husband of this aunt, seemingly
a pathological personality, abused his wife and
children in the most brutal manner, and what
especially pained her was his unconcealed sex
ual preference for the servant and nurse girls
in the house. This became even more obnoxi
ous as the children grew older. When her aunt
died, Rosalia became the protectress of the
orphaned-children* who were harassed by their
father. She took her duties seriously, fought
through
all conflicts, and had to
exert her
greatest efforts to suppress the manifestations
of her contempt for her uncle. It was then that
the choking sensation in her throat originated.
Whenever she was compelled to swallow an
affront, whenever she had to remain silent on
hearing a provoking accusation, she perceived
a scratching in her throat, the tightening and
failure of her voice; in brief, she had all the
localized sensations in her larynx and pharynx
which now disturbed her in singing. It was con
ceivable that she sought the possibility of
making herself independent in order to escape
the excitement and the painful impressions
which were daily occurrences in her uncle's
house. An efficient music teacher took an un
selfish interest in her, assuring her that her
voice entitled her to choose the profession of
singing. She began secretly to take lessons of
him, and because she often went for her les
sons with the choking sensation in her throat,
following some violent scene in the house, a
connection was formed between the singing
and the hysterical paresthesia for which a way
was prepared by the sensitiveness of the vocal
organs during singing. The apparatus of which
she should have had free control was filled
11 had under observation another case in which
a contracture of the masseters made it impossible for
the artist to sing. The young lady in question, through
painful experiences in the family, was forced to gb
on the stage. While rehearsing in Rome, in great ex
citement, she suddenly perceived the sensation of be
ing unable to close her opened mouth and sank faint
ing to the
floor. The physician, who was called,
closed her jaws forcibly, but since that time the pa
tient had been unable to open her jaws' more than a
finger's breadth and had to give up her newly chosen
profession. When she came under my cafe; many
years later,
the motives for that excitement appar
ently had been over for some time, for massage in
a light hynosis sufficed to open her mouth widely.
The lady has since then sung in public.

[60a]
Selected Papers on Hysteria
55
with the remnants of innervation from those
numerous
scenes of
suppressed excitement.
Since then she has left her uncle's house and
has moved to another city, so as to be away
from the family, but her ailments were not
benefited by it. No other hysterical symptoms
were discovered in this pretty and unusually
bright girl.
I endeavoured to cure this retention-hysteria
by a reproduction of all the exciting impres
sions and bysubsequent ab-reaction. I afforded
her the opportunity of railingagainsther uncle
in long speeches and of telling him the bare
truth to his face, etc. The treatment benefited
her, but unfortunately she lived here under
quite unfavourable conditions. Shehad no luck
with her relatives. She was the guest of another
uncle who treated her with friendliness, but
just for that reason she incurred the displeas
ure of her aunt. The latter believed that her
husband evinced too marked an interest in his
niece and made it a point of opposing the girPs
stay in Vienna. She, herself, in her youth was
obliged to relinquish a desire of becoming an
artist and was now jealous of her niece be
cause she had the opportunity to develop her
talent, not considering that it was not mere
desire, but a wish to become independent,
which led her niece to take this step. Rosalia
felt so uncomfortable in the house that she, for
instance, did not dareto sing or play the piano
when her aunt was within hearing distance, and
carefully avoided either singing or playingany
thing for her aged uncle—her mother'sbrother
—whenever her aunt was home: While I was
endeavouring to efface the traces of the old
excitements, new ones originatedthrough these
relations with her hosts, and finally interfered
with the success of my treatment, and prema
turely interrupted the cure.
One day the patient came to me with a new
symptom hardly twenty-four hours old. She
complained of a disagreeable prickling sensa
tion in the fingertips, which had manifested it
self every few hours since the day before, and
forced her to make very peculiar jerky move
ments. I could not see the attack; otherwise,
I would have guessed the cause from seeing
the motions of the fingers, but I immediately
endeavoured to trace through hypnotic analy
sis the causation of this symptom (it was really
a minor hysterical attack). As the whole thing
existed only for a short time, I hoped to be
able to explainit and quickly remove it. To my
surprise, she reproduced, without any hesita
tion in chronological order, a whole row of

[60b]
scenes beginning in her early childhood. All
these had perhaps the same characteristics in
the fact that she had suffered an injustice with
out defense, something which could make her
fingers jerk; for example, scenes like the one
of being forced to hold out her hand in school
while the teacher struck it with a ruler. But
they were all banal causes, to which I would
have.gladly opposed the right to enter into the
aetiology of hysterical symptoms. It was differ
ent, however, with one scene of her early girl
hood, which was connected with the others. The
bad uncle who suffered from rheumatism asked
her to massage his back. She did not dare re
fuse him. He was in bed while she was doing
it and he suddenly threw off the covers,;jumped
up, and attempted to grab her and throw her
down. She naturally stopped the massage and
in a moment escaped and locked herself in her
own room. She evidently did not like to recall
this experience and could not say whether she
had seen anything when the man suddenly ex
posed himself. The sensations in the fingers
could be explained as due to the suppressed
impulse to punish him, or it might simply have
originated from the fact that she was at that
time massaging him. Only after, this scene did
she begin to talk about the one which she ex
perienced yesterday after which the sensitive
ness and jerkiness of the fingers appeared as a
recurring memory symbol. The uncle with
whom she now lived begged her to play some
thing for him. She sat at the piano and accom
panied herself singing, believing that her aunt
was out. Suddenly she appeared in the door
way, Rosalia jumped up, closed the piano, and
flung away the sheet of music. We can guess
what memories came to her mind, and the
train of thought which she tried to ward off
at that moment, for the exasperation brought
on by the unjust accusation should have really
urged her to leave the house, but on account
of
her illness she was
forced to remain in
Vienna and had no other shelter. The move
ment of the fingers which I saw during the
reproduction of this scene resembled a con
tinuous jerking, as if one literally and figura
tively would reject something like throwing
away a sheet of music or rejecting an unrea
sonable demand.
She was quite positive in her assurance that
she did not perceive the symptom before, that
it was not caused by the scenes previously re
lated. Was there anything else to be assumed
except that the scene experienced yesterday
had in the first place awakened the recollection

[61a]
5*
SlGMUND FkETJD
of a former similar content, and that it then
developed into a memory symbol for the whole
group of recollections? The conversion was, on
the one hand, furnished with newly experi
enced affects, and, on the other, with recol
lected affects.
When we- consider this state of affairs, we
must admit that in the origin of hysterical
symptoms such a process is the rule rather
than the exception. Whenever I seek for the
determinants of such states, I frequently find
not a single but a group of similar traumatic
motives.1 In some of these cases it could be
ascertained that this particular symptom had
already existed for a short time after the first
trauma and then subsided, but reappeared after
the next trauma and became fixed. Yet, no real
distinction
can
be
made
between
those of
temporary appearance and those
which re
mained entirely latent causations. In a large
majority of cases, it was also found that the
first trauma had left no symptoms, while a
later trauma of the same kind produced a
symptom for the origin of which the coopera
tion of the former motives could not be dis
pensed with, and for the solution of which it
required a consideration of all the motives.
Translating this into the language of conver
sion theory, this undeniable fact of the sum
mation of traumas and the erstwhile latency of
the symptoms simply means that the conver
sion can be brought about from a fresh, as well
as from a remembered, affect, and this assump
tion
fully explains
the
contradiction which
seems to exist in the history and analysis of
Miss Elisabeth von R.
For there is no question that normal per
sons continue to carry in their consciousness
a
large
number
of
ideas
with
unadjusted
affects. The assertion which I have just de
fended merely approximates the behaviour of
hysteria to that of the normal. It is apparently
reduced to a quantitative factor; it is simply
a question of how many such affective strains
an organization can endure. Even an hysterical
person will be able to retain a certain amount
in ah adjusted state, but if, through a summa
tion of similar motives, it increases beyond the
individual's endurance, the impetus for conver
sion
is formed. It is, therefore, no singular
theory but almost a postulate to say that the
formation of hysterkal symptoms may also be
brought about at the cost of recollected affects.
I have now occupied myself with the motive
1 Compare here the nice examples of Mrs. Emmy in
caseill of Studien ubef Hysterie, 1895.

[61b]
and mechanism'of this case of hysteria; it stillremains to discuss the determination of thehysterical symptoms. Why should just the
pains in the legs have been selected to repre
sent the psychic pains? The circumstances of
the case point to the fact that this somatic
pain was not created by the neurosis, but was
merely utilized, aggravated, and retained by it.
I will add that, in most of the cases of hysteri
cal algias into which I have been able to gain
an insight, the conditions were similar, that
is, there was. to beginwith always a real organ
ically founded pain. It is always the most com
mon, the most widespread, pain of humanity
that seem to be most frequently called upon
to play a part in hysteria. Among the most
common are the periosteal and the neuralgic
pains of the teeth, headaches which originate
from so many different sources, and not in a'
lesser degree the so often mistaken rheumatic;
pains of the muscles. The first attack of pain!
Which Miss
Elisabeth von R had while
she1
nursed her father I consider to have been or
ganically determined, for I received no infor-J
mation when I investigated for its psychic
motive, and I
admit that I am inclined to;
attribute
differential
diagnostic
significance
to my methods of evoking hidden memories,if
they are carefully applied. This original rheu-!
matic pain2 became the memory symbol for
her painful psychic excitements, and as far asj
I can see, for more than one reason. First, and
principally, because it existed in consciousness
almost simultaneously with the other excite
ments, and, second, because it was, or could,
be connected in many ways with, the ideation
content of that time. At all events, it was per-,
haps a remote consequence of the nursing, of
her want of exercise, and of the poor nutrition
entailed by her duties. But this hardly became:
clear to the patient, and what is more impor^
tant is that she had to perceive it during im
portant moments of the nursing, as, for ex
ample, when she jumped out of bed in tjie
cold room to respond to her father's call. Even
more decisive for the direction taken by the
conversion must have been the other manner
of associative connection, namely, the fact that
for many days one of her painful-legs came
in contact with the swollen leg of. her father
during the changing of the bandages. The lo*
cation on the: right leg distinguished by this
contact henceforth remained the focus and
starting point of the pains; it was an artificial
2 But perhaps spinal neurasthenic?
Ui ••i°rJ

[62a]
Selected Papers on Hysteria
57
hysterogenic zone, the origin of which can be
plainly seen in this case.
If anyone should be surprised at the associa
tive
connection
between
physical pain
and
psychic affect, thinking it to be too manifold
and artificial,! should answer that such sur
prise is just as unfair as to be surprised over
the fact that "just the richest people in the
world possess most of the money." Where pro
lific connections do not exist, there is naturally
no formation of hysterical symptoms, and con
version does not find its way. I can also state
that, in reference to determinations, the case
of Miss Elisabeth von R belongs to the simpler
ones. In the case of Mrs. Cecilia M, particu
larly, I had to solve the most intricate knots
of this kind.
I have already discussed in the case history
how the astasia-abasia of our patient was built
up on those;pains after a definite path was
opened to the conversion. But, there, too, I
have expressed the opinion that the patient
created or aggravated the disturbance of func
tion through symbolization. For her dependence
and helplessness to change anything in the cir
cumstances, she found a somatic expression in
the
astasia-abasia,
and
the
expressions "to.
make no headway," "to have no support," etc.,.
formed the bridge for this new act of conver
sion. I will endeavour to support this concep
tion by other examples.
Conversion on the basis of coincidence in
otherwise existing associative connections seems
to exert the least claims on the hysterical pre
disposition; on the other hand, conversion
through
symbolization seems to
require
a
higher grade of hysterical modification, a fact
also demonstrated in Miss Elisabeth von R in
the later stages of her hysteria. The nicest
examples of symbolization I have observed in
Mrs. Cecilia M, whom I can call my most diffi
cult and most instructive case. I have already
mentioned that unfortunately this case history
does not lend itself to detailed reproduction.
Among other things Mrs. Cecilia M also
suffered from a most violent facial neuralgia,
which appeared suddenly two or three times
during the year and persisted for from five to
ten days, resisting every remedy, and then
ceased as if cut off. It limited itself to the sec
ond and third branches of the trigeminus, and
as there was undoubtedly an excess of urates
in the urine, and as a not very "clear acute
rheumatism" played a certain part in the pa
tient's history, it was reasonable to assume
that we dealt with a gouty neuralgia. This

[62b]
opinion was also
shared by the consulting
physicians who saw every attack. The neural
gia was treated by the methods in vogue, such
as electric penciling, alkaline waters and purga
tives, but it always remained uninfluenced until
it found it convenient to make room for an
other symptom. In former years—the neural
gia was fifteen years old—the teeth were ac
cused of preserving it and were condemned to
extraction, and one fine morning, under nar
cosis the execution of seven of the culprits
took place.1 This did not run so smoothly, as
the teeth were so firm that most of the roots
were left behind. This cruel operation was fol
lowed by neither temporary nor permanent re
lief.
At
that time the
neuralgia raged for
months. Even while under my care, whenever
she had neuralgia, the dentist was called and
he always declared he found diseased roots.
He started to get ready for an extraction, but
usually he was soon interrupted, for the neural
gia suddenly ceased, and with it the desire for
the dentist. During the intervals, the teeth did
not ache at all. One day, just while another
attack was raging, I put the patient into a
hypnotic condition and placed an energetic in
terdiction on the pains, and from that moment
they ceased. I then began to doubt the genu
ineness of this neuralgia.
r
About a year after this hypnotic remedial
success, the condition of Mrs. Cecilia M took
a new and surprising turn. There suddenly ap
peared other states than those that had been
characteristic of
the
last
years,
but after
some reflection the patient declared that all
these conditions had existed before and were
really scattered over the long period of her
disease (thirty years). Indeed, a surprising
abundance of hysterical incidents were unrolled
whichthe patient was able to localize correctly
in the past, and soon the frequently very en
tangled mental connections, which determined
the sequence of these incidents, became recog
nizable. It was like a series of pictures with an
explanatory
text.
Pitres,
on
describing
his
dilire ecmnesique,2 must have had in mind a
similar case. The way such an hysterical condi
tion belonging to the past was reproduced was
1 It is remarkable how history repeats itself.
Lest
there should
be
some misunderstanding, X wish
to
remind the reader that the above was written in 1893,
and the theory
of
focal infection, especially of the
teeth, was brought out as something new in. psychi
atry only about ten years ago.-^-TR.
2 A
delirium in which the events of a period of
time are forgotten, although prior events are remem
bered.—Ed.

[63a]
58
Sigmund Freud
most remarkable. In the first place, while the
patient was in the best of condition, there ap
peared a pathological mood of special colouring,
which was regularly mistaken by the patient
and was referred to a banal occurrence of the
last hours. This increasing obnubilation of con
sciousness was followed by hysterical symp
toms, such as hallucinations, pains, convulsions,
and long declamations, and finally an event of
the past attached itself to this hallucinatory
manifestation which could explain the initial
mood and determine the occasional symptoms.
With this
last part of the
attack lucidity
returned, the symptoms disappeared as if by
magic, and good health again existed—until
the next attack, which was half a day later.
Usually I was called at the height of this con
dition. I induced hypnosis, evoked a reproduc
tion of the traumatic events, and by artificial
aid I curtailed the attack. Having gone through
with the patient many hundreds of such cycles,
I obtained the most instructive explanations
concerning
the
determinants
of
hysterical
symptoms. The joint observation with Breuer
of this remarkable case was also the chief mo
tive for the publication of our "Preliminary
Communication."
In this connection, it finally also came to
the reproduction of the facial neuralgias, which
I myself had still treated as actual attacks. I
was desirous of knowing whether we would find
here a psychic causation. When I attempted to
evoke the traumatic scene, the patient soon
imagined herself in a period during which she
felt marked psychic sensitiveness against her
husband. She related a conversation with him
and a remark that he made which annoyed her
very much.
She then suddenly grasped her
cheek, crying aloud with pain, and said, "That
was like a slap in the face." With this, both
the attack and the pain came to an end.
There is no doubt that here, too, we dealt
with a symbolization. She had felt as if she
really received a slap in the face. Now every
body will ask how the sensation of "a slap in
the face" can lead to the manifestation of a
trigeminal neuralgia, to its limiting itself to
the second and third branches, and to its being
aggravated on opening the mouth, and on mas
tication (not on talking).
The following day the neuralgia reappeared,
but this time it could be solved by the repro
duction of another scene, the content of which
equally showed a supposed insult. This process
continued for nine days, and from the result
it seemed that for years irritations, especially

[63b]
through words, produced new attacks of tMs
facial neuralgia by way of symbolization.
But finally we also succeeded in reproducing
the first attack of the neuralgia which occurred
more than fifteen years before. Here, there was
no symbolization, but a conversion through co
incidence. It was a painful sight which recalled
to her mind a reproach, and this caused her
to repress another series of thoughts. We had
here, then, a case of conflict and defense, and
the
origin of the neuralgia in this moment
could not be further explained if we did not
wish to assume that she suffered at that time
from slight toothache or facial pains, a thing
not improbable, as she was then in the first
months of pregnancy.
"i
The result of the explanation showed that
this neuralgia became the mark of a definite
psychic excitement through the usual road of
conversion, but
that it could be
awakened
later
through
associative
accusations
from
mental life and symbolic conversions. It was
really the same procedure as we encountered
in Miss Elisabeth von R.
I will now introduce another example which
will illustrate the efficacy of symbolization un
der other determinants. On one occasion Mrs.
Cecilia M was tormented by a violent pain in
her right heel; she had stinging sensations on
every step, which made walking impossible.
The analysis conducted us to a time when the
patient was in a foreign sanitarium. For eight
days she kept to her room, and for the first
time the house physician was to take her to the
dining room. The pain came on while the pa
tient took the physician's arm on leaving the
room. It disappeared during the reproduction
of this scene while she remarked that at thkt
time she feared lest she would not make the
"proper impression" on this strange society
rechte Auftreten equals proper stepping.
This seems a striking, almost comical, exam
ple for the origin of hysterical symptoms
through symbolization by means of a verbal
expression. But closer investigation of the cir
cumstances of that moment favours another
conception. The patient suffered at that time
from actual pains in her feet on account of
which she remained in bed, and we can only
assume that the fear, which obsessed her on
taking the first steps, produced from the simul
taneously existing pains the one symbolically
appropriate symptom in the right heel, in order
to form it into a psychic algia and to assist it to
maintain itself for a long time.
Notwithstanding the fact that the mechan-

[64a]
Selected Papers on Hysteria
ism of symbolization in these examples seems
to be pushed into second rank, which certainly
agrees with the rule, I have still other exam
ples at my disposal which seem to demonstrate
the origin of hysterical symptoms through sym
bolization only. One of the best is the follow
ing example which again refers to Mrs. Cecilia
M. At the age of fifteen she once lay in bed
watched by her austere grandmother. The girl
suddenly cried out, complaining of having per
ceived a pain in the forehead between the eyes,
which thereafter continued for weeks. On ana
lysing this pain, which was reproduced after
almost thirty years, she stated that her grand
mother gazed at her so "piercingly" that it
seemed as if her look penetrated deeply into
her brain. She was really afraid of being looked
upon suspiciously by this old lady. On repro
ducing this thought she burst into loud laugh
ter and the pain ceased. Here I find nothing
other than the mechanism of symbolization
which in a way stands midway between the
mechanism of auto-suggestion and that of con
version.
The study of Mrs. Cecilia M gave me the
opportunity to gather a collection of such symbolizations. A whole series of physical sensa
tions, which were otherwise looked upon as or
ganically determined, were of psychic origin,
or at least lent themselves to psychic interpre
tation. A certain number of her experiences
were accompanied by a piercing sensation in
the region of the heart ("I felt a stitch in my
heart"). The piercing headache of hysteria was
undoubtedly, in her case, to be interpreted as a
mental pain ("something sticks in my head"),
and it disappeared each time when the prob
lem in question was solved. The sensation of
the hysterical aura in the throat, when it mani
fested itself during an annoyance, ran parallel
with the thought, "I have to swallow that."
There was a whole series of parallel running
sensations and ideas, in which it was now the
sensation evoking the idea as an interpretation,
and now the idea which produced the sensation
by symbolization, and not seldom it remained
obscure which of the two elements was the
primary one.
In no other patient was I able to find such a
prolific application of symbolization. To be
sure, Mrs. Cecilia M was quite an unusual per
son, of a special artistic temperament, whose
highly developed sense of form manifested it
self in producing very beautiful poems. I main
tain,
however,
that
if
an
hysteric
creates
through symbolization a somatic sensation for

[64b]
59
an emotionally accentuated idea, it is due less
to individual and arbitrary things than one sup
poses. When during an offending harangue she
takes literally such phrases as "stitch in the
heart" or "slap in the face," and perceives them
as real occurrences, she practises no facetious
misuse, but only revives the sensations to which
these phrases owe their existence. For how does
it happen that in speaking of an aggrieved
person we use such expressions as "he experi
enced a 'stitch in his heart/ " if the mortifica
tion was not actually companied by a precor
dial sensation that could be so interpreted and
recognized? Is it not probable that the phrase,
"to swallow something," applied to an unreturned insult, really originates from the sensa
tion of innervation appearing in the pharynx
when one forces back his speech, thus prevent
ing a reaction to the insult? All these sensa
tions and innervations belong to the "expres
sion of the emotions," which, as Darwin taught
us, originally consisted of sensible and expedi
ent actions; at present most of them may be so
weakened that their verbal expression seems to
us like a figurative transformation, but very
probably all this was once meant literally, and
hysteria is justified in reconstructing the origi
nal literal sense for its stronger innervation.
Indeed, perhaps it is improper to say that it
creates such sensations through symbolization,
perhaps it has not taken the usage of speech as
a model, but like it draws it from a common
source.1
CHAPTER 4
The Psycho-Therapy of Hysteria8
In our "Preliminary Communication" we have
stated that, while investigating the aetiology of
hysterical symptoms, we have also discovered
a therapeutic method which we consider of
practical significance. "We found, at first to
our greatest surprise, that the individual hys1 In conditions of profounder psychic changes, we
apparently find a symbolic stamp of
the more arti
ficial usage of language in the form of emblematic pic
tures
and
sensations.
There
was
a
time
in
Mrs.
Cecilia M during which every thought was changed
into an hallucination, and which solution frequently
afforded great humor. She at that time complained
to
me
of
being
troubled by the hallucination that
both her physicians, Breuer and I, were hanged in
the garden on two nearby trees. The hallucination dis
appeared after the analysis revealed the following or
igin: The evening before, Breuer refused her request
for a certain drug. She then placed her hopes on me,
but found me just as inflexible. She was angry at both
of us, and in her affect she thought, "They are worthy
of each other, the one is a pendant of the other!"
2 Breuer u. Freud, Studien iiber Hysterie, 1895.

[65a]
6o
Sigmund Freud
terical
symptoms
immediately
disappeared
without returning if we succeeded in thorough
ly awakening the memories of the causal proc
ess with its accompanying affect, and if the
patient circumstantially discussed the process
in the most detailed manner and gave verbal
expression to the affect" (p. 26).
We furthermore attempted to explain how
our psycho-therapeutic method acts: "It abro
gates the efficacy of the original non-ab-reacted
ideas by affording an outlet to their strangu
lated affects through speech. It brings them to
associative correction by drawing them into
normal consciousness (in mild hypnosis) or by
eliminating them through medical suggestion in
the same way as in somnambulism with amne
sia" (p. 30).
Although the essential features of this meth
od have been enumerated in the preceding
pages, a repetition is unavoidable, and I shall
now attempt to show connectedly how farreaching this method is, its superiority over
others, its technique, and its difficulties.
I, for my part, may state that I can firmly
adhere to the "Preliminary Communication,"
but I must confess that in the years that have
elapsed since then, and after continuous occu
pation with the problems touched on there, new
viewpoints obtruded themselves on me, as a
result of which the former material underwent
at least a partial change in grouping and con
ception. It would be unjust to impute too much
of the responsibility for this development to
my honored friend, J. Breuer. The responsibili
ty for the
following elucidations, therefore,
rests preponderate^ upon me.
In attempting to use Breuer's method for
treating hysterical symptoms in a great num
ber of patients by investigation and ab-reaction
in hypnosis, I encountered two obstacles, the
pursuit of which led me to change the tech
nique, as well as the conception. (1) Not all
persons were
hypnotizable who undoubtedly
showed hysterical symptoms, and in
whom
there .most probably existed the same psychic
mechanisms. (2) I had to take an attitude to
wards the question of what essentially charac
terizes hysteria, and in what it differs
from
other neuroses.
How I overcame the first difficulty, and what
it taught me, I will show later. I will first state
what position I have taken in my daily prac
tise towards the second problem. It is very dif
ficult to examine a case of neurosis before it

[65b]
has been subjected to a thorough analysis, such
as would result only through the application of
Breuer's method. But before we have such a
thorough knowledge we are obliged to decide
upon the diagnosis and kind of
treatment.
Hence, the only thing left to me was to select
such
cases for
the cathartic method
which
could, for the time being, be diagnosed as hys
teria, and which showed some or many stig
mata, or the characteristic symptoms, of hys
teria. Yet, it sometimes happened that, in spite
of the diagnosis of hysteria, the therapeutic re
sults were very poor, and even the analysis re
vealed nothing of importance. At other times I
attempted to treat cases which no one took for
hysteria by Breuer's method, and I found that
I could influence them, and even cure them.
Such, for example, was my experience with
obsessions, the real obsessions of Westphal's
type, in cases which did not show a single fea
ture of hysteria. Thus, the psychic mechanism
revealed in the "Preliminary Communication"
could not, therefore, be pathognomonic of hys
teria. Nor could I, for the sake of this mechan
ism, throw so many neuroses into the same pot
with hysteria. Out of all the instigated doubts
I finally seized upon a plan to treat all the other
neuroses in question just like hysteria, to in
vestigate the aetiology and form of psychic
mechanisms, and to leave the decision for the
justification of the diagnosis of hysteria to the
outcome of this investigation.
It thus happened that proceeding from Breu
er's methods I occupied myself mostly with the
aetiology and the mechanism
of the neuroses.
After a relatively brief period I was fortunate
in obtaining useful results. Firsts I became im
pressed with the cognition that, if one may
speak of a causation through which neuroses
would be acquired, the aetiology must be sought
in sexual factors. This agrees with the findings
that, generally speaking, various sexual factors
may also produce various pictures of neurotic
diseases. And depending on the amount of con
firmation of the latter relation, one could now
also venture to utilize the aetiology for the
characteristics of the neuroses, and build up a
sharp line of demarcation between the morbid
pictures of the neuroses. If the aetiological
characters constantly agreed with the clinical,
then this was really justified.
In this way it was found that neurasthenia
really corresponds to a monotonous morbid pic
ture in which, as shown by analysis, psychic
mechanisms play no part. From neurasthenia
we sharply distinguished the compulsion neu-

[66a]
Selected Papers on Hysteria
6i
rosis (obsessions, doubts, phobias), the neuro
sis of genuine obsessions in which we can rec
ognize a complicated psychic mechanism, an
aetiology resembling the one of hysteria, and a
far-reaching possibility of its reduction by psy
chotherapy. On the other hand, it seemed to me
absolutely imperative to separate from neu
rasthenia a neurotic symptom complex which
depends on a totally divergent, indeed, strictly
speaking, on a contrary aetiology, the partial
symptoms of this complex have already been
recognized by E. Hecker1 as having a common
character. They are either symptoms, or equiv
alents, or rudiments of anxiety manifestations,
and it is for that reason, in order to distinguish
this complex from neurasthenia, that I have
called it anxiety neurosis. I maintained that it
originates from an accumulation of physical
tension, which is in turn of sexual origin. This
neurosis, too, has no psychic mechanism, but
regularly influences the psychic life, so that
among its regular manifestations we have "anx
ious expectations," phobias, hyperesthesias to
pain, and other symptoms. This anxiety neuro
sis, as I take it, certainly corresponds in part
to the neurosis called hypochondria, which in
some features resembles hysteria and neuras
thenia. Yet, I cannot consider the demarcation
of this neurosis in the existing works as correct,
and moreover, I find that the usefulness of the
name hypochondria is impaired by its close re
lation to the symptom of nosophobia.
After I had thus constructed for myself the
simple picture of neurasthenia, anxiety neu
roses, and obsessions, I turned my attention to
the
commonly
occurring
cases
of
neuroses
which enter into consideration in the diagnosis
of hysteria. I now had to say to myself that it
would not do to mark a neurosis as hysterical
on the whole, merely because its. symptom com
plex evinced some hysterical features. I could
readily explain this practice by the fact that
hysteria is the oldest, the most familiar, and
the most striking neurosis under consideration,
but it was an abuse nonetheless to put so many
characteristics of perversion and degeneration
under the caption of hysteria. Whenever an
hysterical symptom, such as anaesthesia or a
characteristic attack, could be discovered in a
complicated case of psychic degeneration, the
whole thing was called hysteria, and hence one
could naturally find united under this same
trade mark the worst and most contradictory
1E. Hecker, Zentralblatt fur Nervenheilkunde, De
cember, 1893.

[66b]
features. As certain as this diagnosis was incor
rect, it was also certain that our classification
must be made on neurotic lines, and, as we
knew neurasthenia, anxiety neurosis, and simi
lar conditions in the pure state, there was no
need of overlooking them in combination.
It seemed, therefore, that the following con
ception was more warrantable: The neuroses us
ually occurring are generally to be designated as
mixed. Neurasthenia and anxiety neurosis can
be found without effort in pure forms, and most
frequently in young persons. Pure cases of hys
teria and compulsion neurosis are rare; they
are usually combined with an anxiety neurosis.
This frequent occurrence of mixed neuroses is
due to the fact that their aetiological factors
are frequently mixed, now only accidentally,
and now in consequence of a causal relation be
tween the processes which give rise to the aetio
logical factors of the neuroses. This can be
sustained and proven in the individual cases
without any diflkulty. But it follows from this
that for the purpose of examination it is hardly
possible to take hysteria out of its association
with the sexual neuroses, that hysteria, as a
rule, presents only one side, one aspect of the
complicated neurotic case, and that only, as it
were, in the borderline case can it be found and
treated as an isolated neurosis. In a series of
cases we can perhaps say a potiori fit denomi
nation
I shall now examine the cases reported to
see whether they speak in favour of my view
of the clinical dependence of hysteria. Breuer's
patient, Anna 0,8 seems to contradict this and
exemplifies a pure hysterical disease. Yet, this
case, which became so fruitful for the knowl
edge of hysteria, was never considered by its
observer under the guise of a sexual neurosis
and hence cannot at present be utilized as such.
When I began to analyse the second patient,
Mrs. Emmy von N, the idea of a sexual neuro
sis on an hysterical basis was far from my
mind. I had just returned from the Charcot
school, and considered the connection of hys
teria with the sexual theme as a sort of insult—
just as my patients were wont to do. But when
I now review my notes on this case, there is ab
solutely no doubt that I have to consider it as
a severe case of anxiety neurosis with anxious
expectations and phobias, due to sexual absti
nence, which was combined with hysteria.
2 The name is taken from the stronger aspect.—Ed.
8 Case I in Breuer and Freud, Studien fiber Hysterie,
1895
[translated by A. A.
Brill, Nervous &. Mental
Disease Pub. Co., New York, 193 61.

[67a]
62
Sigmund Freud
The third case, Miss Lucie R,1 could perhaps
more than any other be called a borderline
case of pure hysteria. It is a short episodic hys
teria based on an unmistakably sexual aetiolo
gy, which would correspond to an anxiety neu
rosis in an over-ripe, amorous girl, whose love
was too rapidly awakened through a misunder
standing. Yet, the anxiety neurosis either could
not be demonstrated or had escaped me. Case
IV, Katharina, is really a model of what I have
called virginal anxiety; it is a combination of
an anxiety neurosis and hysteria, the former
creates the symptoms, while the latter repeats
them and works with them. At all events, it is
a typical case of many juvenile neuroses called
hysteria. Case V, Miss Elisabeth von R,2 was
again not'investigated as a sexual neurosis. I
could only suspect that there was a spinal neu
rasthenia at its basis, but I could not confirm
it. I must, however, add that since then pure
hysterias have become still rarer in my experi
ence. That in grouping together these four cases
of hysteria I could disregard in the discussion
the decisive factors of sexual neuroses, was due
to the fact that they were older cases in which
I had not as yet carried out the intentional and
urgent investigation for the neurotic sexual sub
soil. Moreover, the reason for my reporting
four instead of twelve cases of hysteria, the
analyses of which would confirm our claims of
the psychic mechanism of hysterical phenome
na, is due to one circumstance, namely, that the
analysis reveals these cases simultaneously as
sexual neuroses, though there is no doubt that
any diagnostician would have denied them the
name hysteria. However, the discussion of such
sexual neuroses would have overstepped the
limits of our joint publication.
I do not wish to be misunderstood and give
the impression that I refuse to accept hysteria
as an independent neurotic affection, that I
conceive it only as a psychic manifestation of
the anxiety neurosis, that I ascribe it to only
"ideogenous" symptoms, and that I attribute
the somatic symptoms, like hysterogenic points
and anaesthesias to the anxiety neuroses. None
of these statements are true. I believe that hys
teria, purified of all admixtures, can be treated
independently in every respect except in thera
py. For in the treatment we deal with a practi
cal purpose, namely, we have to do away with
the whole diseased state, and if hysteria occurs
in most cases as a component of a mixed neu
rosis, the case merely resembles a mixed infec1See p. 31 above.
2 See p. 38 above.

[67b]
tion, where the task is to preserve life and not
merely to combat the effect of one inciting
cause of the disease.
I, therefore, find it important to separate the
hysterical part in the pictures of the mixed
neuroses from neurasthenia, anxiety neurosis,
etc., for after this separation I can express
concisely the therapeutic value of the cathartic
method. Similarly I would venture to assert
that—principally—it can readily dispose of any
hysterical symptom, whereas, as can be easily
understood, it is perfectly powerless in the pres
ence of neurasthenic phenomena, and can only
seldom and only through detours, influence the
psychic results of anxiety neurosis. Its thera
peutic efficacy in the individual case will de
pend on whether or not the hysterical com
ponents of the morbid picture can claim a prac
tical and significant position in comparison to
the other neurotic components.
Still another limitation is placed on the ef
ficacy of the cathartic method, which we have
already mentioned in our "Preliminary Com
munication." It does not influence the causal
determinations of hysteria, and hence it cannot
prevent the origin of new symptoms in the
place of those removed. Hence, on the whole, I
must claim a prominent place for our thera
peutic method in the realm of a therapy of
neuroses, but I would caution against attaching
any importance to it, or putting it into practice
outside of this connection. As I am unable to
give here a therapy of neuroses as would be re
quired by the practicing physician, the preced
ing statements are put on a level with a de
ferred reference to some later communication;
still, for purposes of discussion and elucida
tion, I can add the following remarks:
1. I do not claim that I have actually re
moved all the hysterical symptoms which I
have undertaken to influence by the cathartic
method, but I believe that the obstacles were
due to the personal circumstances of the cases,
and not to the general principles. In passing
sentence, these cases of failure may be left out
of consideration, just as the surgeon puts aside
all cases who die as a result of narcosis, hemor
rhage, accidental sepsis, etc., when deciding up
on a new technique. Later, when I will again
consider the difficulties and drawbacks of this
method, I will again discuss the failures of such
origin.
2. The cathartic method does not become
valueless simply because it is a symptomatic
and not a causaltherapy. For a causal therapy
is really in most cases only prophylactic; it

[68a]
Selected Papers on Hysteria
stops the further progress of the injury, but it
does not necessarily remove the products which
have already resulted from it. It requires, as a
rule, a second agent to solve the latter task,
and in cases of hysteria the cathartic method
is really insurpassable for this purpose.
3. Where a period of hysterical production,
or an acute hysterical paroxysm, has been over
come, and the only remnant manifestations left
are hysterical symptoms, the cathartic method
fulfills all indications, and achieves a full and
lasting success. Such a favourable constella
tion for the therapy rarely results in the realm
of the sexual life, in consequence of the marked
fluctuations in the intensity of the sexual need
and the complications of the required determi
nation for a sexual trauma. Here the cathartic
method accomplishes all that is required of it,
for the physician cannot possibly change an
hysterical constitution. He must rest content if
he can remove the disease for which such a
constitution shows a tendency, and which can
arise through the assistance of external deter
minants. He must be satisfied if the patient will
again be able to function. Moreover, he need
not despair of the future, even if he considers
the possibility of a relapse, for he knows the
main character of the aetiology of the neuroses,
namely that their origin is mostly overdeter
mined, and that many factors must cooperate
to produce this result. He can hope that this
cooperation will not take place very soon, even
if some of the aetiological factors remained in
force.
It may be argued that in such subsided cases
of hysteria the
remaining
symptoms would
spontaneously disappear without anything else;
but this can be answered by stating that such
spontaneous cures very often terminate neither
rapidly nor fully, and that the cure will be
extraordinarily advanced
by
the
treatment.
Whether the cathartic treatment cures only
that which is capable of spontaneous recovery,
or incidentally also that which would not cease
spontaneously, that question may
surely be
left open for the present.
4. Wherever we encounter an acute hysteria
during the most acute production of hysterical
symptoms, and the consecutive overwhelming
of the ego by the morbid products (hysterical
psychosis), even the cathartic method will
change little in the expression and course of the
disease. One finds himself in the same position
to the neurosis as the doctor to an acute infec
tious disease. The aetiological factors have ex
erted a
sufficient amount of affect for some

[68b]
63
time past, which is now beyond the reach of
influence, and, now that it has passed the in
terval of incubation, it comes to the surface.
The affection cannot be warded off; it has to
run its course; but meanwhile one must bring
about the most favourable conditions for the
patient. If during such an acute period one can
remove the morbid products, the newly formed
hysterical symptoms, it may be expected that
their places will be taken by new ones. The
physician will not be spared the depressing im
pression of fruitless effort, the enormous ex
penditure of exertion, and the disappointment
of the relatives to whom the idea of the neces
sary duration of time of an acute neurosis is
hardly as familiar as in the analogous case of
an acute infectious disease; these, and many
other things, will probably largely impede the
consequent application of the cathartic method
in the assumed case. Nevertheless, it still re
mains to be considered whether, even in an
acute hysteria, the frequent removal of the
morbid products does not exercise a curative
influence by supporting the normal ego, which
is occupied with the defense, and thus prevent
ing it from merging into a psychosis or into
ultimate confusion.
That the cathartic method can accomplish
something, even in an acute hysteria, and that
it can even reduce the new productions of the
morbid symptoms quite practically and no
ticeably, is undoubtedly evident from the case
of Anna 0, in which Breuer first learned this
psycho-therapeutic method.
5. Where we deal with chronic, progressive
hysterias with moderate or continued produc
tions of hysterical symptoms, we feel most the
lack of a causally effective therapy, but we also
learn to value the importance of the cathartic
method as a symptomatic remedy. We then
have
to
deal
with
an
injury produced by
a chronically acting aetiology.
We have to
strengthen the capacity of resistance of the
nervous system of our patient, and we must
bear in mind that the existence of an hysteri
cal symptom signifies a weakening of resist
ance, of the nervous system, and represents a
predisposing factor. From the mechanism of
monosymptomatic hysteria we know that a new
hysterical symptom generally originates as an
addition to, and as an analogy of, one already
in existence. The location once penetrated rep
resents the weak spot which can be penetrated
again. The already split-off psychic group plays
the part of the provoking crystal from which a
formerly omitted crystallization emanates with

[69a]
64
Sigmund Freud
great facility. To remove the already existing
symptoms, to do away with the psychic altera
tions lying at their bases, is to return to the pa
tients the full measure of their resistance ca
pacity, with which they are successfullyable to
resist the noxious influences. One can do a
great deal for the patient by such long con
tinued watchfulness and occasional "chimneysweeping."
6. I still have to mention the apparent con
tradiction between the admission that not all
hysterical symptoms are psychogenic, and the
assertion that they can all be removed by psy
cho-therapeutic procedures. The solution lies in
the fact that some of these non-psychogenic
symptoms, though they represent morbid symp
toms, as for instance, the stigmata, need, nev
ertheless, not to be designated as affections. It
is, therefore, practically unimportant if they
outlast the successful treatment. Other symp
toms of a similar nature seem to be pulled
along indirectly by some psychogenic symp
toms, for indirectly they really depend on some
psychic causation.
I shall now speak of those difficulties and in
conveniences of our therapeutic method which
are not evident from the preceding case histo
ries or from the following remarks concerning
the technique of the method. I will rather enu
merate and indicate them than go into details.
The process is toilsome and wearisome for the
physician; it presupposes in him a profound
interest for psychological occurrences, and yet
also a personal sympathy for the patient. I
could not imagine myself entering deeply into
the psychic mechanism of an hysteria in a per
son who would impress me as common and dis
agreeable, and who would not, on closer ac
quaintanceship, be able to awaken in me hu
man sympathy; whereas I can treat a tabetic
or a rheumatic patient regardless of such per
sonal interest. No less demanding are the req
uisites on the patient's side. The method is es
pecially inapplicable in a person below a cer
tain level of intelligence, and it becomes ex
tremely difficult wherever there is any tinge of
mental deficiency. It requires the full consent,
the full attention of the patients, but, above all,
their confidence,
for the analysis regularly
leads to the inmost and most secretly guarded
psychic processes. A large proportion of the pa
tients suitable for such treatment withdraw
from the physician as soon as they get an ink
ling whither this investigation tends. The phy
sician remains a stranger to them. In others
who have determined to give themselves up to

[69b]
the physician and bestow their confidence upon
him,
something only voluntarily given, but
never demanded; in all those I say it is hardly
avoidable that the personal relation to the phy
sician should not become unduly prominent, at
least for some time. Indeed, it seems as if such
an influence exerted by the physician is a con
dition under which alone a solution of the prob
lem is possible. I do not believe that it makes
any essential difference in this state of affairs
whether one resorts to hypnosis or has to avoid
or substitute for it. Yet, fairness demands that
we emphasize the fact that, although these in
conveniences are inseparable from our method,
they, nevertheless, cannot be charged to it. On
the contrary, it is very obvious that they are
conditioned in the presuppositions of the neu
roses destined to be cured, and that they are
interwoven in every medical activity which in
tensively concerns itself with the patient, and
produce in him a psychic change. I could see
no harm or danger in the application of hypno
sis, even in these cases where it was used ex
cessively. The causes for the harm produced
lay elsewhere and deeper. When I review the
therapeutic efforts of those years since the com
munications
of
my
honoured
teacher
and
friend, J. Breuer, gave me the cathartic meth
od, I believe that I have more often produced
good than harm, and brought about some things
which could not have been produced by any
other therapeutic means. On the whole it was,
as expressed in the "Preliminary Communica
tion," a "distinct therapeutic gain."
I must mention still another advantage from
the application of this method. No severe case
of complicated neurosis, with either an exces
sive or slight tinge of hysteria, can better be
explained than by subjecting it to an analysis
by Breuer's method. In making this analysis, I
find that whatever shows the hysterical mech
anism disappears first, while the rest of the
manifestations I meanwhile learn to interpret
and trace back to their aetiology. I thus gain
the essential factors indicated by the instru
ment of the therapy of the neurosis in question.
When I think of the ordinary differences be
tween my opinion of a case of neurosis before
and after such an analysis, I am almost tempt
ed to maintain that the analysis is indispensa
ble for the knowledge of a neurotic disease.
Moreover, I have made it a practice of apply
ing the cathartic psycho-therapy in acute cases
in conjunction with a Weir-Mitchell rest cure.
This advantage lies in the fact that, on the one
side, I avoid the very disturbing intrusion of

[70a]
Selected Papers on Hysteria
65
new psychic impressions which may be pro
duced during psycho-therapy; on the
other
hand, I exclude the monotony of the WeirMitchell treatment, during which the patient
frequently merges into harmful reveries.
n
I will now add to my former observations
that in attempting to use Breuer's method in
greater latitude I encountered the difficulty that
although I made the diagnosis of hysteria, and
the probabilities spoke in favour of the preva
lence of the psychic mechanism described by
us, yet a number of the patients could not be
hypnotized. But as hypnosis was necessary to
broaden consciousness in order to find the path
ogenic reminiscences which do not exist in the
ordinary consciousness, I was, therefore, forced
either to give up such patients or to bring
about this broadening by other means.
The reason why one person is hypnotizable
and another not, I could no more explain than
others, and hence, I could not start on a causal
way towards the removal of the difficulties. I
also observed that in some patients the obsta
cle was still more marked; they even refused
to submit to hypnosis. The idea then occurred
to me that both cases might be identical, and
that in both it might merely signify an unwill
ingness. Those who entertain psychic doubts
against hypnotism are not hypnotizable;
Itr
makes no difference whether they express their
unwillingness or not. It is not fully clear to me
whether I can firmly adhere to this view or not.
I was, therefore, forced to dispense with hyp
notism and yet, obtain the pathogenic remini
scences. I attained this in the following manner:
On asking my patients during our first inter
view whether they remembered the first motive
for the symptom in question, some said that
they knew nothing, while others thought of
something which they designated as an indis
tinct recollection, yet were unable.to pursue it.
I then followed Bernheim's example of forci
bly awakening apparently forgotten impressions
from somnambulism.11 assured them that they
did know it, and that they would recall it, etc.,
and in this way some thought of something,
while in others the recollections
went even
further. I urged still more, I ordered the pa
tient to lie down and voluntarily shut his eyes
so as to "concentrate" his mind, and I then
discovered that without any hypnosis there
emerged new and retrospective reminiscences
1Cf. p. 32 above.

[70b]
which probably belonged to our theme. Through
such experiences, I gained the impression that
through urging alone it would really be possi
ble to bring to light the definitely existing path
ogenic series of ideas; and as this urging neces
sitated much exertion on my part, and showed
me that I had to overcome a resistance, I there
fore formulated this whole state of affairs into
the
following theory:
Through my psychic
work I had to overcome a psychic force in the
patient which opposedthe pathogenicidea from
becoming conscious (remembered). A new in
sight seemed to have revealed itself to me when
it occurred to me that this must really be the
same psychic force which assisted in the origin
of the hysterical symptom, and which at that
time prevented the pathogenic idea from be
coming conscious. What kind of force could
here be assumed as effective; and what motive
could have brought it into activity? I could
easily formulate an opinion, for I already had
some
complete analyses at my disposal, in
which I found examples of pathogenic, forgot
ten, and repressed ideas. From these I could
judge the general character of such ideas. They
were altogether of a painful nature adapted to
provoke the affects of shame, of reproach, of
psychic pain, or the feeling of injury; they
were altogether of that kind which one would
have liked not to experience and preferred to
forget.
From all these there resulted the thought of
defence, as if spontaneously. Indeed, it is gen
erally admitted by all psychologists that the ac
ceptance of a new idea (acceptance in the sense
of belief, admission of reality) depends on the
mode and drift of the ideas already united in
the ego, and for the process of censorship, to
which the newly arrived idea is subjected, spe
cial technical names have been created. An idea
entered into the patient's ego which proved
to be unbearable and evoked a force of repul
sion on the part of the ego, the object of which
was a defence against this unbearable idea. This
defence actually succeeded and the idea con
cerned was crowded out of consciousness and
out of memory, so that its psychic trace could
not apparently be found; yet, this trace must
have existed. When I made the effort to direct
the attention to it, I felt the same force as a
resistance which showed itself as a repulsion
in the genesis of the symptom. If I could now
make it probable that the idea became pathojgenic in consequence of the exclusion and re-

[71a]
66
Sigmund Freud
pression, the chain would seem complete. In
many epicrises of our histories, and in a small
work concerning the defense neuropsychoses
(1894), I have attempted to indicate the psy
chological hypotheses with the help of which
this connection, as well as the fact of conver
sion, could be made clear.
Hence, a psychic force, the repugnance of
the ego, has originally crowded the pathogenic
idea from the association, and now opposed
its return into the memory. The not knowing
of the hysterics was really a—more or less con
scious—not willing to know, and the task of
the therapist was to overpower this association
resistance by psychic labour. Such accomplish
ment is, above all, brought about by urging;
that is, by applying a psychic force in order to
direct the patient's attention to the ideas that
one wishes to trace. It does not, however, stop
here, but, as I will show, it assumes new forms
in the course of the analysis, and calls to aid
more psychic forces.
I shall above all still linger at the urging.
One cannot go very far with such simple as
surances as, "You do know it, just say it," or,
"It will soon come to your mind." After a few
sentences the thread breaks, even in the patient
who is in a state of concentration. We must
not, however, forget that we deal everywhere
here with a quantitative comparison, with the
struggle between motives of diverse force and
intensity. The urging by a strange and inexpe
rienced physician does not suffice to overcome
association resistance in a grave hysteria. One
must think of more forceful means.
Here, I utilize in the first place a small tech
nical artifice. I inform the patient that in the
next moment I will exert pressure on his fore
head, I assure him that during this pressure he
will see some reminiscence in the form of a pic
ture, or some thought will occur to him, and I
obligate him to communicate to me this pic
ture or this thought, no matter what it might
be. He must not keep it to himself because he
may think that it is not the desired or the
right thing, or because it is too disagreeable to
say. There should be neither criticism nor res
ervation because of affect or underestimation.
Only thus could we find the things desired, and
only thus have we unfailingly found them. I
then exerted pressure for a few seconds on the
forehead of the patient lying in front of me,
and, after ceasing it, I asked in a calm tone, as
if any disappointment was out of the question,
"What have you seen?" or "What occurred to
your mind?"

[71b]
This method1 taught me a great deal and led
me to the goal every time. Of course, I know
that I can substitute this pressure on the fore
head by any other sign, or any other physical
influence, but as the patient lies before me, the
pressure on the forehead, or the grasping of his
head between my two hands, is the most sug
gestive and most convenient thing that I could
undertake for this end. To explain the efficacy
of this artifice, I may perhaps say that it cor
responds to a "momentary, reinforced hypno
sis"; but the mechanism of hypnosis is so enig
matical to me that I would not like to refer to
it as an explanation.2 I rather think that the ad
vantage of the process lies in the fact that
through it I dissociated the attention of the
patient from his conscious quest and reflection,
in brief, from everything upon which his will
could manifest itself. The fact that under the
pressure of my hand there always appeared that
which I was looking for taught me that the
supposedly forgotten pathogenic ideas always
lie ready, close by, and are attainable through
easily approachable associations, all that is nec
essary is to clear away some obstacle. This ob
stacle again seems to be the person's will, and
different persons learn in different ways how to
discard their wilfulness and to assume a per
fectly objective attitude towards the psychic
processes within them.
It is not always a forgotten reminiscence
which comes to the surface under the pressure
of the hand; in the rarest cases the real patho
genic reminiscences can
be superficially dis
covered. More frequently an idea comes to the
surface which is a link between the first idea
and the desired pathogenic idea of the associa
tion chain, or it is an idea forming the start
ing point of a new series of thoughts and rem
iniscences, at the end of which is the pathogenic
idea. The pressure, therefore, has really not
revealed the pathogenic idea, which, if torn
from its connection without any preparation,
would be incomprehensible; but it has shown
the way to it, and indicated the direction to
wards which the investigation must proceed.
The idea which is at first awakened through
the pressure may correspond to a familiar rem
iniscence which was never repressed. If the
connection becomes torn on the road to the
xThe author has discarded this pressure procedure
after only a short trial.—Tr.
2 The solution of this problem was later found by
the author and his pupils. Cf. here Group Psychology
and the Analysis of the Ego, p. 688 below; and Ferenczi's Contributions to Psycho-analysis, Chapter II
(Badger, Boston, 1916).—Tr.

[72a]
Selected Papers on Hysteria
67
pathogenic idea, all that is necessary for the
reproduction of a new orientation and connec
tion is a repetition of the procedure, that is, of
the pressure.
In still other cases the pressure of the hand
awakens a reminiscence well known to the pa
tient, which appearance, however, causes him
surprise because he has forgotten its relation
to the original idea. In the further course of
the analysis this relation becomes clear. From
all these results of the pressure, one receives a
delusive impression of a superior intelligence
outside of the patient's consciousness, which
systematically holds a large psychic material
for definite purposes, and has provided an in
genious arrangement for its return into con
sciousness. I presume, however, that this un
conscious second intelligence is really only ap
parent.
In every complicated analysis one works re
peatedly, nay continuously, with the help of
this procedure
(pressure on the
forehead),
which leads us from the place where the pa
tient's
wakeful
reconductions
became
inter
rupted, it shows us the way to reminiscences
which remained known, and calls our attention
to connections which have sunk into forgetfulness. It also
evokes and connects memories
which have for years been withdrawn from as
sociation, though they can still be recognized
as memories; and finally, as the highest per
formance of reproduction, it causes the appear
ance of thoughts which the patient never wishes
to recognize as his own, which he does not re
member, although he admits that they are in
exorably required by the connection, and is
convinced that precisely these ideas will cause
the termination of the analysis and the cessa
tion of the symptoms.
I will now attempt to give a series of ex
amples which will show the excellent achieve
ments of this procedure. I treated a young
lady who suffered for six years from an intol
erable and protracted nervous cough, which ap
parently was nurtured by very common catarrh,
but must have had its strong psychic motives.
Every other remedy had long since shown itself
powerless, and I therefore attempted to remove
the symptom by psycho-analysis. All that she
could remember was that the nervous cough be
gan at the age of fourteen while she boarded
with her aunt. She remembered absolutely no
psychic excitement during that time, and did not
believe that there was a motive for her suffer
ing. Under the pressure of my hand, she at first
recalled a large dog. She then recognized the

[72b]
memory picture; it was her aunt's dog, which
was attached to her, and used to accompany hei
everywhere, and without any further aid it oc
curred to her that this dog died and that the
children buried it solemnly; and on the re
turn from this funeral her cough appeared. I
asked her why she began to cough, and the fol
lowing thought occurred to her: "Now I am
all alone in this world; no one loves me here;
this animal was my only friend, and now I
have lost it." She then continued her story.
"The cough disappeared when I left my aunt,
but reappeared a year and a half later."—
"What was the reason for it?"—"I do not
know." I again exerted some pressure on the
forehead
and she
recalled the
news of her
uncle's death, during which the cough again
manifested itself, and also recalled a train of
thought similar to the former. The uncle was
apparently the only one in the
family who
sympathized with her and loved her. That was,
therefore, the pathogenic idea: People do not
love her, everybody else is preferred; she real
ly does not deserve to be loved, etc. To the
idea
of love
there
clung
something which
caused a marked resistance to the communica
tion. The analysis was interrupted before this
explanation was obtained.
Some time ago I attempted to relieve an
elderly lady of her anxiety attacks, which, con
sidering
their
characteristic
qualities,
were
hardly suitable for such treatment. Since her
menopause she had become extremely religious,
and always received me as if I were the Devil—
she was always armed with a small ivory cruci
fix which she hid in her hand. Her attacks of
anxiety,
which bore
a
hysterical character,
could be traced to her early girlhood and were
supposed to have originated from the applica
tion of an iodine preparation to reduce a mod
erate swelling of the thyroid. I naturally re
pudiated this origin and sought to substitute
it by another which was in better harmony
with my views concerning the aetiology of neu
rotic symptoms. To the first question for an
impression of her youth, which would stand in
causal connection to the attacks of anxiety,
there appeared the reminiscences of reading a
so-called
devotional
book
wherein
piously
enough there was some mention of the sexual
processes. The passage in question made an
impression on this girl, which was contrary to
the intention of the author.
She burst into
tears and flung the book away. That was before
the first attack of anxiety. The next remini
scence referred to her brother's teacher, who

[73a]
68
Sigmtj^td Freud
showed her great respect and for whom she
entertained a warmer feeling. This reminiscence
culminated in the reproduction of an evening in
her parents' home during which they all sat
around the table with the young man, and de
lightfully enjoyed themselves in a lively con
versation. During the night following this eve
ning, she was awakened by the first attack of
anxiety which surely had more to do with
some resistance against a sensual feeling than
perhaps with the coincidental use of iodine. In
what other way could I have succeeded in re
vealing in this obstinate patient, prejudiced
against me and every worldly remedy, such a
connection contrary to her own opinion and
assertion?
On another occasion I had to deal with a
young happily married woman who, as early
as in the first years of her girlhood, was found
every morning for some time in a state of
lethargy, with rigid limbs, opened mouth, and
protruding tongue. Similar attacks, though not
so marked, recurred at the present time on
awakening. A deep hypnosis could not be pro
duced, so that I began my investigation in a
state of concentration, and assured her during
the first pressure that she would see something
that would be directly connected with the
cause of her condition during her childhood.
She acted calmly and willingly, she again saw
the residence in which she had passed her early
girlhood—her room, the position of the bed,
the grandmother who lived with them at the
time, and one of her governesses whom she
dearly loved. Then there was a succession of
small scenes in these rooms and among these
quite indifferent persons, the
conclusion of
which was the leavetaking of the governess,
who married from the home. I
did not know
what to start with these reminiscences; I could
not bring about any connection between them
and the aetiology of the attacks. To be sure,
the various circumstances were recognized as
haying occurred at the same time as the at
tacks first appeared.
Before I could continue the analysis, I had
occasion to talk to a colleague who, in former
years, was my patient's family physician. From
him I obtained the following explanation: At
the time that he treated the mature and physi
cally well-developed girl for these first attacks,
he was struck by the excessive affection in the
relations between her and the governess. He
became suspicious and caused the grandmother
to watch these relations. After a short while the
old lady informed him that the governess was

[73b]
wont to pay nightly visits to the child's bed,
and that quite regularly after such visits the
child was found in the morning in an attack.
She did not hesitate to bring about the quiet
removal of this corruptress of youth. The chil
dren, as well as the mother, were made to be
lieve that the governess left the house in order
to get married.
The treatment, which was above all success
ful, consisted in informing the young woman
of the explanations given to me.
Occasionally the explanations which one ob
tains by the pressure procedure follow in very
remarkable
form,
and
under
circumstances
which make the assumption of an unconscious
intelligence appear even more alluring. Thus,!I
recall a lady who suffered for years from ob
sessions
and phobias, and who referred the
origin of her trouble to her childhood, but could
mention nothing to which it could have been
attributed. She was frank and intelHgent, and
evinced only a very slight conscious resistance.
I will add here that the psychic mechanism of
obsessions is very closely related to that of
hysterical symptoms, and that the technique
of the analysis in both is the same.
On asking the lady whether she had seen or
recalled anything under the pressure of my
hand, she answered, "Neither, but a word sud
denly occurred to me."—"A single word?"—
"Yes, but it is too foolish."—"Just tell it."—
"Teacher."—"Nothing more?"—"No.". I
ex
erted pressure a second time, and again a
single word flashed through her mind: "Shirt."
I now observed that we dealt with a new mode
of replying, and by repeated pressure I evoked
the following apparently senseless series of
words: Teacher—shirt—bed—city—wagon., I
asked, "What does all that mean?": She re
flected for a moment, and it then occurred to
her that "it can only refer to this one incident
which now comes to my mind. When I was ten
years old, my older sister of twelve had a vio
lent emotional attack one night and had to be
bound, put in a wagon and taken to the city. I
remember distinctly that it was the teacher
who overpowered her and accompanied her to
the asylum."
We then continued this manner of investiga
tion, and received from our oracle another se
ries of words which, though we could not alto
gether interpret them, could nevertheless be
used as a continuation of the story and as an
appendix to a second. The significance of this
reminiscence was soon clear. The reason why
her sister's illness made such an impression on

[74a]
Selected Papers on Hysteria
69
her was because -they both shared a common
secret. They slept in the same room, and orie
night they both- submitted to a sexual assault
by a certain man. In discovering this sexual
trauma of early youth, we revealed not only the
origin of the first obsession, but also the trau-^
ma which later acted pathogenically.
The peculiarity of this case lies only in the
appearance of singlecatch-words,whichwehad
to elaborate into sentences, for the seeming ir
relevance and incoherence in these oracle-like
words generally occur in all ideas and scenes
as a result of pressure. On further investiga
tion it is regularly found that seemingly dis
connected reminiscences are connected by inti
mate streams of thought, and that they lead
quite directly to the desired pathogenic factor.
I therefore recall with pleasure a case of
analysis in which my confidence in the results
of this method was very splendidly justified.
A very intelligent, and apparently very happy,
young woman consulted me for persistent pain
in her abdomen, which yielded to no treatment.
I found that the pain was located in the -ab^
dominal wall and was due to palpable muscular
hardening, and I therefore ordered local treat
ment.
After months I again saw the patient who
said that "the pain had disappeared after taking
the treatment and remained away a long time,
but it has now reappeared as a nervous pain.
I recognize it by the fact that I do not perceive
it now on motion as before, but only during
certain hours, as for example, in the morning
on awakening, and during certain excitements."
The patient's diagnosis was quite correct. It
was now important to discover the cause of
this pain, but in this she could not assist me in
her uninfluenced state. When I asked her in a
state of concentration and under the pressure
of my hand whether anything occurred to her,
or whether she saw anything, she began to de
scribe her visual pictures. She saw something
like a sun with rays, which I naturally had to
assume to be a phosphene produced by pressure
on the eyes. I expected that the needful pictures
would follow, but she continued to see stars of
a peculiar pale blue light, like moonlight, etc.,
and I believed that she merely saw glittering,
shining, and twinkling spots before her eyes.
I was already prepared to add this attempt to
the failures, and I was thinking how I could
quietly withdraw from this affair, when my at
tention was called to one of the manifestations
which she described. She saw a big, black, in
clined cross, the
edges of which were sur

[74b]
rounded with a subdued moon-like light, in
which all the pictures thus far seen were shin
ing, and upon the cross beam there flickered a
little flame that was apparently no longer a
phosphene. I continued to listen. She saw nu
merous pictures in the
same light, peculiar
signs resembling somewhat Sanscrit. She also
saw figures like triangles, among which there
was one big triangle* and again the cross. I now
thought of an allegorical interpretation, and
asked, "What does this cross mean?"—-"It is
probably meant to interpret pain," she an
swered. I argued, saying that, "By cross one
usually understands a moral burden," and asked
her what was hidden behind that pain. She
could not explain that and continued looking.
She saw a sun with golden rays which she in
terpreted as God, the primitive force; she then
saw a gigantic lizard which she examined quiz
zically, but without fear; then a heap of snakes,
then another sun, but with mild silvery rays,
and in front of it, between her own person and
this source of light, there was a barrier which
concealed from her the center of the sun.
I
knew for some time that we dealt here
with allegories, and I immediately asked for an
explanation of the last picture. Without reflect
ing she answered: "The sun is perfection, the
ideal, and the barrier represents my weakness
and failings which stand between me and the
ideal."—"Indeed, do you
reproach yourself?
Are you dissatisfied with yourself?"—"Yes."
—"Since when?"—"Since I became a member
of the Theosophical Society and read the writ
ings edited by it. I have always had a poor op
inion of myself."—"What was it that made the
last,
strongest
impression
upon
you?"—"A
translation from the Sanscrit, which now ap
pears in serial numbers." A minute later I was
initiated into her mental conflicts, and into her
self-reproaches. She related a slight incident
which gave occasion for a reproach, and in
which, as a result of an inciting conversion,
the former organic pain at first appeared. The
pictures, which I had at first taken for phosphenes, were symbols of occultistic streams of
thought, perhaps plain emblems from the title
pages of occultistic books.
Thus far, I have warmly praised the achieve
ments of the pressure procedure, and have en
tirely neglected the aspect of the defence or the
resistance, so that I certainly must have given
the impression that by means of this small
artifice one is placed in a position to become
master of the psychic resistances to the cathar
tic method. But to believe this would be a gross

[75a]
yo
SlGMUND
mistake. Such advantages do not exist in the
treatment so far as I can see; here, as every
where else, a great change requires much effort.
The pressure procedure is nothing but a trick
serving to surprise for awhile the defensive
ego; in all graver cases, it soon recalls its
intentions and continues its resistance.
I need only recall the various forms in which
this resistance "manifests itself. At first, the
pressure experiment usually fails the first or
second time. The patient then expresses him
self disappointedly, saying, "I believed that
some idea would occur to me, but I
only
thought how anxious I was for it, but nothing
came." Such attitudes assumed by the patient
are not yet to be counted as a resistance; we
usually answer to that, "You were really too
anxious, the second time things will come."
And they really come. It is remarkable how
completely the patients—even the most tract
able and the most intelligent—can forget the
agreement into which they have previously
entered. They have promised to tell everything
that occurs to them, be it intimately related
to them or not, be it agreeable to say or not;
that is, they are to tell everything without any
choice or influence of criticism or affect. Yet,
they do not keep their promise; it is apparently
beyond their powers. The work repeatedly
stops, they continue to assert that this time
nothing came to their mind. One need not be
lieve them, and one must always assume, and
also say that they hold back something because
they believe it to be unimportant, or perceive
it as painful. One must insist, and assume an
assured attitude until one really hears some
thing. The patient then usually adds, "I could
have told you that the first time."—"Why did
you not say it?"—"I could not believe that
this could be it. Only after it returned repeated
ly have I decided to tell it," or, "I had hoped
that it would not be just that, that I could
save myself saying it, but only after it could
not be repressed have I noticed that I could not
avoid it." Thus, the patient subsequently be
trays the-motives of a resistance which he did
not at first wish to admit. He apparently could
do nothing but offer resistances.
It is
remarkable under what subterfuges
these resistances are frequently hidden. "I am
distracted today; the clock or the piano playing
in the next room disturbs me," they say. I be
came accustomed to answer to that, "Not at all,
you simply struck something that you are not
willing to say. That does not help you at all.
Just stick to it." The longer the pause between

[75b]
Freud
the pressure of my hand and the utterance of
the patient, the more suspicious I become, and
the more it is to be feared that the patient
arranges what comes to his mind, and distorts
it in the reproduction. The most important ex
planations are frequently ushered in as super
fluous accessories, just as the princes of the
opera who are dressed as beggars. "Something
now occurred to me, but it has nothing to do
with it. I only tell it to you because you wish
to know everything." With this introduction
we usually obtain the long desired solution. I
always listen when I hear a patient talk so
lightly of an idea. That the pathogenic idea
should appear of so little importance on its
reappearance is a sign of the successful de
fence. One can infer from this of what the
process of defence consisted. Its object was to
make a weak out of a strong idea, that is, to
rob it of its affect.
Among other signs, the pathogenic memories
can also be recognized by the fact that they are
designated by the patient as unessential, de
spite the fact that they are uttered with re
sistance. There are also cases where the patient
seeks to disavow the recollections, even while
they are being reproduced, with such remarks
as these: "Now something occurred to me, but
apparently you talked it into me"; or "I know
what you expect to this question, you surely
think that I thought of this and that." An espef
dally clever way of shifting responsibility is
found in the following expression: "Now somef
thing really occurred to me, but it seems to me
as if I added it, and that it is not a reproduced
thought." In all these cases I remain inflexibly
firm; I admit none of these distinctions, but I
explain to the patient that these are only forms
and subterfuges of the resistance against the reh
production of a recollection which in spite of
all we are forced to recognize.
One generally experiences less trouble in the
reproduction of pictures than thoughts. Hysh
terical patients, who
are usually visual, are
easier to manage than patients suffering from
obsessions. Once the picture emerges from the
memory, we can hear the patient state that, as
he proceeds to describe it, it proportionately
fades away and becomes indistinct; the pa
tient wears it out, so to speak, by transforming
it into words. We then orient ourselves through
the memory picture itself in order to find the
direction towards which the work should be
continued. We say to the patient, "Just look
again at the picture, has it disappeared?"—"As
a whole, yes, but I still see this detail."—"Then

[76a]
Selected Papers on Hysteria
7i
this must have some meaning; you will either
see something new, orchis.remnant,will remind
you of something." When the work is finished,
the visual field becomes free again, and a new
picture can be called forth; but at other times
such a picture, in spite of its having been de
scribed, remains persistently before the inner
eye of the patient, and I take this as a sign that
he still has something important to tell me
concerning its theme. As soon as this has been
accomplished, the picture disappears like a
wandering spirit returning to rest.
It is naturally of great value for the progress
of the analysis to carry our point with the pa
tient, otherwise we have to depend on what he
thinks it proper to impart. It therefore will be
pleasant to hear that the pressure procedure
never failed except in a single case which I
shall discuss later, but which I can now char
acterize by the fact that there was a special
motive for the resistance. To be sure, it may
happen under certain conditions that the pro
cedure may be applied without bringing any
thing to light; as, for example, we may ask for
the further aetiology of a symptom when the
same has already been exhausted; or we may
investigate for
the
psychic geneology of a
symptom, perhaps a pain, which really is of
somatic
origin. In
these
cases the
patient
equally insists that nothing occurred to him,
and he is right. We should strive to avoid do
ing an injustice to the patient by making it a
general rule not to lose sight of his features
while he calmly lies before us during the analy
sis. One can then learn to distinguish, without
any difficulty, the psychic calm in the real non
appearance of a reminiscence from the tension
and emotional signs under which the patient
labours in trying to disavow the emerging remi
niscences with the object of defence. The differ
ential diagnostic application of the pressure
procedure is really based on such experiences.
We can thus see that, even with the help of
pressure procedure, the task is not an easy one.
The only advantage gained is the fact that we
have learned from the results of this method
in
which direction to
investigate, and what
things we have to force upon the patient. For
some cases this suffices, for it is essentially a
question of finding the secret and telling it to
the patient, so that he is then usually forced to
relinquish his resistance. In other cases, more
is necessary; here the surviving resistance of
the patient manifests itself by the fact that the
connections become torn, the solutions do not
appear and the recalled pictures come indis

[76b]
tinctly and incompletely. On reviewing, at a
later period, the earlier results of an analysis,
we are often surprised at the distorted aspects
of all the occurrences and scenes which we have
snatched from the patient. It usually lacks the
essential part, the relations to the person or to
the theme, and for that reason the picture re
mained incomprehensible. I will now give one
or two examples showing the effects of such a
censorship during the first appearance ;of the
pathogenic memories. The patient sees the up
per part of a female body on which a loose cov
ering fits carelessly; only much later he adds
to this torso the head, and thereby betrays a
person and
a relationship. Or, he relates a
reminiscence of his childhood about two boys
whose forms are very indistinct, and to whom
a
certain mischievousness was attributed. It
required many months and considerable prog
ress in the course of the analysis before he
again saw this reminiscence and recognized one
of the children as himself and the other as his
brother. What means have we now at our dis
posal to overcome this continued resistance?
We have but few, yet we have almost all
those by which one otherwise exerts a psychic
influence on the other. In the first place, we
must remember that psychic resistance, espe
cially of long continuance, can only be broken
slowly, gradually, and with much patience. We
can also count on the intellectual interest which
manifests itself in the patient after a brief pe
riod of the analysis. On explaining and imparting
to him the knowledge of the marvelous world of
psychic processes, which we have gained only
through such analysis, we obtain his collabora
tion and cause him to view himself with the
objective interest of the investigator,-and we
thus drive back the resistance which rests on an
affective basis. But finally—and this remains
the strongest motive force—after, the motives
for the defence have been discovered, we must
make the attempt to reduce them or even sub
stitute them by stronger ones. Here, the possi
bility of expressing, the therapeutic activity in
formulae ceases. One does as well as he can as
an explainer where ignorance has produced
shyness, as a teacher, as a representative of a
freer and superior philosophy of life, and as a
confessor, who through the continuance of his
sympathy and his respect imparts, so as to say,
absolution after the confession. One endeavours
to do something humane for the patient as far
as the range of one's own personality and the
measure of sympathy which one can set apart
for the case allows. It is an indispensable pre-

[77a]
72
Sigmund Freud
requisite for such psychic activities to have ap
proximately discovered the nature of the case
and the motives of the defence that are here
effective. Fortunately the technique of urging
and the pressure procedure take us just so far.
The more we have solved such enigmas the
easier will we discover new ones, and the
earlier will we be able to manage the actual
curative psychic work. For it is well to bear in
mind that, although the patient can rid him
self of an hysterical symptom only after repro
ducing and uttering under emotion its causal
pathogenic impressions, yet the therapeutic task
merely consists in inducing him to do it, and
once the task has been accomplished, there re
mains nothing for the doctor to
correct or
abolish. All the contrary suggestions necessary
have already been employed during the struggle
carried on against the resistance. The case may
be compared to the unlocking of a closed door,
where,
as soon
as the
doorknob has been
pressed downward, no other difficulties are en
countered in opening the door.
Among the intellectual motives employed
for the overcoming of the resistance one can
hardly dispense with one affective factor, that
is, the personal equation of the doctor, and in
a number of cases this alone is enough to break
the resistance. The conditions here do not dif
fer from those found in any other branch of
medicine, and one should not expect any thera
peutic method fully to disclaim the cooperation
of this personal factor.
m
In view of the discussions in the preceding
section concerning the difficulty of my tech
nique, which I have unreservedly exposed—I
have really collected them from my most diffi
cult cases, though it will often be easier workin view, then, of this state of affairs,-everybody
will wish to ask whether it would not be more
suitable, instead of all these tortures, to apply
one's self more energetically to hypnosis, or to
limit the application of the cathartic' method
only to such cases as can be put into deep
hypnosis. To the latter proposition I should
have to answer that the number of patients
available for my skill would shrink consider
ably; but to the former advice I will advance
the
supposition
that,
even
where
hypnosis
could be produced, the resistance would not be
very much lessened. My experiences in this re
spect are not particularly extensive^ so that I
am unable to go beyond this supposition, but
wherever I achieved a cathartic cure in the

[77b]
hypnotic state, I found that the work devolved
upon me was not less than in the state of mere
concentration. I have only recently finished
such a treatment, during
course of which I
caused the disappearance of an hysterical paral
ysis of the legs. The patient merged into a
state, psychically very different from the con
scious, and
somatically distinguished by the
fact that she was unable to open her eyes or
rise without my ordering heirto do so; arid still
I never had a case showing greater resistance
than this one. I placed no value on these phys
ical signs, and, towards the end of the ten
months' treatment, they really became imper^
ceptible. The state of the patient on which we
worked has, therefore, lost nothing of its psy
chic pecularities, such as the ability to recall
the unconscious, and its very peculiar relation
to the person of the physician. To be sure, in
the history of Mrs. Emmy von N, I have de
scribed an example of a cathartic cure accom
plished in a profound somnambulism in which
the resistance played almost no part. But noth
ing that I obtained from this woman would
have required any special effort; I obtained
nothing that she could not have told me in her
waking state after a longer acquaintanceship
and some personal regard. The real causes of
her disease, which were surely identical with
the causes of her relapses after my treatment,
I have never found—it was my first attempt
in this therapy—and when I once asked her
accidentally for a reminiscence which contained
a fragment of the erotic, I found her just as
resistive and unreliable in her statements as
any one of my later non-somnambulic patients.
This patient's resistance, even in the somnam
bulic state, against other requirements and ex
actions I have already discussed in her history.
Since I have witnessed cases which, even in
deep somnambulism, were absolutely refrac
tory therapeutically despite their obedience in
everything else, I really have become skeptical
as to the value of hypnosis for the facilitatidn
of the cathartic treatment. A case of this kind
I have in brief reported1 and could still add
others. Besides, I admit that even this experi
ence fell badly short of my need for a quanti
tative relation between cause and effect in the
psychic spheres.
In our discussion thus far, the idea of resist
ance has thrust itself to the foreground I have
shown how, in the therapeutic work, one is led
to
the
conception
that
hysteria
originates
"' * See Studien uber Hysierie, 189Si P^ 85V

[78a]
Selected Papers on Hysteria
73
through the repression of an unbearable idea
as a motive of defence, that the repressed idea
remains as a weak (mildly intensive) remini
scence, and that the affect snatched from it is
used for a somatic innervation, that is, for con
version of the excitement. By virtue of its re
pression the idea becomes the cause of morbid
symptoms, that is, pathogenic. A hysteria show
ing this psychic mechanism may be designated
by the name of defence-hysteria, but both
Breuer and myself have repeatedly spoken of
two kinds of hysterias which we have named
hypnoid-and retention-hysteria. The first to re
veal itself to us was really the hypnoid-hysteria,
for which I can mention no better example than
Breuer's case of Miss Anna 0. For this form of
hysteria Breuer gives an essentially different
psychic mechanism than for the form which is
characterized by conversion. Here the idea be-r
comes pathogenic through the fact that it is
conceived in a peculiar psychic state, having
remained from the very beginning external to
the ego. It, therefore, needs no psychic force to
keep it away from the ego, and it need not
awaken any resistance when, with the help of
the somnambulic psychic authority, it is initiat
ed into the ego. The history of Anna O really
shows nothing of such a resistance.
I hold this distinction as so essential that it
has readily induced me to adhere to the forrnation of the hypnoid-hysteria. It is, however, re^-
markable that in my own experience I encoun
tered no genuine hypnoid-hysteria; whatever;I
treated changed itself into a defence hysteria.
Not that I have never dealt with symptoms
which manifestly originated in separated con
scious states, and, therefore, were excluded
from being accepted into the ego. I encoun
tered this also in my own cases, but I could
show that the so-called hypnoid state owed its
separation to the fact that a splitroff psychic
group originated before through defence. In
brief, I cannot suppress the suspicion that hyp
noid and defence hysteria meet somewhere at
their roots, and that the defence is the primary
thing; but I know nothing about it.
Equally uncertain is at present my opinion
concerning the retention-hysteria in which the
therapeutic work is also supposed to follow
without any resistance. I had a case which I
took for a typical retention-hysteria, and I was
pleased with the anticipation of an easy and
certain success, but this success failed to come,
easy as the work really was. I, therefore, pre
sume, and again with all caution appropriate
to ignorance, that in retention-hysteria, too, we

[78b]
can find at its basis a fragment of defence,
which has thrust the whole process into hys
teria. Let us hope that new experiences will
soon decide whether I am running into the
danger, of one-sidedness and error, in my tend
ency to spread the conception of defence for
the whole of hysteria.
Thus far I
have dealt with the difficulties
and technique of the cathartic method. I would
now like to add a few indications to show how
one does an analysis with this technique. For
me this is a very interesting theme, but I do
not expect that it will excite similar interest in
others who have not practised such analyses.
Properly speaking, we shall again deal with
technique, but this time with those difficulties
concerning which the patient cannot be held
responsible, and which must in part be the
same in a hypnoid- and a retention-hysteria as
in the defence-hysteria which I have: ip mind
as a model* I start with this last fragment of
discussion;with the hope, that the^psychic, per
culiarities to be revealed here might rsometimes
attain a certain value as raw material for ide
ational dynamics.
;,;-,,-•
The first and strongest impression which one
gains fromsuch an analysis is surely {he,fact
that the pathogenic psychic, material, appar
ently forgotten and not at the disposal of the
ego, which plays up role in the association and
in memory, still lies ready in some manner and,
what is more, in proper and good order. All
that is necessary is to remove the resistances
blocking the way. Barring that, everything is
known as well as we know anything at all. The
proper
connections of
the
indiyidual ideas
among themselves and with
the non-patho
genic, which are frequently remembered, are
present; they have been produced in their time
and
retained
in
memory.
The
pathogenic
psychic material appears as the property of an
intelligence which is not necessarily inferior
to the normal ego. The semblance of a second
personality is often most delusively produced.
Whether this impression is justified, whether
the arrangement of the psychic material result
ing after the adjustment is not transferred
back into the period of the disease—these are
questions, which I do not like to consider in
this place. One cannot certainly describe the
experiences gained from such analyses more
easily and more clearly than by placing one's
self in the position which one may take, for. a
survey after the whole thing has been com
pleted.
The situation is usually not so simple as one

[79a]
74
Sigmund Freud
represents it in special cases, as, for example,
in a single case in which a symptom originates
through a large trauma. We frequently deal
not with a single hysterical symptom, but with
a number of such, which are partially inde
pendent of one another and partially connected.
We must not expect a single traumatic remi
niscence, and as its nucleus one single patho
genic idea, but we must be ready to assume a
series of partial traumas and concatenations of
pathogenic mental streams.
The monosymptomatic traumatic hysteria is, as it were, an
elementary organism, a single being in com
parison to the complicated structure of a grave
hysterical neurosis, as we generally encounter
it.
The psychic material of such hysteria pre
sents itself as
a multi-dimensional formation
of at least triple stratification. I hope to be
able to justify soon this figurative expression.
First of all there is a nucleus of such reminis
cences (either experiences or mental streams)
in which the traumatic moment culminated, or
in which the pathogenic idea has found its
purest formation. Around this nucleus we often
find an incredibly rich mass of other memory
material which we have to elaborate in the
analysis in the triple arrangement mentioned
before. In the first place, there is an unmistak
able linear chronological arrangement, which
takes place within every individual theme. As
an example of this, I can only cite the arrange
ment in
Breuer's analysis of Anna O. The
theme is that of becoming deaf, of not hearing,
which then becomes differentiated according
to seven determinants, and under each heading
there were
from ten to
one hundred single
reminiscences in chronological order. It read
like an abstract from an orderly kept archive.
The analysis of my patient Emmy von N con
tained similar memory fascicles though not so
fully described, but they formed part of every
analysis. They always appeared in chronolog
ical order which was as definitely reliable as
the serial sequences df the days of the week
or the names of the months in psychically
normal individuals. They
increased the work
of the analysis through the peculiarity of re
versing the series of their origin in the repro
duction;
the
freshest
and the
most recent
occurrence of the accumulation occurred first,
so to speak, as a "wrapper," and the one with
which the series really began gave the impres
sion of the conclusion.
The grouping of similar reminiscences in a
multiplicity of linear stratifications, as repre

[79b]
sented in a bundle of documents, in a package,
etc., I have designated as the formation of a
theme. These themes now show a second form
of arrangement. I cannot express it differently
than by saying that they are concentrically
stratified around the pathogenic nucleus. It is
not difficult to
say
what determines
these
strata, and according to what decreasing or
increasing magnitude this arrangement follows.
They are layers of equal resistance tending to
ward the nucleus, accompanied by zones of
similar alteration of consciousness into which
the individual themes extend. The most peri
pheral layers contain those reminiscences (or
fascicles) of the different themes, which can
readily be recalled and which were always per
fectly conscious. The deeper one penetrates
the more difficult it becomes to recognize the
emerging reminiscences, until one strikes those
near the nucleus which the patient disavows,
even at the reproduction.
j
As we shall hear later, it is the peculiarity
of the concentric stratification of the patho
genic
psychic material which gives
to
the
course of such an analysis its characteristic
features. We must now mention the third and
most essential arrangement concerning which
a general statement can hardly be made. It lis
the arrangement according to the content of
thought, the connection which reaches the nu
cleus through the logical threads, which might
in each case correspond to a special irregular
and manifoldly devious road. This arrangement
has a dynamic character in contradistinction
to both morphological stratifications mentioned
before. Whereas, in a specially formed scherhe
the
latter
would
be
represented by rigid,
arched, and straight lines, the course of the
logical
concatenation would have to be
fol
lowed with a wand, over the most tortuous
route, from the superficial into the deep layers
and back, generally, however, progressing frdm
the
peripheral to
the
central nucleus,
and
touching thereby all stations; that is, its move
ment is similar to the zigzag movement of the
knight in the solution of a chess problem. !
I shall still adhere for a moment to the last
comparison in order to call attention to a point
in which it does not do justice to the qualities
of the thing compared. The logical connection
corresponds not only to a zigzag-like devious
line, but rather to a ramifying and especially
to a converging system of lines. It has a junc
tion in which two or more threads meet, only
to proceed thence united, and, as a rule, many
threads running independently, or here and

[80a]
Selected Papers on Hysteria
75
there connected by by-paths, open
into the
nucleus. To put it in different words, it is very
remarkable how frequently a symptom is man
ifoldly determined, that is overdetermined.
I will introduce one more complication, and
then my effort to illustrate the organization of
the
pathogenic
psychic
material
will
be
achieved. It can happen that we may deal with
more than one single nucleus in the pathogenic
material, as, for example, when we have to
analyze a second hysterical outbreak having its
own aetiology, but which is still connected with
the first outbreak of an acute hysteria which
has been overcome years before. It can readily
be imagined what strata and streams of thought
must be added in order to produce a connec
tion between the two pathogenic nuclei.
I will still add a few observations to the
given picture of the organization of the patho
genic material. We have said of this material
that it behaves like a foreign body, and that
the therapy also acts like the removal of a
foreign body from, the living tissues. We are
now in position to consider the shortcomings
of this comparison. A foreign body does not
enter into any connection with the layers of
tissue surrounding it, although it changes them
and produces in them a reactive inflammation.
On the
other hand,
our pathogenic psychic
group does not allow itself to be cleanly shelled
out from the ego, its outer layers radiate in
all directions into the parts of the normal ego,
and really belong to the latter as much as to
the pathogenic organization. The boundaries
between both become purely conventional in
the analysis, being placed now here, now there,
and in certain locations no demarcation is pos
sible. The inner layers become more and more
estranged from the ego without showing a vis
ible beginning of the pathogenic boundaries.
The pathogenic organization really does not
behave like a foreign body, but rather like an
infiltration. The infiltrate must, in this com
parison, be assumed to be the resistance. In
deed, the therapy does not consist in extirpating
something—psychotherapy cannot do that at
present—but it causes a melting of the resis
tance, and thus opens the way for the circula
tion into a hitherto closed territory.
(I make use here of a series of comparisons
all of which have only a very limited resem
blance to my theme, and do not even agree
among themselves. I am aware of that, and I
am not in danger of over-estimating their val
ue; but, as it is my intention to illustrate the
many sides of a most complicated and not as

[80b]
yet depicted idea, I, therefore, take the liberty
of dealing also in the following pages with
comparisons which are not altogether free from
objections.)
If, after a thorough adjustment, one could
show to a third party the pathogenic material
in its present recognized, complicated and mul
tidimensional
organization,
he
would
justly
propound the question: "How could such a
camel go through the needle's eye?" Indeed,
one does not speak unjustly of a "narrowing of
consciousness."
The term gains in sense and
freshness for the physician who accomplishes
such an analysis. Only one single reminiscence
can enter into the ego-consciousness; the pa
tient, occupied in working his way through this
one, sees nothing of that which follows, and
forgets everything that has already wedged its
way through. If the conquest of this one path
ogenic
reminiscence
strikes
against impedi
ments, as, for example, if the patient does not
let up the resistance against it, but wishes to
repress or distort it, the strait is, so to speak,
blocked; the work comes to a standstill, it
cannot advance, and the one reminiscence in
the breach confronts the patient until he takes
it up into the breadth of his ego. The whole
spatially extended mass of the pathogenic ma
terial is thus drawn through a narrow fissure
and reaches consciousness as if disjointed into
fragments or strips. It is the task of the psy
chotherapist to put it together again into the
conjectured organization. He who desires still
more comparisons may think here of a Chinese
puzzle.
If one is about to begin an analysis in which
one may expect such an organization of the
pathogenic material, the following results of
experience may be usefullitis perfectly hope
less to attempt to make any direct headway
towards the nucleus of the pathogenic organi
zation. Even if it could be guessed, the patient
would still not know how to start with the
explanation given to him, nor would it change
him psychically.
There is nothing left to do but follow up
the periphery of the pathogenic psychic forma
tion. One begins by allowing the patient to
relate and recall what he knows, during which
one can already direct his attention, and may
even overcome slight resistances. Whenever a
new way is opened, it can be expected that the
patient will follow it for some distance without
any new resistance.
After having worked for a while in such
manner, a cooperating activity is usually mani-

[81a]
76
Sigmund Freud
fested in the patient. A number of reminis
cences now occur to him without any need of
questioning or setting him a task. A way has
thus been opened into an inner stratum, within
which the patient now spontaneously disposes
of the material of equal resistance. It is well to
allow him to reproduce for a while without
influencing him; of course, he is unable to re
veal important connections, but he may be
allowed to clear things within the same stratum.
The things which he thus reproduces often
seem disconnected, but they give up the ma
terial which is later revived by the recognized
connections.
One has to guard here in general against two
things. If the patient is checked in the repro
duction of the inflowing ideas, something is
apt to be buried which must be uncovered later
with great effort. On the other hand, one must
not overestimate his unconscious intelligence,
and one must now allow it to direct the whole
work. If I should wish to schematize the mode
of labour, I could perhaps say that one should
himself undertake the opening of the inner
strata and the advancement in the radial direc
tion, while the patient should take care of the
peripheral extension.
The advancement is brought about by the
fact that the
resistance is overcome in the
manner indicated above. As a rule, however,
one must at first solve another problem. One
must obtain a piece of a logical thread by
which direction alone one can hope to pene
trate into the interior. One should not expect
that the voluntary information of the patient,
the material which is mostly in the superficial
strata, will make it easy for the analyst to
recognize its
deep-seated
locations,
and
to
which points the desired connections of thought
are
attached. On the contrary, just this is
cautiously concealed, the patient's assertion
sounds as if perfect and firm in itself. One is
at first confronted, as it were, by a wall which
shuts off every view and gives no suggestion
of anything hidden behind it.
If, however, one views with a critical eye
the assertion obtained from the patient without
much effort and resistance, one will unmistak
ably discover it in gaps and damages. Here the
connection is visibly interrupted and scantily,
supplemented by the patient through phrases
which
convey only insufficient
information.
There one strikes against a motive which in a
normal person would be designated as flimsy.
The patient refuses to recognize these gaps
when his attention is called to them. The phy

[81b]
sician, however, does well to seek under these
weak
points access to
the material of the
deeper layers and hope to discover just here
the threads of the connection, which he traces
by the pressure procedure. One, therefore, tells
the patient, "You are mistaken, what you as
sert can have nothing to do with the thing in
question; here we will have to strike against
something which will occur to you under the
pressure of my hand."
The hysterical stream of thought, even if it
reaches into the unconscious, may be expected
to show the same logical connections and suf
ficient motivations as those that would be ex
pected in a normal individual. A looseness of
these
relationships does
not
lie within the
sphere of the neurosis. If the association of
ideas of neurotics, and especially of hysterics,
makes a different impression, if the relation of
the intensities of different ideas does not seem
to be explainable here on psychological determi
nants alone, we know that such manifestations
are due to the existence of concealed uncon
scious motives. Such secret motives may be
expected, wherever such a deviation in the con
nection, or a transgression from the normally
justified motivations can be demonstrated.
One must naturally free himself from the
theoretical prejudice that one has to deal with
abnormal brains of degenerSs and desequilibres, in whom the freedom of overthrowing
the common psychological laws of the associ
ation of ideas is a stigma, or in whom a pre
ferred idea without any motive may grow in
tensively excessive, and another without psy
chological motives may remain indestructible.
Experience shows the contrary in hysteria; as
soon as the hidden—often unconsciously re
maining— motives
have been
revealed and
brought to account, there remains nothing in
the hysterical mental stream that is enigmatical
and anomalous.
I
Thus, by retracing the breaches of the pa
tient's first statements, which are often hidden
by "false connections," one gets hold of a part
of the logical thread at the periphery, and
thereafter continues the route by the pressure
procedure.
Very seldom do we succeed in working our
way into the inner strata by the same thread,
usually it breaks on the way and yields either
no experience, or one which cannot be ex
plained or be continued despite all efforts. In
such a case we soon learn how to protect our
selves from the obvious confusion. The expres
sion of the patient must decide whether one

[82a]
Selected Papers on Hysteria
77
really reached an end or encountered a case
needing no psychic explanation, or whether it
is the enormous resistance that halts the work.
If the latter cannot be overcome soon, it may
be assumed that the thread has been followed
into a stratum which is, as yet, impenetrable.
One lets it fall in order to grasp another thread,
which may, perhaps, be followed up just as far.
If one had followed all the threads into this
stratum,
if
the
nodes have been
reached
through which no single isolated thread can be
followed, it is well to think of seizing anew
the resistances on hand.
One can readily imagine how complicated
such a work may become. By constantly over
coming the resistance, one pushes his way into
the inner strata, gaining knowledge concerning
the accumulative themes and passing threads
found in this layer; one examines as far as he
can advance with the means at hand, and thus
gains first information concerning the content
of the next stratum; the threads are dropped,
taken upon again, and followed until they reach
the juncture; they are always retrieved, and
by following a memory fascicle one reaches
some by-way which finally opens again. In this
manner it is finally possible to leave the strati
fications and advance directly on the main
road to the nucleus of the pathogenic organiza
tion. With this the fight is won, but not fin
ished. One has to follow up the other threads
and exhaust the material; but now the patient
again helps energetically, for his resistance has
mostly been broken.
In these later stages of the work it is of
advantage if one can surmise the connection
and tell it to the patient before it has been re
vealed to him. If the conjecture is correct, the
course of the analysis is accelerated, but even an
incorrect hypothesis helps, for it urges the
patient to participate and elicits from him
energetic refutation, thus revealing that he
surely knows better.
One, thereby, becomes astonishingly con
vinced that it is not possible to press upon the
patient things which he apparently does not
know, or to influence the results of the analysis
by exciting his expectations. I have not suc
ceeded a single time in altering or falsifying
the reproductions of memory or the connec
tions of events by my predictions; had I suc
ceeded it surely would have been revealed
in the end by a contradiction in the construc
tion. If anything occurred as I predicted, the
correctness of my conjecture was always at
tested to by numerous trustworthy reminis

[82b]
cences. Hence, one must not fear to express
his opinion to the patient concerning the con
nections which are to follow; it does no harm.
Another observation which I
had occasion
to see again and again refers to the patient's in
dependent reproductions. It can be asserted
that not a single reminiscence comes to the sur
face during such an analysis which has no sig
nificance. An interposition of irrelevant mem
ory pictures which has no connection with the
important associations does not really occur.
An exception not contrary to the rule may be
postulated
for
those
reminiscences
which,
though in themselves unimportant, are indis
pensable as intercalations, since the associa
tions between two closely related reminiscences
pass
over them.
As mentioned
above, the
period during which a reminiscence abides in
the narrow pass of the patient's consciousness
is directly proportionate to its significance. A
picture which does not disappear requires fur
ther consideration; a thought which cannot be
abolished must be followed further. A remin
iscence never recurs if it has been adjusted, a
picture spoken away cannot be seen again.
However, if that does happen, it can be defi
nitely expected that the second time the pic
ture
will
be
joined
by a
new
content
of
thought, that the
idea
will contain a new
inference which will show that no perfect ad
justment has taken place. On the other hand,
a recurrence of different intensities, at first
vaguely, then quite plainly, often occurs, but
it does not, however, contradict the assertion
just advanced.
If one of the tasks of the analysis is to
remove
a
symptom
(pains, symptoms like
vomiting, sensations and contractures) which
is capable of aggravation or recurrence, the
symptom shows during the work the interest
ing and not undesirable phenomenon of join
ing in the discussion. The symptom in question
reappears, or appears with greater intensity, as
soon as one penetrates into the region of the
pathogenic organization containing the aetiol
ogy of this
symptom, and it continues to
accompany the work with characteristic and
instructive fluctuations.
The intensity of the
same (let us say of a nausea) increases the
deeper one penetrates into its pathogenic rem
iniscences; it reaches its height shortly before
the latter has been expressed, and suddenly
subsides or disappears completely for a while
after it has been fully expressed. If through
resistance the patient delays the expression,
the tension of the sensation of nausea becomes

[83a]
78
Sigmund Freud
unbearable, and if the expression cannot be
forced, vomiting actually sets in. One thus
gains a plastic impression of the fact that the
vomiting takes the place of a psychic action
(here, that of speaking) just as was asserted
in the conversion theory of hysteria.
These fluctuations of intensity on the part
of the hysterical symptom recur as often as
one of its new and pathogenicreminiscences is
attacked; the symptom remains, as it were, all
the time on-the..order .of the day. If it is neces
sary to drop for a while the thread uponwhich
this symptom hangs, the symptom, too, merges
into obscurity in order to emerge again at a
later period of. the analysis. This play con
tinues until, through the completion of the
pathogenic material, there occurs a definite ad
justment of this symptom.
Strictly speaking, the hysterical symptom
does not behave here differently than a memory
picture or a reproduced thought which is
evoked by the pressure of the hand. Here, as
there, the adjustment necessitates the same
obsessing obstinacy of recurrence in the mem
ory of the patient. The difference lies only in
the apparent spontaneous appearance of the
hysterical symptom, whereas one readily re
calls having himself provoked the scenes and
ideas. But in reality the memory symbols run
in an uninterrupted series from the unchanged
memory remnants of affectful experiences and
thinking-acts to the hysterical symptoms.
The phenomenon of joining in the discussion
of the hysterical symptom during the analysis
carries with it a practical inconvenience to
which the patient should be reconciled. It is
quite impossible to undertake the analysis of a
symptom in one stretch or to divide the pauses
in the work in such a manner as precisely to
coincide with the resting points in the adjust
ment. Furthermore, the interruption which is
categorically dictated by the accessory circum
stances of the treatment, like the late hour,
etc., often occurs in the most awkward loca
tions, just when some critical point could be
approached or when a new theme comes to
light. These are the same inconveniences which
every newspaper reader experiences in reading
the daily fragments of his newspaper romance,
when, immediately after the decisive speech of
the heroine, or after the report of a shot, etc.,
he reads, "To be continued." In our case, the
raked-up, but unabolished theme, the symptom
at first strengthened but not yet explained, re
mains in the patient's psyche, and troubles
him perhaps more than before. But the patient

[83b]
must understand this, as it cannot be differ
ently arranged. Indeed, there are patients who
during such an analysis are unable to get rid
of the theme once touched; they are obsessed
by it even during the interval between two
treatments, and, as they are unable to advance
alone with the adjustment, they suffer more
than before. Such patients, too, finally learn
to wait for the doctor, postponing all interest
which they have in the adjustment of the path
ogenic material for the. hours of the treatment,
and they then begin to feel freer during the
intervals.
The general condition of the patient during
such an analysis seems also worthy of consid
eration. For a while it remains uninfluenced by
the treatment, expressing the former effective
factors, but then a moment comes in which the
patient is "seized," and his interest becomes
chained, and from that time his general con
dition becomes more and more dependent on
the condition of the work. Whenever a new
explanation is gained and an important con
tribution in the chain of the analysis is reached,
the patient feels relieved and experiences a
presentiment of the approaching deliverance,
but at each standstill of the work, at each
threatening entanglement, the psychic burden,
which oppresses him, grows, and the unhappy
sensation of his incapacity increases. To
be
sure, both conditions are only temporary, for
the analysis continues, disdaining to boast of a
moment of well-being, and continues regardlessly over the period of gloominess. One is
generally pleased if it is possible to substitute
the spontaneous fluctuations in the patient's
condition by such as one himself provokes and
understands, just as one prefers to. see in place
of the spontaneous discharge of the symptoms
that order of the day which corresponds to the
state of the analysis.
Usually the deeper one penetrates into the
above described layers of the psychic struc
ture, the more obscure and difficult the work
will at first become. But once the nucleus is
reached, light ensues and there is no more fear
that a strong gloom will overcast the condition
of the patient. However, the reward of the
labour, the cessation of symptoms of the dis
ease can be expected only when the full analysis
of every individual symptom has been accom
plished ; indeed, where the individual symptoms
are connected through many junctures, one is
not even encouraged by partial successes dur
ing the work. By virtue of the great number
of existing causal connections every unadjusted

[84a]
pathogenic idea acts as a motive for the com
plete creation of the neurosis, and only with
the last word of the analysis does the whole
picture of the disease disappear, very similarly
to the behaviour of the individually reproduced
reminiscence.
If a pathogenic reminiscence or a pathogenic
connection which was previously withdrawn
from the ego-consciousness is revealed by the
work of the analysis and inserted into the ego,
one
can observe in the
psychic personality
which was thus enriched the many ways in
which it gave utterance to its gain. Especially
does it frequently happen that, after the pa
tients have been painstakingly forced to a cer
tain knowledge, they say: "Why I have known
that all the time, I could have told you that
before." Those who have more insight recog
nize this afterwards as a self-deception and ac
cuse themselves of ingratitude. In general, the
position that the ego takes towards the new
acquisition depends upon the stratum of the
analysis from which the latter originates. What
ever belongs to the outermost layers is recog
nized without any difficulty, for
it
always
remained in the possession of the ego, and the
only thing that was new to the ego was its
connection with the deeper layers of the patho
genic material. Whatever is brought to light
from these deeper layers also finds apprecia
tion and recognition, but frequently only after
longhesitation and reflection. Of course,visual
memory pictures are here more difficult to
deny than reminiscences of mere streams of
thought. Not very seldom the patient will at
first say, "It is possible that I thought of that,
but I cannot recall it," and only after a longer
familiarity with this assumption recognition
will appear. He then recalls and even verifies
by side associations that he once really had
this thought. During the analysis, I make it a
point of considering the value of an emerging
reminiscence
independently of
the
patient's
recognition. I am not tired of repeating that
we are obliged to accept everything that we
bring to light with our means. Should there be
anything unreal or incorrect in the material
thus revealed, the connection will later teach
us to separate it. I may add that I rarely ever
have occasion subsequently to withdraw the
recognition from a reminiscence which I had
preliminarily admitted. In spite of the decep
tive appearance of an urgent contradiction,
whatever came to the surface finally proved
itself correct.
Those ideas which originate in the deepest

[84b]
Selected Papers on Hysteria
79
layer, and from the nucleus of the pathogenic
organization, are recognized by the patient as
reminiscences only with the greatest difficulty.
Even after everything is accomplished, when
the patients are overcome by the logical force
and are convinced of the curative effect ac
companying the emergence
of this idea—I
say even if the patients themselves assume that
they have thought "so and so," they often add,
"but to recall that I have thought so, I can
not." One readily comes to an understanding
with them by saying that these were uncon
scious thoughts. But how should we note this
state of affairs in our own psychological views?
Should we pay no heed to the patient's demur
ring recognition, which has no motive after the
work has been completed; should we assume
that it is really a question of thoughts which
never occurred, and for which there was only
a possibility of existence, so that the therapy
consisted in the consummation of a psychic act
which at that time was omitted? It is obviously
impossible to state anything about it, that is,
to state anything concerning the condition of
the pathogenic material previous to the analy
sis, before one has thoroughly explained his
psychological views, especially concerning the
essence of consciousness. It is, however, a fact
worthy of reflection that in such analyses one
can follow a stream of thought from the con
scious into the unconscious (that is, absolutely
riot recognized as a reminiscence), thence draw
it for some
distance through consciousness,
and again.see it end in the unconscious; and
yet this alteration of the "psychic elucidation"
would change nothing in it, in its logic, and in
the connection of its single parts. Should I,
then, have this stream of thought freely before
me, I could not conjecture what part was, and
what part was not, recognized by the patient
as a reminiscence. In a measure, I see only the
points of the stream of thought that merge
into the unconscious, just the reverse of that
which has been claimed concerning our normal
psychic processes.
I
have still another theme to treat which
plays an undesirably great part in the work of
such a cathartic analysis. I have already ad
mitted the possibility that the pressure pro
cedure may. fail, and despite all assurance and
urging it may evoke no reminiscences. I also
stated that two possibilities are to be consid
ered: there is really nothing to evoke, in the
place where we investigate—that can be recog
nized by the perfectly calm expression of the
patient—or, we have struck against a resis-

[85a]
8o
Sigmund Freud
tance to be overcome only at some future time.
We are confronted with a new layer into which
we cannot as yet penetrate, and this can again
be read from the drawn and psychic exertion
of the patient's expression. A third cause may
be possible which also indicates an obstacle,
not from within, but externally. This cause oc
curs when the relation of the patient to the
physician is disturbed, and signifies the worst
obstacle that can be encountered. One can ex
pect this in every more serious analysis.
I have already alluded to the important role
falling to the personality of the physician in
the creation of motives which are to overcome
the psychic force of the resistance. In not a
few cases, especially in women and where we
deal with explanations of erotic streams of
thoughts, the cooperation of the patients be
comes a personal sacrifice which must be re
compensed by some kind of a substitute for
love. The great effort and the patient friendli
ness- of the physician must suffice for such
substitutes. If this relation of the patient to
the physician is disturbed, the
readiness of
the patient's collaboration fails;
if the phy
sician desires information concerning the next
pathogenic idea, the patient is confronted by
the consciousness of the unpleasantness which
has accumulated in her against the physician.
As far as I have discovered, this obstacle oc
curs in three principal cases.
i. In personal estrangement, if the patient
believes herself slighted, disparaged, and in
sulted, or if she hears unfavourable accounts
concerning the physician and his methods of
treatment. This is the least serious case, This
obstacle can readily be overcome by discussion
and
explanation,
although
the
sensitiveness
and the suspicion of hysterics can occasionally
manifest itself in unimaginable dimensions.
2. If the patient is seized with the fear that
she is becoming too dependent on her physi
cian, that in his presence she loses her inde
pendence and could even become sexually de
pendent upon him; this case is more significant
because it is less determined individually. The
occasion for this obstacle lies in the nature of
the therapeutic distress. The patient has now a
new motive for resistance which manifests it
self not only in a certain reminiscence, but at
each attempt of the treatment. Whenever the
pressure procedure is started, the patient usu
ally complains of headache. Her new motive
for the resistance remains for the most part
unconscious, and she manifests it by a newly
created hysterical symptom. The headache sig

[85b]
nifies the aversion towards being influenced.
3. If the patient fears lest the painful ideas
emerging
from the
content of the analysis
would be transferred to the physician. This
happens frequently, and, indeed, in many analy
ses it is a regular occurrence. The transference
to the physician occurs through false connec
tions. I must here give an example. The origin
of a certain hysterical symptom in one of my
hysterical patients was the wish she entertained
years ago, which was immediately banished
into the unconscious, that the man with whom
she at that time
conversed would heartily
grasp her and force a kiss on her. After the
ending of a session, such a wish occurred to
the patient in reference to me. She was horri4
fied and spent a sleepless night, and at the
next session, although she did not refuse the
treatment she was totally unfit for the worki
After I
had
discovered the obstacle and re-*
moved it, the work continued. The wish that
so frightened the patient appeared as the next
pathogenic reminiscence, that is, as the
one
now required by the logical connection. It came
about in the following manner: The content of
the wish at first appeared in the patient's con4
sciousness which would have transferred this
wish into the past. Through the associative
force prevailing in her consciousness, the ex-f
istirig wish became connected with my own
person, with which the patient could naturally
occupy herself, and in this mesalliance—which
I call a false connection—the same affect awakj
ened which originally forced the patient to
banish this clandestine wish. Now that I have
discovered this, I can presuppose in every simi-r
lar claim on my personality that this is another
transference and false connection. It is remark
able how the patient falls a victim to deception
on every new occasion.
!
No analysis can be brought to an end if one
does riot know how to meet the resistances re|
suiting from the causes mentioned. The Way
can be found if one bears in mind that the new
symptom produced after the old model should
be treated like the old symptoms/In the first
place, it is necessary to make the patient con~
scious of the obstacle. In one of my patients;
in whom I had cause to assume an unconscious
idea like the one mentioned above in 2, I met
it for the first time with an unexpected attack.
I told her that there must have originated soma
obstacle, arid then pressed her head. She then
said, surprisingly, "I see you sitting here on
the chair, but that is nonsense, what can that
mean?" But now I could explain it.

[86a]
In another patient, the obstacle did not usu
ally show itself directly on pressure, but I
could always demonstrate it by taking the pa
tient back to the moment in which it originat
ed. The pressure procedure never failed to bring
back this moment. By discovering and demon
strating the obstacle, the first difficulty was re
moved, but a greater one still remained. The
difficulty lay in inducing the patient to give in
formation where there was an obvious personal
relation and where the third person coincided
with the physician. At first I was very much
annoyed about the increase of this
psychic
work until I had learned to see the lawful part
of this whole process, and I then also noticed
that such a transference does not cause any
considerable increase in the work. The work of
the patient remained the same; she perhaps
had to overcome the painful affect of having
entertained such a wish, and it seemed to be
the same for the success whether she took this
psychic repulsion as a theme of the work in the
historical case or in the recent case with me.
The patients also gradually learned to see that
in such transferences to the person of the phy
sician they generally dealt with a force or a
deception which disappeared when the analy
sis was accomplished. I believe, however, that
if I should have delayed in making clear to
them the nature of the obstacle, I would have
given them a new, though a milder, hysterical
symptom, for another spontaneously developed.
I now believe that I have sufficiently indi
cated how such analyses should be executed,
and the experiences gained from theiri. They
perhaps make some things appear more compli
cated than they are, for many things really re
sult by themselves during such work. I have
not enumerated the difficulties of the work in
order to give the impression that in view of
such requirements it does not pay the physician
or patient to undertake a cathartic analysis ex
cept in the rarest cases. However, in my medi
cal activities I am influenced by contrary sup
positions. To be sure, I am unable to formu
late the most definite indications for the ap
plication of the therapeutic method discussed
here without entering into the valuation of the
more significant and more comprehensive theme
of the therapy of the neuroses in general. I have
often compared the cathartic psycho-therapy
to surgical measures, and designated my cures
as psycho-therapeutic operations; the analogies
follow the opening of a pus pocket, the curet
ting of a carious location, etc. Such an analogy
finds its justification, not so much in the re

[86b]
Selected Papers on Hysteria
81
moval of the morbid material as in the produc
tion of better curative conditions for the issue
of the process.
When I promised my patients help and relief
through the cathartic method,
I
was
often
obliged to hear the following objections: "You
say, yourself, that my suffering has probably
much to do with my own relation and desti
nies. You cannot change any of that. In what
manner, then, can you help me?" To this I
could always answer: "I do not doubt at all
that it would be easier for fate than for me to
remove your sufferings, but you will be con
vinced that much will be gained if we succeed
in
transforming your hysterical misery into
everyday unhappiness, against which you will
be better able to defend yourself with a re
stored nervous system."
CHAPTER 5
The Defence-Neuro-Psychoses : A Tenta
tive Psychological Theory of Acquired
Hysteria, Many Phobias and Obsessions,
and Certain Hallucinatory Psychoses1
After an exhaustive study of many nervous
patients afflicted with phobias and obsessions,
a tentative explanation of
these symptoms
forced itself upon me, which happily helped
me later to conjecture the origin of such mor
bid ideas in other new cases, and I therefore
believe it worthy of reporting and further ex
amination. Simultaneously with this psycho
logical theory of phobias and obsessions, the
examination of these patients resulted in a con
tribution to the theory of hysteria, or rather
to a change of it, which seems to imply an m>
portant and common character of hysteria as
well as the aforementioned neuroses. Further
more I had the opportunity to look into the
psychological mechanism of a form of indubi
table psychic malady and found that my at
tempted observation shows an intelligible con
nection between this psychosis and the two neu
roses mentioned.
At the
conclusion of
this
theme, I shall describe the corroborative hy
pothesis which I utilized in all three cases.
I am beginning with that change which seems
to be necessary for the theory of the hysterical
neuroses.
That the symptom-complex of hysteria, as
far as it can be understood, justifies the as
sumption of a splitting of consciousness with
1 Neurologisches Zentralblatt (1894), zo-zi.

[87a]
82
Sigmund Freud
the formation of separate psychic groups, has
been generally recognized since the interesting
works of P. Janet, J. Breuer, and others. Less
understood are the opinions concerning the ori
gin of this splitting of consciousness and con
cerning the role played by this character in the
structure of the hysterical neuroses.
According to Janet's1 theory, the splitting of
consciousness is a primary feature of the hys
terical alteration. It is due to a congenital weak
ness of the capacity for psychic synthesis, and
to a narrowing of the field of consciousness
(champ du conscience) which as a psychic stig
ma confirms the degeneration of hysterical in
dividuals.
In contradistinction to Janet's views, which
in my opinion admit the most manifold objec
tions, are those advocated by J. Breuer in our
joint communication. According to Breuer, the
"basis and determination" of hysteria is the oc
currence of peculiar dream-like conscious states
with a narrowed association capacity, for which
he proposedthe name hypnoid states.The split
ting of consciousnessis secondary and acquired,
and originates because the ideas emerging in
the hypnoid states are isolated from associative
communication with the rest of consciousness.
I
can now demonstrate two other extreme
forms of hysteria in which it is impossible to
show that the splitting of consciousness is pri
mary in the sense of Janet. In the first of these
forms I could repeatedly show that the split
ting of the content of consciousness was an ar
bitrary act of the patient, that is, it was initiat
ed through an exertion of the will, the motive
of which can be stated. I naturally do not main
tain that the patient intended to produce a
splitting of his consciousness; the patient's in
tention was different, but instead of attaining
its aim it produced a splitting of consciousness.
In the third form of hysteria, as we have
demonstrated by psychic-analysis of intelligent
patients, the splitting of consciousness plays
only an insignificant and perhaps really no role.
This includes those cases in which there had
been no reaction to the traumatic stimulus and
which were then adjusted and cured by ab-re
action. They are the pure retention hysterias.
In connection with the phobias and obses
sions, I have only to deal here with the second
form of hysteria which for reasons to be pres
ently explained I will designate as defence hys
teria and thus distinguish it from the hypnoid
xEtat
mental
des
hystiriques,
Paris,
1893
and
1894. "Quelques
definitions
ricentes
de Vhystirie"
Arch. de. Neurol., 1893, XXXV-VI.

[87b]
and retention hysterias. Preliminarily I am able
to call my cases of defence-hysteria acquired
hysterias, for they show neither marked heredi
tary taints nor any degenerative stigmata.
In those patients whom I have analyzed,
there existed psychic health until the moment
in which a case of incompatibility occurred in
their ideation, that is, until there appeared an
experience, idea, or feeling which evoked such
a painful affect that the person decided to for
get it because he did not trust his own ability
to remove the resistance between the unbear
able ideas and his ego.
Such incompatible ideas originate in the fem
inine sex on the basis of sexual experiences and
feelings. With all desired precision, the pa
tients recall their efforts of defence, their in
tention "to push it away," not to think of it, to
repress it. As appropriate examples I can easily
cite the following cases from my own experi
ence: A young lady reproached herself because,
while nursing her sick father, she thought of a
young man who made a slight erotic impression
on her; a governess fell in love with her em
ployer and decided to crowd it out of her mind
because it was incompatible with her pride, etc.
I am unable to maintain that the exertion of
the will, in crowding such thoughts out of one's
mind, is a pathological act, nor am I able to
state whether and how the intentional forget
ting succeeds in these persons who remain well
under the same psychic influences. I only know
that in the patientswhom I analyzed such a for
getting was unsuccessful and led to either hys
teria, obsession, or a hallucinatory psychosis.
The ability to produce, by the exertion of the
will, one of these states which are connected
with the sphtting of consciousness, is to be
considered as the expression of a pathological
predisposition, but it need not necessarily be
identified with personal or hereditary degenera
tion.
From the road leading from the patient's ex
ertion of the will to the origin of a neurotic
symptom I formed a concept which in the cur
rent psychological abstractions may be
ex
pressed as follows: The task assumed by the de
fensive ego to treat the incompatible idea as
non arrivie can not be directly accomplished.
The memory trace as well as the affect adher
ing to the idea are here and can not be exter
minated. The task can, however, be brought to
an approximate solution if it is possible to
change the strong idea into a weak one and to
take away the affect or sum of excitement
which adheres to it. The weak idea will then

[88a]
Selected Papers on Hysteria
exert almost no claims on the association work;
but the separated sum of excitement will have
to be utilized in another direction.
Thus far the processes are the same as in
hysteria, in phobias and obsessions, but from
now on their ways part. The unbearable idea
in hysteria is rendered harmless because the
sum of excitement is transformed into physical
manifestations, a process for which I would
like to propose the term conversion.
The conversion may be total or partial, and
follows that motor or sensory innervationwhich
is either ultimately or more loosely connected
with the traumatic experience. In this way the
ego succeeds in freeing itself from opposition,
but instead it becomes burdened with a mem
ory symbol which remains in consciousness as
an unadjusted motor innervation, or as a con
stantly recurring hallucinatory sensation simi
lar to a parasite. It thus remains fixed until a
conversion takes place in the opposite direction.
The memory symbol of the repressed idea does
not perish, but from now on forms the nucleus
for a second psychic group.
I will follow up this view of the psycho-phys
ical processes in hysteria with a few more
words. If such a nucleus for an hysterical split
ting is once formed in a traumatic moment, it
then increases in other moments which might
be designated as auxiliary traumatic as soon as
a newly formed similar impression succeeds in
breaking through the barrier formed by the
will and in adding new affects to the weakened
idea, and in forcing for a while the associative
union of both psychic groups until a new con
version produces a defence. The condition thus
attained in hysteria, in regard to the distribu
tion of the excitement, proves to be unstable
in most cases. As shown by the familiar con
trast of the attacks and the persistent symp
toms, the excitement which was pushed on a
false path (in the bodily innervation) now and
then returns to the idea from which it was dis
charged and forces the person to associative
elaboration or to adjustment in hysterical at
tacks. The effect of Breuer's cathartic method
consists in the fact that it consciously recon
ducts the excitement from the physical into the
psychic spheres and then forces an adjustment
of the contradiction through intellectual work,
and
a discharge of the
excitement through
speech.
If the splitting of consciousness in acquired
hysteria is due to an act of volition, we can ex
plain with surprising simplicity the remarkable
fact that hypnosis regularly broadens the nar-

[88b]
83
rowed consciousness of hysteria, and causes
the split off psychic groups to become accessi
ble. For we know that it is peculiar to all sleep
like states to remove that distribution of ex*
citement which depends on the will of the con
scious personality.
We accordingly recognize that the character
istic element of hysteria is not the splitting of
consciousness but the ability of conversion,
and, as an important part of the hitherto un
known disposition of hysteria, we can mention
the psycho-physical adaptation for the trans
ference of a great sum of excitement into bodi
ly innervation.
The adaptation doesnot in itself exclude psy
chic health, and leads to hysteria only in event
of a psychic incompatibility or accumulation of
excitement. With this turn, we—Breuer and I
—come near to the familiar definitions of hys
teria of Oppenheim1 and Strumpel,2 and devi
ate from Janet,8 who assigns to the splitting of
consciousness too great a role in the character
istics of hysteria. The description here given
can lay claim to the fact that it explains the
connection between the conversionand the hys
terical sphtting of consciousness.
If there is no adaptation for conversion in a
predisposed person, and an effort is neverthe
less made to separate an unbearable idea from
its affect for the purpose of defence, the affect
must then remain in the psychic sphere. The
weakened idea remains apart from all associa
tion in consciousness, but its freed affect at
taches itself to other not in themselves unbear
able ideas, which on account of this "false"
connection become obsessions. This is in brief
the psychological theory of the obsessions and
phobias concerning which I have spoken above.
I shall now state what parts demanded in
this theory can be directly demonstrated and
1 Oppenheim: Hysteria is an exaggerated expression
of emotion. But the "expression of emotion" repre
sents that amount of psychic excitement which nor
mally experiences conversion.
2 Strumpel: The disturbance of hysteria lies in the
psycho-physical,
there where
the
physical and psy
chical are connected with each other.
8 Janet, in the second chapter of his spirited essay,
Quelques definitions, etc., has
treated the objection
that the splitting of consciousness belongs also to the
psychoses and the
so-called
psychaesthenia, but in
my opinion he has not satisfactorily solved it. It is
essentially this
objection
which urged him
to
call
hysteria
a
form
of
degeneration.
But
through
no
characteristic is he able to
separate sufficiently the
hysterical splitting of consciousness from the psycho
pathic, etc.

[89a]
84
SlGMUND
what parts I have supplemented. Besides the
end product of the process, the obsession, we
can in the first place directly demonstrate the
source from which the affect in the false con
nection originates. In all cases that I have ana
lyzed, it was the sexual life that has furnished
a-painful affect of precisely the same character
as the one attached to the obsession. It is not
theoretically excluded that this affect could not
occasionally originate in other spheres, but I
must say that thus far I have found no other
origin. Moreover, one can readily understand
that it is precisely the sexual life which fur
nishes the most manifold occasions for the ap
pearance of unbearable ideas.
Moreover, the exertion of the will, the at
tempt at defence, upon which this theory lays
stress is demonstrated by the most unequivo
cal utterances of the patients. At least in a
number of cases the patients themselves inform
us that the phobia or obsession appeared only
after the exertion of the will manifestly gained
its point. "Something very disagreeable hap
pened to me once and I have exerted all my
power to push it away, not to think of it. When
I have finally succeeded, I have gotten the
other thing instead, which I
have
not
lost
since." With these words a patient verified the
main points of the theory here developed.
Not all who suffer from obsessions are so
clear concerning the origin of the same. As a
rule when we call the patient's attention to the
original idea of a sexual nature, we receive the
following answer: "It could not have come from
that. Why, I have not thought much about it.
For a moment I was frightened, then I distract
ed myself, and since then it has not bothered
me." In this so frequent objection we have the
proof that the obsession represents a compen
sation or substitute for the unbearable sexual
idea, and that it has taken its place in con
sciousness.
Between the patient's exertion of the will
which succeeds in repressing the unacceptable
sexual idea and the appearance of the obses
sion, which, though in itself of little intensity,
is here furnished with an inconceivably strong
affect, there is a yawning gap which the theory
here developed will fill. The separation of the
sexual idea from its affect and the connection
of the latter with another suitable but not un
bearable idea—these are processes which take
place unconsciously which we can only pre
sume but not prove by any clinico-psychological analysis. Perhaps it would be more correct
to say that these are not really processes of a

[89b]
Freud
psychic nature but physical processes of which
the psychic result so presents itself that the ex
pressions "separation of the idea from its af
fect and false connection of the latter," seem
actual occurrences.
Besides the cases evincing in turn the sexual
unbearable idea and the obsession, we find a se
ries of others in which there are simultaneously
obsessions and
painfully accentuated sexual
ideas. It will not do very well to call the latter
sexual obsessions; they lack the essential char
acter of obsessions in proving themselves fully
justified, whereas the painfulness of the ordi
nary obsession is a problem for the doctor as
well as the patient. From the amount of insight
that could be obtained in such cases, it seems
that we deal here with a continued defence
against sexual ideas which are constantly re
newed, a work heretofore not accomplished.
As long as the patients are aware of the sex
ual origin of their obsessions, they often con
ceal them. If they complain, they generally ex
press surprise that this affect is behind the
symptoms, that they are afraid, and that they
have certain impulses, etc. To the experienced
physician, however, the affect appears justified
and intelligible; and the only thing he finds pe
culiar is the connection of such an affect with
an idea unworthy of it. In other words, the af
fect of the obsession appears to him as one dis
located or transposed, and, if he has accepted
the observations laid down here, he can in many
cases retranslate obsessions into the sexual.
Any idea which either through its character
may be combinable with an affect of such quali
ty, or which bears a certain relation to the un
bearable by virtue of which it seems a suitable
substitute for it, may be used for the secon
dary connection of the freed affect. Thus, for
example, freed anxiety, the sexual
origin of
which can not be recalled, attaches itself to the
common primary phobias of man for animals^
thunderstorms,
darkness, etc.,
or
to
things
which are unmistakably in some way associated
with the sexual, such as urination, defecation,
pollutions, and infections.
The advantage gained by the ego in the trans
position of the affect for the purpose of de
fence is considerably less than in the hysterical
conversion of psychic excitement into somatic
innervation. The affect under which the ego has
suffered remains now as ever unchanged and
undiminished, but the unbearable idea is sup
pressed and excluded from memory. The re
pressed ideas again form the nucleus of a sec
ond psychic group which I believe can be ac-

[90a]
Selected Papers on Hysteria
85
cessible without having recourse to hypnotism.
That in the phobias and obsessions there ap
pear none of the striking symptoms which in
hysteria accompany the formation of an inde
pendent psychic group, is due to the fact that
in the former case the whole transformation
remains in the psychic sphere, while the so
matic innervation experiences no change.
What I have here said concerning obsessions
I will explain by some examples which are prob
ably of a typical nature:
i. A young girl suffers from obsessive re
proaches. If she reads anything in the newspa
pers about counterfeiters, she
conceives the
thought that she, too, made counterfeit money;
if a murder was anywhere committed by an
unknown assassin, she anxiously asked herself
whether she had not committed this crime. At
the same time she is perfectly aware of the ab
surdity of these obsessive reproaches. For a
time the consciousness of her guilt has gained
such a power over her that her judgment was
suppressed, and she accused herself before her
relatives and physician of having really com
mitted all these crimes (Psychosis through sim
ple aggravation — overwhelming psychosis —
Uberwdltigungs-psychose). A thorough exami
nation revealed the source of the origin of this
guilty conscience. Accidentally incited by a sen
sual feeling, she allowed herself to be allured
by a friend to masturbate. She practiced it for
3'ears with the full consciousness of her wrong
doing, and under the most violent but useless
self-reproaches. The girl was cured after a few
months' treatment and strict watching.
2. Another girl sufferedfrom the fear of get
ting sudden desires of micturition and of being
forced to wet herself. This began after such a
desire had really forced her to leave a concert
hall during the performance. This phobia had
gradually caused her to become quite incapa
ble of any enjoyment and social relationship.
She felt secure only when she knew that there
was a toilet nearby to which she could repair
unobserved. An organic suffering which might
have justified this lack of confidence of the
control of the bladder was excluded. At home
among quiet surroundings and during the night
there was no such desire to micturate. Detailed
examination showed that the desire to mictu
rate appeared for the first time under the fol*
lowing conditions: A gentleman to whom she
was not indifferent took a seat in the concert
hall not far from her. She began to think and
him as his wife. In this erotic reverie she ex
perienced that physical feeling which must be
compared to an erection in the man, and which
in her—I do not know whether it is generalended in a slight desire to micturate. She now
became extremely frightened over her other
wise accustomed sexual sensation, because she
had determined to overcome this as well as ev
ery desire, and in the next moment the affect
transposed itself to the accompanying desire to
micturate and forced her to leave the hall after
a very painful struggle. In her life she was so
prudish that she experienced an intensive hor
ror for all things sexual, and could not conceive
the thought of ever marrying; on the other
hand she was sexually so hyperesthetic that
during every erotic revery, which she gladly
entertained, there appeared sensual feeling. The
erection was always accompanied by the desire
to micturate, and up to the time of the.scene
in the concert hall it had made no impression
on her. The treatment led to an almost com
plete control of the phobia.
3. A young woman who had only one child
after five years of married life complained of
obsessive impulses to throw herself from the
window or balcony, and of fears lest at the
sight of a sharp knife she might kill her child.
She admitted that the marriage relations were
seldom practised and then only with caution
against conception; but she added that she did
not miss this as she was not of a sensual na
ture. I
then ventured to tell her that at the
sight of a man she conceives erotic ideas, and
that she therefore lost confidence in herself
and imagined herself a depraved person fit for
anything. The retranslation of the obsession
into the sexual was successful; weeping, she
soon admitted her long concealed marital mis
ery, and then mentioned painful ideas of an
unchanged sexual character such as the often
recurring sensation of something forcing itself
under her skirts.
I have made use of such experiences in the
therapy of phobias and obsessions, and, despite
the patient's resistances, I have redirected the
attention to the repressed sexual ideas, and
wherever feasible I have blocked the sources
from which the same originated. To be sure, I
cannot maintain that all phobias and obsessions
originate in the manner here revealed; first, my
experience, in proportion to
the
abundance
of these neuroses, embraces only a limited
amount, and second, I, myself, know that these
to picture to herself how she would sit near
psychasthenic symptoms (according to Janet's

[90b]


[91a]
86
Sigmtjnd Freud
designation) are not all of the same value.1
Thus, for instance, there are pure hysterical
phobias. But I believe that the mechanism of
the displacement of the affect will be demon
strated in the greater part of the phobias and
obsessions, and I must assert that these neu
roses, which are found just as often isolated as
combined with hysteria and neurasthenia, are
not to be thrown together with the ordinary
neurasthenia for which fundamental symptom
a psychic mechanism is not at all to beassumed.
in
In both cases thus far considered, the de
fence of the unbearable idea was brought about
by the separation of the same from its affect;
the idea, though weakened and isolated, re
mained in consciousness. There exists, how
ever, a far more energetic and more successful
form of defence wherein the ego misplaces the
unbearable idea with its affect, and behaves as
though the unbearable idea had
never ap
proached the ego. But at the momentwhenthis
is brought about, the person suffers from a psy
chosis which can only be classified as an hallu
cinatory confusion. A single example will ex
plain this assertion. A young girl givesher first
impulsive love to a man who she firmly be
lieved reciprocated it. As a matter of fact she
was mistaken; the young man had other mo
tives for visiting her. It was not long before she
was disappointed; at first she defended herself
against it by converting hysterically the corre
sponding experience, and thus came to believe
that he would come some day to ask her in mar
riage; but in consequence of the imperfect con
version and the constant pressure of new pain
ful impressions, she felt unhappy and ill. She
finally expected him with the greatest tension
on a definite day, it was the day of a family
reunion. The day passes but he did not come.
After all the trains on which he could have
come have passed she suddenly merged into an
hallucinatory confusion. She thought that he
did come, she heard his voice in the garden,
and hastened down in her nightgown to receive
him. For two months thereafter she lived in a
happy dream, the content of which was that he
was as before (before the time of the painful
ly defended disappointment). The hysteria and
xThe group of typical phobias,
for
which agora
phobia is a prototype, cannot be reduced to the psy->
chic
mechanisms
here
developed.
Furthermore,
the
mechanism of
agoraphobia deviates in one decisive
point
from
that
of
the
real
obsessions
and
from
phobias based on such. Here there is no repressed idea
from which the affect of fear has been separated. The
fear of this phobia has another origin.

[91b]
depression were thus conquered; during her
sickness1 she never' mentioned anything about
the last period of doubt and suffering; she was
happy as long as she was left undisturbed, and
was:excited only when a regulation of her en
vironment prevented her from accomplishing
something which she thought quite natural as
a result of her blissful dream. This psychosis,
unintelligible as it was in its time, was revealed
ten years later through hypnotic analysis.
The fact to which I call attention is this:
That the content of such an hallucinatory psy
chosis consists in directly bringing into promi- \
nence that idea which was threatened by the
motive of the disease. One is, therefore, justi- \
fied in saying that through its flight into the
psychosis the
ego defended the
unbearable
idea; the process through which this has been
brought about withdraws itself from self pert
ception as well as from the psychological-clini
cal analysis. It is to be considered as the ex-j
pression of a higher grade of a pathological pre
disposition, and can perhaps be explained as
follows: The ego tears itself away from the
unbearable idea, but, as it hangs inseparably
together with a part of reality, the ego while
accomplishing this performance also detaches
itself wholly or partially from reality. The lat-]
ter is, in my opinion, the condition under whidh
hallucinatory vividness is decreed to particular
ideas, and hence after a very successful de4
fence the person finds himself in an hallucina--
tory confusion.
I have but very few analyses of such'psyj
choses at my disposal; but I believe that wedeal with a very frequent type of psychic ilU
ness. For analogous examples such as the moth
er who, becoming sick after the loss of her
child, continues to rock in her arms a piece of
wood, or the jilted bride who in full dress ex
pects her bridegroom, can be seen in every
mental hospital.
It will perhaps not be superfluous to men--
tion that the three forms of defence here con
sidered, and hence the three forms of disease
to which this defence leads, may be united in
the same person. The simultaneous occurrence
of phobias and hysterical symptoms, so fre
quently observed in practice, really belong to
those factors which impede a pure separation
of hysteria from other neuroses and force the
formation of a mixed neurosis. To be sure, the
hallucinatory confusion is not frequently com
patible with the continuation of hysteria and
not as a rule with obsessions; but on the other
hand it is not rare that a defense psychosis

[92a]
Selected Papers on Hysteria
87
should episodically break through the courseof
an hysteria or mixed neurosis.
In conclusion I will mention in a few words
the subsidiary idea of which I have made use
in this discussion of the defence neuroses. It is
the idea that there is something to distinguish
in all psychic functions (amount of affect, sum
of excitement), that allqualities havea quantity
though we have no means to measure the
same—it is something that can be increased,
diminished, displaced,-and discharged, and that
extends over the memory traces of the ideas
perhapslike an electric charge over the surface
of the body.
This hypothesis, which also underlies our
theory of ab-reaction (" PreliminaryCommuni
cation"), can be used in the same sense as the
physicist uses the assumption of the current
of electric fluid. It is preliminarily justified
through its usefulness in the comprehension
and elucidation of diverse psychic states.
CHAPTER 6
On the Right To Separate from Neuras
thenia a Definite Symptom-Complex As
"Anxiety Neurosis" (Angstneurose)1
It is difficult to assert anything of general va
lidity concerning neurasthenia as long as this
term is allowed to express all that for which
Beard used it. I believe that neuropathology
can only gain by an attempt to separate from
the actual neurosis all those neurotic disturb
ances the symptoms of which are on the one
hand more firmly connected among themselves
than to the
typical neurasthenic symptoms,
such as headache, spinal irritation, dyspepsia
with flatulence and constipation, and which on
the other hand show essential differences from
the typical neurasthenic neurosis in their aeti
ology and mechanism. If we accept this plan,
we will soon gain quite a uniform picture of
neurasthenia. We will soon be able to differenti
ate^—sharper than we have hitherto succeeded
—from the real neurasthenia the different pseu
do-neurasthenias, such as the organically de
termined nasal reflex neurosis, the neurotic dis
turbances of cachexias and arteriosclerosis, the
early stages of progressive paralysis, and of
some psychoses. Furthermore, following the
proposition of Moebius, some status nervosiof
hereditary degenerates will be set aside and we
will also find reasons for ascribing to melancho
lia, some of the neuroses which are now called
neurasthenia, especially those of an intermit1 First published in the Neurologisches Zentralblatt,
1895, No. 2.

[92b]
tent or periodic nature. But we force the way
into the most marked changes if we decide to
separate from neurasthenia that symptom-com
plex which I shall hereafter describe and which
especially fulfills the conditions formulated
above. The symptoms of this complex are clinir
cally more related to one another than to the
real neurasthenic symptoms, that is,. they ire?
quently appear together and substitute one an
other in the course of the disease, and both the
aetiology as well as the mechanism of this neu
rosis differs basically from the aetiology and the
mechanism of the real neurasthenia which re
mains after such a separation.
I call this symptom-complex anxiety neuro
sis (Angstneurose) because the sum of its com
ponents can be grouped around the main symr>
torn of anxiety, because each individual symp
tom shows
a definite relation to anxiety. I
believed that I was original in this conception
of the symptoms of anxiety neurosis until an
interesting lecture by E. Hecker2 fell into my
hand. In this lecture I found the description of
the same interpretation with all the desired
clearness and completeness. To be sure, Hecker
does not separate the equivalents or rudiments
of the attack of anxiety from neurasthenia as
I intend to do; but this is apparently due to the
fact that neither here nor there has he taken
into account the diversity of the aetiologi
cal determinants. With the knowledge of the
latter difference, every obligation to designate
the anxiety neurosis by the same name as the
real neurasthenia disappears, for the only ob
ject of arbitrary naming is to facilitate the
formulation of general assertions.
1.Clinical Symptomatology of Anxiety Neurosis
What I call anxiety neurosis can be observed
in complete or rudimentary development, ei
ther isolated or in combination with other neu
roses. The cases which are in a measure com
plete, and at the same time isolated, are natu
rally those which especially corroborate the
impression that the anxiety neurosis possesses
clinical independence. In other cases we are
confronted with the task of selecting and sepa
rating from a symptom-complex which corre
sponds to a mixedneurosis, all those symptoms
which do not belong to neurasthenia, hysteria,
etc., but to the anxiety neurosis.
aE. Hecker, "t)ber larvierte und abortive Angstzustande
bei
Neurasthenic"
Zentralblatt
fur
Nervenheilkunde,
December,
1893.— Anxiety is
made
particularly prominent among the chief symptoms of
neurasthenia
by
Kaan,
Der
neurasthenische
Angstdffekt bei Zwangsvorstellungen und der primordiale
Griibelzwang, Vienna, 1893.

[93a]
8&
Sigmund Freud
The clinical picture of the anxiety neurosis
comprises the following symptoms:
i.
General Irritability. This is a frequent
nervous symptom, common as such as to many
nervous states. I mention it here because it con
stantly occurs in the anxiety neurosis and is of
theoretical importance. For increased irritabili
ty always points to an accumulation of excite
ment or to an inability to tolerate such ac
cumulation, hence to an absolute or relative ac
cumulation of excitement. The expression of
this increased irritability through an auditory
hyperesthesia is especially worth mentioning;
it is an over sensitiveness for noises, which
symptom is certainly to be explained by the
congenital intimate relationship between audi
tory impressions and fright. Auditory hyperes
thesia is frequently found as a cause of insom
nia, of which more than one form belongs to
anxiety neurosis.
2. Anxious Expectation. I cannot explain
better the condition that I have in mind than
by this name and by some appended examples.
Thus a woman who suffers from anxious ex
pectation thinks of influenza-pneumonia when
ever her husband, who is afflicted with a catar
rhal condition, has a coughing spell; and in her
mind she sees a passing funeral procession. If
on her way home she sees two persons standing
together in front of her house, she cannot re
frain from the thought that one of her children
fell out of the window; if she hears the bell
ring, she thinks that someone is bringing her
mournful tidings, etc.; yet in none of these
cases is there any special reason for exaggerat
ing a mere possibility.
Anxious expectation naturally reflects itself
constantly in the normal, and embraces all that
is designated as "uneasiness, and a tendency to
a pessimistic conception of things," but as often
as possible it goes beyond such a plausible un
easiness, and it is frequently recognized as a
part of constraint even by the patient himself.
For one form of anxious expectation, namely,
that which refers to one's own health, we can
reserve the old name of hypochondria. Hypo
chondria does not always run parallel with the
height of the general anxious expectation; as a
preliminary stipulation it requires the existence
of paresthesias and annoying somatic sensa
tions. Hypochondria is thus the form preferred
by the genuine neurasthenics whenever they
merge into the anxiety neurosis, a thing which
frequently happens.
As a further manifestation of anxious expec
tation, we may mention the frequent tendency

[93b]
observed in morally sensitive persons to pangs
of conscience, scrupulosity, andpedantry, which
varies, as it were, from the normal to its ag
gravation as doubting mania.
Anxious expectation is the most essential
symptom of the neurosis; it also clearly shows
a part of its theory. It can perhaps be said
that we have here a quantum of freely floating
anxiety which controls the choice of ideas by
expectation and is forever ready to unite itself
with any suitable ideation.
j
3. This is not the only way in which anxiousness, usually latent but constantly lurking
in consciousness, can manifest itself. On the
contrary it can also suddenly break into con
sciousness, without being aroused by the issue
of an idea, and thus provoke an attack of anx
iety. Such an attack of anxiety consists either
of the anxious feeling alone without any asso
ciated idea, or of the nearest interpretation of
the termination of life, such as the idea of sud
den death or threatening insanity; or the feel
ing of anxiety becomes mixed with some pares
thesia (similar to the hysterical aura); or ft
nally the anxious feelingmay be combined with
a disturbance of one or many somatic func
tions, such as respiration, cardiac activity, vas
omotor innervation, and glandular activity.
From this combination the patient renders es
pecially prominent now this and now the other
factor. He complains of "heartspasms," "heavy
breathing," "profuse perspiration," "inordinate
appetite," etc.,andin hisdescription the feeling
of anxiety is put to the background or it is
rather vaguely described as "feeling badly,"
"uncomfortably," etc.
f
4. Whatis interesting and of diagnostic signir
ficance is the fact that the amount of admix
ture of these elements in the attack of anxiety
varies extraordinarily, and that almost any ac
companying symptom can alone constitute the
attack as well as the anxiety itself.Accordingly
there are rudimentary attacks of anxiety, and
equivalents for the attack of anxiety, probably
all of equal significance in showing a profuse
and hitherto little appreciated richness in forms.
A more thorough study of these larvated states
of anxiety (Hecker) and their diagnostic divi^
sion from other attacks should soon become the
necessary work for neuro-pathologists.
I now add a list of those forms of attacks
of anxiety with which I am acquainted. There
are attacks:
(a) With disturbances of heart action, such
as palpitation with transitory arrythmia, with
longer continued tachycardia up to gravestates

[94a]
Selected Papers on Hysteria
89
of heart weakness, the differentiation of which
from organic heart affection is not always easy;
among: such we have the pseudo-angina pec
toris, a delicate diagnostic sphere!
(b) With disturbances of respiration, many
forms of nervous dyspnoea, asthma-like at
tacks, etc. I assert that even these attacks are
not always accompanied by conscious anxiety;
(c) Of profuse perspiration, often nocturnal;
(d) Of trembling and shaking which may
readily be mistaken for hysterical attacks;
(e) Of inordinate appetite, often combined
with dizziness;
(f) Of diarrhea appearing in the form of
attacks;
(g) Of locomotor dizziness;
(h) Of so-called congestions, embracing all
that was called vasomotor neurasthenia; and,
(i) Of paresthesias (these are seldom with
out anxiety or a similar discomfort).
5. Very frequently the nocturnal frights
{pavor nocturnus) of adults usually combined
with anxiety, dyspnea, perspiration, etc., are
nothing other than a variety of the attack of
anxiety. This disturbance determines a second
form of insomnia in the sphere of the anxiety
neurosis. Moreover, I became convinced that
even the pavornocturnus of children evinces a
form belonging to the anxiety neurosis. The
hysterical tinge and the connection of the fear
with the reproduction of appropriate experience
or dream, makes the pavor nocturnus of chil
dren appear as something peculiar, but it also
occurs alone without a dream or a recurring
hallucination.
6. Vertigo. In its lightest forms better des
ignated as dizziness, assumes a prominent place
in the group of symptoms of anxiety neurosis.
In its severer forms the attack of vertigo, with
or without fear, belongs to the gravest symp
toms of the neurosis. The vertigo of the anx
iety neurosis is neither a rotatory dizziness nor
is it confined to certain planes or lines like
Menier's vertigo. It belongs to the locomotor
or coordinating vertigo, like the vertigo in pa
ralysis of the ocular muscles; it consists in a
specific feeling of discomfort which is accom
panied by sensations of a heaving ground, sink
ing legs, of the impossibility to continue in an
upright position, and at the same time there is
a feeling that the legs are as heavy as lead, they
shake, or give away. This vertigo never leads
to falling. On the other hand; I would like to
state that such an attack of vertigo may also
be substituted by a profound attack of Syn
cope. Other fainting-like states in the anxiety

[94b]
neurosis seem to depend on a cardiac collapse.
The vertigo attack is frequently accompa
nied by the worst kind of anxiety and is often
combined with cardiac and
respiratory dis
turbances. Vertigo of
elevations, mountains,
and precipices, can also be frequently observed
in anxiety neurosis; moreover, I do not know
whether we are still justified in recognizing a
vertigo a stomacho laeso}
7. On the basis of the chronic anxiousness
(anxious expectation) on the one hand, and the
tendency to vertiginous attacks of anxiety on
the other, there develop two groups of typical
phobias; the first refers to the general physio
logical menaces, while the second refers to loco
motion. To the first group belong the fear of
snakes, thunderstorms, darkness, vermin, etc.,
as well as the typical moral overscrupulousness, and the forms of doubting-mania. Here
the available fear is merely used to strengthen
those aversions which are instinctively im
planted in every human being. But usually a
compulsively acting phobia is formed only after
a reminiscence is added to an experience in
which this fear could manifest itself; as, for
example, after the patient has experienced a
storm in the open air. To attempt to explain
such cases as mere continuations of strong im
pressions is incorrect. What makes these expe
riences significant and their reminiscences dur^
able is, after all, only the fear which could at
that time appear and can also appear today.
In other words, such impressions remain force
ful only in persons with anxious expectations.
The other group contains agoraphobia with
all its accessory forms, all of which are char
acterized by their relation to locomotion. As
a determination of the phobia, we frequently
find a precedent attack of vertigo; I do not
think that it can always be postulated. Oc
casionally, after a first attack of vertigo with
out fear, we see that though locomotion is al
ways accompanied by the sensations of vertigo,
it remains possible without any restrictions,
but as soon as fear attaches itself to the attack
of vertigo, locomotion fails, under the condi
tions of being alone, narrow streets, etc.
The relation of these phobias to the phobias
of obsessions, which mechanism I discussed
above,2 is as follows: The agreement lies in the
fact that, here as there, an idea becomes ob
sessive through its connection with an avail
able affect. The mechanism of displacement of
the affect therefore holds true for both kinds
1 From upset stomach.—Ed.
a The Defence-Heuro-Psychoses, p. 81 ff. above.

[95a]
go
Sigmund Freud
of phobias. But in phobias of the anxiety neu
rosis, this affect is (i) a monotonous one, it is
always one of anxiety; (2) it does not originate
from a repressed idea, and on psychological
analysis it proves itself not further reducible,
nor can it be attacked through psycho-therapy.
The mechanism of substitution does not, there
fore, hold true for the phobias of anxiety
neurosis.
Both kinds of phobias (or obsessions) often
occur side by side, though the atypical phobias
which depend on obsessions need not necessari
ly develop on the basis of anxiety neurosis. A
very frequent, ostensibly complicated, mech
anism appears if the content of an original
simple phobia of anxiety neurosis is substituted
by another idea, the substitution is then subse
quently added to the phobia. The protective
measures originally employed in combating the
phobia are most frequently used as substitu
tions. Thus, for example, from the effort to
provide oneself with counter evidence that one
is not crazy, contrary to the assertion of the
hypochondriacal phobia, there results a reason
ing mania. The hesitations, doubts, and the
many repetitions of the folie du doute originate
from the justified doubt concerning the certain
ty of one's own stream of thoughts, for, through
the compulsive-like idea one is surely conscious
of so obstinate a disturbance, etc. It may there
fore be claimed that many syndromes of com
pulsion neurosis, like folie du doute and simi
lar ones, can clinically, if not notionally, be
attributed to anxiety neurosis.1
8. The digestive functions in anxiety neu
rosis are subject to very few but characteristic
disturbances. Sensations like nausea and sickly
feeling are not rare, and the symptom of in
ordinate appetite, alone or with other conges
tions, may serve as a rudimentary attack of
anxiety. As a chronic alteration analogous to
the anxious expectations, one finds a tendency
to diarrhea which has occasioned the queerest
diagnostic mistakes. If I am not mistaken it is
this diarrhea to which Moebius2 has recently
called attention in a small article. I believe,
moreover, that Peyer's8 reflex diarrhea, which
he attributes to a disease of the prostrate, is
nothing other than the diarrhea of anxiety neu
rosis. The deceptive reflex relation is due to the
fact that the same factors which are active in
1
"Obsessions
and
Phobias"
(1895),
Collected
Papers, I.
2 Moebius,
Neuropathologische
Beitrdge
(1894),
Book 2.
3 Peyer,
Die
nervosen
Affektionen
des
Darmes,
Vienna Clinic, January, 1893.

[95b]
the origin of such prostatic affections also come
into play in the aetiology of anxiety neurosis.
The behaviour of the gastro-intestinal func
tion in anxiety neurosis shows a sharp contrast
to the influence of this same function in neu
rasthenia. Mixed cases often show the familiar
"fluctuations between diarrhea and constipa
tion." The desire to urinate in anxiety neurosis
is analogous to the diarrhea.
9. The paresthesias which accompany the at
tack of vertigo or anxiety are interesting be
cause they associate themselves into a firm
sequence, similar to the sensations of the hys
terical aura. But, in contrast to the hysterical
aura, I find these associated sensations atypical
and changeable. Another similarity to hysteria
is shown by the fact that in anxiety neurosis a
kind of conversion* into bodily sensations, as,
for example, into rheumatic muscles, takes
place which otherwise can be
overlooked at
one's pleasure.
A large number of so-called!
rheumatics, who are moreover demonstrable as
such, really suffer from an anxiety neurosis.
Besides this aggravation of the sensation of
pain, I have observed in a number of cases of
anxiety neurosis a tendency towards hallucina
tions which could not be explained as hys
terical.
10. Many of the so-called symptoms which
accompany or substitute for the attack of anx
iety also appear in a chronicmanner. They are
then still less discernible, for the anxious feel
ing accompanying them appears more indistinct than in the attack of anxiety. This espe
cially holds true for the diarrhea, vertigo, and
paresthesias. Just as the attack of vertigo can
be substituted for by an attack of syncope, so
can the chronic vertigo be substituted for by
the continuous feeling of feebleness, lassitude,
etc.
n.
The Occurrence and Aetiology of
Anxiety Neurosis
In some cases of anxiety neurosis, no aetiol
ogy can readily be ascertained. It is noteworthy
that in such cases it is seldom difficult to dem
onstrate a marked hereditary taint.
Where we have reason to
assume that the
neurosis is acquired we can find.by careful and
laborious examinationthat the aetiologicallyef
fective factors are based on a series of injuries
and influences from the sexual life. These at
first appear to be of a varied nature but easily
display the common character which explains
their homogeneous effect on the nervous sys-
*See The Defence-Neuro-Psychoses, p. 81 ff. above.

[96a]
Selected Papers on Hysteria
9i
tern. They are found eitheralone or with other
banalinjuries to which a reinforcing affect can
be attributed. This sexual aetiology of anxiety
neurosis can be demonstrated so preponderately often that I venture for the purpose of
this brief communication to set aside all cases
of a doubtful or different aetiology.
For the more precise description of the
aetiological determinations under which anxiety
neurosis occurs, it will be advisable to treat
separately those occurring in men and those
occurring in women. Anxiety neurosis appears
in women—disregarding their predisposition—
in the following cases:
(a) As virginal fear or anxiety in adults. A
number of unequivocal observations showed
me that an anxiety neurosis, which is almost
typically combined with hysteria, can be
evoked in maturing girls, at the first encounter
with the sexual problem, that is, at the sud
den revelationof the things hitherto veiled, by
either seeing the sexual act, or by hearing or
reading something of that nature;
(b) As fear in the newly married. Young
women who remain anaesthetic during the first
cohabitationnot seldom merge into an anxiety
neurosis which disappears after the anaesthesia
is displaced by the normal sensation. As most
young women remain undisturbed through such
a beginning anaesthesia, the production ofthis
fear requires determinants which I will men
tion;(c) As fear inwomen whose husbands suffer
from ejaculatio precox or from diminished po
tency; and,
(d) In those whose husbands practice coitus
interruptus or reservatus. These cases go to
gether, for on analyzing a large number of ex
amples one can easily be convinced that they
only depend on whether the woman attained
gratification during coitus ornot. In the latter
case, one finds the determinant for the origin of
anxiety neurosis. Onthe otherhandthe woman
is spared from the neurosis if the husband af
flicted by ejaculatio precox canrepeat the con
gress with better results immediately there
after. The congressus reservatus by means of
the condom is not injurious to the woman if
she is quickly excited and the husband is very
potent; in other cases, the noxiousness of this
kind of preventive measure is not inferior to
the others. Coitus interruptus is almost reg
ularly injurious; but for the woman it is in
jurious only if thehusband practices it regardlessly, that is, if he interrupts coitus as soon as
he comes near ejaculating without concerning

[96b]
himself about the termination of the excite
ment of his wife. On the other hand if the
husband waits until his wife is gratified, the
coitus has the same significance for the latter
as a normalone; but then the husband becomes
afflicted with an anxiety neurosis. I have col
lected and analyzed a number of cases which
furnished the material for the above state
ments.
(e) As fear in widows and intentional ab
stainers, not seldom in typical combination
with obsessions; and,
(f.) As fearintheclimacteriumduring thelast
marked enhancement of the sexual desire.
The cases (c), (d), and (e) contain the de
terminants under which the anxiety neurosis
originates in the female sex, most frequently
and most independently of hereditary predis
position. I will endeavour to demonstrate in
these—curable, acquired—cases of anxietyneu
rosis that the discovered sexual injuries really
represent the aetiological factors of the neu
rosis. But beforeproceeding I will mention the
sexual determinants of anxiety neurosis in men.
I would like to formulate the following groups,
everyoneof which finds its analogy in women:
(a) Fear ofthe intentional abstainers; this is
frequently combined with symptoms ofdefence
(obsessions, hysteria). The motives which are
decisive for intentional abstinence carry along
with them the fact that a number of hereditari
ly burdened eccentrics, etc., belong to this
category.
(b) Fearin men with frustrated excitement
(during the engagement period), persons who
out of fear for the consequences of sexual re
lations satisfy themselves with handling or
looking at the woman. This group of determi
nants which can moreover be transferred to the
other sex—engagement periods, relations with
sexual forbearance—furnish the purest cases
of the neurosis.
(c) Fear in men who practice coitus inter
ruptus. As observed above, coitus interruptus
injures thewoman ifit ispracticed regardless of
the woman's gratification; it becomes injurious
to the manif, in order to bring aboutthe grati
fication in the woman, he voluntarily controls
the coitus by delaying the ejaculation. In this
manner we can understand why it is that, in
couples who practice coitus interruptus, it is
usually only one ofthem who becomes afflicted.
Moreover the coitusinterruptus only rarely pro
duces in man a pure anxiety neurosis; usually
it is a mixture of the same with neurasthenia.
(d) Fear in men in senium. There are men

[97a]
92
Sigmund Freud
who show a
climacterium like women,
and
merge into an
anxiety neurosis at the time
when their potency diminishes and their libido
increases.
Finally I must add two more cases holding
true for both sexes:
(e) Neurasthenics merge into anxiety neu
rosis in consequence of masturbation as soon
as
they refrain from this manner of sexual
gratification.
These persons
have
especially
made themselves unfit to bear abstinence.
What is important for the understanding of
the anxiety neurosis is the fact that any note
worthy development of the same occurs only
in men who remain potent, and in non-anes
thetic women. In neurasthenics, who on ac
count of masturbation have markedly injured
their potency, anxiety neurosis as a result of
abstinence occurs but rarely and limits itself
usually to hypochondria and light chronic diz
ziness. The majority of women are really to be
considered as potent; a real impotent, that is,
a real anesthetic woman, is also inaccessible to
anxiety neurosis, and bears strikingly well the
injuries cited above.
How far we are perhaps justified in assum
ing constant relations between individual aetio
logical factors and individual symptoms from
the complex of anxiety neurosis, I do not care
to discuss here.
(f) The last of the aetiological determinants
to be mentionedseems,in the first place, really
not to be of a sexual nature. Anxiety neurosis
originates in both sexes through overwork, ex
haustive exertion, as, for instance, after sleep
less nights, nursing the sick, and even after
serious illness.
The main objection to my formulation of a
sexual aetiology of anxiety neurosis will prob
ably be based on the argument that such ab
normal relations of the sexual life exist very
frequently, that they will be found wherever
one will look for them, and that their occur
rence in cases of anxiety neurosis does not
therefore demonstrate the aetiology of this neu
rosis. It may also be argued that the number of
persons practicing coitus interruptus, etc., is
incomparably greater than those who are bur
dened with anxiety neurosis, and that the over
whelming number of the former are quite well
in spite of this injury.
To this I can answer that we certainly need
not expect a rare aetiological factor in the neur
oses, especially in anxiety neurosis, which
everyone concedes are enormously frequent.
Moreover, this very finding really fulfills a

[97b]
pathologicalpostulate, if an aetiologicalexami
nation shows that the aetiological factor can be
more frequently demonstrated than its effect,
for the latter requires still other determinants
(predisposition, summation of the specific aeti
ology, reinforcement through other banal in
juries); and furthermore, the detailed analysis
of suitable cases of anxiety neurosis show quite
unequivocally the significance of the sexual;
factor. I shall, however, confine myself here
to the aetiological factor of coitus interruptus,
and will render prominent obvious individual
experiences.
i. Aslongas anxietyneurosis in youngwom
en is not yet constituted but appears in frag
ments and again spontaneously disappears, it
can be shown that every such shift of the neu
rosis depends on a coitus lacking gratification.
Two days after suchbehaviour, and,in persons
oflittleresistance, thedayafter,thereregularly
appears the attack of anxiety or vertigo to
which all the other symptoms of the neurosis
attach themselves; they abate again on rarer
marital relations. An unexpected journeyof the
husband, a sojourn in the mountains causing a
separation of the married couple, does good;
the benefit froma course of gynecological treat
ment is due to the fact that, during its con
tinuation, the marriage relations are stopped.
It is noteworthy that the success of a local
treatment is only transitory, the neurosis re
appears in the mountain resort if the husband
joinshis wifefor his ownvacation. If, in a not
as yet constituted neurosis, a physician aware
of this aetiology causes a substitution of the
coitus interruptus by normal relations, there re
sults a therapeutic proof of the assertion here
formulated. The anxiety disappears and does
not return unless there be a new or similar
cause.
2.In the anamnesis of manycases of anxiety
neurosis, we find in both men and women a
striking fluctuation in the intensity of the ap
pearances in both the coming and going of the |
whole condition. This year was almost wholly
good, the following was terrible, etc.; on one
occasion the improvement occurred after a def
inite treatment which, however, failed to pro
duce a response at the next attack. If we in
form ourselves about the number and the se
quence of the children, and compare this mar
riage chronicle with the peculiar course of the
neurosis,the result of the simplesolution shows
that the periods of improvement or well-being
corresponded with the pregnancies of the wom
an during which, naturally, the occasions for

[98a]
Selected Papers on Hysteria
93
preventive relations were unnecessary. The
treatment which benefited the husband, be it
Father Kneip's or hydrotherapy, was the one
which he had taken after his wife was pregnant.
3. From the anamnesis of patients, we often
find that the symptoms of the anxiety neurosis
are relieved at a certain time by another neu
rosis, perhaps a neurasthenia which has sup
planted it. It can then be regularly demon
strated that, shortly before this change of the
picture, there occurred a corresponding change
in the form of sexual injury.
Whereas such experiences, which can be aug
mented at pleasure, plainly obtrude upon the
physician the sexual aetiology for a certain
category of cases, othercases which would have
otherwise remained incomprehensible can at
least without gainsaying be solved and classi
fied by the key of the sexual aetiology. We re
fer to those numerous cases in which every
thing exists that has been found in the former
category, such as the appearance of anxiety
neurosis on the one hand, and the specific fac
tor of coitus interruptus on the other, but yet
something else slips in, namely, a long interval
between the assumed aetiology and its effect,
andperhaps otheraetiological factors of a non
sexual nature. We have, for example, a man
who was seized with an attack of palpitation on
hearing of his father's death, and who since
that time suffered from an anxiety neurosis.
The case cannot be understood, for up to that
time this man was not nervous. The death of
the father, well advanced in years, did not oc
cur under any peculiar circumstances, and it
must be admitted that the expected natural
death of an aged father does not belong to
those experiences which are wont to make a
healthy adultsick. Theaetiological analysis will
perhaps seem clearer if I add that out of re
gard for his wife this man practiced coitus
interruptus for eleven years. At all events the
manifestations are precisely the same as those
appearing in other persons after a short sexual
injury of this nature, and without the interven
tion of another trauma. The same judgment
may be pronounced in the case of a woman
who merges into an anxiety neurosis after the
death of her child, or in the case of the stu
dent who becomes disturbed by an anxiety
neurosis while preparing for his final state ex
amination. I find that here, as there, the effect
is not explained by the reported aetiology. One
must not necessarily overwork himself study
ing, and a healthy mother is wont to react to
the death of her child with normal grief. But,

[98b]
above all, I would expect that the overworked
student would acquire a cephalasthenia, and
that the mother, in our example, an hysteria.
That both became afflicted with anxiety neu
rosis causes me to attach importance to the fact
that the mother lived for eight years in mari
tal coitus interruptus, and that the student en
tertained for three years a warm love affair
with a "respectable" girl whom he was not
allowed to impregnate.
These examples tend to show that where the
specific sexual injury of the coitus interruptus
is in itself unable to provoke an anxiety neu
rosis, it at least predisposes to its acquisition.
The anxiety neurosis then comes to light as
soon as the effect of another banal injury en
ters into the latent effect of the specific factor.
The former can quantitatively substitute the
specific factor but not supplant it qualitatively.
The specific factor always remains that which
determines the form of neurosis. I hope to be
able to prove to a greater extent this theory
for the aetiology of the neurosis.
Furthermore, the last discussions contain
the not in itself improbable assumption that
a sexual injury like coitus interruptus asserts
itself through summation. The time required
before the effect of this summation becomes
visible depends upon the predisposition of the
individual and the former burdening of his
nervous system. The individuals who bear
coitus interruptus manifestly without disad
vantage really become predisposed by it to the
disturbance—anxiety neurosis—which can at
any time burst forth spontaneously or after a
banal, ptherwise inadequate, trauma, justasthe
chronic alcoholic finally develops a cirrhosis or
another disease by summation, or, under the
influence of a fever, merges into a delirium.
m.
Addenda to the Theory of
Anxiety Neurosis
The following discussions claim nothing but
the value of a first tentative experiment, which
judgment should notinfluence theacceptance of
the facts mentioned above. The estimation of
this theory of anxiety neurosis is rendered still
more difficult by the fact that it merely cor
responds to a fragment of a more comprehen
sive representation of the neuroses.
The facts hitherto expressed concerning the
anxiety neurosis already contain some starting
points for an insight into the mechanism of
this neurosis. In the first place, it contains the
assumption that we deal with an accumulation
of excitement, and then the very important

[99a]
94
Sigmund Freud
fact that the anxiety underlying the manifesta
tions of the neurosis is not of psychic deriv
ation. Such, for example, would exist if we
found as a basis for the anxiety neurosis a justi
fied fright happening once or repeatedly which
has since supplied the source of the prepared
ness for the anxiety neurosis. But this is not
the case; a former fright can perhaps cause
an hysteria or a traumatic neurosis but never an
anxiety neurosis. As the coitus interruptus is
rendered so prominent among the causes of
anxiety neurosis, I have thought at first that
the source of the continuous anxiety was per
haps the repeated fear during the sexual act
lest the technique will fail and conception fol
low. But I have found that this state of mind
of the man or woman during the coitus inter
ruptus plays no part in the origin of anxiety
neurosis, that the women who are really indif
ferent to the possibilities of conception are just
as exposed to the neurosis as those who are
trembling at the possibility of it; it all depends
on
which person suffers the
loss of sexual
gratification.
Another starting point presents itself in the
as yet unmentioned observation that in a whole
series of cases the anxiety neurosis goes along
with the most distinct diminution of the sexual
libido or the psychic desire, so that, on re
vealing to the patients that their affliction de
pends on insufficient gratification, they reg
ularly reply that this is impossible as just now
their whole desire is extinguished. The indica
tions that we deal with an accumulation of ex
citement, that the anxiety which probably cor
responds to such accumulated excitement is of
somatic origin, so that somatic excitement be
comes accumulated, and, furthermore, that this
somatic excitement is of a sexual nature, and
that it is accompanied by a decreased psychic
participation in the sexual processes—all these
indications, I say, favour the expectation that
the mechanism of the anxiety neurosis is to be
found in the deviation of the somatic sexual
excitement from the psychic, and in the abnor
mal utilization of this excitement.
This conception of the mechanism of anxiety
neurosis will become clearer if one accepts the
following view concerning the sexual process in
man. In the sexually mature male organism,
the
somatic
sexual excitement is—probably
continuously—produced, and this becomes a
periodic stimulus for the psychic life. To make
our conceptions clearer we will add that this
somatic sexual excitement manifests itself as a
pressure on the wall of the seminal vesicle

[99b]
which is provided with nerve endings. This
visceral excitement thus becomes continuously
increased, but not before attaining a certain
height is it able to overcome the resistances of
the intercalated conduction as far as the cortex,
and manifest itself as psychic excitement. Then
the group of sexual ideas existing in the psyche
becomes endowed with energy and results in a
psychic state of libidinal tension which is ac
companied by an impulse to remove this ten
sion. Such psychic unburdening is possible only
in one way which I wish to designate as specific
or adequate action. This adequate action for
the male sexual impulse consists of a compli
cated spinal reflex-act which results in the un
burdening of those nerve endings, and of all
psychically formed preparations for the liber^
ation of this reflex. Anything else except the
adequate action would be of no avail, for after
the somatic sexual excitement has once reached
the liminal value, it continuously changes into
psychic excitement; that must by all means oc
cur which frees the nerve endings from their
heavy pressure, and thus abolish the whole so
matic excitement existing at the time and allow
the subcortical conduction to reestablish its re
sistance.
I will desist from presenting in a similar
manner more complicated cases of the sexual
process. I will merely formulate the statement
that this scheme can essentially be transferred
to the woman, despite the problem of the per
plexity, artificial retardation, and stunting of
the female sexual impulse. In the woman, tod;
it can be assumed that there is a somatic sex*
ual excitement, and a state in which this ex+
citement becomes psychic, evoking libido and
the impulse to specific action accompanied by
the sensual feeling. But we are unable to state
what analogy there may be in the woman to
the unburdening of the seminal vesicles.
We can bring into the bounds of this repref
sentation of the sexual process the aetiology of
actual neurasthenia as well as of anxiety neui
rosis. Neurasthenia always originates whenever
the adequate (action) unburdening is replaced
by a less adequate one, like the normal coitus
under the most favourable conditions, by a
masturbation or spontaneous pollution; while
anxiety neurosis is produced by all, factors
which impede the psychic elaboration of the
somatic sexual excitement. The manifestations
of anxiety neurosis are brought about by the
fact that the somatic sexual excitement di
verted from the psyche expends itself subcortically in not at all adequate reactions.

[100a]
Selected Papers on Hysteria
95
estrangement between the somatic and psychic
in the discharge of the sexual excitement suc
ceeds quicker in the woman than in the man
and is more difficult to remove. The case of
widowhood or voluntary abstinence, as well as
the case of climacterium, adjusts itself in the
woman as in the man, but in the case of ab
stinence there surely is in addition the inten
tional repression of the sexual ideas, for an
abstinent woman struggling with
temptation
must often decide to suppress it. The abhor
rence perceived by an elderly woman during
her menopause against the immensely increased
libido can have a similar effect.
The two aetiological determinants mentioned
last can also be classified without any difficulty.
The tendency to anxiety of the masturbator
who becomes neurasthenic is explained by the
fact that such persons easily merge into the
state of abstinence, after they have so long
been accustomed to afford a discharge—to be
sure an inadequate one—for every little quan
tity of somatic excitement. Finally the last
case, the origin of anxiety neurosis through a
severe illness
(overwork, exhaustive nursing,
etc.), aided by the efficacy of coitus interrup
tus readily permits this free interpretation:
Through deviation, the psyche becomes here
insufficient for the. subjugation of the somatic
sexual excitement, a task which continuously
devolves upon it. We know how deeply the
libido can sink under the same conditions, and
we have here a nice example of a neurosis which
although not of a sexual aetiology still evinces
a sexual mechanism.
The conception here
developed represents
the symptoms of anxiety neurosis in a meas
ure as a substitute for the omitted specific ac
tion of sexual excitement. As a further cor
roboration of this I recall that also in normal
coitus the excitement extends itself in respira
tory acceleration, palpitation, perspiration, con
gestion, etc. In the corresponding attack of
anxiety of our neurosis, we have before us the
dyspnoea, the palpitation, etc., of the coitus
in an isolated and aggravated manner.
It can still be asked why the nervous system
merges into a peculiar affective state of anxiety
under the circumstances of psychic inadequacy
for the subjugation of the sexual excitement.
A hint to the answer is as follows: The psyche
merges into the affect of anxiety, when it per
ceives itself unfit to adjust an externally ap
proaching task (danger) by a corresponding
reaction; it merges into the neurosis of anxiety,
subcortically expended. The formation of an
when it finds itself unable to equalize the enI will now attempt to test the aetiological
determinants suggested before in order to see
whether they show the common character for
mulated by me. As the first aetiological factor
in the man, I have mentioned intentional ab
stinence. Abstinence consists in foregoing the
specific action which results from libido. Such
foregoing may have two consequences, first the
somatic excitement accumulates, second, which
is more important, it then becomes diverted to
another route where there is more chance for
discharge than through the psyche. It will then
finally diminish the libido and the excitement
will manifest itself subcortically as anxiety.
Where the libido does not become diminished,
or the somatic excitement is expended in pol
lutions, or where it really becomes exhausted
in consequence of repulsion, everything else
except anxiety neurosis is formed. In this man
ner, abstinence leads to anxiety neurosis. But
abstinence is also the active process in the
second aetiological group of frustrated excite
ment. The third case, that of the very consid
erate coitus reservatus, acts through the fact
that it disturbs the psychic preparedness for
the sexual discharge by establishing beside the
subjugation of the sexual affect another dis
tracting psychic task. Through this psychic
distraction, too, the libido gradually disap
pears, and the further course is then the same
as in the case of abstinence. The anxiety in old
age (climacterium of men) requires another
explanation. Here the libido does not diminish,
but, just as in the climacterium of women, such
an increase takes place in the somatic excite
ment that the psyche shows itself relatively in
sufficient for the subjugation of the same.
The subsummation of the aetiological de
terminants in the woman, under the aspect
mentioned, does not afford any greater diffi
culties. The case of the virginal fear is espe
cially clear. Here the group of ideas with which
the somatic sexual excitement should combine
are not as yet sufficiently developed. In anaesthetically newly married women, the anxiety
appears only if the first cohabitations awakened
a
sufficient
amount
of
somatic
excitement.
Where the local signs of such excitability (like
spontaneous feelings of excitement, desire to
micturate, etc.) are lacking, the anxiety, too,
stays away. The case of ejaculatio precox or
coitus interruptus is explained similarly to that
in the man by the fact that the libido grad
ually disappears in the psychically ungratified
act, whereas the excitement thereby evoked is

[100b]


[101a]
96
dogenously original (sexual) excitement. The
psyche, therefore, behaves as if projecting this
excitement externally. The affect and the neu
rosis corresponding to it stand in close relation
ship to each other, the first is the reaction to
an exogenous, the. latter the reaction to an
analogous endogenous excitement. The affect
is a rapidly passing state, the neurosis is chron
ic, because the exogenous excitement acts like
a stroke happening but once, while the endoge
nous acts like a constant force.
The nervous
system reacts in the neurosis against an inner
sourceof excitement, just as it does in the cor
responding affect against an analogous external
one.
rv.
The Relations to Other Neuroses
A few observations still remain to be men
tioned on the relations of anxiety neurosis to
the other neuroses in reference to occurrence
and inner relationship.
The purest cases of anxiety neurosis are also
usually the most pronounced. They are found
in potent young individuals with a uniform
aetiology, and where the disease is not of long
standing.
To be sure, the symptoms of anxiety are
found more frequently as a simultaneous and
common occurrence with those of neurasthenia,
hysteria, compulsive ideas, and melancholia.
If, on account of such clinical mixtures, one
hesitates in recognizing anxiety neurosis as an
independent unity, he will also have to abandon
the laboriously acquired separation of hysteria
and neurasthenia.
For the analysis of the mixed neuroses I can
advocate the following proposition: Where a
mixed neurosis exists, an involvement of many
specific aetiologies can be demonstrated.
Such a multiplicity of aetiological factors
determining a mixed neurosis can only come
about accidentally, if the activities of a new
ly formed injury are added to those already
existing. Thus, for example, a woman who was
at all times a hysteric begins to practice coitus
reservatus at a certain period of her married
life, and adds an anxiety neurosis to her hys
teria; a man who had masturbated and become
neurasthenic becomes engaged and excites him
self with his fiancee so that a fresh anxiety
neurosis allies itself to his neurasthenia.
The multiplicity of aetiological factors in
other cases is not accidental; one of them has
brought the other into activity. Thus, a wom
an, with whom her husband practices coitus
reservatus without regard to her gratification,

[101b]
Sigmtjnd Freud
finds herself forced to finish the tormenting
excitement following such an act with mastur
bation, as a result of which she shows an anx
iety neurosis with symptoms of neurasthenia.
Under the same noxiousness another woman
has to contend with lewd pictures against which
she wishes to defend herself, and in this way
the coitus interruptus will cause her to acquire
obsessions along with the anxiety neurosis.
Finally, a third woman, as a result of coitus
interruptus, loses her affection for her husband
and forms another which she secretly guards,
and as a result she evinces a mixture of hys
teria and anxiety neurosis.
In a third category of mixed neuroses the
connection of the symptoms is of a still more
intimate nature, as the same aetiological deter
minants regularly and
simultaneously evoke
both neuroses. Thus, for example, the sudden
sexual explanation which we have found in
virginal fear always produces hysteria, too;
most causes of intentional abstinence connect
themselves in the beginning with actual ob
sessions; and it seems to me that the coitus
interruptus of men can never provoke a pure
anxiety neurosis, but always a mixture of the
same with neurasthenia, etc.
It follows from this discussion that the aetio
logical determinants of the occurrence must
moreover be distinguished from
the specific
aetiological factors of neurasthenia.
The first
factors, as, for example, coitus interruptus,
masturbation, and abstinence, are still ambig
uous, and can each produce different neuroses;
and it is only the aetiological factors abstracted
from them, like the inadequate unburdening,
psychic insufficiency, and defence with substi
tution, that have an unambiguous and specific
relation to the aetiology of the individual great
neuroses.
In its intrinsic property, anxiety neurosis
shows the most interesting agreements and difrferences when compared with the other great
neuroses,
particularly
when
compared
with
neurasthenia and hysteria. With neurasthenia
it shares one main character, namelyj that the
source of excitement, the cause of the disturb
ance, lies in the somatic rather than in the
psychic sphere, as in the case of hysteria and
compulsion neurosis. For the rest we can rec
ognize a kind of contrast between the symp
toms of neurasthenia and
anxiety neurosis,
which can be expressed in the catchwords ac
cumulation and impoverishment of excitement.
This contrast does not hinder the two neuroses
from combining with each other, but shows

[102a]
itself in the fact that the most extreme forms
in both cases are also the purest.
When compared with hysteria, anxiety neu
rosis shows in the first place a number of agree
ments in the symptomatology, the valuation of
which is still unsettled. The appearance of the
manifestations as persistent symptoms or at
tacks, the aura-like grouped paresthesias, the
hyperesthesias and pressure points can be found
in certain substitutes for the anxiety attack, as
in dyspnoea and palpitation, the aggravation
of the perhaps organically determined pains
(by conversion)—these and other joint fea
tures lead to the supposition that some things
which are ascribed to hysteria can with full
authority be fastened to anxiety neurosis. But
if we enter into the mechanism of both neu
roses, as far as it can at present be penetrated,
we find aspects which make it appear that the
anxiety neurosis is really the somatic counter
part to hysteria. Here as there we have accu
mulation and excitement, on which is perhaps
based the similarity
of the aforementioned
symptoms; here as there we have a psychic
insufficiency
which results
from
abnormal
somatic processes; and here as there we have
instead of a psychic elaboration a deviation of
the excitement into the somatic. The difference
only lies in the fact that the excitement, in
which displacement the neurosis manifests it
self, is purely somatic (somatic sexual excite
ment) in anxiety neurosis, while in hysteria it
is psychic (evoked through a conflict). Hence
it is not surprising that hysteria and anxiety
neurosis lawfully combine with each other, as in
the virginal fear or in the sexualhysteria, and
that hysteria simply borrows a number of
symptoms from anxiety neurosis, etc. This in
timate
relationship between anxiety neurosis
and hysteria furnishes us with a new argument
for demanding the separation of anxiety neu
rosis from hysteria, for, if this be denied, one
will also be unable to maintain the so pains
takingly acquired distinction between neuras
thenia and hysteria, so indispensable for the
theory of the neuroses.
CHAPTER 7
Further Observations on the DefenceNeuro-Psychoses1
Under the
caption
of Defence-Neuro-Psy
choses I have comprised hysteria, obsessions,
as well as certain cases of acute hallucinatory
confusion. All these affections evince one com-
*Neurologisches Zentralblatt, (1896), No. 10.

[102b]
Selected Papers on Hysteria
97
mon aspect in the fact that their symptoms
originated through the psychic mechanism of
(unconscious) defence, that is, through the at
tempt to repress an unbearable idea which ap
peared in painful contrast to the ego of the
patient. I was also able to explain and exempli
fy by cases reported in the preceding chapters
in what sense this psychic process of defence
or repression is to be understood. I have also
discussed the laborious but perfectly reliable
method of psycho-analysis of which I make
use in my examinations, and which at the same
time serves as a therapy.
My experiences during the last two years
have strengthened my predilection for making
the defence the essential point in the psychic
mechanism of the neuroses mentioned, and on
the other hand have permitted me to give a
clinical foundation to the psychological theory.
To my surprise, I have discovered some simple
but sharply circumscribed solutions for
the
problem of the neuroses which I shall provi
sionally briefly report in the following pages.
It would be inconsistent with this manner of
reporting to add to the assertions the required
proofs, but I hope to be able to fulfill this obli
gation in a comprehensive discussion.
1. The Specific Aetiology of Hysteria
That the symptoms of hysteria become com
prehensible only through a reduction to trau
matically effective experiences, and that these
psychic traumas refer to the sexual life, has
already been asserted by Breuer and me in for
mer publications. What I have to add today
as a uniform result of thirteen analyzed cases
of hysteria concerns, on the one hand, the na
ture of these sexual traumas, and on the other,
the period of life in which they occurred. An
experience occurring at any period of life,
touching in any way the sexual life, and then
becoming pathogenic through the liberation and
suppression of a painful affect, is not sufficient
for the causation of hysteria. It must on the
contrary belong to the sexual traumas of early
childhood (the period of life before puberty),
and its content must consist in a real irritation
of the genitals (coitus-like processes).
This specific determination of hysteria—sex
ual passivity in pre-sexual periods—I have
found fulfilled in all analyzed cases of hysteria
(among which were two men). To what extent
the determination of the accidental aetiolog
ical factor diminishes the requirement of the
hereditary predisposition needs only to be in
timated. We can, moreover, understand the dis-

[103a]
98
proportionately greater frequency of hysteria
in the female sex, as even in childhood this sex
is more subject to sexual assaults.
The
objection
most frequently advanced
against this result may be to the purport that
sexual assaults on little children occur too fre
quently to give an aetiological value to its veri
fication, or that such experiences must remain
ineffectual just because they concern a sexually
undeveloped being; and that one must more
over be careful not to obtrude upon the patient
through the examination such alleged reminis
cences, or believe in the romances which they
themselves fabricate. To the latter objections,
I hold out the request that no one should real
ly judge with great certainty this obscure realm
unless he has made use of the only method
which can clear it up (the method of psycho
analysis for bringing to consciousness the hith
erto unconscious).1 The essential point in the
first doubts is settled by the observation that
it really is not the experiences themselves that
act traumatically, but their revival as reminis
cences after the individual has entered into sex
ual maturity.
My thirteen cases of hysteria were through
out of the graver kind, they were all of long
duration, and some had undergone a lengthy
and unsuccessful hospital treatment. Every one
of the infantile traumas which the analysis
revealed for their severe cases had to be des
ignated as severe sexual injuries; some of them
were indeed abominable. Among the persons
who were guilty of such serious abuse we have
in the first place nurses, governesses, and other
servants to whom children are left much too
carelessly; then in regrettable frequency come
the teachers; but in seven of the thirteen cases
we dealt with innocent childish offenders, mostly
brothers who for years entertained sexual rela
tions with their younger sisters. The course of
events always resembled some of
the cases
which could with certainty be tracked, namely,
that the boy had been abused by a person of
the feminine sex, thus awakening in him prema
turely the libido, and that after a few years he
repeated in sexual aggression on his sister the
same procedures to which he himself was sub
jected.
I must exclude active masturbation from the
list of sexual injuries of early childhood as
being pathogenic for hysteria. That it is so
very frequently found associated with hysteria
II myself surmise that the so frequently fabricated
assaults of hysterical persons are obsessional confabu
lations emanating from the memory traces of infantile
traumas.

[103b]
Sigmund Freud
is due to the fact that masturbation in itself
is more frequently the result of abuse or seduc
tion than one supposes. It not seldom happens
that both members of a childish pair later in
fife become afflicted by a defence neurosis, the
brother by obsessions and the sister by hys
teria, which naturally gives the appearance of
a familial neurotic predisposition. This pseudoheredity is now and then solved in a surprising
manner. I have had under observation a broth
er, sister, and a somewhat older cousin. The
analysis which I
have undertaken with the
brother showed me that he suffered from re
proaches for being the cause of his sister's mal
ady; he himself was corrupted by his cousin,
concerning whom it was known in the family
that he fell a victim to his nurse.
I can not definitely state up to what age
sexual damage occurs in the aetiology of hys
teria, but I doubt whether sexual passivity can
cause repression after the eighth and tenth year
unless qualified for it by previous experiences.
The lower limit reaches as far as memory in
general, that is, to the delicate age of one and
one-half or two years (two cases)! In a num
ber of my cases the sexual trauma (or the num
ber of traumas) occurred during the third and
fourth year of life. I myself would not lend
credence to this peculiar discovery if it were
not for the fact that the later development of
the neurosis furnished it with full trustworthi
ness. In every case there are a number of mor
bid symptoms, habits, and phobias, which are
only explainable by returning to those youth
ful experiences, and the logical structure of the
neurotic manifestation makes it impossible to
reject the faithfully retained memories of child
hood. Except through psycho-analysis, it is of
no avail to ask a hysterical patient about these
infantile traumas; their remnants can only be
found in the morbid symptoms and not in con
scious memory.
All the experience's and excitements which
prepare the way for, or occasion the outburst
of, hysteria in the period of life after puberty
evidently act through the fact that they awaken
the memory remnants, of those infantile trau
mas which do not become conscious but lead to
the liberation of affect and repression. It is
quite in harmony with this role of the later
traumas not to be subject to the strict limita
tion of the infantile traumas, but that both
in intensity and quality they can vary from an
actual sexual assault to a mere approximation
of the sexual, such as perceiving the sexual acts

[104a]
Selected Papers on Hysteria
of others, or receiving information concerning
sexual processes.1
In my first communication on the defence
neuro-psychoses, I failed to explain how the ex
ertion of a hitherto healthy individual to forget
such traumatic happenings would result in the
real intentional repression, and thus open the
door for the defence neurosis. It can not de
pend on the nature of the experience, as other
persons remain unaffected despite the same mo
tives. Hysteria cannot therefore be fully ex
plained by the effect of the trauma, and we
are forced to admit that the capacity for hys
teria already existed before the trauma.
This indefinite hysterical predisposition can
now wholly or partially be substituted by the
posthumous effect of the infantile sexual trau
ma. The repression of the memory of a pain
ful sexual experience of maturer years can take
place only in persons in whom this experience
can bring into activity the memory remnants
of an infantile trauma.2
The prerequisite of obsessions is also a sexual
infantile experience, but of a different nature
than that of hysteria. The aetiology of both de
fense neuro-psychoses now shows the following
relation to the aetiology of both simple neu1 In an article on the anxiety neurosis (Neurologisches
Zentralblatt
[1895],)
[See
p.
91
above]
I stated that "an anxiety neurosis which can almost
typically be combined with hysteria can be evoked in
maturing girls at the first encounter with the sexual
problem." I know today that the occasion in which
such virginal anxiety breaks out does not really cor
respond to the first encounter with sexuality, but that
in such persons there was in childhood a precedent
experience
of
sexual
passivity
which
memory was
awakened at the "first encounter."
2 A psychological theory of repression ought also to
inform us why only ideas of a sexual content can be
repressed.
It
may be
formulated
as
follows:
It
is
known that ideas of a sexual content produce exciting
processes in the genitals resembling the actual sexual
experience. It may be assumed that this somatic excite
ment becomes transformed into psychic excitement. As
a rule the effect referred to is much stronger at the
time of its occurrence than at the recollection of it.
But if the sexual experience takes place during the
time of sexual immaturity and the recollection of it is
awakened during or
after maturity, the recollection
then acts disproportionately more exciting than the
previous experience, for puberty has in the meantime
incomparably increased the reactive capacity of
the
sexual apparatus. But such an inverse proportion be
tween the real experience and the meaning of it seems
to contain the psychological determination of repres
sion. Through the retardation of pubescence, in con
trast to the psychic function, the sexual life offers the
only existing possibility for that reversal of the rela
tive efficacy. The infantile traumas subsequently act
like fresh experiences, but they are then unconscious.
Deeper psychological discussions I will have to post
pone for
another time. Moreover, I call attention to
the fact that the here considered time of sexual ma
turity
does
not coincide with
puberty, but occurs
before the same (eight to ten years).

[104b]
99
roses, neurasthenia and anxiety neurosis. As I
have shown above, both the latter neuroses are
direct results of the sexual noxae alone, while
both defence neuroses are the direct results of
sexual noxae which acted before the appearance
of sexual maturity; that is, they are the results
of the psychic memory remnants of those noxae.
The actual causes producing neurasthenia and
anxiety neurosis simultaneously play the role
of inciting causes of the defence neurosesj and,
on the other hand, the specific causes of the
defence neuroses, the infantile traumas, may
simultaneously prepare the soil for the later
developing neurasthenia. Finally it not seldom
happens that the existence of a neurasthenia or
anxiety neurosis is only preserved by continued
recollection of an infantile trauma rather, than
by actual sexual injuries.
11. The Essence and Mechanism of Compulsion
Neurosis
Sexual experiences of early childhood have
the same significance in the aetiology of the
compulsion neurosis as in hysteria; still we no
longer deal here with sexual passivity but with
pleasurably accomplished aggressions, and with
pleasurably experienced participation-in sexual
acts; that is, we/deal here with sexual activ
ity;8 It is due to this difference in the aetiology
ical relations that the masculine sex seems to
be preferred in the compulsion neurosis.
In all my cases of compulsion neurosis I have
found besides
a sub-soil of hysterical symp
toms which could be traced to a pleasurable ac
tion of sexual passivity from a precedent scene.
I presume that this coincidence is a lawful one,
and that premature sexual aggression always
presupposes an experience of seduction. But I
am unable to present as yet a complete descrip
tion of the aetiology of the compulsion neuro
sis. I only believe that the final determination
as to whether a hysteria or compulsion neurosis
should originate on the basis of infantile trau
mas.depends on the temporal relation of the de
velopment of the libido.
The essence of the compulsion neurosis may
be expressed in the following simple formula:
Obsessions are always transformed reproaches
returning from the repression which always
refer to a pleasurably accomplished sexual ac
tion of childhood. In order to elucidate this
sentence, it will be necessary to describe the
typical course of compulsion neurosis.
In a first period—period of childish unmo8 These theories of passive and active sexual trau
mas have later been given up by the author.—Tr.

[105a]
100
Sigmund Freud
rality—the events containing the seeds of the
later neurosis take place. In the earliest child
hood there appear at first the experiences of sex
ual seduction which later makes the repression
possible, and this is followed by the actions of
sexual aggressions against the other sex which
later manifest themselves as actions of reproach.
This period is brought to an end by the ap
pearance
of
the—^often
self-ripened—sexual
maturity. A reproach then attaches itself to the
memory of that pleasurable action, and the
connection with the initial experience of pas
sivity makes it possible—often only after con
scious and recollected effort—to repress it and
replace it by a primary symptom of defence.
The third period, that of apparent healthiness
but really of successful defence, begins with the
symptoms of scrupulousness, shame and diffi
dence.
The next period of the disease is character
ized by the return of the repressed reminis
cences, hence, by the failure of the defence.
But it remains undecided whether the awaken
ing of it is more frequently accidental and
spontaneous, or whether it appears in conse
quence of actual sexual disturbances, that is, as
additional influences.of the same. But the re
vived reminiscences and the reproaches formed
from them never enter into consciousness unn
changed. What becomes conscious as an obses
sion and obsessive affect, and substitutes the
pathogenic memory in the conscious life, are
compromise formations between the repressed
and the repressing ideas.
In order to describe clearly and probably
convincingly the processes of repression, the
return of the repression, and the formation of
the pathological ideas of compromise, we would
have to decide upon very definite hypotheses
concerning the substratum of the psychic oc
currence and consciousness. As long as we wish
to avoid it, we will have to rest content with
the following rather figuratively understood ob
servations. Depending on whether the memory
content of the reproachful action alone forces
an entrance into consciousness or whether it
takes with it the accompanying reproachful af
fect, we have two forms of compulsion neu
rosis. The first represents the typical obses
sions, the content of which attracts the patient's
attention; only an indefinite displeasure is per
ceived as an affect, whereas, for the content of
the obsession, the only suitable affect would be
one of reproach. The content of the obsession
is doubly distorted when compared to the con
tent of the infantile compulsive act. First, some

[105b]
thing actual replaces the past experience, and,
second, the sexual is substituted by an anal
ogous non-sexual experience. These two changes
are the results of the constant tendency to re
pression still in force which we will attribute
to the ego. The influence of the revived patho^
genie memory is shown by the fact that the
content of the obsession is still partially iden
tical with the repressed, or can be traced to it
by a correct stream of thought. If, with the
help of the psycho-analytic method, we recon
struct the origin of one individual obsession,
we find that one actual impression instigated
two diverse streams of thought, and that the
one which passed over the repressed memory,
though incapable of consciousness and correc
tion, proves to be just as correctly formed, log
ically, as the other. If the results of the two
psychic operations disagree, the contradiction
between the two may never be brought to log
ical adjustment, but, as a compromise between
the resistance and the pathological result of
thought, an apparently absurd obsession enters
into consciousness, beside the normal result of
the thought. If both streams of thought yield
the same result, they reinforce each other so
that the normally gained result of thought now
behaves psychically like an obsession. Wher
ever neurotic compulsion manifests itself psy
chically, it originates from repression. The ob
sessions have, as it were, a psychical course of
compulsion which is due, not to their own va
lidity, but to the source from which they orig
inate, or to the source which furnishes a part
of their validity.
A second form of compulsion neurosis re
sults if the repressed reproach and not the
repressed content of memory forces a replace
ment in the conscious psychic life. Through a
psychic admixture, the affect of the reproach
can change itself into any other affect of dis
pleasure, and if this occurs there is nothing to;
hinder the substituting affect from becoming
conscious. Thus the reproach (of having per^
formed in childhood some sexual actions) may
be easily transformed into shame (if some one
else becomes aware of it), into hypochondriacal
anxiety (because of the physical harmful con
sequences of those reproachful acts), into so
cial anxiety (fearing punishment from others),
into religious anxiety, into delusions of observa
tion (fear of betraying thoseactions to others),
into fear of temptations (justified distrust in
one's own moral ability of resistance), etc. Be
sides, the memory content of the reproachful
action may also be represented in conscious-,

[106a]
ness, or it may be altogether concealed, which
makes the diagnosis very difficult. Many cases
which on superficial examination are-taken'asordinary (neurasthenic) hypochondria often
belong to this group of compulsive affects; the
very frequently so-called periodic neurasthenia
or periodic melancholia especially seem to be
explained by compulsive affects or obsessions,
a recognition not unimportant therapeutically.
Beside these compromise symptoms which
signify the return of the repression and hence
a failure of the originally achieved defence,
the compulsion neurosis forms a series of other
symptoms of a totally different origin. The ego
really tries to defend itself against those de
scendants of the initial repressed reminiscence,
and in this conflict of defence it produces symp
toms which may be comprehended as second
ary defence. These are throughout protective
measures which have performed good service
in the struggle carried on against the obsessions
and the obsessing affects. If these helps in the
conflict of the defense really succeed in repress
ing anew the symptoms of return obtruding
themselves on the ego, the compulsion then
transmits
itself
on the protective measures
themselves and produces a third form of the
compulsion neurosis, the
compulsive action.
These are never primary; they never contain
anything else but a defence, never an aggres
sion. Psycho-analysis shows that, despite their
peculiarity, they can always be fully explained
by reduction to the compulsive reminiscence
which they oppose.1
1 One example instead of many: An eleven-year-old
boy has obsessively arranged for himself the following
ceremonial
before going to
bed:
He could not
fall
asleep unless he related to his mother most minutely
all experiences of the day; not the smallest scrap of
paper or any other rubbish was allowed in the eve
ning on the carpet of his bedroom. The bed had to be
moved close to the wall, three chairs had to stand in
front of it, and the pillows had to lie in just such a po
sition. In order to fall asleep he had to kick with both
legs a number of times, and then he had to lie on the
side. This was explained as follows: Years before, while
putting this pretty boy to sleep, the servant girl made
use of this opportunity to lay over him and assault him
sexually. When this reminiscence was later awakened
by a recent experience, it made itself known to con
sciousness by the compulsion in the above mentioned
ceremonial, which sense could really be surmised and
the details verified by psycho-analysis. The chairs be
fore the bed which was close to the wall—so that no
one could have access to it; the arrangement of the
pillows in a definite manner—*o that they should be
differently arranged than they were on that evening;
the motion with the legs—to kick away the person
lying on him; sleeping on the side—because during
that scene he lay on his back; the detailed confessipn
to his mother—-because in consequence of the prohibi
tion of his seductress he concealed from his mother
this and other sexual experiences; finally, keeping the
floor of his bedroom clean—because this was the main
reproach, which he had to hear from his mother up to
that time.

[106b]
Selected Papers on Hysteria
IOI
The secondary defence of the obsessions can
be brought about by a forcible deviation to
other thoughts of possibly contrary content;
hence, in case of success, there is a compulsive
reasoning, regularly concerning abstract and
transcendental subjects, because the repressed
ideas always occupied themselves with sensuousness. Or the patient tries to become master
of every compulsive idea through logical la
bour and by appealing to his conscious mem
ory; this leads to compulsive thinking and ex
amination and to doubting mania. The priority
of the perception before the memory in these
examinations at first induces and then forces
the patient to collect and preserve all objects
with which he comes in contact. The secondary
defence against the compulsive affects results
in a greater number of defensive measures
which are capable of being transformed into
compulsive actions. These can be grouped ac
cording to their tendency. We may have meas*
ures of penitence (irksome ceremonial and ob
servation of numbers), of prevention (diverse
phobias, superstition, pedantry, aggravation of
the
primary
symptom of
scrupulousness),
measures of fear of betrayal (collecting papers;
shyness), and measures of becoming uncon
scious (dipsomania). Among these compulsive
acts and impulses, the phobias play the greatest
part as limitations of the patient's existence.
There are cases in which we can observe how
the compulsion becomes transferred from the
idea or affect to the measure, and other cases
in which the compulsion oscillates between the
returning symptoms of secondary defence. But
there are also cases in which no obsessions are
really formed, but the repressed reminiscence
immediately becomes replaced by the apparent
primary defensive measure. Here that stage is
attained at a bound which otherwise ends the
course of the compulsion neurosis only after
the conflict of the defence. Grave cases of this
affection end either with a fixation of ceremo
nial actions, general doubting mania, or in an
existence of eccentricity conditioned by phobias.
That the obsessions and everything derived
from them are not believed is probably due to
the fact that the defence symptom of scrupu
lousness was formed during the first repression
and gained compulsive validity. The certainty
of having lived morally throughout the whole
period of the successful defence makes it im
possible to give credence to the reproach which
the obsession really involves. Only transitorily

[107a]
102
during the appearance of a new obsession, and
now and then in melancholic exhaustive states
of the ego, do the morbid symptoms of the re
turn also enforce the belief. The compulsion of
the psychic formations here described has in
general nothing to do with the recognition
through belief, and is not to be mistaken for
that factor which is designated as strength or
intensity of an idea.
Its main characteristic
lies in its inexplicableness through psychic ac
tivities of conscious ability, and this character
undergoes to change whether the idea to which
the compulsion is attached is stronger or weak
er, more or less intensively elucidated, supplied
with energy, etc.
The reason for the unassailableness of the
obsession or its derivative is due only to its
connection with the repressed memory of early
childhood, for as soon as we succeed in making
it conscious, for which the psycho-therapeutic
methods already seem quite sufficient, the com
pulsion, too, becomes detached.
in. Analysis of a Case of Chronic Paranoia
For some length of time I entertained the
idea that paranoia also—or the group of cases
belonging to paranoia—is a defence psychosis,
that is, like hysteria and obsessions it originates
from the repression of painful reminiscences,
and that the form of its symptoms is deter
mined by the content of the repression. A spe
cial way or mechanism of repression must be
peculiar to paranoia, perhaps just as in hys
teria which brings about the repression by way
of conversion into bodily innervation, and per
haps like obsessions in which a substitution is
accomplished (displacement along certain as
sociative categories); I observed many cases
which seemed to favour this interpretation, but
I had not found any which demonstrated it un
til a few months ago when, through the kindness
of Dr. J. Breuer, I subjected to psycho-analy
sis, with therapeutic aims, an intelligent woman
of 32, whom no one will be able to refuse to
designate as a chronic paranoiac. I report here
some explanations gained in this work; because
I have no prospects of studying paranoia ex
cept in very isolated examples, and because I
think it possible that these observations may
instigate a psychiatrist for whom conditions are
more favourable to give due justice to the ele
ment of defence in the present animated dis
cussion on the nature and psychic mechanism
of
paranoia.
It is of course far from my
thoughts to wish to show from the following
single observation anything but that this case

[107b]
Sigmund Freud
is a defence-psychosis, and that in the group
of paranoia there may be still others of a sim
ilar nature.
Mrs. P, thirty-two years old, married three
years. She is the mother of a two-year-old
child, and does not descend from nervous par
ents ; but her sister and brother, whom I know,
are also neurotic. It was doubtful whether she
was not transitorily depressed and mistaken in
her judgment in the middle of her twentieth
year. During the last years she was healthy
and
capacitated until she evinced the first
symptoms of the present illness, six months
after the birth of her child. She became se
cluded and suspicious, showing a disinclination
towards social relations with the relatives of
her husband, and complained that the neigh
bours in the little town-now'behaved towards
her in a rather impolite and regardless man
ner. Gradually these complaints grew in inten
sity; she thought that there was something
against her, though she had no notion what it
could be. But there was no doubt that all the
relatives and friends denied her respect, and
did everything to aggravate her. She was try
ing very hard to find out whence this came
but could not discover anything. Some time
later she complained that she
was watched,
that her thoughts were guessed, and that every
thing that happened in her house was known.
One
afternoon she
suddenly conceived the
thought that she was watched during the eve
ning while undressing. After that, she applied
while undressing the most complicated precau
tionary measures. She slipped into her bed in
the darkness and undressed only under cover.
As she avoided all social relations, and took
but little nourishment, and was very depressed,
she was sent in the summer of 1895 to a hydrotherapeutic institute. There new symptoms ap
peared and reinforced those already existing.
As early as the spring, while she was alohe
with the servant girl, she suddenly perceived
a sensation in her lap, and thought that the
servant girl
then had an unseemly thought.
This sensation became more frequent in the
summer, it was almost continuous, and she
felt her genitals "as if one feels a heavy hand."
She then began to see pictures which fright
ened her; they were hallucinations of female
nakedness, especially an exposed woman's lap
with hair; occasionally she also saw male gen
itals.
The picture of the hairy lap and the
organic sensation in the lap usually came con
jointly. The pictures became very aggravating,
as she regularly perceived them when she was

[108a]
Selected Papers on Hysteria
103
in the company of a woman, and the thought
accompanying them
was that she sees the
woman in an indecent exposure, and that in the
same moment the woman sees the same picture
of her! Simultaneously with these visual hallu
cinations, which, after their first appearance in
the
hospital,
disappeared
again
for
many
months, she began to be troubled with voices
which she did not recognize and could not ex
plain. When she was in the street she heard,
"This is Mrs. P.—Here she goes.—Where does
she go?" Every one of her movements and ac
tions were commented upon. Occasionally she
heard threats and reproaches. All these symp
toms became worse when she was in society,
or even in the street; she therefore hesitated
about going out; she also stated that she ex
perienced nausea at the thought of food, and as
a result she became reduced in vitality.
I obtained all this from her when she came
under my care in the winter of 1895. I have
presented the details of this case in order to
give the impression that we really deal here
with a very common form of chronic paranoia,
the diagnosis of which will agree with the de
tails of the symptoms and the patient's be
haviour to be described later. At that time she
either concealed from me the delusions for the
interpretation of the hallucinations, or they
really had not as yet occurred. Her intelligence
was undiminished. It was reported to me as
peculiar that she made a number of rendezvous
with her brother who lived in the neighbour
hood, in order to confide something to him, but
she never told him anything. She never spoke
about her hallucinations, and, towards the end,
she did not say much about the aggravations
and persecutions from which she suffered.
What I shall report about this patient con
cerns the aetiology of the case and the mecha
nism of the
hallucinations.
I
discovered the
aetiology by applying Breuer's method, exactly
as in hysteria, for the investigation and re
moval of the hallucinations. I started with the
presupposition, that, just as in the two other
defenre-neuroses known to me, this paranoia,
too, must contain unconscious thoughts and re
pressed reminiscences which had to be brought
to consciousness, in the same manner as in the
others, by overcoming a certain resistance. The
patient immediately corroborated this expecta
tion by behaving during the analysis exactly
like a hysteric, and under attention to the pres
sure of my hand she reproduced thoughts which
she could not remember having had, which she
at first could not understand, and which con

[108b]
tradicted her expectations. The occurrence of
'important unconscious ideas was therefore also
demonstrated in a case of paranoia, and I
could hope to reconduct the^ compulsion of
paranoia to repression. It was only peculiar
that the assertions which originated in the un
conscious were usually heard inwardly or hallu
cinated by her as her voices.
Concerning the origin of the visual hallucina
tions, or at least the vivid pictures, I discov
ered the following: The picture of the female
lap
occurred
almost
always
together
with
the organic sensation in the lap. The latter,
however, was more constant and often occurred
without the picture.
The first pictures of feminine laps appeared
in the hydro-therapeutic institute a few hours
after she had actually seen a number of women
naked in
the bath house. They were there
fore only simple reproductions of a real impres
sion. It may be assumed that these impressions
repeated themselves because something of great
interest was connected with them. She stated
that she was at that time ashamed of these
women, and that, since she recalled it, she is
ashamed of having been seen naked. Having
been obliged to look upon this shame as some
thing compulsive, I concluded that, according
to the mechanism of defence, an experience
must have here been repressed in which she was
not ashamed, and I requested her to allow those
reminiscences to emerge which belonged to the
theme of shame. She promptly reproduced a
series
of
scenes
from
her
seventh
to
her
eighth year, during which, while bathing before
her mother, her sister, and her physician, she
was
ashamed of her nakedness. This series,
however, reached back to a scene in her sixth
year when she undressed in the children's room
before going to sleep without feeling ashamed
of her brother who was present. On question
ing her, it was found that there were a number
of such scenes, and that for years the brothers
and sisters were in the habit of showing them
selves naked to one another before retiring. I
now understood the significance of the sudden
thought of being watched on going to sleep.
It was an unchanged fragment of the old re
proachful reminiscence, and she was now try
ing to make up in shame what she lost as a
child.
The supposition that we dealt here with an
amour of childhood, so frequent in the aetio
logy of hysteria, was strengthened by the fur
ther progress of the analysis, which also showed
simultaneous solutions for individual frequent-

[109a]
104
Sigmund Freud
ly recurring details in the picture of paranoia.
The beginning., of her depression commenced
at the time of a disagreement between her husr
band and her brother on account of which the
latter no longer visited her. She was always
much attached to this brother and missed him
very much at this time. Besides this, she spoke
about an experience in the history of her dis
ease during which for the first time "every
thing became clear," that is, during which she
became convinced that her assumption about
being generally despised and intentionally anr
noyed was true. She gained this assurance dur
ing a visit of her sister-in-law, who in the course
of conversation dropped the words, "If such a
thing should happen to me I would not mind
it." Mrs. P at first took this utterance unsus
pectingly, but when her visitor left her it
seemed to her that these words contained a
reproach, meaning that she was in the habit of
taking serious matters lightly, and since that
hour she was sure that she was a victim of
common slander. On asking her why she felt
justified in referring those words
to herself,
she answered that the tone in which her sisterin-law spoke convinced her of it—to be sure
subsequently. (This is really a characteristic
detail of paranoia.) I now urged her to recall
her sister-in-law's conversation before the ac
cusing utterance, and it was found that she re
lated that in her father's home there were all
sorts
of difficulties with the
brothers,
and
added the wise remark, "In every family many
things happen which one would rather keep
under cover, and that if such a thing should
happen to her she would take it lightly." Mrs.
P had to acknowledge that her depression was
connected with the sentences before the last
utterance. As
she
repressed both sentences
which could recall her relations with her bro
ther and retained only the last meaningless one,
she was forced to connect with it the feeling
of being reproached by her sister-in-law; but
inasmuch as the contents of this sentence of
fered absolutely no basis for such assumption
she disregarded it and laid stress on the tone
with which the words were pronounced. It is
probably a typical illustration of the fact that
the misinterpretations of paranoia depend on
repression.
In a surprising manner it also explains her
peculiar behaviour in making appointments
with her brother and then refusing to tell him
anything. Her explanation was that she thought
that if she only looked at him he must under
stand her suffering, as he knew the cause of it.

[109b]
As this brother was really the only person who
could know anything about the aetiology of her
disease, it followed that she acted from a mo
tive which, though she did not consciously
understand, seemed perfectly justified as soon
as a new sense was put on it from the uncon
scious.
I then succeeded in causing her to reproduce
different scenes, the culminating points of which
were the sexual relations with her brother, at
least from her sixth to her tenth year. During
this work of reproduction, the organic sensa
tion in the lap "joined in the discussion," pre
cisely as regularly observed in the analysis of
memory remnants of hysterical patients. The
picture of a naked female lap (but now reduced
to childish proportions and without hair) im
mediately appeared or stayed away in accord
ance
with
the
occurrence
of
the
scene
in
question in full light or in darkness.The disgust
for eating, too, was explained by a repulsive
detail of these actions. After we had gone
through this series, the hallucinatory sensations
and picture disappeared without having thus
far
returned.1
I have thus learned that these hallucinations
were nothing other than fragments from the
content of the repressed experiences of child
hood, that is, symptoms of the return of the
repressed material.
I now turned to the analysis of the voices.
Here it must before all be explained why such
different remarks as, "Here goes Mrs. P.—She
now looks for apartments," etc., could be so
painfully perceived, and how these harmless
sentences managed to become distinguished by
hallucinatory enforcement. To begin with, it
was clear that these "voices" could not be hal
lucinatory reproduced reminiscences like the
pictures and sensations, but rather thoughts
which "became loud."
She heard the voices for the first time under
the following circumstances.With great tension
she read the pretty story, The Heiterethei, by
0. Ludwig, and noticed that while reading she
was preoccupied with obtruding thoughts. Im
mediately after, she took a walk on the high
way, and suddenly, while passing a peasant's
cottage, the voices told her, "That is how the
house of the Heiterethei looked! Here is the
well, and here is the bush! How happy she was
in all her poverty!" The voices then repeated
^When the meagre success of this treatment was
later removed by an exacerbation, she did not again
see the offensive pictures of strange genitals, but she
had the idea that strangers saw her genitals as soon
as they were behind her.

[110a]
whole paragraphs of what she had just read,
but it remained incomprehensible why house,
bush, and well of the Heiterethei, and just such
indifferent and most irrelevant passages of the
romance
should
have
obtruded
themselves
upon her attention with pathological strength.
The analysis showed that while reading she at
the same time entertained extraneous thoughts,
and that she was excited by totally different
passages of the book. Against this material
analogybetween the couple of the romance and
herself and her husband, the reminiscence of
intimate things of her married life and family
secrets—against all these there arose a repres
sive resistance because they were connected
with her sexual shyness by very simple and
demonstrable streams of thought, and finally
resulted in the awakening of old experiences
of childhood. In consequence of the censor
ship exercised by the repression, the harmless
and idyllic passages, connected with the ob
jectionable ones by contrast and vicinity, be
came
reinforced
in
consciousness,
enabling
them to become audible. For example, the first
repressed thought referred to the slander to
which the secluded heroine was subjected by
her neighbours. She readily found in this an
analogy to herself. She, too, lived in a small
place, had no intercourse with anybody and
considered herself despised by her neighbours.
The
suspicion
against
the
neighbours
was
founded on the fact that in the beginning of
her married life she was obliged to content
herself with a small apartment. The wall of the
bedroom, near which stood the nuptial bed of
the young couple, adjoined the
neighbour's
room. With the beginning of her marriage
there awakened in her a great sexual shyness.
This was apparently due to an unconscious
awakening of some reminiscences of childhood
of having played husband and wife. She was
very careful lest the neighbours might hear
through the
adjacent wall either words or
noises, and this shyness changed into suspicion
against the neighbours.
The voices, therefore, owed their origin to
the repression of thoughts which in the last
analysis really signified reproaches on the oc
casion of an experience analogous to the infan
tile trauma; they were accordingly symptoms
of the return of the repression, but at the same
time they were results of a compromise be
tween the resistance of the ego and the force
of the returning repression, which in this case
produced a distortion beyond recognition. On
other
occasions
when
analyzing
voices
in

[110b]
Selected Papers on Hysteria
105
Mrs. P, the distortion was less marked, still the
words heard always showed a character of dip
lomatic uncertainty. The annoying allusion was
generally deeply hidden, the connection of the
individual sentences was masked by a strange
expression, unusual forms of speech, etc., char
acteristics generally common to the auditory
hallucinations of paranoiacs, and in which I
noticed the remnant of the compromise distor
tion. The expression, "There goes Mrs. P; she
is looking for apartments in the street," signi
fied, for example, the threat that she will never
recover, for I promised her that after the treat
ment she would be able to return to the little
city where her husband was employed. She
rented temporary quarters in Vienna for a few
months.
On some occasions Mrs. P also perceived
more distinct threats, for example, concerning
the relatives of her husband, the restrained ex
pression of which still continued to contrast
with the grief which such voices caused her.
Considering all that we otherwise know of
paranoiacs, I am inclined to assume a gradual
relaxation of that resistance which weakens the
reproaches, so that finally the defence fails
completely and the original reproach, the insult
ing word, which one wished to save himself,
returns in unchanged form. I do not, however,
know whether this is a constant course, wheth
er the censor of the expressions of reproach can
not from the beginning stay away, or persist
to the end.
The only thing left is to utilize the explana
tions gained in this case of paranoia for a com
parison of paranoia with compulsion neurosis.
Here, as there, the repression was shown to
be the nucleus of the psychic mechanism, and
in both cases the repression is a sexual experi
ence of childhood. The origin of every com
pulsion in this paranoia is in the repression,
and the symptoms of paranoia allow a similar
classification as the one found justified in com
pulsion neurosis. Some symptoms also originate
from the primary defence, among which are all
delusions of distrust, suspicion, and persecution
by others. In compulsion neurosis the initial
reproach became repressed through the forma
tion of the primary symptom of defence: selfdistrust. Moreover, the reproach was recognized
as justified, and, for the purpose of adjustment,
the validity acquired by the scrupulousness
during the normal interval now guards against
giving credence to the returning reproach in
the form of an obsession. By the formation of
the defence-symptom of distrust in others, the

[111a]
to6
Sigmund Freud
reproach in paranoia is repressed in a way
which may be designated as projection; the
reproach is also deprived of recognition, and
as a retaliation there is no protection against
the returning reproaches contained in the delu
sions.
The other symptoms in my case of paranoia
are, therefore, to be designated as symptoms
of the return of the repression, and as in the
compulsion neurosis they show the traces of
the
compromise which alone permits an en
trance into consciousness. Such are the delu
sions of being observed while undressing, the
visual hallucination, the perceptual hallucina
tions, and the hearing of voices. The memory
content existing in the delusion mentioned is
almost unchanged and appears only uncertain
through utterance. The return of the repres
sion into visual pictures comes nearer to the
character of hysteria than to
the character
of compulsion neurosis; still, hysteria is wont
to repeat its memory symbols without modifi
cation, whereas the paranoiac memory hal
lucination undergoes a distortion similar to
that
in
compulsion neurosis.
An
analogous
modern picture takes the place of the one re
pressed (instead of a child's lap, it was the
lap of a woman upon which the hair were par
ticularly distinct because they were absent in
the original impression). Quite peculiar to para
noia, but no further elucidated in this compari
son, is the fact that the repressed reproaches
return as loud thoughts; this must yield to a
double distortion: (i) a censor, which either
leads to a replacement through other associated
thoughts or to a concealment by indefinite ex
pressions, and (2) the reference to modern
which is merely analogous to the old thoughts.
The third group of symptoms found in com
pulsion neurosis, the symptoms of the second
ary defence, cannot exist,as such in paranoia,
for no defence asserts itself against the return
ing systems which really find credence. As a
substitute for this, we find in paranoia another
source of symptom formation; the delusions
(symptom of return) reaching consciousness
through the compromise, make great demands
on the mental work of the ego before they can
be unconditionally accepted. As they them
selves are not to be influenced, the ego must
adapt itself to them, and hence the combining
delusional formation, the delusion of interpre
tation which results, in the transformation of
the ego, corresponds here to the symptoms of
secondary defence of compulsion neurosis. In
this respect my casewas imperfect, as it did not

[111b]
at that time show any attempt at interpreta
tion; this only appeared later. I do not doubt,
however,
that if
psycho-analysis were
also
applied to that stage of paranoia, another im
portant result would be established. It would
probably be
found that
even the
so-called
weakness of memory in paranoiacs is tenden
tious, that is, it depends on the repression and
serves its purpose. Subsequently even those
non-pathogenic memories which stand in op
position
to
the
transformation of
the
ego
become repressed and replaced; this, the symp
toms of return imperatively demand.
CHAPTER 8
On Psycho-Therapy.1
Gentlemen: It is almost eight years since, at
the request of your deceased chairman, Profes- \
sor von Reder, I had the pleasure of speaking
in your midst on the subject of hysteria. Short
ly before (1895), I had published the Studies
in Hysteria together with Dr. J. Breuer, and,
on the basis of a new knowledge for which we
are thankful to this investigator, I have at
tempted to introduce a new way of treating
the neuroses. Fortunately, I can say that the en
deavours of our Studies have met with success,
that the ideas which they advance concerning
the effects of psychic traumas through the re
straining of affects, as well as the concept of
the hysterical symptoms as a displacement of
excitement from the psychic to the physical—
ideas for which we have coined the terms abreaction and conversion are today generally,
known and understood. In German-speaking
countries one cannot find any descriptions of
hysteria in which these facts are not more or
less recognized. There is-no psychiatrist who
does not now at least take some note of these
theories. And yet, as long as they were new,
these
theories
and
these
terms must have
sounded strange enough.
I can not however, say the. same about the
therapeutic procedure which we have proposed
together with our theory. It still struggles for
recognition. This may have its special reasons.\
The technique of the procedure was at that time
still rudimentary. I was unable to give those
indications to the medical reader of our book;
which would enable him to accomplish thisj
treatment. But there were surely other causes!
of a general nature. To many physicians, psy
cho-therapy even today appears as a product
of modern mysticism. In comparison to our
1 Lecture delivered before the Vienna
College of
Physicians, on December 12, 1904.

[112a]
physico-chemical remedies, the application of
which is based on physiological insight, psycho
therapy appears quite unscientific and unworthy
of the interest of a true scientist. You will,
therefore, allow me to speak to you on the
subject of psycho-therapy in order to point out
what part of this verdict can be designated as
unjust or erroneous.
In the first place, let me remind you that
psycho-therapy is not a modern therapeutic
procedure. On the contrary, it is one of the
oldest in medicine. In Lewenfeld's instructive
work(Lehrbuch der gesamten Psychotherapie),
you can find that the methodsutilizedin prim
itive and ancient medicine were mostly of a
psycho-therapeutic nature. In order to cure a
patient, he wastransferred into a state of cred
ulous expectation which acts in a ssimilar man
ner even today. Even after the doctors found
other remedial agents, psycho-therapeutic en
deavours never disappeared from this or that
branch of medicine.
Secondly, I call your attention to the fact
that we doctors really can not abandon psycho
therapy, if only because another very impor
tant party in the treatment—namely, the pa
tient—has no intention of abandoning it. You
know how much we owe to the Nancy school
(Liebault, Bernheim) for these explanations.
Without our intention, an independent factor
from the patient's psychic disposition enters
into the activity of every remedial agent in
troduced by physicians, which, though mostly
favourable, often also acts inhibitingly. We
have learned to apply to this factor the word
suggestion, and Moebius taught us that the
failures of some of our remedies are to be as
cribed to the disturbing influences of this very
powerful factor. You doctors, all of you,
constantly practise psycho-therapy, even when
you do not know it, or do not intend it, but
with one disadvantage—you leave entirely to
the patient the psychic factors of your influ
ence. It then becomes uncontrollable; it can
not be divided into doses and hence can not be
increased. Is it not justifiable on the part of
the doctor to master this factor, to make in
tentional use of it, to direct and enforce it? It
is nothing but that, that scientific psycho
therapy expects of you.
In the third place, gentlemen, I wish to call
your attention to a well-known fact, namely,
that certain maladies and particularly the psy
cho-neuroses, are more accessible to psychic
influences than to any other remedies. It is no
modern talk, but a dictum of old physicians,

[112b]
Selected Papers on Hysteria
107
that these diseases are not cured by the drug,
but by the doctor—to wit, by the personal
ity of the physician in so far as he exerts a
psychic influence. I am well aware, gentlemen,
that you are impressed with the idea which
the esthete Vischer, in his parody on Faust
(Faust, der Tragodie, HI Teil), endowed with
this classical expression: "I know that the psy
chical often acts on the moral."
But would it not be more adequate and
frequently more correct to influence the moral
part of the person with the moral, that is, with
psychic means?
There are many ways and means of psycho
therapy. All methods are good which produce
the aim of the therapy. Our usual consolation,
"You will soon be well again," with which we
are so generous to our patients, corresponds
to one of these psycho-therapeutic methods,
only that on gaining a profounder insight into
the neuroses we are not forced to limit our
selves to this consolation alone. We have de
veloped the technique of hypnotic suggestion,
of psycho-therapy through diversion, through
practice, and through the evocation of service
able affects. I do not disdain any of them, and
would practise them all under suitable con
ditions. That I have in reality restricted my
self to a single therapeutic procedure, to the
method called by Breuer cathartic, which I
prefer to call analytic, is simply due to subjec
tive motives which guided me. Having partici
pated in the elaboration of this therapy, I feel
it a personal duty to devote myself to its in
vestigation, and to the final development of its
technique. I maintain that the analytic meth
od of psycho-therapy is one which acts most
penetratingly, and carries farthest;
through
it one can produce the most prolific changes
in the patient.
If I relinquish for a mo
ment the therapeutic point of view, I can as
sert that it is the most interesting, and that
it alone teaches us something concerning the
origin and the connection of the morbid mani
festations. Owing to insights which it opens in
to the mechanism of the psychic malady, it
can even lead us beyond itself, and show us the
way to still other kinds of therapeutic influ
ences.
Allow me now to correct some errors, and
furnish some explanations concerning this cath
artic or analytic method of psycho-therapy.
(a) I notice that this method is often mis
taken for the hypnotic suggestive treatment.
I notice this by the fact that quite frequently
colleagues, whose confidant I am not by any

[113a]
io8
Sigmund Freud
means, send patients to me, refractory patients,
of course, with the request that I should, hyp
notize them. Now, for eight years I have not
practised
hypnotism
(individual
cases
ex
cepted) as a therapeutic aim, and hence I re
turn the patients with the advice that he who
relies on hypnosis should do it himself. In
truth, the greatest possible contrast exists be
tween the suggestive and the analytic techni
ques, that contrast which the great Leonardo
da Vinci has expressed for the arts in the for
mulae per via di porre and per via di levare.
Said Leonardo, "the art of painting works per
via di porre, that is to say, by placing little
heaps of paint where they have not been before
on the uncoloured canvas; sculpturing, on the
other hand, works per via di levare, that is to
say, it takes away from the stone as much as
covers the surface of the statute therein con
tained." Quite similarly, gentlemen, the sug
gestive technique acts per via di porre; it does
not concern itself about the origin, force, and
significance of the morbid symptoms, but puts
on something, to wit, the suggestion, which it
expects will be strong enough to prevent the
pathogenic idea from expression. On the other
hand, the analytic therapy does not wish to put
on anything, or introduce anything new, but
to take away, and extract, and for this purpose
it concerns itself with the genesis of the mor
bid symptoms and the psychic connection of
the pathogenic idea, the removal of which is
its aim. This manner of investigation has con
siderably furthered our understanding. I have
so early given up the technique of suggestion,
and with it hypnosis, because I despaired of
making the suggestion as strong and persistent
as would be necessary for a lasting cure. In all
grave casesI noticed that the suggestions which
were put on crumbled off again, and then the
disease, on replacing it, reappeared. Besides,
I charge this technique with concealing from us
the psychic play of forces. It does not permit
us to recognize the resistance with which the
patients adhere to their malady, with which
they also strive against recovery, and which
alone can give us an understanding of their
behaviour in fife.
(b) It seems to me that a very widespread
mistake among my colleagues is the idea that
the technique of the investigation of the causes
of the disease and the removal of its manifesta
tions by this investigation is easy and self-evi
dent. I concluded this from the fact that, of the
many who interest themselves in my therapy
and express a definite opinion on the same, no

[113b]
one has yet asked me how I do it. There can
only be one reason for it; they believe there
is nothing to ask, that it is a matter of course.
I occasionally also hear with surprise that, in
this or that division of a hospital, a young in
terne is requested by his chief to undertake
a psycho-analysis with a hysterical woman. I
am convinced that he would not entrust him
with the examination of an extirpated tumor
without previously assuring himself that he is
acquainted with histological technique. Like
wise I am informed that this or that colleague
has made appointments with a patient for
psychic treatment, whereas I am certain that
he does not know the technique of such a treat
ment. He must, therefore, expect that the pa
tient will bring him her secrets, or he seeks
salvation in some kind of a confession or con
fidence. I should not wonder if the patient thus
treated would be harmed rather than benefited.
The mental instrument is really not at all easy
to play. On such occasions I can not help but
think of the speech of a world-renowned neu
rotic, who really never came under a doctor's
treatment, and only lived in the fancy of the
poet. I mean Prince Hamlet of Denmark. The
king has sent the two courtiers, Rosencrantz
and Guildenstern, to investigate him and rob
him of his secret. While he defended himself,
pipes were brought on the stage. Hamlet took a
pipe and requested one of his tormentors to
play on it, saying that it is as easy to play as to
lie. The courtier hesitated because he knew no
touch of it, and, as he could not be moved to
attempt to play the pipe, Hamlet finally burst
forth: "Why, look you now, how unworthy a
thing you make of me! You would play upon
me; you would seem to know my stops; you
would pluck out the heart of my mystery; you
would sound me from my lowest note to the
top of my compass; and there is much music,
excellentvoice,in this Httle organ, yet you can
not make it speak. 'Sblood! do you think I am
easier to be played on than a pipe? Call me,
what instrument you will; though you can fret
me, you cannot play upon me."1
(c) You will have surmised from some of
my observations that the analytic cure contains
qualities which are far from an ideal therapy.
Tuto, cito, incundef the investigation and ex
amination do not really mean rapidity of suc
cess, and the allusion to the resistance has pre
pared you for the expectation of inconven*
iences. Certainly, the psycho-analytic method
1 Act in, scene 2.
2 Entirely, quickly, agreeably.—Ed.

[114a]
Selected Papers on Hysteria
109
makes high claims on the patient as well as the
physician. From the first, it requires the sac
rifice of perfect candour, it takes up much of
his time, and is therefore also expensive; for
the physician it also means the loss of much
time, and, due to the technique which he has
to learn and practise, it is quite laborious. I
even find it quite justified to employ more suit
able remedies as long as there is a prospect to
achieve something with them. It comes to this
point only: if we gain by the more laborious
and cumbersome procedure considerably more
than by the short and easy one, the first is jus
tified despite everything. Just think, gentlemen,
by how much the Finsen therapy of lupus is
more inconvenient and expensive than the for
merly used cauterization and scraping, and yet
it means
great progress, merely because it
achieves more, it actually cures the lupus rad
ically. I do not really wish to carry through
the comparison, but psycho-analysis can claim
for itself a similar privilege. In reality, I could
develop and test my therapeutic method in
grave and in the gravest of cases only; my ma
terial at first consisted of patients who tried
everything unsuccessfully, and had spent years
in asylums. I hardly gained enough experience
to be able to tell you how my therapy behaves
in those lighter, episodically appearing diseases
which we see cured under the most diverse in
fluences, and also spontaneously. The psycho
analytic method was created for patients who
are permanently incapacitated, and its triumph
is to make a gratifying number of such perma
nently capacitated. Against this success, all ex
pense is insignificant. We can not conceal from
ourselves what we were wont to disavow to the
patient, namely, that the significance of a grave
neurosis for the individual subjected to it is
not less than any cachexia or any of the gen
erally feared maladies.
(d) In view of the many practical limitations
which I have encountered in my work, I can
hardly definitely enumerate the indications and
contra-indications of this treatment. However,
I will attempt to discuss with you a few points:
1. The former value of the person should not
be overlooked in the disease, and you should
refuse a patient who does not possess a certain
degree of education, and whose character is
not in a measure reliable. We must not forget
that there are also healthy persons who are
good for nothing, and that if they only show a
mere touch of the neurosis, one is only too rea
dy to blame the disease for incapacitating such
inferior persons. I maintain that the neurosis

[114b]
does not in any way stamp its bearer as a d6genere, but that frequently enough it is found
in the same individual associated with the mani
festations of degeneration. The analytic psycho
therapy is, therefore, no procedure for the
treatment of neuropathic degeneration; on the
contrary it is limited by it. It is also not to
be applied in persons who are not prompted
by their own suffering to seek treatment, but
subject themselves to it by order of their rel
atives. The characteristic feature upon which
the usefulness
of the psycho-analytic treat
ment depends, the educability, we will still have
to consider from another point of view.
2. If one wishes to take a safe course, he
should limit his selection to persons of a nor
mal state, for, in psycho-analytic procedures,
it is from the normal that we seize upon the
morbid.
Psychoses,
confusional
states,
and
marked (I might say toxic) depressions, are
unsuitable for analysis, at least as it is prac
tised today. I do not think it at all impossible
that, with the proper changes in the procedurej
it will be possible to disregard this
contra
indication, and thus claim a psycho-therapy for
the psychoses.
3. The age of the patient also plays a part in
the selection for the psycho-analytic treatment.
Persons near or over the age of fifty lack, on
the one hand, the plasticity of the psychic proc-?
esses upon which the therapy depends (old peo
ple are no longer educable), and, on the other
hand, the material which has to be elaborated,
and the duration of the treatment, is immensely
increased. The earliest age limit is to be indi
vidually determined; youthful persons, even be
fore puberty, are excellent subjects for analysis.
4. One should not attempt psycho-analysis
when it is a question of rapidly removing a
threatening manifestation, as, for example, in
the case of an hysterical anorexia.
You have now gained the impression that the
sphere of application of the analytic psycho
therapy is a very limited one, for you really
heard me enumerate nothing but contra-indica
tions.
Nevertheless,
there
remain
sufficient
cases and morbid states, such as all chronic
forms of hysteria with remnant manifestations,
the extensive realm of compulsive states, abu
lias, etc., on which this therapy can be tried.
It is pleasing that particularly the worthiest
and highest developed persons can thus be most
helped. Where the analytic psycho-therapy has
accomplished but little, one can cheerfully as
sert that any other treatment would have cer
tainly resulted in nothing.

[115a]
no
(e) You will surely wish to ask me about
the possibility of doing harm through the ap
plication of psycho-analysis. To this I will re
ply that, if you will judge justly, you will meet
this procedure with the same critical goodfeeling as you have met our other therapeutic
methods; and doing this, you will have to agree
with me that a rationally executed analytic
treatment entails no dangers for the patient.
One who, like a layman, is accustomed to as
cribe to the
treatment everything occurring
during the disease, will probably judge differ
ently. It is really not so long since our hydrotherapeutic institutes met with similar opposi
tion. Thus one who was advised to go to such
a place became thoughtful because he had an
acquaintance who entered the institute as nerv
ous and there became insane. As you may sur
mise, we dealt with cases of initial paresis who
in the first stages could still be sent for hydrotherapeutic help, and who there merged into
the irresistible course leading to manifest in
sanity. For the layman, the water was the cause
and author of this sad transformation. Where
it is a question of unfamiliar influences, even
doctors are not free from such mistaken judg
ment. I recall having once attempted to treat
a woman by psycho-therapy who passed a great
part of her existence by alternating between
mania and melancholia. I begun to treat her at
the
end
of
a
melancholia,
and
everything
seemed to go well for two weeks, but in the
third week she was again merging into a mania.
It was surely a spontaneous alternation of the
morbid picture, for two weeks is no time in
which anything can be accomplished by psy
cho-therapy; but the prominent—now deceased
—physician who saw the case with me could
not refrain from remarking that this change
must have been due to the psycho-therapy. I
am quite convinced that he would have been
more critical under different conditions.
(f) In conclusion, gentlemen, I must say to
myself that it will not do to lay claim to your
attention so long in favour of the analytic psy
cho-therapy without telling you of what this
treatment consists, and on what it is based. To
be sure I can only indicate it, as I have to be
brief. This therapy is founded on the under
standing that unconscious ideas—or rather the
unconsciousness of
certain psychic processes
—are the main causes of morbid symptoms.
We
share
this
conviction
with
the
French
school
(Janet), which,
moreover,
by
gross
schematization reduces the hysterical symptom
to an unconscious idee fixe. Do not fear now

[115b]
Sigmund Freud
that we will thus merge too far into this ob
scurest
philosophy.
Our unconscious is not
quite the same as that of the philosophers, and,
what is more, most philosophers wish to know
nothing of the psychical unconscious. But if
you will put yourselves in our position, you will
understand that the interpretation of this un
conscious in patients' psychic life, into the con
scious, must result in a correction of their
deviation from the normal, and in an abrogation
of
the
compulsion controlling their psychic
life. For the conscious will reaches as far as the
conscious psychic processes, and every psychic
compulsion is substantiated by the unconscious.
You need never fear that the patient will be
harmed by the emotions produced in entering
from his unconscious into consciousness, for
you can theoretically readily understand that
the somatic and affective activity of the emo
tions which become conscious can never be
come as great as those of the unconscious. For
we only control all our emotions by directing
upon them our highest psychic activities, and
they are connected with consciousness.
We can still choose another point of view
for the understanding of the psycho-analytic
treatment. The revealing and interpreting of
the unconscious takes place under constant re
sistance on the part of the patient. The emerg
ing
of
the
unconscious
is
connected
with
displeasure, and owing to this displeasure it is
continuously repulsed by the patient. It is up6n
this conflict in the patient's psychic life that
we encroach; and, if we succeed in prevailing
upon him to accept something (for motives of
better insight) which he has thus far repulsed
(repressed) on account of the automatic ad
justment of displeasure, we have achieved ih
him a piece of educational work. For it is realty
an education if we can induce a person to leavb
his bed early in the morning despite his unwil
lingness to do so. As such an after training for
the overcoming of inner resistances, you can
conceive the psycho-analytic treatment in quite
a general manner.
!
But in no sphere of the nervous patients is
such an after training .as essential as in the
psychic elements of the sexual, life. For no
where have culture and education produced-as
much harm as here, and it is here, as experi
ence will show you, that the controlling aetio
logies of the neuroses are found.
The other
aetiological element, the constitutional contri
bution, is really given to us as something im
mutable. But this gives rise to an important
demand on the doctor. Not only must he be of

[116a]
Selected Papers on Hysteria
unblemished character—"morality is really a
matter of course" as the principal person in
Theodor Vischer's Auch Einer used to say—but
he must have overcome in his own personality
the mixture of lewdness and prudishness with
which so many others are wont to meet the sex
ual problems.
This is perhaps the place for another ob
servation. I know that the emphasis which I
laid on the sexual role in the origin of the psychoneuroses has become widely known. But I
also know that restriction and nearer determi
nations are of little use with the great public;
the multitude has little room in its memory,
and generally retains from a statement the
bare, nucleus, thus creating for itself an easily
remembered extreme. The
same might also
have happened to some physicians whose faint
notion of my theory is that I trace back the
neurosis in the last place to sexual privation. Of
such there is surely no dearth under the vital
conditions of our society. But, if that assump
tion were true, Would it not seem obvious that,
in order to avoid the roundabout way of the
psychic treatment and tend directly towards
the cure, we should directly recommend sexual
activity as the remedy? I really do not know
what could induce me to suppress such con
clusions if they were justified. But the state
of affairs is quite different. Sexual need or pri
vation is merely one of the factors playing a
part in the mechanism of the neurosis, and if
it alone existed the result would not be a dis
ease but a dissipation. The other equally in
dispensable factor, which one is only too ready
to forget, is the sexual repugnance of neurotics,
their inability to love; it is that psychic feature
which I have designated as repression.It is only
from the conflict between the two
strivings
that the neurotic malady originates, and it is
for this reason that the advice for sexual activ
ity can really only seldom be designated as
good in cases of psychoneuroses.
Allow me to conclude with this guarded re
mark. Let us hope that, with an interest for
psychotherapy, purified of all hostile prejudice,
you-will-help us. to. do some good in the treat
ment of the severe cases of .psychoneuroses.
CHAPTER 9
My Views on the Role of Sexuality in the
Aetiology of the Neurosis1
I am of the opinion that my theory on the
aetiological significance of the sexual factor in
^rom Lowenfeld, Sexualleben und
Nervenleiden,
4th ed., 1906.

[116b]
Ill
the neuroses can be best appreciated by follow
ing its development. I will by no means make
any effort to deny that it passed through an evo
lution during which it underwent a change. My
colleagues can find the assurance in this ad
mission that this theory is nothing other than
the result of continued and painstaking experi
ences.
In contradistinction to this, whatever
originates from speculation can certainly ap
pear complete at one go and continue un
changed.
Originally the theory had reference only to
the morbid pictures comprehended as neuras
thenia, in which I found two types which oc
casionally appeared pure, and which I described
as actual neurasthenia and anxiety neurosis.
For it was always known that sexual factors
could play a part in the causation of these
forms, but they were found neither regularly
effective, nor did we think of conceding to them
a precedence over other aetiological influences.
I was above all surprised at the frequency of
coarse disturbances in the vita sexualis of nerv
ous patients. The more I was in quest of such
disturbances during which I remembered that
all men conceal the truth in things sexual, and
the more skilful I became in continuing the
examination despite the incipient negation, the
more regularly such disease-forming factors
were
discovered in the sexual life, until it
seemed to me that they were but little short of
universal. But one must from the first be pre
pared for similar frequent occurrences of sex
ual irregularities under the stress of the social
relations of our society, and one could therefore
remain in doubt as to what part of the devia
tion from the normal sexual function is to be
considered as a morbid cause. I could, there
fore, only place less value on the regular dem
onstration of sexual noxae than on other ex
periences which
appeared to me to be less
equivocal. It was found that the form of the
malady, be it neurasthenia or anxiety neurosis,
shows a constant relation to the form of the
sexual injury. In the typical cases of neuras
thenia, we could always demonstrate mastur
bation or
accumulated pollutions,
while
in
anxiety neurosis we could find such factors as
coitus interruptus, frustrated excitement, etc.
The factor of insufficient discharge of generated
libido seemed to be common to both. Only after
this experience, which is easy to gain and very
often confirmed, had I the courage to claim
for the sexual influences a prominent place in
the aetiology of the neurosis. It also happened
that the mixed forms of neurasthenia and anx-

[117a]
112
iety neurosis, occurring so often, showed the
admixture of the aetiologies accepted for both,
and that such a bipartition in the form of the
manifestations of the neurosis seemed to ac
cord well with the polar characters of sexuality
(male and female).
At the same time, while I assigned to sex
uality this significance in the origin of the
simple neurosis, I still professed for the psycho
neuroses (hysteria and obsessions) a purely
psychological theory in which the sexual fac
tor was no differently considered than any other
emotional sources. Together with J.
Breuer,
and in addition to observations which he had
made on his hysterical patients fully a decade
before, I have studied the mechanism of«the
origin of hysterical symptoms by the awaken
ing of memories in hypnotic states. We ob
tained information which permitted us to cross
the bridge from Charcot's traumatic hysteria
to
the common non-traumatic hysteria. We
reached
the
conception that
the
hysterical
symptoms are permanent results of psychic
traumas, and that the amount of affect belong
ing to them was pushed away from conscious
elaboration
by
special
determinations,
thus
forcing an abnormal road into bodily innerva
tion. The terms strangulated affect, conversion,
and ab-reaction, comprise the distinctive char
acteristics of this conception.
In the close relations of the psycho-neuroses
to the simple neuroses, which can go so far that
the diagnostic distinction is not always easy for
the inexperienced, it could happen that the
cognition gained from one sphere has also taken
effect in the other. Leaving such influences out
of the question, the deep study of the psychic
traumas also leads to the same results. If by the
analyticmethod we continue to trace the psychic
traumas from which the hysterical symptoms
are derived, we finally reach to experiences
which belong to the patient's childhood and
concern his sexual fife.
This can be found
even in such cases where a banal emotion of
a non-sexual nature has occasioned the outburst
of the disease. Without taking into account
these sexual traumas of childhood, we could
neither explain the symptoms, find their deter
mination intelligible, nor guard against their
recurrence. The incomparable significance of
sexual experiences in the aetiology of the psy
choneuroses
seems
therefore
firmly
estab
lished, and this fact remains until today one of
the main.supports of our theory.
If we represent this theory by saying that
the course of the life long hysterical neurosis

[117b]
Sigmund Freud
lies in the sexual experiences of early child
hood, which are usually trivial in themselves,
it surely would sound strange enough. But if
we take cognizance of the historical develop
ment of
the theory, and transfer the main
content of the same into the sentence: "Hys
teria is the expression of a special behaviour of
the sexual function of the individual, and that
this
behaviour was already decisively deter
mined by the first effective influences and ex
periences of childhood," we will perhaps be
poorer in a paradox, but richer in a motive for
directing our attention to a hitherto very neg
lected and most significant after-effect of in
fantile impressions in general.
As I reserve the question whether the aeti
ology of hysteria (and compulsion neurosis) is
to be found in the sexual infantile experiences
for a later more thorough discussion, I now re
turn to the construction of the theory expressed
in some small preliminary publications in the
years
1895-1896.V The bringing into promi
nence of the assumed aetiological factors pet;-
mitted us at the time to contrast the common
neuroses, which are maladies with an actual
aetiology, with the psychoneuroses which aeti
ology was in the first place to be sought in the
sexual experiences of remote times. The theory
culminates in the sentence: In a normal vita
sexualis no neurosis is possible.
If I still consider today this sentence as cor
rect, it is really not surprising that after ten
years' labour on the knowledge of these rela
tions I passed a good way beyond my former
point of view, and that I now think myself in
a position to correct by detailed experience the
imperfections, the displacements, and the mis
conceptions, from which this theory then suf
fered. By chance my former rather meagre ma
terial furnished me with a great number of
cases in which infantile histories, sexual seduc
tion by grown-up persons or older children,
played the main role. I overestimated the fre
quency of these (otherwise not to be doubted!)
occurrences, the more so because I was then in
no position to distinguish definitely the decep
tive memories of hysterical patients concern
ing their childhood from the traces of the real
processes, whereas I have since then learned to
explain many a seduction-fancy as an attempt
at defence against the reminiscences of their
own sexual activity (infantile masturbation).
The emphasis laid on the traumatic element of
the infantile sexual experience disappeared with
1 See chapter 7 above.and "The Aetiology of Hys
teria," Collected Papers, 1.

[118a]
Selected Papers on Hysteria
this explanation, and it remained obvious that
the infantile sexual activities (he they spon
taneous or provoked) dictate the course of the
later sexual life after maturity. The same ex
planation, which really corrects the most sig
nificant of my original errors, perforce also
changed the conception of the mechanism of
the hysterical symptoms.
These no
longer
appeared as direct descendants of. repressed
memories of infantile sexual experiences, but
between the symptoms and the infantile im
pressions there slipped in the fancies (confabu
lations of memory) of the patients which were
mostly produced during the years of puberty
and which, on the one hand, are raised from,
and over, the infantile memories, and, on the
other hand, are immediately transformed into
symptoms. Only after the introduction of the
element of hysterical fancies did the structure
of the neurosis and its relation to the life of the
patient become transparent. It also resulted in
a veritable surprising analogy between these un
conscious hysterical fancies and the romances
which became conscious as delusions in paranoia.
After this
correction, the infantile sexual
traumas were in a sense supplanted by the in
fantilism of sexuality. A second modification
of the original theory was not remote. With the
accepted frequency of seduction in childhood,
there also disappeared the enormous emphasis
of the accidental influences
of sexuality to
which I wished to shift the main role in the
causation of the disease without, however, de
nying constitutional and hereditary factors. I
even hoped to solve thereby the problem of
the selection of the neurosis, that is, to decide
by the details of the sexual infantile experi
ence, the form of the psychoneurosis into which
the patient may merge. Though with reserve,
I thought at that time that passive behaviour
during these scenes results in the specific pre
disposition for hysteria, while active behaviour
results in compulsion neurosis. This conception
I was later obliged to
disclaim
completely,
though some facts of the supposed connection
between passivity and hysteria, and activity
and compulsion neurosis, can be maintained to
some extent. With the disappearance of the ac
cidental influences of experiences, the elements
of constitution and heredity had to regain the
upper hand, but, differing from the view gen
erally in
vogue,
I
placed the sexual
con
stitution in place of the general neuropathic
predisposition. In my recent work, Three Con
tributions to the Theory of Sex* I have at1 First published in 1905.

[118b]
"3
tempted to discuss the varieties of this sexual
constitution, the components of the sexual im
pulse in general, and its origin from the con
tributory sources of the organism.
Still in connection with the changed con
ception of the sexual infantile traumas,the the
ory continued to develop in a course which was
already indicated in the publications of 18941896. Even before sexuality was installed in its
proper place in the aetiology, I had already
stated as a condition for the pathogenic effica
ciousness of an experience that the latter must
appear to the ego as unbearable and thus evoke
an exertion for defence. To this defence I have
traced the psychic splitting—or, as it was then
called, the splitting of consciousness—of hys
teria. If the defence succeeded, the unbearable
experience with its resulting affect was expelled
from consciousness and memory; but under
certain conditions the thing expelled, which was
now unconscious, developed its activity, and,
with the aid of the symptoms and their adher
ing affect, it returned into consciousness, so
that the disease corresponded to a failure of
the defence. This conception had the merit of
entering into the play of the psychic forces, and
hence approximated the psychic processes of
hysteria to the normal, instead of shifting the
characteristic of the neurosis into an enigmatic
and no-further-analyzable disturbance.
Further inquiries among persons who re
mained normal furnished the unexpected result
that the sexual histories of their childhood need
not differ essentially from the infantile life of
neurotics, and that especially the role of seduc
tion is the same in the former, so the acci
dental influences receded still more in com
parison to the factors of repression (which I
began to use instead of defence). It really does
hot depend on the sexual excitements which an
individual experiences in his
childhood, but
above all on his reactions towards these experi
ences, and whether these impressions respond
ed with repression or not. It could be shown
that spontaneous sexual manifestations of child
hood were frequently interrupted in the course
of development by an act of repression. The
sexual maturity of neurotic individuals thus
regularly brings with it a fragment of sexual re
pression from childhood, which manifests itself
in the requirements of real life. Psycho-analy
sis of hysterical individuals shows
that the
malady is the result of the conflict between the
libido and the sexual repression, and that their
symptoms have the value of a compromise be
tween both psychic streams.

[119a]
H4
Sigmund Freud
Without a comprehensive discussion of my
conception of repression, I could not explain
any further this part of the theory. It suffices
to refer here to my Three Contributions to the
Theory of Sex, where I have made an attempt
to throw somelight on the somatic processes in
which the essence of sexuality is to be sought.
I have stated there that the constitutional pre
disposition of the childis more irregularly mul
tifarious than one would expect, that it deserves
to be called polymorphous-perverse, and that
from this predisposition the so-called normal
behaviour
of
the
sexual
functions
results,
through a repressionof certain components. By
referring to the infantile character of sexual
ity, I could form a simple connection between
normal, perversions, and neurosis. The normal
resulted through the repression of certain par
tial impulses and components of the infantile
predisposition, and through the subordination
of the rest under the primacy of the genital
zones for the service of the function of procre
ation. The perversions corresponded to distur
bances of this connection due to a superior
compulsive-like development of some of the
partial impulses; while the neurosis could be
traced to a marked repression of the libidinous
strivings. As almost all perversive impulses of
the infantile predisposition are demonstrable as
forces of symptom formation in the neurosis, in
which, however, they exist in a state of repres
sion, I could designate the neurosis as the neg
ative of the perversion.
I think.it worth emphasizing that with all
changes my ideas on the aetiology of the
psychoneuroses still never disavowed or aban
doned two points of view, to wit, the estima
tion
of sexuality and infantilism. In other
respects we have in place of the accidental in
fluences the constitutional factors, and instead
of the pure psychologically intended defence we
have the organic sexual repression. Should any
body ask where a cogent proof can be found
for the asserted aetological significance of sex
ual factors in the psychoneuroses, and argue
that, since an outburst of these diseases can re
sult from the most banal emotions, and even
from somatic causes, a specific aetiology in the
form of special experiences of childhood must
therefore be disavowed; I mention as an an
swer for all these arguments the psycho-ana
lytic investigation of neurotics as the source
from which the disputed conviction emanates.
If one only makes use of this method of inves
tigation, he will discover that the symptoms
represent the whole or a partial sexualmanifes

[119b]
tation of the patient, from the sources of the
normal or perverse partial impulses of sexu
ality. Not only does a good part of the hysteri
cal symptomatology originatedirectly from the
manifestations of
the sexual excitement, not
only are a series of erogenouszones,reinforcing
infantile attributes, raised in the neurosis to
the importance of genitals, but even the most
complicated symptoms become revealed as the
converted representations of fancies having a
sexual situation as a content. He who can in
terpret the language of hysteria'can^understand
that the neurosis only deals with the repressed
sexuality. One should, however, understand
the sexual
function in its proper sphere as
circumscribed
by
the
infantile
predisposi
tion. Where a banal emotion has to be added
to the causation of the disease, the analysis
regularly shows that the sexual components of
the traumatic experience, which are never miss
ing, have exercised the pathogenic effect.
We have unexpectedly advanced from the
question of the causation of the psychoneu
roses to the problem of its nature. If we wish
to take cognizance of what we have discovered
by psycho-analysis, we can only say that the
nature of these maladies lies in disturbances of
the sexual processes, in those processes of the
organism which determine the formation and
utilization of the sexual libido. We can hardly
avoid imagining these processes in the last place
as chemical, so that we can recognize in the socalled actual neuroses the somatic effects of
disturbances in the sexual metabolism, while in
the phychoneuroses we recognize besides the
psychic effects of the same disturbances. The
resemblance of the neuroses to the manifesta
tions of intoxication and abstinence following
certain alkaloids, and to Basedow's and Addi
son's diseases, obtrudes itself clinically without
any further ado, and, just as these two diseases
should no more be described as nervous disj
eases, so will the genuine neuroses soon have tp
be removed from this class, despite their no{
menclature.
Everything that can exert harmful influences
in the processes serving the sexual function,
therefore, belongs to the aetiology of the neu
rosis. In the first place we have the noxae di
rectly affecting the sexual functions insofar as
they are accepted as injuries by the sexual conr
stitution which is changeable through culture
and breeding. In the second place, we have all
the different noxae and traumas which may also
injure the sexual processes by injuring the orr
ganism as a whole. But we must not forget that

[120a]
CHAPTER io
Hysterical Fancies and Their Relations to
Bisexuality1
The delusional formations of paranoiacs con
taining the greatness and sufferings of their own
ego, which manifest themselves quite typically
in almost monotonous forms, are universally
familiar. Furthermore, through numerous com
munications we became acquainted with the pe
culiar organizations by means of which certain
perverts put into operation their sexual gratifi
cations, be it in fancy or reality. On.the other
hand, it may sound rather novel to some to
hear that quite analogous psychic formations
regularly appear in all psychoneuroses, espe
cially in hysteria, and that these so-called hys
terical fancies show important relations to the
causation of neurotic symptoms.
Of the same source and of the normal proto
type are all these fantastic creations, so-called
reveries of youth, which have already gained a
certain consideration in the literature, though
not a sufficient one.2 They are perhaps equally
frequent in both sexes; in girls and women they
seem to be wholly of an erotic nature, while in
men they are of an erotic or ambitious nature.
Yet, even in men, the importance of the erotic
factor is not to be put in the second place, for
on examining more closely the reveries of men
1 Zeitschrift fiir Sexualwissensckaft, herausgegeben
von Hirschfeld, i, 1908.
2 Compare Breuer and
Freud, op. cit.; P. Janet,
NSuroses
et
ideSs
fixes,
1
("Les
reveries
subconscientes"), 1898; Havelock Ellis, Sexual Impulse and
Modesty; Freud, Interpretation of Dreams; A. Pick,
"Uber pathologische Traumerei und ihre Beziekungen
zur Hysterie" lahrbuch fur Psychiatrie und Neurologie, XIV, 1896.

[120b]
we generally learn that all these heroic acts are
accomplished, that all these successes are ac
quired, in order to please a woman and to be
preferred to other men.3 These fancies are wish
gratifications which emanate from
privation
and longing. They are justly named day dreams,
for they give the key for the understanding of
night dreams in which the nucleus of the dream
formation is produced by just such complicat
ed/disfigured day fancies which are misunder
stood by the conscious psychic judgment.*
These day dreams are garnished with great
interest, are
cautiously nurtured and
coyly
guarded, as if they were numbered among the
most intimate estates of personality. On the
street, however, the day dreamer can be read
ily recognizedby a sudden, as if absent-minded,
smile, by talking to himself, or by a running
like acceleration of his gait wherein he desig
nates the acme of the imaginary situation.
All hysterical attacks which I have been
thus far able to examine proved to be of such
involuntary incursions of day dreams. Observa
tion leaves no doubt that such fancies may ex
ist as unconscious or conscious, and whenever
they become unconscious they may also be
come pathogenic, that is, they may express
themselves in symptoms and attacks. Under fa
vourable conditions it is possible for conscious
ness to seize such unconscious fancies. One of
my patients, whose attention I have called to
her fancies, narrated that once while in the
street she suddenly found herself in tears,,and
rapidly reflecting over the cause of her weep
ing the fancy became clear to her. She fancied
herself in delicate relationship with a piano vir
tuoso familiar in the city, but whom she did not
know personally. In her fancy she bore him a
child (she was childless), and he then deserted
her, leaving her and her child in misery. At this
passage of the romance she burst into tears.
The unconscious fancies are either from the
first unconscious, having been formed in the
unconscious, or, which is more frequently the
case, they were once
conscious fancies, day
dreams, and were then intentionally forgotten,
merging into the
unconscious by repression.
Their content then either remained the same or
underwent a transformation, so that the present
unconscious fancy represents a descendant of
the once conscious one. The unconscious fancy
stands in a very important relation to the sex
ual life of the person; it is really identical with
that fancy which helped it towards sexual grat8 H. Ellis similarly expresses himself, op. cit.
4 Compare Freud, Interpretation of Dreams.

[121a]
n6
Sigmund Freud
ification during a period of masturbation. The
masturbating act (in the broader sense the
onanistic) then consisted of twoparts, the evo
cation of the fancy, and the active performance
of self-gratification at the height of the same.
This combination is familiarly in itself a kind
of soldering.1 Originallythis action was a pure
ly auto-erotic undertaking for the pleasure ob
tained from a certain so-called erogenouspart
of the body. Later this action blended with a
wish presentation from the sphere of objectlove, and served for a partial realization of the
situation in which this fancy culminated. If,
then, the person forgoes in this manner the
masturbo-fantastic gratification, the action re
mains undone; the fancy, however, changes
from a conscious to an unconscious one. If no
other manner of sexual gratification occurs, if
the person remains abstinent and doesnot suc
ceed in sublimating his libido, that is, in divert
ing the sexual excitement to a higheraim, we
then have the conditions for the refreshment
of the unconscious fancy. It then grows exuberr
aritly and with all the force of the desire for
love,at least a fragmentof its content becomes
a morbid symptom.
The unconscious fancies are then the nearest
psychical first steps of a whole series of hys
terical symptoms: The hysterical symptoms are
nothingother than unconscious fancies brought
to light by conversion, and, insofar as they are
somatic symptoms, they are frequently enough
taken from the spheres of the sexual feelings
and motor innervations which originally accom
panied the former still conscious fancies. In
this way the disuse of onanism is really made
retrogressive, and the final aim of the whole
pathological process, the restoration of the pri
mary sexual gratification, though it never be
comes perfect, in a manner always achieves a
certain resemblance.
The interest of him who studies hysteria
turns directly from the symptoms to the fan
cies from which the former originate. The tech
nique of psycho-analysis gives the means of
finding out from the symptoms these uncon
scious fancies, and of bringing them back to
the patient's consciousness. In this way it was
found that the unconscious fancies of hysterics
perfectly correspond in content to the con
sciously performed gratification situations of
perverts. Those who lack examples of such na
ture need only recall the historical achievements
of the Roman Caesars, whose frenzies were nat
urally only conditioned by the unrestricted po1 Cf. Three Contributions to the Theory of Sex.

[121b]
tency of the fancy-creator. The delusional for
mations of paranoiacsiare the;same, but they
are phantasies which immediately become con
scious, and are borne by the sado-masochistic
components of the sexual instinct. Complete
counterparts of these can also be found in cer
tain unconscious phantasies of hysterics. It is a
familiar, practically important fact, that hys
terics express their phantasies not as symptoms
but as conscious realization, and in this way
they feign and commit murders, assaults, and
sexual aggressions.
AH that can be found out about the sexuality
of the psychoneurotic can be ascertained by
psychoanalytic investigation, which leads from
the obtrusive symptoms to the hidden uncon
scious phantasies. It also furnishes the fact of
this small preliminary communication which is
to be reported here.
Probably because of the difficulties which
stand in the way of the effort of the uncon
scious phantasies to express themselves1, the re
lation of the phantasies to the symptoms is not
simple but rather manifoldly complicated.2 As
a rule, i.e., in a fully developedand long stand
ing neurosis,: a symptom does not correspond
to one unconscious phantasy, but to a number
-ofsuch, and indeed not in arbitrary but in law
ful combination. To be sure, in the beginning
of the disease all these complications are not
yet developed.
For the sake of general interest, I pass over
the connection of this communication and add
a series of formulas which strive progressively
to exhaust the nature of hysteria. They do not
contradict one another but correspond partly to
more completeandsharper conceptions,andpart
ly to the application of differentpoints of view.
i. The hysterical symptom is the memory
symbol of certain effective, (traumatic) impres
sions and experiences.
2. The hysterical symptom is the associa
tive return of this traumatic experience, or a
substitute produced by conversion.
3. The hysterical symptom—like all other
psychic formations—is the expression of a wish
realization.
4. The hysterical symptom is the realization
of one of the unconscious phantasies, serving
as a wish fulfillment.
5. The hysterical symptom serves as a sex
ual gratification, and represents a part of the
2 The same holds true for the relation between the
latent thoughts of the dream and the elements of the
manifest content of the dream. See the Chapter on the
"Dream
Work"
in
the
author's
Interpretation
of
Dreams, p. 252, below.

[122a]
Selected Papers on Hysteria
sexual life of the individual (corresponding to
one of the components of his sexual impulse).
6. The hysterical symptom corresponds to
the return of one form of the sexual gratifica
tion, which was real in infantile life but had
been repressed since then.
7. The hysterical symptom results as a com
promise between two opposing affects or im
pulses, one of which strives to bring to realiza
tion a partial impulse, or a component of the
sexual constitution, while the other strives to
suppress the same.
8. The hysterical symptom may represent
diverse unconscious non-sexual impulses, but
can not dispense with the sexual meaning.
It is the seventh among these determinants,
which expresses most exhaustively the nature
of the hysterical symptom as a realization of an
unconscious phantasy, and it is the
eighth
which evaluates in fitting manner the signifi
cance of the sexual factor. Some of the pre
ceding formula? are contained as first steps in
this formula.
In view of these relations between symptoms
and phantasies, one can readily reach from the
psycho-analysis of the symptoms to the knowl
edge of the components of the sexual impulse
controlling the individual, just as I have shown
in the Three Contributions to the Theory of
Sex. But in some cases this examination gives
rather unexpected results. It shows that many
symptoms can not be solved by one uncon
scious sexual phantasy or by a series of phan
tasies in which the most significant and most
primitive is of a sexual nature, but that in or
der to solve the symptoms two sexual phanta
sies are required, one of the masculine and one
of the feminine character, so that one of these
phantasies corresponds to a homosexual im
pulse. The theory expressed in formula seven is
in no way affected by this novelty, so that an
hysterical symptom necessarily corresponds to
a compromise between a libidinal and a re
pressed emotion, but, besides that, it can cor
respond to a union of two libidinal phantasies
of contrary sex characters.
I refrain from giving examples for this the
ory. Experience has taught me that short analy
ses compressed into the form of an abstract
can never make the vivid impression for which
they were intended. The
communication of
fully analyzed cases must, however, be reserved
for another place.
I therefore content myself with the fact of
formulating the theory and elucidating its
meaning.

[122b]
117
9. An hysterical symptomis the expression,
on the one hand, of a masculine, and, on the
other hand, of a feminine unconscious sexual
phantasy.
I expressly observe that I am unable to ad*
judge to this theory the same general validity
that I claimed for the other formulae. As far as
I can see,it neither fits into all symptoms of a
single case, nor into all cases. On the contrary,
it is not difficult to find cases in which the con
trary
sexual emotions have found separate
symptomatic expression, so that the symptoms
of hetero- andhomosexuality can be as sharply
distinguished from eachother as the phantasies
hidden behind them. Nevertheless, the relation
claimed in the ninth formula occurs frequently
enough, and wherever it is found it is of suffi
cient importance to merit a special formula
tion. It seems to signify the highest stage of
complexity which the determination of hys
terical symptoms can attain, and can only
be expected in a long-standing neurosis, where
in a great amount of organization has taken
place.1
The demonstrable bisexual significance of
hysterical symptoms in many cases is indeed
an
interesting confirmation of the assertion
formulated by me that the supposed bisexual
predisposition of man can be especially recog
nized in psychoneurotics by means of psycho
analysis.2 Quite an analogous process from the
same sphere is that in which the masturbator in
his conscious
phantasies attempts to
live
through in his imagination the fancied situa
tions of both the man and the woman. Other
counterparts are found in certain hysterical
crises in which the patients play both rolesly
ing at the basis of sexual phantasies; thus, for
example, one of the cases under my observa
tion pressed his garments to his body with one
arm (as a woman), and with the other arm at
tempted to tear them off (as a man). This con
tradictory
simultaneity determines, for the
most part, the incomprehensiveness of the situ
ation otherwiseso plastically represented in the
attack, and is excellently suited for the conceal
ment of the affective unconscious phantasy.
In psycho-analytical treatment, it is very im
portant to be prepared for the bisexual mean
ing of a symptom. It should not be at all sur
prisingor misleading when a symptomremains
1 Indeed, J. Sadger, who recently discovered the
theory in question, independently by psycho-analysis,
claims for it a general validity {"Die Bedeutung der
psychoanalytische Methode nach Freud," Zentralbl. f.
Nerv. u. Psych., No. 229).
2Freud, Three Contributions to the Theory of Sex.

[123a]


[123b]
11S
Sigmund Freud
apparently undiminished in spite of the fact
patient makes use of this convenience. While
that one of its sexual determinants is already
analyzing one of the sexual meanings, he consolved. It maystillbe based on the unsuspected
tinually switches his thoughts into the sphere
contrary sexual element. Moreover during the
of the contrary meaning, as if onto an adjatreatment of such cases we can observe how the
cent track.

[124a]
An Open Letter to Dr. M. Furst, Editor of
Soziale Medizin und Hygiene
Dear Sir: When you ask me for an expression
of opinion on the matter of sexual enlighten
ment for children, I assume that what you
want is the independent opinion of an individ
ual physician whose professional work offers
him special opportunities for studying the sub
ject, and not a regular conventional treatise
dealing with all the mass of literature that has
grown up around it. I am aware that you have
followed my scientific efforts with interest, and
that, unlike many other colleagues, you do not
dismiss my ideas without a hearing because I
regard the psycho-sexual constitution and cer
tain noxae in the sexual life as the most im
portant causes of the neurotic disorders that are
so common. My Three Contributions to the
Theory of Sex, in which I describe the compo
nents of which the sexual instinct is made up,
and the disturbances which may occur in its de
velopment into the function of sexuality, has
recently received favourable mention in your
journal.
I am, therefore, to
answer the questions
whether children may be given any informa
tion at all in regard to the facts of sexual fife,
and at what age and in what way this should
be done. Now let me confess at the outset that
discussion with regard to the second and third
points seems to me perfectly reasonable, but
that to my mind it is quite inconceivable how
the first of these questions could ever be the
subject of debate. What can be the aim of
withholding from children, or let us say from
young people, this information about the sex
ual life of human beings? Is it a fear of arous
ing interest in such matters prematurely, be
fore it spontaneously stirs in them? Is it a hope
of retarding by concealment of this kind the
development of the sexual instinct in general,
until such time as it can find its way into the
only channels open to it in the civilized social
order? Is it supposed that children would show
no interest or understanding for the facts and
riddles of sexual life if they were not prompted
1 Collected Papers, II;
first published in
Soziale.
Medizin
und
Hygiene, Vol. U,
1907;
reprinted in
Sdmmlung, Zweite Folge.

[124b]
to do so by outside influence? Is it regarded as
possible that the knowledge withheld from
them will not reach them in other ways? Or is
it genuinely and seriously intended that later on
they should consider everything connected with
sex as something despicable and abhorrent
from which their parents and teachers wish to
keep them apart as long as possible?
I am really at a loss to say which of these
can be the motive for the customary conceal
ment from children of everything connected
with sex. I only know that these arguments are
one and all equally foolish, and that I find it
difficult to pay them the compliment of serious
refutation. I remember, however, that in the
letters of that great thinker and friend of hu
manity, Multatuli, I once found a few fines
which are more than adequate as an answer.2
"To my mind it seems that certain things
are altogether too much wrapped in mystery.
It is well to keep the fantasies of children pure,
but their purity will not be preserved by ig
norance. On the contrary, I believe that con
cealment leads a girl or boy to suspect the
truth more than ever. Curiosity leads to prying
into things which would have roused little or
no interest if they were talked of openly with
out any fuss. If this ignorance could be main
tained, I might be more reconciled to it, but
that is impossible; the child comes into contact
with other children, books fall into his hands
which lead him to reflect, and the mystery with
which things he has already surmised are treat
ed by his parents actually increases his desire
to know more. Then this desire that is only in
completely and secretly satisfied gives rise to
excitement and corrupts his imagination, so
that the child is already a sinner while his par
ents still believe he does not know what sin is."
I do not know how the case could be better
stated, though perhaps one might amplify it. It
is surely nothing else but habitual prudery and
a guilty conscience in themselves about sexual
matters which causes adults to adopt this atti-;
tude of mystery towards children; possibly,
however, a piece of theoretical ignorance on
their part, to be counteracted =only by fresh
information, is also responsible. It is commonly
3 Multatuli, Brief e (1906), I, 26.

[125a]
120
Sigmund Freud
believed that the sexual instinct is lacking in
children, and only begins to arise in them when
the sexual .organs mature.; This is a grave error,
equally serious from the point of view both of
theory and of actual practice. It is so easy to
correct it by observation that one can only
wonder how it can ever have arisen. As a mat
ter of fact, the new-born infant brings sex
uality with it into the world; certain sexual
sensations attend its development while at the
breast and during early childhood, and only
very few children would seem to escape some
kind of sexual activity and sexual experiences
before puberty. A more complete exposition of
this statement can be found in my Three Con
tributions to the Theory of Sex, to which ref
erence has been made above. The reader will
learn that the specific organs of reproduction
are not the only portions of the body which
are a source of pleasurable sensation, and that
Mature has stringently ordained that even stim
ulation of the genitals cannot be avoided dur
ing infancy. This period of life, during which a
certain degree of directly sexual pleasure is pro
duced by the stimulation of various cutaneous
areas (erotogenic zones), by the activity of cer
tain biological impulses and as an accompany
ing excitation during many affective states, is
designated by an expression introduced by
Havelock Ellis as the period of auto-erotism.
Puberty merely brings about attainment of the
stage at which the genitals acquire supremacy
among all the zones and sources of pleasure,
and in this way presses erotism into the service
of reproduction, a process which naturally can
andergo certain inhibitions; in the case of
those persons who later on become perverts
and neurotics this .process.is only incompletely
accomplished. On the other hand, the child is
capable long before puberty of most of the
mental manifestations of love: for example,
tenderness,
devotion,
and
jealousy.
Often
enough the connection between these mental
manifestations and the physical sensation of
sexual excitation is so close that the child can
not be in doubt about the relation between the
two. To put it briefly, the child is long before
puberty a being capable of mature love, lacking
only the ability for reproduction; and it may
be definitely asserted that the mystery which
is set up withholds him only from intellectual
comprehension of achieveihents for which he!
is psychically and physically prepared.
);?
jT"he intellectual interest of a child in thei
rMcUe of sexual life, his desire for knowledge!-7
finds expression at an:earlier period of life;than

[125b]
is usually suspected. If they have not often
come across such cases as I am about to men
tion, parents must either be, afflicted with
blindness in regard to this interest in their
children, or, when they cannot overlook it,
must make every effort to stifle it. I know a
splendid boy, now four years old, whose intelli
gent parents abstain from forcibly suppressing
one side of the child's development.
Little
Herbert, who has certainly not been exposed
to any seducing influence from servants, has
for some time shown the liveliest interest in
that part of his body which he calls his "weewee-maker." When only three years old he
asked his mother, "Mamma, have you got a
weewee-maker, too?" His mother answered,
"Of course, what did you think?" He also asked
his father the same question repeatedly. At
about the same age he was taken to a barn and
saw a cow milked for the first time. "Look,
milk is coming out of the weewee-maker!" he
called in surprise. At the age of three and threequarters he was well on the way to establish
correct categories by means of his own inde
pendent observation. He saw how water is run
off from a locomotive and said, "See, the en
gine is making weewee, but where is its wee
wee-maker?" Later on he added thoughtfully,
"Dogs and horses have weewee-makers, but
tables and chairs don't have them." Recently he
was watching his little sister of one week old
being bathed, and remarked,
"Her weeweemaker is still tiny; it will get bigger when she
grows." (I have heard of this attitude towards
the problem of sex difference in other boys ofthe same age.) I must expressly assert that
Herbert is not a sensual child nor even mor
bidly disposed; in my opinion, since he has
never been frightened or oppressed with a senseof guilt, he gives expression quite ingenuously
to what he thinks.
The second great problem which exercises
a child's mind—probably at a rather later date
—is that of the origin of children, and is usu
ally aroused by the unwelcome arrival of a
baby brother or sister. This is the oldest and•
most burning question that assails immature
humanity;: those who understand how to in
terpret myths and legends can detect it in the
riddle which the Theban Sphinx set to Oedipus.
The answers usually given to children in the
nursery wound the child's -frank and genuine
spirit of investigationj 'and generally deal the
first blow at his confidencein his parents; from
this time/onwards he commonly begins-to mistrust ^own-up people and? Sleeps t^^hhnself;

[126a]
what interests him most. The following letter
may [show how torturing this very curiosity
may become in older children; it was written
by a motherless girl of eleven and a half who
had been puzzling over the problem with her
younger sister.
Dear Aunt Mali: Please will you be so kind as
to write and tell me how you got Cluis or Paul.
You must know because you are married. We were
arguing about it yesterday, and we want to know
the truth. We have nobody else to ask. When are
you coming to Salzburg? You know, Aunt Mali,
we simply can't imagine how the stork brings
babies. Trudel thought the stork brings them in a
shirt. Then we want to know, too, how the stork
gets them out of the pond, and why one never
sees babies in ponds. And please will you tell me,
too, how you know beforehand when you are
going to have one. Please write and tell me all
about it. Thousands of kisses from all of us.
Your inquiring niece,
Lily
I do not think that this touching request
brought the two sisters the information they
wanted. Later on the writer developed the neu
rosis that arises in unanswered unconscious
questions—obsessive speculating.
I do not think that there is even one good
reason for denying children the information
which their thirst for knowledge demands. To
be sure, if it is the purpose of educators to
stifle the child's power of independent thought
as early as possible, in order to produce that
"good behaviour" which is so highly prized,
they cannot do better than deceive children in
sexual matters and intimidate them by relig
ious means. The stronger characters will, it is
true, withstand these influences; they will be
come rebels against the authority of their par
ents and later against every other form of
authority. When children do not receive the
explanations forwhich they turn to their elders,
they go on tormenting themselves in secretwith
the problem, and produce attempts at solution
in which the truth they have guessed is mixed
up in the most extraordinary way with gro
tesque inventions; or else they whisper confi
dences to each other which, because of the
sense of guilt in the youthful inquirers, stamp
everything sexual as horrible and disgusting.
These infantile sexual theories are well worth
collecting and examining. After these experi
ences children usually lose the only proper atti
tude to sexual questions, many of them never
to find it again.
It would seem that the overwhelming ma
jority of writers, both men and women, who

[126b]
121
have dealt with the question of explaining sex
ual matters to children have expressed them
selves in favour of enlightenment. The clumsi
ness, however, of most of their proposals how
and when this enlightenment should be carried
out leads one to conclude that they have not
found it very easy to .venture this admission.
As far as my knowledge of the literature goes,
the charming letter of explanation which a cer
tain .Frau Emma Eckstein gives as written to
her ten-year-old boy stands out conspicuously,1
The customary method is obviously not the
right one. All sexual knowledge is kept from
children as long as possible, and then on one
single occasion an explanation, which is even
then only half the truth and generally comes
too late, is proffered them in mysterious and
solemn language;. Most of the answers to the
question, "How can I tell my children?" make
such a pitiful impression, at least upon me, that
I should prefer parents not to concern them
selves with the explanation at all. It is much
more important that children should never get
the idea that one wants to make more of a
secret of the facts of sexual life than of any
other matter not suited to their understanding.
To ensure this it is necessary that from the
very beginning everything sexual should be
treated like everything else that is worth know
ing about. Above all, schools should not evade
the task of mentioning sexual matters; lessons
about the animal kingdom should include the
great facts of reproduction, which should be
given
their
due
significance,
and
emphasis
should be laid at the same time on the fact that
man shares with the higher animals everything
essential to his organization. Then, if the at
mosphere of the home does not make for sup
pression of all reasoning, something similar to
what I once overheard in a nursery would prob
ably occur oftener. A small boy said to his little
sister, "How can you think the stork brings ba
bies ! You know that man is a mammal, do you
suppose that storks bring other mammals their
young, too?" In this way, the curiosity of chil
dren will never become very intense, for at
each stage in its inquiries it will find the satis
faction it needs. Explanations about the spe
cific
circumstances of human sexuality and
some indication of its social significance should
be provided before the child is eleven years
old.2 The age of confirmation would be a more
1 Emma Eckstein, Die Sexualfrage in der Erziehung
des Kindes, 1904.
2 The original has also:
Am Schlusse des
Volks*
schulunterrichtes und vor Eintritt in die Mittelschule.
—Tr.

[127a]
122
suitable time than any other at which to in
struct the child, who already has full knowl
edge of the physical facts involved, in those
social obligations which are bound up with ac
tual gratification of this instinct. A gradual and
progressive course of instruction in sexual mat
ters such as this, at no period interrupted, in
which the school takes the initiative, seems to
me to be the only method of giving the neces
sary information that takes into consideration
the development of the child and thus success
fully avoids ever-present dangers.
I consider it a most significant advance in the
science of education that in France, in place of
the catechism, the State should have introduced
a primer which gives the child his first instruc
tion in his position as a citizen and in the
ethical obligations which will be his in time to

[127b]
come. The
elementary instruction provided
there, however, is seriously deficient in that it
includes no reference to sexual matters. Here is
the omission which stands in such need of at
tention on the part of educators and reformers.
In those countries which leave the education
of children either wholly or in part in the hands
of the priesthood, the method urged would of
course not be practicable. No priest will ever
admit the identity in nature of man and beast,
since to him the immortality of the soul is a
foundation for moral training which he cannot
forgo. Here again we clearly see the unwisdom
of putting new wine into old bottles, and per
ceive the impossibility of carrying through a
reform in one particular without altering the
foundations of the whole system.

[128a]
An Address delivered before the Second
International Psycho-Analytical
Con
gress at Nuremberg in 1910
Since the objects for which we are assembled
here today are mainly practical, I shall choose
a practical theme for my introductory address
and appeal to your interest in medical, not in
scientific, matters. I can imagine what your
opinion about the success of our therapy proba
bly is, and I assume that most of you have
already passed through the two stages which all
beginners go through, that of enthusiasm at the
unexpected increase in our therapeutic achieve
ments, and that of depression at the magnitude
of the difficulties which stand in the way of our
efforts. Whichever of these stages in develop
ment, however, each of you may happen to be
going through at the moment,..my intention to^
day is to show you that we have by no means
come to the end of our resources for combat
ing the neuroses, and that we. may expect a
substantial improvement in
our therapeutic
prospects before very long.
This improvement will come, I think, from
three sources:
i. From internal progress.
2. From increased prestige.
3. From the general effect of our work.
1. Under "internal progress" I understand
advances (a) in our analytical knowledge, (b)
in our technique*
(a) Advances in our knowledge. We are, of
course, still a long way from knowing all that
is required for an understanding of the uncon
scious minds of our patients. Now it is clear
that every advance in our knowledge means an
increase in the power of our therapy. As long
as we understood nothing, we accomplished
nothing; the more we understand the more we
shall achieve. At its beginning, psycho-analytic
treatment
was ; inexorable
and
exhaustive.
The patient had to say everything himself, and
the physician's part, consisted of urging him
on incessantly. Today
things have a more;
friendly air. The treatment is made up of two
parts: out of what the physician infers and tells
1 Collected Papers, n;
first
published in Zentral
blatt, Vol. 1, 1910; reprinted in Sammlung, 3rd Series.
123

[128b]
the patient, and out of the patient's work of
assimilation, of workingthrough,what he hears.
The mechanism of our curative method is in
deed quite easy to understand; we give the pa
tient the conscious idea of what he may expect
to find (bewusste Erwartungsvorstellung), and
the similarity of this with the repressed uncon
scious one leads him to come upon the latter
himself. This is the intellectual help which
makes it easier for him to overcome the resist
ances between conscious and unconscious. In
cidentally, I may remark that it is not the only
mechanism made use of by the analytic meth
od; you all know that far more powerful one
which lies in the use of the transference. I in
tend soon to undertake an exposition of these
various factors, which are so important for; an
understanding of the cure, in a practice of
psycho-analysis. And, further, in speaking to
you I need not rebut the objection that the way
in which we practise the method today ob^
scures its testimony to the correctness of our
hypotheses; you will not forget that this evi
dence is to be found elsewhere, and that a
therapeutic procedure cannot be performed in
the. same way as a theoretical investigation.
Now let me refer briefly to various fields in
which we both have much to learn that is new
and do actually make new discoveries daily.
First of all, there is the matter of symbolism
in dreams and in the unconscious—a fiercely
contested subject, as you know! It is no small
credit to our colleague, W. Stekel, that, indif
ferent to all the objections of our opponents,
he has undertaken a study of dream-symbols.
In this there is indeed much still to learn; my
Interpretation of Dreams, which was .written
in ,1899, awaits important amplification from
researches into symbolism.
I will say a few words about one of the
symbols that has lately been recognized. Not
long ago it came to my knowledge that a psy
chologist whose views are not too distant from
ours had remarked to one of us that we un
doubtedly overestimateJthe hidden sexual sig-.
nificance of dreams; his most frequent dream
was of going upstairs, and there could certainly
be nothing sexual about that. Our attention be-

[129a]
124
Sigmund
ing thus drawn to it, we began to study the in
cidence of stairs, steps and ladders in dreams,
and soon could^^establish the fact that stairs,
and such things are certainly a symbol of co-'
itus. The underlying element which the., two
things have in common is not difficult ^tb dis
cover; one climbs an acclivity in rhythmic
movements, accompanied by increasing breathlessriess,.and in a few rapid leaps can be dqwti
again; Tftius the rhythm of coitus reappears in
climbing: steps. We will not forget to adduce
the usages" of speech in this connection; ft
shows us that mounting is used quite sinlply
as a symbol for the sexual act. In German, one
says, "the man is a Steiger, nachsieigen". In
French, ;the
steps
of
a
stair
are
called
marches; un vieux marcheur, ein alter Steiger
both mean ah old profligate. The dream-mate
rial from which these newly recognized symbols
are derived will in due time be put before you
by the committee we are about to form for col
lecting and studying symbols. An account of
another intefestihg "symbol, of the idea of rwcue and:*its changes in significance; will appear
in the second volume of our lahrbuch. How
ever, I must break off here or I shall not reach
my other points.
Every one of you will know from his own
experience the total change in one's attitude to
a new case When once one has thoroughly mas
tered the structure of some typical cases of ill
ness. Assuming now that we had narrowly de
fined the regular elements in the composition of
the various forms of neurosis, just as we bave
already succeeded in doing for hysterical symp
tom-formation, how much more assured we
should be in our prognoses! Just as an obstetri
cian knows by examining the placenta whether
it has been completely expelled or whether nox
ious fragments of it still remain, so we should
be able, independently of the success of the
cure and the patient's present condition, to say
whether the work had been completely carried
to an end or whether we nad to expect relapses
and fresh onsets of illness.
( :
' (b) I will hasten on to the innovations irirthe
field of technique, where indeed nearly every
thing still awaits definitive settlement, and
much is only how beginning to come clear.
There are now two aims in psycho-analytic
technique: to save the physician effort anrfto
open up for the patient' the freest access terhis
unconscious. You know that our technique has
been transformed in important respects. At the
time of the cathartic treatment we set our
selves the aim of elucidating the symptoms,

[129b]
Freud
then we turned away from the symptoms to
discovering the complexes, to use Jung's indis
pensable; word;; iiow^ however, our work is
aimed directly at finding out and overcoming
the resistances, and we can with justification
rely on the complexes coming to light as soon as
the resistances have been recognized and re
moved. Some of you have since shown a desire
to formulate and classify these resistances. Now
I beg you to examine your material and see
whether you can confirm the following statemerit: In male patients the most important re
sistances to the treatment seem to be derived
from the father-complex and to express them
selves in fear of the father, and in defiance and
incredulity towards him.
Other innovations in technique relate to the
physician himself. We have begun to consider j
the counter-transference,whith arises in the
physician as a result of the patient's influence
on his unconscious feelings, and have nearly
come to the point of requiring the physician
to recognize and overcome this counter-trans
ference in himself. Now that a larger number
of people have come to practise psycho-anal
ysis and mutually exchange their experiences,
we have noticed that every analyst's achieve
ment is limited by what his own complexes and
resistances permit, and
consequently we re
quire that he should begin his practice with a
self-analysis and should extend and deepen this
constantly while making his observations on
his patients. Anyone who cannot succeed in this
self-analysis may without more ado regard,
himself as unable to treat neurotics by analysis.
We are also now coming to the opinion that
the analytic technique must undergo certain
modifications according to the nature of tne
disease and the dominating instinctual trends
in the patient. Our therapy was, in fact, first
designed for conversion-hysteria; in anxietyhysteria (phobias) we must alter our procedure
to some extent. The fact is that these patients
cannot bring out the material necessary for \
resolving the phobia so long as they feel pro
tected by retairiirig their phobic condition. One
cannot, of course induce them to give up their
protective measures and work under the1 in
fluence of anxiety from the beginning of the
treatment. One must, therefore, help them by
interpreting their unconscious to them until
they can make up their minds to do without
the protection of their phobia and expose them-i
selves to a now comparatively moderate degree
of anxiety. Only when they have done so does
the material necessary for achieving solution of

[130a]
Future of Psychothe phobia become accessible. Other modifica
tions of technique which seem to me not yet
ready for discussion will be required in^ the
treatment of obsessional neurosis. In this- con
nection very important questions arisei which
are riot yet elucidated: how far the instincts
involved in the conflict in the patient are to be
allowed some gratification during the treat
ment, and what difference it then makes wheth
er these impulses are active (sadistic) of pas
sive (masochistic )in nature.
I hope you have received the impression that,
when all that can at present be merely glimpsed
is known and when we have established all the
improvements in technique to which deeper
experience with our patients must lead us, then
our
medical practice will reach a degree of
precision and certainty of success which is not
to be had in all medical specialties.
2. I said that we had much to expect from
the increase in prestige which must accrue to
us as time goes on. I need hardly say much to
you about the importance of authority. Only
very few civilized persons are capable of ex
isting
without '-•' reliance
on
others
or
are
even capable of coming to an independent opin
ion. You cannot' exaggerate the intensity of
man's
inner irresolution and craving for au
thority. The extraordinary increase in the neu
roses since the power of religion has waned
may give you some indication of it. The im
poverishment of the ego due to the tremendous
effort in repression demanded of every individ
ual by culture rnay be one of the principal
causes of this state of things.
Hitherto the weight
of authority with its
enormous suggestive force has been against us.
AH
bur
therapeutic
successes
have
been
achieved in spite of this suggestion; it is sur
prising that any success wasto be had at all in
the circumstances. I will not let myself go to to
the extent of describing to you the agreeable
things that happened during the time when t
alone represented psycho-analysis. I know that
when I assuredmy. patients that I knewhowto
relieve them permanently of their sufferings
they looked round my modest abode, thought
of my want of fame and honours, and regarded
me like a man who possesses an infallible sys
tem in a gambling-place, of whom people say
that if he could do what he professes he would
look very different. Nor was it really at aH
pleasant to operate on people's minds while
colleagues whose duty it was to assist- took a
pleasure in spitting into the field of operation,

[130b]
Analytic Therapy
125
and while at the first signs of blood or restless*
nesi in him the patient's relatives threatened
one. An operation may surely cause reactions;
iff"surgery we became used to that long ago.
Nobody believed in me, in fact, just as even
today very, few believe in us; under such con
ditions many ari attempt was bound to fail: To
estimate the increase in our therapeutic capac
ities that will ensue when general recognition
is accorded us, you should think of the differ
ent positions of gynaecologists in Turkey and
in the West. All that a woman's physician may
do there is to feel the pulse of an arm which
is stretched out to him through a hole in the
wall. And his curative results are in proportion
to the inaccessibility of their object; our op
ponents in the West wish to restrict our ac
cess over our patients' minds to something very
similar. But now that the force of public opin
ion drives sick women to the gynaecologist; he
has become their helper and saviour. Now do
not say that, even if the weight of public opin
ion comes to our aid arid so much increases
our successes, that will in no way prove the
validity of our hypotheses. Suggestion is sup
posed to be able to do anything, and our suc
cesses would then be results of suggestion and
not of psychoanalysis. Public opinion is at
present suggesting hydropathic cures, diet cures,
electricity cures for nervous persons, but that
does not enable these measures to remove the
neuroses. It will be seen whether psychoana
lytic treatment can accomplish more than they.
But now, to be sure, I must damp the ardour
of your expectations. The community will not
hasten to grant authority to us. It is bound to
offer resistance to us, for we adopt a critical
attitude towards it; we accuse it of playing a
great part itself in causing the neuroses. Just
as we make any single person our enemy by
discovering what is repressed in him, so the
community cannot respond with sympathy to
a relentless exposure of its injurious effects and
deficiencies; because we destroy illusions, we
are accused of endangering ideals. It seems,
therefore, that the state of things from which
I expect such great advantages for bur thera
peutic results will never arrive; And yet the
situation is not so hopeless as one might think
at the present time. Powerful though the feel
ings and the self-interest of men may be, yet
intellect is a power too. It has not; perhaps,
the powef that makes itself felt immediately,
but one that is all the more certain in the end.
The most mordant verities are heard at last,
after the interests they injure and the emotions

[131a]
126
Sigmund Freud
they rouse have exhausted their frenzy. It has
alwaysbeenso,and the unwelcome truths which
we psycho-analysts have to tell the world will
undergo the same fate. Only it will not come
very quickly; we must be able to wait.
3. Finally, I have to explain to you what I
mean by the "general effect" of our work, and
how I come to set my hopes on it. This con^
sists in a very remarkable therapeutic constel
lation which could, perhaps, not be repeated
anywhere else and which will appear strange
to you too at first, until you recognize in it
something you have long been familiar with.
You know, of course, that the psychoneuroses
are substitutive gratifications of instincts, the
-existenceof which one is forced.to deny to one
self and others. Their capacity to exist depends
on this distortion and disguise. When the rid
dle they hold is solved, and the solution ac
cepted by the sufferers, these diseases will no
longer be able to exist. There is hardly any
thing quite like it in medicine; in fairy-tales
you hear of evil spirits whose power is broken
when you can tell them their names which they
have kept secret.
Now in place of a single sick person put the
whole community of persons liable to neuroses,
persons ill and persons well; in place of the ac
ceptance of the solution in the first put a gen
eral recognition in the second; and a little re
flection will show you that this substitution
cannot alter the result at all. The success which
the therapy has with individuals must appear
in the many too. Diseased people cannot let
their various
neuroses become known—their
apprehensive overanxiousness which is to con
ceal their hatred, their agoraphobia which be
trays disappointed ambition, their actions which
represent self-reproaches for
evil intentions
and precautions against them—when all their
relatives and every stranger from whom they
wish to conceal their thoughts and felings know
the general meaning of these symptoms, and
when they themseves know that the manifesta
tions of their disease produce nothing which
others cannot instantly understand. The affect,
however, will not be merely that they will con
ceal their symptoms—a design, by the way,
which would be impossible to execute; for this
concealment will destroy the purpose of the ill
ness. . Disclosure of the secret will have at
tacked, at its most sensitive point, the aetio
logical equation from which the neuroses de
scend, will have made the advantagethrough ill
ness illusory, and, consequently, in the end,
nothing can come of the changed situation

[131b]
brought about by the ^discretions of physi
cians but an end of producing these illnesses.
, If this hope seems Utopian to you, you may
remember that
certain neurotic
phenomena
have already been dispelled by this means, al
though only in quite isolated instances. Think
how common hallucinations of the Virgin Mary
were in peasant girls, in former times. So long
as such a phenomenon brought a flock of be
lievers and resulted, perhaps, in a chapel being
built on the sacred spot, the visionary state of
these maidens was inaccessible to influence. To
day even the priesthood has changed its atti
tude to such things; it allows police and medi
cal men to visit the seer, and since then the
Virgin appears very seldom. Or allow me to
study the same processes, that I have been de
scribing as taking place in the future, in an
analogous situation which is on a smaller scale
and
consequently,
more
easily appreciated.
Suppose that a number of ladies and gentlemen
in good society had planned a picnic at an inn
in the forest one day. The ladies make up their
minds that if one of them wants to relieve a
natural need she will say aloud that she is go
ing to pick flowers; but a wicked fellow hears
of this secret and has printed on the programme
which is sent round to the whole party—"If the
ladies wish to retire, they are requested to say
that they are going to pick flowers." Of course,
after this, no lady will think of availing her
self of this flowery pretext, and other freshly
devised formulas of the same kind will be se
riously compromised by it. What will be the re
sult? The ladies will own up to their natural
needs without shame and none of the men will
take exception to it. Let us return to the serious
aspect of our problem. A number of people who
find life's conflicts too difficult to solve have
taken flight into neurosis and in this way
won an unmistakable, although in the end too
costly, advantage through illness. What would
these people have to do if their flight into ill-!
ness were barred by the indiscreet revelationsj
of psycho-analysis? They would have to be hon
est, own up to the instincts that are at work in
them, face the conflict, fight for what they
want or go without, and the tolerance from the
community which is bound to ensue as a result
of psycho-analytical
knowledge would help
them in their task.
Let us remember, however, that it is not for
us to advance upon life as fanatical hygienists
or therapeutists. We must admit that this ideal
prevention of all neurotic illness would not be
advantageous to every individual. A good num-

[132a]
Future of Psycho-Analytic Therapy
E27
ber of those who now take flight into illness
would not support the conflict under the con
ditions we have assumed, but would rapidly
succumb or would commit some outrage which
would be worse than if they themselves fell ill
of a neurosis. The neuroses have, in fact, their
biological function as defensive measures and
their social justification; the advantage through
illness that they provide is not always a purely
subjective one. Is there one of you who has not
at some time caught a glimpse behind the scenes
in the causation of a neurosis and had to allow
that it was the least of the evils possible in the
circumstances? And should one really require
such sacrifices in order to exterminate the neu
roses, while the world is all the same full of
other inextinguishable miseries?
Should we, therefore, abandon our efforts to
explain the hidden meaning of neurotic mani
festations, regarding it as dangerous to the in
dividual and harmful to the interest of society;
should we give up drawing the practical con
clusion from a piece of scientific insight? No;
I think that, nevertheless, our duty lies in the
other direction. The advantage through illness
provided by the neuroses is indeed on the whole
and in the end detrimental to the individual
as well as to society. The distress that our work
of revelation may cause will affect but a few.
The change to a more honest and honourable
attitude in the world in general will not be
bought too dearly by these sacrifices. But above
all, all the energies which are today consumed
in the production of neurotic symptoms, to
serve the purposes Of a world of phantasy out
of touch with reality, will, even if they cannot
at once be put to uses in life, help to strengthen
the outcry for those changes in our civilization
from which alone we can hope for beter things
for our descendants.
I will let you go, therefore, with the assur
ance that you do your duty in more than one
sense by treating your patients psycho-analytically. You are not merely working in the serv
ice of science by using the only and irreplace
able opportunity for discovering the secrets of
the neuroses; you are not only giving your
patients the most efficacious remedy for their
sufferings available at the present time; but
you are contributing your share to that enlight
enment of the many from which we expect to
gain the authority of the community in general
and thus to achieve the most far-reaching pro
phylaxis against neurotic disorders.

[133a]
A few days ago an elderly lady, under the pro
tection of a female friend, called upon me for
a consultation, complaining of anxiety-states.
She was in the second half of the forties, fairly
well preserved, and had obviously not yet fin
ished with her womanhood. A divorce from her
last husband had been the occasion exciting the
anxiety-states; but the anxiety had become
greatly intensified, according to her account,
since she had consulted a young physician in
the suburb she lived in, for he had informed
her that her sexual desires were the cause of
her anxiety. He said that she could not tolerate
the loss of intercourse with her husband, and
so there were only three ways by which she
could recover her health—-she must either re
turn to her husband, or take a lover, or satisfy
herself. Since then she had been convinced that
she was incurable, for she would not return to
her husband, and the other two alternatives
were repugnant to her moral and religious feed
ings. She had come to me, however, because
the doctor had said that I was responsible for
this new opinion, and that she had only to come
and ask me to confirm what he said, and I
should tell her that this and nothing else was the
truth. The friend who was with her, a still older,
pinched and unhealthy-looking woman, then
implored me to assure the patient that the doc
tor was mistaken. It could not possibly be true,
for she herself had been a widow for many
years, and had remained respectable without
suffering from anxiety.
I will not dwell on the awkward predica
ment in which I was placed by this visit, but
instead will consider the conduct of the prac
titioner who sent this lady to me. First, how
ever, it will be as well to adopt a cautious atti
tude, which may possibly not be superfluous—
indeed we will hope so. Long experience has
taught me—as it may others—not to accept
straight away as true what patients, especial
ly nervous patients, relate about their physi
cian. A neurologist not only easily becomes the
object of many of the patient's hostile feelings,
whatever method of treatment he employs; he
must also sometimes resign himself to accept
ing responsibility, by a kind of projection, for
the buried repressed wishes of his nervous
1 Collected Papers, U;
first
published in Zentral
blatt, Vol. I, 1910;
reprinted in Sammlung,
Dritte
Folge.

[133b]
Observations on "Wild" Psycho-Analysis1
patients. That such accusatipns, then,, nowhere
find more credence than among other;physi
cians is a melancholy but a significant circum
stance.
,, I have some grounds, therefore, for hoping
that this lady gave me a tendenciously distorted:
account of what her physician had. said, and|
that I do a man who is unknown to me. an in
justice by connecting my remarks about "wild"
psycho-analysis with this incident. But all the
same, by doing so I may perhaps prevent others
from acting wrongly towards their patients.
Let us suppose, therefore, that her medical
practitioner spoke to the patient exactly as she;
reported of him. Everyone will at once vouch
safe the criticism that if a physician holds it
necessary to discuss the question of sexuality
with a woman he must do so with tact and
consideration. Compliance with this demand,
however, coincides with carrying out certain!
of the technical regulations of psycho-analysis;
moreover, the physician in question was igno*
rant of a number of the scientific principles of
psycho-analysis or had misapprehended them,;
and thus snowed how little understanding of
its nature and purposeshe had in fact acquired.
We will begin with the second of these, with
his scientific errors. His advice to the lady
shows clearly in what sense he understands the|
expression sexual life-—in the popular sense,:
namely, in which by sexual needs nothing is
meant but the need for coitus or analogous acts;
producing orgasm and emission of sexual secre-!
tions. The physician cannot have been unaware,
however, that psycho-analysis is commonly re
proached with havingextended the connotation j
of the term sexual far beyond its usual range.;
The fact is undisputed; whether it may justly!
be used as a reproach shall not be discussed!
here. In psycho-analysis the term sexuality
comprises far more; it goes lower and also
higher than the popular sense of the word. This
extension is justified genetically; we reckon as
belonging to sexual life all expressions of tender
feeling, which spring from the source of prim
itive sexual feelings, even when those feelings
have become inhibited in regard to their orig
inal sexual aim or have exchanged this aim for
another which is no longer sexual. For this rea
son we prefer to speak of psycho-sexuality,
thus laying stress on the point that the mental

[134a]
factor should not be overlooked or under-esti
mated. We use the word sexuality in the same
comprehensive sense as that in which the Ger
man language uses the word lieben (to love).
And we have long known-that a mental lack
of satisfaction with all its consequences can
exist where there is, no lack of normal sexual
intercourse;
as therapeutists, too,
we
have
constantly to remember that the unsatisfied
sexual trends (the substitutive satisfactions of
which in thea form ;pf nervous symptoms we
have to combat) can often find only very in
adequate outlet in coitus or other sexual acts.
Anyone not sharing this psycho-analytical
point of view has no right to call to his aid
psychoanalytical theories concerned with the
aetiologicalsignificanceof sexuality. By empha
sizing exclusively the somatic factor in sexuality
he certainly simplifies the problem greatly, but
he alone must bear the responsibility for what
he does.
A. second and equally gross misunderstand
ing is discernible behind the physician's advice.
It is true that psycho-analysis puts forward
lack of sexual satisfaction as the cause of nerv
ous disorders. But does it not also go much fur
ther than this? Is its teaching to be ignored as
too complicated when it declares that nervous
symptoms arise from a conflict. between two
forces—on the one hand, the libido (which is
for the most part excessive), and oh the other,
a too severe aversion from sexuality or a re
pression? No one who remembers this,second
factor, whiclris by ho means secondary in im
portance, can ever believe that sexual satisfac
tion in itself constitutes a remedy of general
reliability for the sufferings of neurotics. A good
number of nervous persons are, indeed, either
in the actual circumstances or altogether'in
capable of satisfaction. If they were capable of
it, if they were without their inner resistances,
the strength of the instinct itself would point
the way to satisfaction for them even though no
physician recommended it. What is the good,
therefore, of advice such as that supposed to
have been given to this lady by her physician?
Even if it could be justified scientifically, it is
not advice that she can carry out. If she had had
no inner resistances against onanism or against
a liaison, she would, of course, have adopted
one of these measures long before. Or does the
physician think that a woman of over forty has
never heard of such a thing as taking a lover,
or does he overestimate his influence so much
as to think that she could never decide upon
such a step without medical recommendation?

[134b]
Observations on "Wild" Psycho-Analysis
129
AH this seems^very simple, and yet it must
be admitted that there is
one factor which
often complicates the issue in forming a judge
ment. Some nervous states wMch we call the
actual neuroses, such as typical neurasthenia
and pure forms of anxiety-neurosis, obviously
depend on the physical factor in sexual life, arid
we have^nd certain knowledge of the part played
in them by the mental factor and by repress
sion. In such cases it is natural that the physi
cian should first consider some actual therapy,
some alteration in the physical sexual way of
life, and.he does so with perfect justification if
his diagnosis is correct. The lady who consulted
the young physician complained chiefly of anx
iety-states, and so he probably assumed that
she was suffering from an anxiety-neurosis, and
felt justified in recommending an actual ther
apy to her. Again a convenient misapprehen
sion ! A person suffering from anxiety is not for
that reason necessarily suffering from anxietyneurosis ; a diagnosis of it cannot be based on
its name; one has to know what manifestations
are comprised in an anxiety-neurosis, and be
able to distinguish it from other pathological
states in which anxiety appears. My impression
wasthat the lady in question was suffering from
anxiety-hysteria, and the whole: value of such
nosographical
distinctions,
one. which
quite
justifies them, lies in the fact that they indicate
a different aetiology and a different therapy. No
one who took into consideration the possibility
of anxiety-hysteria in this
case would have
fallen into the error of neglecting the mental
-factors, as this physician did with his three
alternatives.
vOddly: enough, the three therapeutic: alter
natives of this would-be psycho-analyst leave
no room for—psycho-analysis! This woman can
only be cured of her anxiety by returning to
her husband, or by satisfying her needs by
onanism or with a lover. And where does ana
lytic treatment come in, the treatment which
we
regard
as the
first
remedy in
anxietystates?
•
..i
This brings us to the technical errors to be
remarked in the way that, according to our
assumption, this physician proceeded. The idea
that a neurotic is suffering from a sort of igno
rance, and that if one removes this ignorance
by telling him facts (about the causal connecr
tion of
his illness with his life, about his
experiences in childhood, and so on) he must re
cover, is an idea that has long been superseded,
and one derived from superficial appearances.
The pathological factor is not his ignorance in

[135a]
130
Sigmund Freud
itself, but the root of this ignorance in his in
ner resistances;it was they that first called this
ignorance into being, arid they still maintain it
now. In combating these resistances lies the
task of the therapy. Telling the patient what
he does not know because he has repressed
it is only one of the necessary preliminaries
in the therapy. If knowledge about his uncon
scious were as important for the patient as
the inexperienced in psycho-analysis imagine,
it would be sufficient to cure him for him to
go to lectures or read books. Such measures,
however, have as little effect on the symptoms
of nervous disease as distributing menu-cards
in time of famine has on people's hunger. The
analogy goes even further than its obvious ap
plication, too; for describing his unconscious
to the patient is regularly followed by intensifi
cation of the conflict in him and exacerbation
of his symptoms.
Since, however, psycho-analysis cannot dis
pense with making this disclosure to patients, it
prescribes that two conditions are to be fulfilled
before it is done. First, by preparatory work,
the repressed material must have come very
near to the patient's thoughts, and secondly,
he must be sufficiently firmly attached, by an
affective relationship to the physician (trans
ference) to make it impossible for him to take
fresh flight again.
Only when these two conditions are fulfilled
is it possible to recognize and to overcome the
resistances which have led to the repression
and the ignorance. Psycho-analytic measures,
therefore, cannot possibly dispense with a fair
ly long period of contact with the patient, and
attempts to bully the patient.during his first
consultation by brusquely telling him the hid
den things one infers behind his story are tech
nically reprehensible; they mostly lead to their
own doom, too, by inspiring in the patient a
hearty dislike for the physician and putting an
end to any further influence.
Besides all this, one may sometimes make a
false inference, and one is never in a position
to discover the whole truth. In psycho-analysis
these exact technical precautions take the place
of a vague demand, implying a peculiar talent,
for "medical tact."
It is not enough, therefore, for a physician
to know a little of what psycho-analysis has
discovered; he must also
have
familiarized
himself with its technique if he wishes his med
ical practice to be guided by a psycho-analytic

[135b]
point of view. This technique is even today not
to be learnt from books, and it is certainly not
to be discovered independently without great
.sacrifices of time, labour and success. It is to
be learnt, like other medical measures, from
those who are already proficient in it. In form
ing a judgment on the incident that I took as
a starting-point for these remarks, therefore,
it is a matter of some significance that I do
not know the physician who is said to have
given the lady such advice arid have never be
fore heard his name.
Neither for myself nor for my friends and
co-workers is it pleasant to claim in this way a
monopoly in the use of psycho-analytic tech
nique. But in face of the danger to patients
and to the cause of psycho-analysis which one
foresees in this "wild" psycho-analysis, we have
no other choice. In the spring of into we
founded an International Psycho-Analytical As
sociation, in which the members admit their
participation by allowing publication of their
names, in order to be able to repudiate respon
sibility for what is done by those who do not
belong to us and yet call their methods "psycho
analysis." For as a matter of fact, "wild" ana
lysts of this kind do more harm to the cause
Of psycho-analysis than to individual patients.
I have often found that a clumsy feat of a sim
ilar kind led to good results in the end, although
it first produced an exacerbation of the pa
tient's condition. Not always, but still often.
When he has abused the physician enough and;
feels impervious enough to any further influ
ence of the kind, his symptoms give way, or
he decides to take some step leading to re
covery. The final improvement then "comes of
itself," or is ascribed to some entirely harmless
treatment by another physician to whom the
patient turned afterwards. In the case of the
lady whose complaint against her doctor we;
have heard, I should say that, in spite of all,!
the wild psycho-analyst did more for her than'
some highly
respected authority who might
have told her she was suffering from a vaso
motor neurosis. He did force her attention to
the real cause of her trouble, or in that direc
tion, and in spite of all her struggles, that can
not be without some favourable results. But
he has done himself harm and helped to inten
sify the prejudices which patients feel, owing
to their natural resistances, against the ways
of psycho-analysts. And this can be avoided.

[136a]
[página ilustrada]

[136b]
[página ilustrada]

[137a]
Foreword to the Third EngUsh Edition
135
Preface to the Third (German) Edition
135
Preface to the Second (German) Edition
135
Introductory Note
136
I.
The Scientific Literature of
Dream-Problems (up to 1900)
137
A. The Relation of the Dream to
the Waking State
139
B. The Material of Dreams—
Memory in Dreams
141
C. Dream-Stimuli and Sources
145
D. Why Dreams are Forgotten
after Waking
155
E. The Psychological Peculiarities
of Dreams
157
F. The Ethical Sense in Dreams
164
G. Dream-Theories and the
Function of the Dream
168
H. The Relation between Dreams
and Mental Diseases
174
II. The Method of Dream-Inter
pretation—The Analysis of a
Specimen Dream
178
III. The Dream as Wish-Fulfilment 189
IV. Distortion in Dreams
193
V.
The Material and Sources of
Dreams
205
A. Recent and Indifferent Impres
sions in the Dream
206
B. Infantile Experiences as the
Source of Dreams
215
C. The Somatic Sources of Dreams 228
D. Typical Dreams
237
(a) The Embarrassment-Dream
of Nakedness
237

[137b]
(b) Dreams of the Death of
Beloved Persons
240
(c) The Examination-Dream
251
VI. The Dream-Work
252
A. Condensation
253
B. The Work of Displacement
262
C. The Means of Representation
in Dreams
264
D. Regard for Representability
277
E. Representation in Dreams by
Symbols—Some Further
Typical Dreams
281
F. Examples—Arithmetic and
Speech in Dreams
298
G. Absurd Dreams—Intellectual
Performances in Dreams
305
H. The Affects in Dreams
319
I.
The Secondary Elaboration
332
VII. The Psychology of the DreamProcesses
340
A. The Forgetting of Dreams
341
B. Regression
350
C. The Wish-Fulfilment
356
D. Waking Caused by Dreams—
The Function of Dreams—
The Anxiety-Dream
366
E. The Primary and Secondary
Processes—Repression
373
F. The Unconscious and
Consciousness—Reality
382
Bibliography
A. Before the Publication of
this Book (1900)
389
B. Since 1900
393

[138a]
[página ilustrada]

[138b]
[página ilustrada]

[139a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
Foreword to The Third English Edition
In 1909 G. Stanley Hall invited me to Clark
University, in Worcester, to give the first lec
tures on psycho-analysis. In the same year Dr.
Brill published the first of his translations of
my writings, which were soon followed by fur
ther ones. If psycho-analysis now plays a role
in American intellectual life, or if it does so
in the future, a large part of this result will
have to be attributed to this and other activ
ities of Dr. BrilPs.
His first translation of The Interpretation of
Dreams appeared in 1913. Since then much has
taken place in the world, and much has been
changed in our views about the neuroses. This
book, with the new contribution to psychology
which surprised the world when it was pub
lished (1900), remains essentially unaltered. It
contains, even according to my present-day
judgment, the most valuable of all discoveries
it has been my good fortune to make. Insight
such as this falls to one's lot but once in a life
time.
Freud
Vienna, March 15, 1931
Preface to the Third (German) Edition
Whereas there was a space of nine years beT
tween the first and second editions of this book,
the need of a third edition was apparent when
little more than a year had elapsed. I ought to
be gratified by this change; but if I was unwil
ling previously to attribute the neglect of my
work to its small value, I cannot take the inter
est which is now making its appearance as proof
of its quality.
The advance of scientific knowledge has not
left The Interpretation; of Dreams untouched.
When I wrote this book in i899,there was as yet
no "sexual theory," and the analysis of the
more
complicated forms of
the psychoneu
roses was still in its infancy. The interpreta
tion of dreams was intended as an expedient to
facilitate the psychological analysis of the neu
roses; but since then a profounder understand
ing of the neuroses has contributed towards the
comprehension of the dream. The doctrine of
dream-interpretation itself has evolved in a di
rection which was insufficiently emphasized in
the first edition of this book. From my own ex
13s

[139b]
perience, and the works of Stekel and other
writers,11 have since learned to appreciate more
accurately the significance of symbolism in
dreams (or rather, in unconscious thought). In
the course of years, a mass of data has accumu
lated which demands consideration. I have en
deavored to deal with these innovations by
interpolations in the text and footnotes. If these
additions do not always quite adjust themselves
to the framework of the treatise, or if the earlier
text does not everywhere come up to the stand
ard of our present knowledge, I must beg indul
gence for this deficiency, since it is only the
result and indication of the increasingly rapid
advance of our science. I will even venture to
predict the directions in which further editions
of this book—should there be a demand for
them—may diverge from
previous editions.
Dream-interpretation must seek a closer union
with the rich material of poetry, myth, and pop
ular idiom, and it must deal more faithfully
than has hitherto been possible with the rela
tions of dreams to the neuroses and to mental
derangement.
Herr Otto Rank has afforded me valuable
assistance in the selection of supplementary
examples, and has revised the proofs of this
edition. I have to thank him and many other
colleagues for their contributions and correc
tions.
Vienna, 1911
Preface to the Second (German) Edition
That there should have been a demand for a
second edition of this book—"a book which
cannot be described as easy to read—before
the completion of its first decade is not to be
explained by the interest of the professional
circles to which I was addressing myself. My
psychiatric colleagues have not, apparently, at
tempted to look beyond the astonishment which
may at first have been aroused by my novel
conception of the dream; and the professional
philosophers, who are anyhow accustomed to
disposing of the dream in a few sentences—-
mostly the same-—as a supplement to the states
of consciousness, have evidently failed to real
ize that precisely in this connection it was pos
sible to make all manner of deductions, such as
must lead to a fundamental modification of our
^Omitted in subsequent editions.

[140a]
136
Sigmund Freud
psychological doctrines. The attitude of the sci
entific reviewers was such as to lead me to ex
pect that the fate of the book would be to faU
into oblivion; and the little flock of faithful
adherents, who follow my lead in the thera
peutic application of psycho-analysis, and inter
pret dreams by my method, could not have
exhausted the first edition of this book. I feel,
therefore, that my thanks are due to the wider
circle of cultured and inquiring readers whose
sympathy has induced me, after the lapse of
nine years, once more to take up this difficult
work,whichhas so many fundamentalbearings.
I am gladto be ableto say that I found little
in the book that called for alteration. Here
and there I have interpolated fresh material,
or have added opinions based on more exten
sive experience, or I have sought to elaborate
individual points; but the essential passages
treating of dreams and their interpretation, and
the psychologicaldoctrines to be deduced there
from, have been left unaltered; subjectively,
at all events, they have stood the test of time:.
Those who are acquainted with my other writ
ings (on the aetiology and mechanism of the
psychoneuroses) will know that I never offer
unfinished work as finished, and that I have
always endeavoured to revise my conclusions
in accordance with my maturing opinions; but
as regards the subject of the dream-life, I am
able to stand by my original text. In my many
years' work upon the problems of the neuroses
I have often hesitated, and I have often gone
astray; and then it was always the interpreta
tion of dreams that restored my self-confidence.
My many scientific opponents are actuated by
a wise instinct when they decline to follow me
into the region of oneirology.
Even the material of this book* even my own
dreams, defaced by time or superseded, by
means of which I have demonstrated the rules
of dream-interpretation, revealed, when I came
to revise these pages, a continuity that resisted
revision. For me, of course, this book has an
additional subjective significance, which I did
not understand until after its completion. It
reveals itself to me as a piece of my self-anal
ysis, as my reaction to the death of my father,
that is, to the most important event, the most
poignant loss in a man's life. Once I had real
ized this, I felt that I could not obliterate the
traces ,of this influence. But tp my readers the
material from which they learn to eyajuate and
interpret.dreams will be a matter of indiffei>-
enccte-co:'-/.I": 11".•
.' ';-'Tn .-r^t-b-.* ^ •' ; i
' • •'•
Where an inevitable comment could not be

[140b]
fitted into the old context, I have indicated by
square brackets that it does not occur in the
first edition^1
Berchtesgaden, 1908
Introductory Note
In this volume I have attempted to expound
the methods and results of dream-interpreta
tion; and in so doing I do not think I have
overstepped the boundary ofneuro-pathological
science; For the dream proves on psychological
investigation to be the first of a series of abt
normal psychic formations, a series whose suc
ceeding members—the hysterical phobias, the
obsessions, the delusions—must, for practical
reasons, claim the attention of the physician.
The dream, as we shall see, has no title to such
practical importance, but for that very reason
its theoretical value as a typical formation is
all the greater, and the physician who cannot
explain the origin of dream-images will strive
in vain to understand the phobias and the ob*
sessive and
delusional ideas, or to
influence
them by therapeutic methods.
But the very context to which our subject
owes its importance must be held responsible
for the deficiencies of the following chapters.
The abundant lacunae in this exposition repre
sent so many points of contact at which the
problem of dream-formation is linked up.with
the more comprehensive problems of psychos
pathology; problems which cannot be treated
in these pages, but which, if time and powers
suffice and if further material presents itself,
may be elaborated elsewhere.
The peculiar natureof the material employed
to exemplify the interpretation of dreams has
made the writing even of this treatise a diffiT
cult task. Consideration of the methods of
dream-interpretation will show why the dreams
recorded in the literature on the subject, or
those collected by persons unknown to me^
were useless for my purpose; I had only the
choice between my own dreams and those of
the patients whom I was treating by psycho^-
analytic methods. But this later material was
inadmissible, sinc£ the dream-processes were
undesirably complicated by the intervention of
neurotic characters.-And if Ij relate my own
dreams I must inevitably reveal to the gaze
of strangers more of the intimacies of my ipsyr
chic life than is agreeable to me, and more
than seems fitting, ina writer who is not a; poet
but a scientific' investigator. To do so is pah>
ful, but unavoidable; I :bave;submitted-to, the
necessity^qior votherwise >1^ could not' have
1Omitted iri! subsequent1editions. ^ !
-*
-r> ">

[141a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
m
demonstrated my
psychological
conclusions.
Sometimes, of course, I could not resist the
temptation to
mitigate my indiscretions by
omissions and substitutions; but wherever I
have done so the value of the example cited has
I. The Scientific Literature of DreamProblems (up to 1900)
In the following pages I shall demonstrate that
there is a psychological technique which makes
it possible to interpret dreams, and that on the
application of this technique every dream will
reveal itself as a psychological structure, full
of significance, and one which may be assigned
to a specific place in the psychic activities of
the waking state. Further, I shall endeavour to
elucidate the
processes which
underlie the
strangeness and obscurity of dreams, and to
deduce: from these processes the nature of the
psychic forces whose conflict or cooperation is
responsible for our dreams. This done, my in
vestigation will terminate,
as it
will have
reached the point where the problem of the
dream merges into more comprehensive prob
lems, and to solve these, we must have recourse
to material of a different kind.
I shall begin by giving a short account of the
views of earlier writers on this subject, and of.
the. status of the dreamrproblem in.contemporary science; since in the course of this treatise.
I shall not often have occasion to refer to ei
ther. In spite of thousands of years of endeav
our, little progress has been made in the sci
entific understanding of dreams. This fact has
been so universally acknowledged by previous
writers on the subject that it seenis hardly
necessary to quote individual opinions. The
reader will find, in the works listed at the end
of this work, many stimulating observations,
and plenty of interesting material relating to
our subject, but little or nothing that concerns
the true nature of the dream, or that solves
definitely any of its enigmas. The educated
layman, of course, knows even less
of the
matter.
The conception of the dream that was held
in prehistoric ages by primitive peoples, and
the influence which it may have exerted on the
formation of their conceptions of the universe,
and of the soul, is a theme of such great inter
est that it is only with reluctance that I refrain
from dealing with it in these pages. I will refer
the reader to the well-known works of Sir John

[141b]
Lubbock (Lord Avebury)* Herbert Spencer,
E. B. Tylor, and other writers; I will only add
that we shall not realize the importance of these
problems and speculations until we have com
pleted the task of dream-interpretation that
lies before us.
A reminiscence of the concept of the dream
that was held in primitive times seems to under
lie the evaluation of the dream which was cur
rent among the peoples of classical antiquity.1
They took it for granted that dreams were re
lated to the world of the supernatural beings
in whom they believed, and that they brought
inspirations from the gods and demons. Moreiover,••••it
appeared to them that dreams must
serve a special purpose in respect of the dream
er; that, as a rule, they predicted the future.
The extraordinary variations'in the content of
dreams, and in the impressions which they pro
duced on the dreamer, made it, of course, very
difficult to formulate a coherent conception of
them, and necessitated manifold differentia
tions and group-formations, according to their
value and reliability. The valuation of dreams
by the individual philosophers of antiquity nat
urally depended on the importance which they
were prepared to attribute to manticism in
general.
In the two works of Aristotle in which there
is mention of dreams, they are already regarded
as constituting a problem of psychology. We are
told that the dream is not god-sent, that it is
not of divine but of demonic origin. For nature
is really demonic, not divine; that is to say,
the dream is not a supernatural revelation, but
is subject to the laws of the human spirit, which
has, of course, a kinship with the divine,: The
dream is defined as the psychic activity of the
sleeper, inasmuch as he is asleep. Aristotle was
acquainted with some of the characteristics of,
the dream-life; for example, he knew that a
dream converts the slight sensations perceived,
in sleep into intense sensations, ("one imagines
that one is walking through fire, and feels hot,
if this or that part of the body becomes only'
1 The
following
remarks
are
based
on
Biichsen-:
schutz's careful essay, Traum und Traumdeutung im
Altertum (Berlin, 186$).
-.

[142a]
ijS
SlGMUND FREUD i
quite slightly-warm"), which led him to con
clude that dreams might easily betray to the
physician the first indications of an incipient
physical changewhich escapedobservation dur
ing the day.1
As has been said, those writers of antiquity
who preceded Aristotle did not
regard the
dream as a product of the dreaming psyche, but
as an inspiration of divine origin, and in ancient
times the two opposing tendencies which we
shall find throughout the ages in respect of the
evaluation of the dream-life were already per
ceptible. The ancients distinguished between
the true and valuable dreams which were sent
to the dreamer as warnings, o%r to foretell fu
ture events; and the vain,,fraudulent, and emp
ty dreams whose object was to misguide him
or lead him to destruction.
Gruppe? speaks of such a classification of
dreams, citing Macrobius and Artemidorusv
"Dreams were divided into two classes; the first;
class was believed to be influenced only by the
present (or the past), and was unimportant in
respect;of the future; it included the
kvvKVia
(insomnia), which directly reproduce a given
idea or its opposite; e.g., hunger or its satia
tion; and the <f>avTairpara, whichelaborate the
given idea phantastically, as e.g. the nightmare,
ephialtes. The second class of dreams, on the
other hand, was determinative* of. the. future.
To this belonged: .,
i. Direct. prophecies received in the dream
(xp^jwctrto-jLios,
Oraculum);
2. the foretelling of a future event
(opaixa,
visio);
3. the symbolic dream, which requires inter
pretation
(oveupos, somnium).
This theory survived for many centuries."
Connected with these varying estimations
>^pJLthe dream was the problem of "drean>interpretltrDn." Dreams in general were expected
to yield important solutions, but not every
dream was immediately understood, and it was
impossible to be sure that a certain incompre
hensible dream did not really foretell something
of importance, so that an effort was made to re
place the
incomprehensible
content
of the
dream by something that should be at once
comprehensible and significant. In later antiq
uity Artemidorus of Daldis was regarded as
the greatest authority on dream-interpretation.
^The relationship between dreams and
disease
is
discussed by Hippocrates in a chapter of his famous
work.
2 Griechische
Mythologie
und
Religionsgeschichte,..
p. 390.

[142b]
His comprehensive works must serve to com
pensate us for the lost works of a similar na
ture.3 The
pre-scientific; conception
of
the
dream which obtained among the ancients was,
of course, in perfect keeping with their general
conception of the universe, which was accus
tomed to project as an external reality that
which possessed reality only in the life of the
psyche. Further, it accounted for the main im
pression made upon the waking life by the
morning memory of the dream; for in this
memory the dream, as compared with the rest
of the psychic content, seems to be something
alien, coming, as it were, from another world,
It would be an error to suppose that the
ory of the supernatural origin of dreams lacks
followers even in our own times; for quite apart
from pietistic and mystical writers—who cling,
as they are perfectly justified in doing;]to the;
remnants of the once predominant realm of:
the supernatural. until'* these remnants have
been swept away by scientific explanation-hhwe
not infrequently find that quite intelligent per-)
sons, who in other respects are averse from
anything of a romantic nature, go so far as to|
base their religious belief in the existence and1
co-operation of superhuman spiritual powers!
on the inexplicable nature of the phenomena of;
dreams (Haffner). The validity ascribed to the;
dream-life by certain schools of philosophy—
for example, by the school of Schelling—is a
distinct reminiscence of the undisputed belief:
in the divinity of dreams which prevailed in an
tiquity; and for some thinkers the mantic or
prophetic power of dreams is still a subject of
debate. This is due to the fact that the expla
nations attempted by psychology are too in
adequate to~ri cope with the accumulated mate
rial, howeverr strongly the scientific thinker
may
feel
that such
superstitious
doctrines:
should be repudiated.
•-.••!
To write a history of our scientific knowl-l
edge of the dream-problem is extremely dimcult, becausej valuable though this knowledge
may be in certain respects, no real progress in
a definite direction is as yet discernible* No
3 For the later history of dream-interpretation in the
Middle Ages consult Diepgen, and the special investi
gations
of
M.
Forster,
Gotthard, and others.
The
interpretation of dreams
among the
Jews has been
studied by Amoli, Amram, and Lowinger, and recently,
with reference to the
psycho-analytic standpoint, by
Lauer. Details of the Arabic methods of dream-inter
pretation are
furnished by Drexl, F.
Schwarz, and
the missionary Tfinkdji. The interpretation of dreams
among the Japanese has been investigated by Miura
and Iwaya, among the Chinese by Seeker, and among
the Indians by Negelein.

[143a]
A. The.Relation of the Dream to the Waking
State
The nai've judgment of the dreamer on waking
assumes that the dream—even if it does not

[143b]
come from another world—has at all events
transported the dreamer into another world.
The old physiologist, Burdach, to whom we are
indebted for a careful and discriminating de
scription of the phenomena of
dreams, ex
pressed this conviction in a frequently quoted
passage (p. 474): "The waking life, with its
trials and joys, its pleasures and pains, is never
repeated; on the contrary, the dream aims at
relieving us of these. Even when our whole
mind is filled with one subject, when our hearts
are rent by bitter grief, or when some task has
been taxing our mental capacity to the utmost,
the dream either gives us something entirely
alien, or it selects for its combinations only a
few elements of reality; or it merely enters in
to the key of our mood, and symbolizes real
ity." J. H. Fichte (I. 541) speaks in precisely
the same sense of supplementary dreams, call
ing them one of the secret, self-healing bene
fits of the psyche. L. Strumpell expresses him
self to the same effect in his Natur und Entster
hung der Traume, a study which is deservedly
held in high esteem. "He who dreams turns his
back upon the world of waking consciousness"
(p. 16); "In the dream the memory of the or
derly content of waking consciousness and its
normal
behaviour
is
almost
entirely
lost"
(p. 17); "The almost complete and unencum
bered isolation of the psyche in the dream from
the regular normal content and course of the
waking state ..." (p. 19).
Yet the overwhelming majority of writers
on the subject have adopted the contrary view
of the relation of the dream to waking life.
Thus Haffner (p. 10): "To begin with, the
dream continues the waking life. Our dreams
always connect themselves with such ideas as
have shortly before been present-in our con
sciousness. Careful examination will nearly al
ways detect a thread by which the dream has
linked itself to the experiences of the previous
clay." Weygandt (p. 6) flatly contradicts the
statement of Burdach. "For it may often be
observed, apparently indeed in the great ma
jority of dreams, that they lead us directly back
into everyday life, instead of releasing us from
it." Maury (p. 56) expresses the same idea in
a
concise formula: 'Nous revons de ce que
nous avons vu, dit, desiri, ou fait."1 Jessen,
in his Psychologie, published in 1855 (p. 530),
is rather more explicit: "The content of dreams
is always more or less determined by the per-.
1 We dream of what we have seen, said, desired, or
done.—Ed.

[144a]
140
Sigmund Freud
sonality,-the agej sex, station in life, education
and habits, and by< the events and experiences
of the whole past life of the individual."
The philosopher, I. G. E. Maas, adopts the
most unequivocal attitude in respect of this
question
(Uber
die
Leidenschaften,
1805):
"Experience corroborates our assertion that we
dream most frequently of those things toward
which our warmest passions are directed. This
shows us that our passions must influence the
generation of our dreams. The ambitious man
dreams of the laurels which he has won (per
haps only in imagination), or has still to win,
while the lover occupies himself, in his dreams,
with the object of his dearest hopes. . . . All
the sensual desires and loathings which slumber
in the heart, if they are stimulated by any cause,
may combine with other ideas and give rise to
a dream; or these ideas may mingle in an al
ready existing dream."1
The ancients entertained the same idea con
cerning tbe dependence of the dream-content
on life. I will quote Radestock (p.
139):
"When Xerxes, before his expedition against
Greece, was dissuaded from his resolution by
good counsel, but was again and again incited
by dreams to undertake it, one of the old, ra
tional dream-interpreters of the Persians, Artabanus, told him, and very appropriately, that
dream-images for the most part contain that
of which one has been thinking in the waking
state."
In the didactic poem of Lucretius, On the
Nature of Things (IV. 962), there occurs tHis
passage:
"Et quo quisque fere studio devinctus adhaeret,
aut quibus in rebus mutium sumus ante mordti
atque in ea raiione fuit contenta magis mens, in
somnis eadem plerumque videmur obire; causidici causas agere et componere leges, indujferatores
pugnare ac proelia obire," .. .etc., etc.2
Cicero (De Divinatione, II. LXVII) says, in
a similar strain, as does also Maury many cen
turies later: "Maximeque 'reliquiae9 rerum
earum moventur in animis et agiidntur, de qui'
bus vigilantes aut cogitavimus auf egimus." *
The contradiction between these two views
concerning the relation between dream life and
1Communicated by Winterstein., to the Zentralblatt
fur Psychoanalyse.
2 And whatever be the pursuit to which one clings
with devotion, whatever the things on which we have
been occupied much in the past, the mind being thus
more intent upon that pursuit, it is generally the same
things that we seem to encounter in dreams;-: pleaders
to
plead
their cause
and
collate laws, generals
to
contend and engage battle.—Eb.
.
-
3 And
especially
the
"remnant"
of
our waking
thoughts and deeds move and stir within the souI.-^Ed.

[144b]
waking life seems indeed irresolvable. Here we
may usefully cite the opinion of F. W; Hildef
brandt (1875), who held that on the whole: the
peculiarities of the dream can only be.-de
scribed as "a series.of contrasts which appar
ently amount to contradictions" (p. 8). "The
first offthese contrasts is. formed by the strict
isolation or seclusion of the dream from true
and actual life on the one hand, and on the
other hand by the continuous encroachment of
the one upon the other, and the constant de
pendence of the one upon the other. The dream
is something absolutely divorced from the real
ity experienced during the waking, state; one
may call it an existence hermetically sealed up
and insulated from real life by an unbridgeable
chasm. It frees us from reality, blots out the
normal recollection of reality, and sets us in an
other world and a totally different life, which
fundamentally has nothing in common with
real life. . . ." Hildebrandt then asserts that in
falling asleep our whole being, with its forms
of existence, disappears "as through an invisi
ble trapdoor." In one's dream one is perhaps
making a voyage to St. Helena in order to of
fer the imprisoned Napoleon an exquisite vin
tage of Moselle. One is most affably received by
the ex-emperor, and one feels almost sorry
when, on waking, the interesting illusion is de
stroyed. But let us now compare the situation
existing in the dream with the actual reality.
The dreamer has never been a wine-merchant,
and has no desire to become one. He has never
made a sea-voyage, and St. Helena is the last
place in the world that he would choose as the
destination of such a voyage. The dreamer feels
no sympathy for Napoleon, but on the contrary
a strong patriotic aversion. And lastly, the
dreamer was not yet among the living when Na
poleon died on the island of St. Helena; so that
it was beyond the realms of possibility that he
should have had any personal relations with Na-i
poleon. The dream-experience thus appears as
something entirely
foreign, interpolated be
tween two mutually related and successiveperi
ods of time.
"Nevertheless," continues Hildebrandt, "the
apparent contrary is just as true and correct.
I believe that side by side with this seclusion
and insulation there may still exist the most in
timate interrelation. We may therefore justly
say: Whatever the dream may offer us, it de
rives its material from reality, and from the
psychic life centered upon this reality. How
ever extraordinary the dream may .seem, it can
never detach-itself from the,realwp$d,.an|d its

[145a]
in the wall which was reserved especially •for
them. He also gave them a few fronds of a lit
tle fern which' was growing on the wall, and of
which he knew;they were very^ fond. In the
dream he knew the name of the plant; Aspleni
um ruta muralis. The dream continued return
ing after a digression to the lizards; and to his
astonishment Delboeuf saw two other little Wiz
ards falling upon what was left of the ferns. On
turning his eyes to the open fields he saw a fifth
and a sixth lizard making for the hole in the
wall, and finally the whole road was covered
by a procession of lizards, all wandering in the
same direction.
In his waking state Delboeuf knew only a few
Latin names of plants, and nothing of any As
plenium. To his great surprise he discovered
that a fern of this name did actually exist, and
from a comparison between the two. On the
that the correct name was Asplenium ruta muraria, which the dream had slightly distorted;
An accidental coincidence was of course incon
ceivable; yet where he got his knowledge of
the name Asplenium in the dream remained a
mystery to him.
The dream occurred in 1862. Sixteen years
later, while at the house of one of his friends,
the philosopher noticed a small album contain
ing dried plants, suchlas are sold as souvenirs
to visitors in many parts of Switzerland. A sud
den recollection came to him: he opened the
herbarium, discovered therein the Asplenium
of his dream, and recognized his own hand
writing in the accompanying Latin name. The
connection could now be traced. In i860, two
years before the date of the lizard dream, One
of his friend's sisters, while on her weddingjourney, had paid a visit to Delboeuf. She had
with her at the time this very album, which was
intended for her brother, and Delbceuf had
taken the trouble to write, at the dictation of a
botanist, the Latin name under each of the
dried plants.
The same good fortune which gave this ex
ample its unusual value enabled Delbceuf to
trace yet another portion of this dream to its
forgotten source. One day in 1877he came upon
an old volume of an illustrated periodical, in
which he found the whole procession of lizards
pictured, just as he had dreamt of it in 1862.
The volume bore the date 1861, and Delbceuf
remembered that he had subscribed to the jour
nal since its first appearance.
That dreams have at their disposal recollec
tions which are inaccessible to the waking state
is such a remarkable and theoretically impor
tant fact that I should like to draw attention
Most sublime as well; as its most ridiculous con
structions must always borrow their elementary
material either from that which our eyes have
beheldriri the outer world, or from that which
has already found; a place somewhere an our
waking thoughts; in other words, it must be
taken from that which we have already experi
enced, either objectively or subjectively."
-
B. The Material of Dreams—Memory in
Dreams
That all the material composing the content of
a dream is somehow derived from experience,
that it is reproduced or remembered in the
dream—this at least may be accepted as an in
contestable fact. Yet it would be wrong to as^
sume
that
such
a
connection
between the
dream-content and reality will be easily obvious
contrary, the;j connection
must be carefully
sought, and in quite a number of cases it may
for a long while elude discovery, The reason
for this is to be found in a number of peculiar?
ities evinced by the faculty of memory in
dreams; which peculiarities, though generally
observed, have hitherto defied explanation. It
will be worth our while to examine these char
acteristics exhaustively.
To begin with, it happens that certain ma
terial appears in the dream-content which can^
not be subsequently recognized*in the waking
state, as being part of one's knowledge and ex
perience. One remembers clearly enough hav
ing dreamed of the thing in question, but one
cannot recall the actual experience or the time
of its occurrence. The dreamer is therefore in
the dark as to the source which the dream has
tapped, and is even tempted to believe in an
independent productive activity:on the part of
the dream, until, often long afterwards,.a fresh
episode restores the memory of that former ex
perience, which had been given up for lost, and
so reveals the source, of the dream. One is there
fore forced to admit that in the dream some
thing was known and remembered that cannot
be remembered in the waking state.1
. Delboeuf relates from his own experience an
especially impressive example of this kind. He
saw in his dream the courtyard of his house
covered with snow, and found there two little
lizards, half-frozen and buried in the snow. Be
ing a lover of animals he picked them up,
warmed them, and put them back into the hole
• xVaschide even
maintains that it has often been
observed that in one's dreams one speaks foreign lan
guages more fluently and with greater purity than in
the waking state.

[145b]
The Interpretation of Dreams
141

[146a]
142
Sigmund Freud
to the point by recording yet other hypermnesic dreams. Maury relates that for some time
the word Mussidan used to occultto him dur
ing the day. He knew it to be the name of a
French city, but that was all. One night he
dreamed of a conversation with a certain per
son, who told him that she came from Mussi
dan, and, in answer to his question as to where
the city was, she replied: "Mussidan is the
principal town of a district in the department
of Dordogne." On waking, Maury gave no cre
dence to the information received in his dream;
but the gazetteer showed it to be perfectly cor
rect. In this case the superior knowledge of the
dreamer was confirmed, but it was not possible
to trace the forgotten source of this knowledge.
Jessen (p. $$) refers to a very similar inci
dent, the period of
which is more remote.
"Among others we may here mention the dream
of the elder Scaliger (Hennings, I.e., p. 300),
who wrote a poem in praise of the famous men
of Verona, and to whom a man named Brugnolus appeared in a dream, complaining that he
had been neglected. Though Scaliger could not
remember that he had heard of the man, he
wrote some verses in his honour, and his son
learned subsequently that a certain Brugnolus
had at one time been famed in Verona as a
critic."
A hypermnesic dream, especially remarkable
for the fact that a memory not at first re
called was afterwards recognized in a dream
which followed the first, is narrated by the
Marquis d'Hervey de
St.
Denis1: "I
once
dreamed of a young woman with fair golden
hair, whom I saw chatting with my sister as
she showed her a piece of embroidery. In my
dream she seemed familiar to me; I thought,
indeed, that I had seen her repeatedly. After
waking, her face was still quite vividly before
me, but I was absolutely unable to recognize it.
I fell asleep again; the dream-picture repeated
itself. In this new dream I addressed the gold
en-haired lady and asked her whether I had not
had the pleasure of meeting her somewhere.
'Of course/ she replied; 'don't you remember
the bathing-place at
Pornic?' Thereupon
I
awoke, and I was then able to recall with cer
tainty and in detail the incidents with which
this charming dream-face was connected."
The same author2 recorded that a musician
of his acquaintance once heard in a dream a
melody which was absolutely new to him. Not
until many years later did he find it in an old
1 See Vaschide, p. 232.
2 Vaschide, p. 233

[146b]
collection of musical compositions, though still
he could not remember ever having seen it
before.
I believe that Myers has published a whole
collection of such hypermnesic dreams in the
Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Re
search, but these, unfortunately, are inaccessi
ble to me. I think everyone who occupies him
self with dreams will recognize, as a very com
mon phenomenon, the fact that a dream will
give proof of the knowledge and recollection of
matters of which the dreamer, in his waking
state, did not imagine himself to be cognizant.
In my analytic investigations of nervous pa
tients, of which I shall speak later, I find that
it happens many times every week that I am
able to convince them, from their dreams, that
they are perfectly well acquainted with quota
tions, obscene expressions, etc., and make use
of them in their dreams, although they have
forgotten them in their waking state. I shall
here cite an innocent example of dream-hypermnesia, because it was easy to trace the
source of the knowledge which was accessible
only in the dream.
A patient dreamed amongst other things (in
a rather long dream) that he ordered a konr
tuszdwka in a cafe, and after telling me this he
asked me what it could be, as he had never
heard the name before. I was able to tell him
that kontuszdwka was a Polish liqueur, which
he could not have invented in his dream, as the
name had long been familiar to me from the
advertisements. At first the patient would not
believe me, but some days later, after he had
allowed his dream of the cafe to become a reg
ality, he noticed the name on a signboard at a
street corner which for some months he had
been passing at least twice a day.
I have learned from my own dreams how
largely the discovery of the origin of individual
dream-elements may be dependent on chance.
Thus, for some years before I had thought of
writing this book, I was haunted by the picture
of a church tower of fairly simple construe}
tion, which I could not remember ever having
seen. I then suddenly recognized it, with abso^
lute certainty, at a small station between Salzf
burg and Reichenhall. This was in the late
nineties, and the first time I had travelled ovet
this route was in 1886. In later years, when I
was already busily engaged in the study of
dreams, I was quite annoyed by the frequent
recurrence of the dream-image of a certain pe
culiar locality. I saw, in definite orientation to
my own person—on my left—a dark space in

[147a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
which a number of grotesque sandstone figures
stood out. A glimmering recollection, which I
did not quite believe, told me that it was the
entrance to a beer-cellar; but I could explain
neither the meaning nor
the origin of this
dream-picture: In 1907 I happened to go to
Padua, which, to my regret, I had been unable
to visit since 1895. My first visit to this beau
tiful university city had been unsatisfactory.
I had been unable to see Giotto's frescoes in
the church of the Madonna dell' Arena: I set
out for the church, but turned back on being
informed thatit was closed for the day. On my
second visit, twelve years later, I thought I
would compensate myself for this disappoint
ment, and before doing anything else I set out
for Madonna dell' Arena. In the street leading
to it, on my left, probably at the spot where I
had
turned back in 1895, I discovered the
place, with its sandstone figures, which I had
so often seen in my dream. It was, in fact, the
entrance to a restaurant garden.
One of the sources from which dreams draw
material for reproduction—material of which
some part is not recalled or utilized in our
waking thoughts—is to be found in childhood.
Here I will cite only a few of the authors who
have observed and emphasized this fact:
Hildebrandt (p. 23): "It has already been
expressly admitted that a dream sometimes
brings back to the mind, with a wonderful
power of reproduction, remote and even for
gotten experiences from the earliest periods of
one's life."
Strumpell (p. 40): "The subject becomes
more interesting still when we remember how
the dream sometimes drags out, as it were,
from the deepest and densest psychic deposits
which later years have piled upon the earliest
experiences of childhood, the: pictures of cer
tain persons, places and things, quite intact,
and in all their original freshness. This is con
fined not merely to such impressions as were
vividly perceived at the time of their occur
rence, or were associated with intense psycho
logical values, to recur later in the dream as
actual reminiscences which give
pleasure to
the waking mind. On the contrary, the depths
of the dream-memory rather contain such im
ages of persons, places, things and early,expe
riences as either possessed but little conscious
ness and no psychic value whatsoever, or have
long since lost both, and therefore appear to
tally strange and unknown, both in the dream
and in the waking state, until their early ori
gin is revealed."

[147b]
143
Volkelt (p. 119): "It is especially to be re
marked how readily infantile and youthful rem
iniscences enter into our dreams. What we
have long ceased to think about, what has long
since lost all importance for us, is constantly
recalled by the dream."
The control which the dream exercises over
material from our childhood, most of which, as
is well known, falls into the lacunae of our con
scious memory, is responsible for the produc
tion
of interesting hypermnesic dreams,
of
which I shall cite a few more examples.
Maury relates (p. 92) that as a child he
often went from his native city, Meaux, to the
neighbouring Trilport, where his father was su
perintending the construction of a bridge. One
night a dream transported him to Trilport and
he was once more playing in the streets there.
A man approached him, wearing a sort of uni
form. Maury asked him his name, and he in
troduced himself, saying that his name was G,
and that he was a bridge-guard. On waking,
Maury, who still doubted the actuality of the
reminiscence, asked his old servant, who had
been with him in his childhood, whether she
remembered a man of this name. "Of course,"
was the reply; "he used to be watchman on
the bridge which your father was building
then."
Maury records another example, which e|em-,
onstrates no less clearly the reliability of the-c
reminiscences of childhood that emerge in our.
dreams. M. F., who as a child had 1&N& in -
Montbrison, decided, after an absenceof twen-r~
ty-five years, to visit his home and the old,
friends, of his family. The night before his de
parture he dreamtthat he had reached his des
tination, and that near Montbrison he met a
man whom he did not know by sight, and who
told him that he was M. F., a friend of his
father's. The dreamer remembered that as a
child he had known a gentleman of this.name,
but on waking he could no longer recall his fea
tures. Several days later, having actually ar
rived at Montbrison, he found once more the
locality of his dream,, which he had thought
was unknown, to him, and there he met a man
whom he at once recognized as the M. F. of his
dream, with only this difference, that the real
person was very much older than his dreamimage.
Here I might relate one of my own dreams,
in which the recalled impression takes the form
of an association. In my dream I saw a man
whom I recognized, while dreaming, as the
doctor of my native town. His face was not

[148a]
144
Sigmund Freud
distinct, but his features were blended with
those of one of my schoolmasters, whom I still
meet from time to time. What association there
was between the two persons I could not dis
cover on waking; but upon questioning my
mother concerning the doctor I learned that he
was a one-eyed man. The schoolmaster, whose
image in my dream obscured that of the phy
sician, had also only one eye. I had not seen
the doctor for thirty-eight years, and as far as
I know I had never thought of him in my wak
ing state, although a scar on my chin might
have reminded me of his professional attentions.
As though to counterbalance the excessive
part which is played in our dreams by the im
pressions of childhood, many authors assert
that the majority of dreams reveal elements
drawn from our most recent experiences. Robert
(p. 46) even declares that the normal dream
generally occupies itself only with the impres
sions of the last few days. We shall find, indeed*
that the theory of the dream advanced by
Robert absolutely requires that our oldest im
pressions should be thrust into the background,
and bur most recent ones brought to the fore.
However, the fact here stated by Robert is cor
rect ; this I can confirm from my own investiga
tions. Nelson, an American author, holds that
the impressions received in a dream most fre^
quently date from the second day before the
~ilream, or from the third day before it, as
Jtbough the impressions of the day immediately
_pr£#edihg the dream were not sufficiently weak
ened and remote.
•"' Many authors who are unwilling to question
the; intimate connection between the dream-con
tent and the waking state have been struck by
the fact that the impressions which have in
tensely occupied the waking mind appear in
dreams only after they have been to some ex
tent removed from the mental activities of the
day. Thus, as a rule, we do not dream of a be
loved person who is dead while we are still
overwhelmed with sorrow (Delage). Yet Miss
Hallam, one of the most recent observers, has
collected examples which reveal the very op^
posite behaviour in this respect, and upholds
the claims of psychologicalindividuality in this
matter.
The third, most remarkable, and at the same
time most incomprehensible, peculiarity of
memory in dreams-is shown in the selection of
the material reproduced; for here it is not, as
in the waking state; onlyrthe most significant
things that are held to be worth remembering,
but also the most indifferent and insignificant

[148b]
details. In this connection I will quote:those
authors who have expressed rtheir surprise in
the most emphatic language.r
Hildebrandt (p. 11): "For it is a remarkable
fact that dreams do not, as a rule, take their
elements
from
important
and
far-reaching
events, or from the intense and urgent interests
of the preceding day, but from unimportant
incidents, from the worthless odds and ends of
recent experience or of the remoter past. The
most shocking death in our family, the impres
sions of which keep us awake long into the
night, is obliterated from our memories until
the first moment of waking brings it back to us
with distressing force. On the other hand, the;
wart on the forehead of a passing stranger, to
whom we did not give a moment's thought
once he was out of sight, finds a place in our
dreams;"
Strumpell (p. 39) speaks of "cases in which;
the analysis of a dream brings to light elements
which, although derived from the experiences
of yesterday or the day before yesterday, were
yet so unimportant and worthless for the wak
ing state that they were forgotten soon aftet
they were experienced. Some experiences may
be the chance-heard remarks of other persons^
or their superficially observed actions, or, fleet
ing perceptions of things or persons, or isolated
phrases that we have read, etc."
i
Havelock Ellis (p. 727): "The profound
emotions of wakinglife,the questionsand prob{
lems on which we spend our chief-voluntary
mental energy, are not those which usually prei
sent themselves at once to dream-conscious
ness. It is, so far as the immediate past is con-t
cerned, mostly the trifling, the incidental, the
•forgotten' impressions of daily life which rei
appear in our dreams. The psychic activities^
that are awake most intensely are those that
sleep most profoundly."
j
It is precisely in connection with these char
acteristics of memory in dreams that Bini
(p. 45) finds occasion to express dissatisfaction
with the explanations of dreams which he hinu
self had favoured:
"And the normal dread!
raises-similar questions. Why do1 we not al
ways dream :of mental impressions of therday
before, instead of going back, without any per
ceptible reason^ to the almost forgotten past,
nowlyingfair behindus? Why, in a dream, does
consciousness so often revive the impression
of indifferent memory-pictures, while the cere
bral cells that bear the most sensitive records
of experience remain for the most part inert
and numb, unless an acute revival during the

[149a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
*45
waking state has quite recently excited them?"
We can readily understand how the strange
preference shown by the dream-memory for
the indifferent and therefore disregarded' de*
tails of daily experience must commonly lead
us altogether to overlook the dependence; of
dreams on the waking state, or must at least
make it.-difficult for us to prove this depend
ence in any individual case. Thus it happened
that in the statistical treatment of her own and
her friend's, dream, Miss Whiton Calkinsrfound
that 11 per cent .of the entire number showed
no relation to the waking state. Hildebrandt
was certainly correct in his assertion that all
our
dream-images
could
be
genetically ex
plained if we devoted enough time and ma
terial to; the tracing of their origin. To be sure,
he calls this "a most tedious and thankless job.
For most often it would lead us to ferret out
all sorts of psychically worthless things from
the remotest corners of our storehouse of mem
ories, and to bring to light all sorts of quite
indifferent events of long ago from the oblivion
which may have overtaken them an hour after
their occurrence." I must, however, express my
i-egret that this discerning author refrained
from following the path which at first sight
seemed so unpromising, for it would have led
him directly to the central point of the expla
nation of dreams.
The behaviour of memory in dreams is sure
ly most significant for any theory of memory
whatsoever. It teaches us. that "nothing which
we have once psychically possessed is ever en
tirely lost" (Scholz, p. 34) ; or as Delboeuf puts
it, "que toute impression, meme la plus irtsi?
gnificante, laisse une trace inalterable, indefiniment susceptiblede reparaitre aujour";1 a con
clusion to which we are urged by so many other
pathological manifestations of mental life. Let
us bear in mind this extraordinary capacity of
the memory in dreams, in order the more keen
ly to realize the contradiction which has to be
put forward in certain dream-theories to be
mentioned later, which seek to explain the ab
surdities and incoherences of dreams by a par
tial forgetting of what we have known during
the day.
It might even occur to one to reduce the phe
nomenon of dreaming to that of remembering,
and to regard the dream as the manifestation
of a reproductive activity, unresting even at
night, which is an end in itself. This would
xThat every impression, even the most insignifi
cant, leaves an
ineradicable mark, indefinitely capa
ble of reappearing by day.—Ed.

[149b]
seem to be in agreement with statements such
as those made by Pilcz, according to which
definite relations between the time 1of dream
ing and the contents of a dream may be demon
strated, inasmuch as the impressions repro
duced by the dream in deep sleep belong to
the remote past, while those reproduced to
wards morning are of recent origin. But such a
conception is rendered improbable from the
outset by the manner in which the dream deals
with the material to be remembered, Strumpell
rightly calls our attention to the fact that repe
titions of experiences do not occur in dreams.
It is true that a dream will make a beginning in
that direction, but the next link is wanting; it
appears in a different form, or is replaced by
something entirely novel. The dream gives us
only fragmentary reproductions; this is so far
the rule that it permits of a theoretical gen
eralization. Still, there are exceptions in which
an episode is repeated in a dream as completely
as it can be reproduced by our waking memo
ry> Delboeuf relates of one of his university
colleagues that a dream of his repeated, in all
its details, a perilous drive in which he escaped
accident as if by miracle. Miss Calkins men-/
tions two dreams the contents of which exactly
reproduced an experience of the previous day,
and in a later chapter I shall have occasion to
give an example that came to my knowledge of
a childish experience which recurred unchanged
in a dream.8
G. Dream-Stimuli and Sources,
What is meant by dream-stimuli and dreamsources may be explained by a reference to the
popular saying: "Dreams come from the stom
ach." This notion covers a theory which con
ceives the dream as resulting from a disturb
ance of sleep. We should not have dreamed if
some disturbing element had not come into
play during our sleep, and the dream is the re
action against this disturbance.
The discussion of the
exciting causes of
dreams occupies a great deal of space in the
literature of dreams. It is obvious that this
problem could have made its appearance only
after dreams had become an object of biologi
cal investigation. The ancients, who conceived
of dreams as divine inspirations, had no need
2 From subsequent experience. I am, able to state
that it is not at all rare to find in dreams reproduc
tions of simple and unimportant occupations of every
day life, such as packing trunks, preparing food in the
kitchen, etc., but in such dreams the dreamer himself
emphasizes not the character of the recollection but
its "reality"—"I really did this during the day."

[150a]
146
Sigmund Freud
to look for stimuli; for them a dream was due
to the will of divine or demonic powers, and
its content was the product of their special
knowledge and intention. Science, however, im
mediately raised the question whether the stim
uli of dreams were single or multiple, and this
in turn led to the consideration whether the
causal explanation of dreams belonged to the
region of psychology or to that of physiology.
Most authors appear to assume that disturb
ance of sleep, and hence dreams, may arise
from various causes, and that physical as well
as mental stimuli may play the part of dreamexcitants. Opinions differ widely in preferring
this or the other factor as the cause of dreams,
and in classifying them in the order of im
portance.
Whenever the sources of dreams are com
pletely enumerated they fall into the following
four categories, which have also been employed
in the classification of dreams: (1) external
(objective) sensory stimuli; (2) internal (sub
jective) sensory stimuli; (3) internal (organic)
physical stimuli; (4) purely psychical sources
of excitation.
1. External sensory stimuli
The younger Striimpell, the son of the philos
opher, whose work on dreams has already more
than once served us as a guide in considering
th& problems of dreams, has, as is well known,
recorded his observations of a patient afflicted
with general anaesthesia of the skin and with
paralysis of several of the higher sensory or
gans. This man would laps into sleep whenever
the few remaining sensory paths between him
self and the outer world were closed. When we
wish to fall asleep we are accustomed to strive
for a condition similar to that obtaining in
Striimpell's experiment. We close the most im
portant sensory portals, the eyes, and we en
deavour to protect the other senses from all
stimuli or from any change of the stimuli al
ready acting upon them. We then fall asleep,
although our preparations are never wholly suc
cessful. For we can never completely insulate
the sensory organs, nor can we entirely abolish
the excitability of the sensory organs them
selves. That we may at any time be awakened
by intenser stimuli should prove to us "that
the mind has remained in constant communica
tion with the external world even during sleep."
The sensory stimuli that reach us during sleep
may easily become the source of dreams.
There are a great many stimuli of this na
ture, ranging from those unavoidable stimuli

[150b]
which are proper to the state of sleep or oc
casionally admitted by it, to those fortuitous
stimuli which are calculated to wake the sleep
er. Thus a strong light may fall upon the eyes, a
noise may be heard, or an odour may irritate
the mucous membranes of the nose. In our
unintentional movements during sleep we may
lay bare parts of the body, and thus expose
them to a sensation of cold, or by a change of
position we may excite sensations of pressure
and touch. A mosquito may bite us, or a slight
nocturnal mischance may simultaneously attack
more than one sense-organ. Observers have
called attention to a whole series of dreams in
which the stimulus ascertained on Waking and
some part of the dream-content corresponded
to such a degree that the stimulus could be
recognized as the source of the dream.
I shall here cite a number of such dreams,
collected by Jessen (p. 527), which are trace
able to more or less accidental objective sen
sory stimuli. Every noise indistinctly perceived
gives rise to corresponding dream-representa
tions; the rolling of thunder takes us into the
thick of battle, the crowing of a cock may be
transformed into human shrieks of terror, and
the creaking of a door may conjure up dreams
of burglars breaking into the house. When one
of our blankets slips off us at night we may
dream that we are walking about naked, or
falling into water. If we lie diagonally across
the bed with our feet extending beyond the
edge, we may dream of standing on the brink
of a terrifying precipice, or of falling from 4
great height. Should our head accidentally get
under the pillow we may imagine a huge rock
overhanging us and about to crush us under its
weight. An accumulation of semen produces
voluptuous dreams, and local pains give rise to
ideas of suffering ill-treatment, of hostile atj
tacks, or of accidental bodily injuries. ...
"Meier (Versuch einerErklarung des Nachtwandelns, Halle, 1758, p. $$) once dreamed of
being attacked by several men who threw him
flat on the ground and drove a stake into the
earth between his first and second toes. While
imagining this in his dream he suddenly awoke
and felt a piece of straw sticking between his
toes. The same author, according to Hemmings
(Von den Traumen und Nachtwandlern, Wei
mar, 1784, p. 258), "dreamed on another oc
casion, when his nightshirt was rather too tight
round his neck, that he was being hanged. In
his youth Hoffbauer dreamed of having fallen
from a high wall, and found, on waking, that
the bedstead had come apart, and that he had

[151a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
147
actually fallen on to the floor. . . . Gregory re
lates that he once applied a hot-water bottle to
his feet, and. dreamed of taking a trip to the
summit of Mount Etna, where he; found: the
heat of the soil almost unbearable. After hav
ing a blister applied to his head, another man
dreamed of being scalped by Indians; still an
other, whose shirt was damp, dreamed that he
was dragged through a stream. An attack of
gout caused a patient to believe that he was in
the hands of the Inquisition, and suffering the
pains of torture (Macnish)."
The argument that there is a resemblance
between the dream-stimulus and the dreamcontent would be confirmed if, by a systematic
induction of stimuli, we should succeed in pro
ducing dreams corresponding to these stimuli.
According to Macnish such experiments had al
ready been made by Giron de Buzareingues.
"He left his knee exposed and dreamed of
travelling on a mail-coach by night. He re
marked, in this connection, that travellers were
well aware how cold the knees become in a
coach at night. On another occasion he left
the back of his head uncovered, and dreamed
that he was taking part in a religious ceremony
in the open air. In the country where he lived
it
was customary to keep the head always
covered except on occasions of this kind."
Maury reports fresh observation on selfinduced dreams of his own. (A number of other
experiments were unsuccessful.)
i. He was tickled with.,a feather on his lips
and on the tip of his nose. He.dreamed of an
awful torture, viz., that a mask of pitch was
stuck to his face and then forcibly torn off,
bringing the skin with it.
2. Scissors were whetted against a pair of
tweezers. He heard bells ringing, then sounds
of tumult which took him back to the days of
the Revolution of 1848.
3. Eau de Cologne was held to his nostrils.
He found himself in Cairo, in the
shop of
Johann Maria Farina. This was followed by
fantastic adventures which he was not able to
recall.
4. His neck was lightly pinched. He dreamed
that a blister was being applied, and thought of
a doctor who had treated him in childhood.
5. A hot iron was brought near his face. He
dreamed that chauffeurs1 hadvbroken into, the
house, and were forcing the occupants to give
up their money by thrusting their feet into,
braziers. The Duchesse d'Abrantes, whose sec1 Chauffeurs were bands of robbers in the Vendee
who resorted to this form of torture.

[151b]
retary he imagined himself to be then entered
the room.
-1
6.' A drop of water was allowed to fall on to
his forehead. He. imagined himself in Italy, per--
spiring heavily, and drinking the white wine of
Orvieto.:
7. When the light of a candle screened with
red paper was allowed to fall on his face, he.
dreamed of thunder, of heat, and of a storm at
sea which he once witnessed in the English 1
Channel.
Hervey, Weygandt, and others have made a,U
tempts to produce dreams experimentally.
Many have observed the striking skill of the
dream in interweaving into its structure sud
den impressions from the outer world, in such a
manner as to represent a gradually approaching
catastrophe (Hildebrandt). "In former, years,"
this author relates, "I occasionally made use
of an alarm-clock in order to wake punctually
at a certain hour in the morning. It probably
happened hundreds of times that the sound of
this instrument fitted into an apparently very
long and connected dream, as though the entire
dream had been especially designed for it, as
though it found in this sound its appropriate
and logicallyindispensable climax,its inevitable
denouement."
I shall presently have occasion to cite three
of these alarm-clock dreams in a different con
nection.
Volkelt (p. 68) relates: "A composer once
dreamed that he was teaching a class, and was
just explaining something to his pupils. When
he had finished he turned to one of the boys
with the question: 'Did you understand me?'
The boy cried out like one possessed 'Oh, ja!'
Annoyed by this, he reprimanded his pupil for
shouting. But now the entire class was scream
ing 'Orja,' then 'Eurjo,' and finally 'Feuer}©.'
He was then aroused by the actual fire alarm
in the street."
Gamier (Traite des facultes de Vame, 1865),
on the authority of Radestock, relates that
Napoleon I, while sleeping in a carriage, was
awakened from a dream by an explosion which
took him back to the crossing of the Tagliamento and the bombardment of the Austrians,
so that he started up, crying, "We have been
undermined."
The following dream of Maury's has become
celebrated: He was ill in bed; his mother was
sitting beside him. He dreamed of the Reign of
Terror during the Revolution. He witnessed
some terrible scenes of murder, and finally he
himself was summoned before the Tribunals

[152a]
148
SlGMUND FEEUD
There he saw Robespierre, Marat, FouquierTinville, and all the sorry heroes of those ter
rible days; be had to give an account of him
self, and after all manner of incidents which did
hot fix themselves inhis memory\ he was:sen
tenced to death. Accompanied by an enormous
crowd, he was led to the place of execution. He
mounted the scaffold; the executioner tied him
to the plank, it tipped over, and the knife of the
guillotine fell. He felt his head severed from his
trunk, and awakened in terrible anxiety, only
to
find that the head-board of the bed had
fallen, and
had
actually struck the; cervical
vertebrae just where the knife of the guillo
tine would have fallen.
This dream gave rise to an interesting dis
cussion, initiated by Le Lorrain and Egger in
the Revue Philosophique, as to whether, and
how, it was possible for the dreamer to crowd
together an amount of dream-content apparent
ly so large in the short space of time elapsing
between the perception of the waking stimulus
and the moment of actual waking.
Examples of this nature show that objective
stimuli occurring in sleep are among the most
firmly-established of all the sourcesof dreams;
they are, indeed, the only stimuli of which the
layman knows anything whatever. If we ask an
educated person who is not familiar with the
literature of dreams how dreams originate, he
is certain to reply by a reference to a case
known to him in which a dream has been ex
plained after waking by a recognized objective
stimulus. Science, however, cannot stop here,
but is incited to further investigation by the
observation that the stimulus influencing the
senses during sleep does not appear in the
dream at all in its true form, but is replaced
by some other representation, which is in some
way related to it. But the relation existing be
tween the stimulus and the resulting dream is,
according to Maury, "une affiniti quelconque
maisquin'est pasunique et exclusive"1 (p. 72).
If we read, for example, three of Hildebrandt's
"alarm-clock dreamsj" we shall be compelled
to ask why the same casual stimulus evoked so
many different results, and why just these re
sults and no others.
(P- 37) • "I am taking a walk on a beautiful
spring morning. I stroll through the green
meadows to a neighbouring village, where I see
numbers of the inhabitants going to church,
wearing their best clothes and carrying their
hymn-books under their arms. I remember that
1A
sort of
relation
which
unique nor exclusive.—Ed.
is,
however,
neither

[152b]
it is Sunday, and that the morning service will
soon begin. I decide to attend it, but as I am
rather overheated I think I will wait in the
churchyard until I am cooler. While reading
the various epitaphs, I hear the sexton climb
ing the church-tower, and I see above me the
small bellwhich is about to ring for the begin
ning of service. For a little while it hangs
motionless; then it begins to swing, and sud
denly its notes resound so clearly and pene
tratingly that my sleep comes to an end. But
the notes of the bell come from the alarmclock."
"A second combination. It is a bright winter
day; the streets are deep in snow. I have prom
ised to go on a sleigh-ride, but I have to wait
some time before I am told that the sleigh is at
the door. Now I am preparing to get into the
sleigh. I put on my furs, the foot-warmeris put
in, and at last I have taken my seat. But still
my departure is delayed. At last the reins are
twitched, the horses start, and the sleighbells,
now violently shaken, strike up their familiar
music with a force that instantly tears the
gossamer of my dream. Again it is only the
shrill note of my alarm-clock."
"Yet a third example. I see the kitchen-maid
walking along the passage to the dining-room,
with a pile of several dozen plates. The porce
lain column in her arms seems to me to be in
danger of losing its equilibrium. 'Take care,' I
exclaim, 'you will drop the whole pile!' The
usual retort is naturally made-—that she is used
to such things, etc. Meanwhile I continue to
follow her with my anxious gaze, and behold,
at the threshold the fragile plates fall and crash
and roll across the floor in hundreds of pieces*
But I soon perceive that the endless din is not
really a rattling but a true ringing, and with
this ringing the dreamer now becomes aware
that the alarm-clock has done its duty."
The question why the dreaming mind mis
judges the nature of the objective sensory
stimulus has been answered by Striimpell, and
in an almost identical fashion by Wundt; their
explanation is that the reaction of the mind to
the stimulus attacking sleep is complicated and
confused by the formation of illusions. A sen
sory impression is recognized by us and cor
rectly interpreted—that is, it is classed with
the memory-group to'which it belongs accord
ing to all previous experience if the impression
is strong, clear, and sufficiently prolonged^ and
if we have sufficient time to submit it to those
mental processes. But if these conditions are
hot fulfilled we mistake the object which gives

[153a]
The Interrelation of Dreams
149
rise to the.impression;and on the:basis of this
impression we; construct an illusion, "If one
takes a walk -iniah open field and perceives, in
distinctly a distant object, it may happen that
one will at first take-it for a horse." On closer
inspection the image of a cow, resting, may
obtrude itselfv:ahd the picture may finally re
solve itself with: certainty into a grbtip of peo
ple.sitting on the ground. The impressions
which the mind; receives during sleep from exr
ternal stimulinare of a similarly indistinct na-f
ture; they give rise to illusions becausethe imr
pression evokes a greater or lesser number of
memory-images, through which it acquires its
psychic value. As for the question, in which of
the many possible spheres of,memory the cor
responding images are aroused, and which of
the-possible associative connections are brought
into play, that—to quote Striimpell againr-is
indeterminable, and is left, as it were,-.to the
caprices of the mind.
.-. • ,
Here we may take our choice. We may admit
that the laws of dream-formation cannot really
be traced any further, and so refrain from ask
ing whether or not the;interpretation of the
illusion evoked by the sensory impression de?-
pends upon still other conditions; or we may
assume that the objective sensory stimulus
encroaching :upon sleep plays only a modest
role as a dream-source, and that other factors
determine the choice of the memory-image to
be evoked. Indeed, on carefully examining
Maury's
experimentally produced
dreams,
which I have purposely cited in detail, one is
inclined to object that his investigations trace
the origin of only one element of the dreams,
and that the rest of the dream-content seems
too independent and too full of detail to be ex
plained by a single requirement, namely, that it
must correspond with the element experimen
tally introduced. Indeed, one even begins to
doubt the illusion theory, and the power of ob
jective impressions to shape the dream, when
one realizes that such impressions are some
times subjected to the most peculiar and far
fetched interpretations in our dreams. Thus M.
Simon tells of a dream in which he saw persons
of gigantic stature1 seated at a table, and heard
distinctly the horrible clattering produced, by
the impact of their jaws as they chewed tneir
1 Gigantic persons in a dream justify the assump
tion that the dream is dealing with a scene from the
dreamer's childhood. This interpretation of. the dream
as a reminiscence of Gulliver's Travels is, by the way;
a good example of how an interpretation should not
be made. The dream-interpreter should not permit his
own intelligence to operate in disregard of the dream
er's impressions.

[153b]
food. On waking he heard the clatter of 3
horse's hooves as it galloped past his window^ If
in tifcris case the sound of the horse's hooves had
revived ideas from the memory-sphere of Gul
liver's Travels, the sojourn with the giants of
Brobdingnag,;and the virtuous horse-like crea
tures—as I should,perhaps.interpret the dream
without. any assistance on the author's part-^
ought not the choice of a memoryvsphere so
alien to the stimulus to be further elucidated
by other motives?
2.Internal (subjective)) sensorystimuli
All objections to the contrary notwithstand
ing, we must admit that the role of the objec
tive sensory stimuli as producers of dreams
has been indisputably established, and if\> havingi,regard to their nature and their:frequency;
these stimuli seem perhaps insufficient to ex
plain all dream-pictures, this indicates that we
should look for other dream-sources which act
in a similar fashion. I do not know where the
idea first arose that together with the external
sensory stimuli the internal (subjective) stim
uli should also be considered, but as a matter
of fact this has been done more or less explic
itly in all:the more recent descriptions of the
aetiology of dreams. "I believe," says Wundt
(p. 363), "that an important part is played in
dream-illusions by those subjective sensations
of sight and hearing which are familiar to us
in the waking state as a luminous chaos in the
dark field of the vision, and a ringing, buzzing;
etc., of the ears, and in especial,subjective irri
tations of the retina. This explains the remarki
able tendency of dreams to delude the eyes with
numbers of similar or identical objects. Thus
we see outspread before our eyes innumerable
birds, butterflies, fishes, colouredbeadsyflowersetc. Here the luminous dust in the dark field of
vision has assumed fantastic forms, and the
many luminous points of which it consists are
embodied in our dreams in as many single im
ages, which, owing to the mobility ofithe lumi
nous chaos, are seen as moving objects. This is
perhaps the reason of the dream's decidedpref
erence: for the most varied animal forms, for
owing to the multiplicity of such forms they
can readily adapt themselves to the subjective
luminous images."
<
The subjective sensory stimuli as a source of
dreams have the obvious advantage that, un
like objective stimuli, they are independent of
external accidents. They are, so to speak, at
the disposal of the interpretation whenever
they are required. But they are inferior^ to the

[154a]
150
SlGMTJND
objective sensory stimuli by the fact that their
claim to the role of dream-inciters—which ob
servation and experiment have established in
the case of objective stimuli—can in their case
be verified with difficulty or not at alL The
main proof of the dream-inciting power of sub
jective sensory stimuli is afforded by the socalled hypnogogic hallucinations, which have
been described by Johann Miiller as "phantastic visual manifestations." They are those very
vivid and changeable pictures which with many
people occur constantly during the period of
falling asleep, and which may linger for a
while even after the eyes have been opened.
Maury, who was very subject to these pictures,
made a thorough study of them, and main
tained that they were related to or rather iden
tical with dream-images. This had already been
asserted by Johann Miiller. Maury maintains
that a certain psychic passivity is necessary for
their origin; that it requires a relaxation of the
intensity of attention (p. 50). But one may
perceive a hypnogogic hallucination in any
frame of mind if one falls into such a lethargy
for a moment, after which one may perhaps
wake up, until this oft-repeated process termi
nates in sleep. According to Maury, if one
wakes up shortly after such an experience, it
is often possible to trace in the dream the im
ages which one has perceived before falling
asleep as hypnogogic hallucinations (p. 134).
Thus Maury on one occasion saw a series of
images of grotesque figures with distorted fea
tures and curiously dressed hair, which ob
truded themselves upon him with incredible
importunity during the period of falling asleep,
and which, upon waking, he recalled having seen
in his dream. On another occasion, while suffer
ing from hunger, because he was subjecting
himself to a rather strict diet, he saw in one of
his hypnogogic states a plate, and a hand armed
with a fork taking some food from the plate.
In his dream he found
himself at a
table
abundantly supplied with food, and heard the
clatter of the diner's forks. On yet another oc
casion, after falling asleep with strained and
painful eyes, he had a hypnogogic hallucination
of microscopically small characters, which he
was able to decipher, one by one, only with a
great effort; and on waking from sleep an hour
later he recalled a dream in which there was an
open book with very small letters, which he was
obliged to read through with laborious effort.
Not only pictures, but auditory hallucina
tions of words, names, etc., may also occur
hypnogogicaHy, and then repeat themselves in

[154b]
Freud
the dream, like an overture announcing the
principal motif of the opera which is to follow.
A more recent observer of hypnogogic hal
lucinations, G. Trumbull Ladd, follows the
same lines as Johann Miiller and Maury. By
dint of practice he succeeded in acquiring the
faculty of suddenly arousmg-himself, without
opening his eyes, two
to five minutes after
gradually falling asleep. This enabled him to
compare the
disappearing retinal sensations
with the dream-images remaining in his mem
ory. He assures us that an intimate relation=
between the two can always be recognized, in
asmuch as the luminous dots and lines of light
spontaneously perceived by the retina produce,
so to speak, the outline or scheme of the psy
chically perceived dream-images. For example,
a dream in which he saw before him clearly
printed lines, which he read and studied, cor
responded with a number of luminous spots
arranged in parallel lines; or, to express it in
his own words: The clearly printed page re
solved itself into an object which appeared to
his waking perception like part of an actual
printed page seen through a small hole in a
sheet of paper, but at a distance too great to
permit of its being read. Without in any way
underestimating the central element of the phe
nomenon, Ladd believes that hardly any visual
dream occurs in our minds that is not based
on material furnished by this internal condi
tion of retinal irritability. This is particularly
true of dreams which occur shortly after falling
asleep in a dark room, while dreams occurring^
in the morning, near the period of waking, re
ceive their stimulus from the objective light
penetrating the eye in a brightly-lit room. The!
shifting and infinitely variable character of the;
spontaneous luminous excitations of. the retina
exactly corresponds with the fitful succession of
images presented to us in our dreams. If we at-;
tach any importance to Ladd's observations,
we cannot underrate the productiveness of this!
subjective source of stimuli; for visual images,!
as we know, are the principal constituents of
our dreams. The share contributed by the other
senses, excepting, perhaps, the sense of hear
ing, is relatively insignificant and inconstant.
3. Internal (organic) physical stimuli
If we are disposed to look for the sources of
dreams not outside but inside the organism, we
must remember that almost all our internal or
gans, which in a state of health hardly remind;
us of their existence, may, in states of excita
tion—as we call them—or in disease, become

[155a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
a source of the most painful sensations, and
must therefore be put on a par with the exter
nal excitants of pain and sensation. Strumpell,
for example, gives expression to a long-familiar
experience when he declares that ''during sleep
the psyche becomes far more deeply and broad
ly conscious of its. coporality than in the wak
ing state, and it is compelled to receive and to
be influenced by certain stimulating impressions
originating in parts of the body, and in alter
ations of the body, of which it is unconscious
in the waking state." Even Aristotle declares
it to be quite possible that a dream may draw
our attention to incipient morbid conditions
which we have not noticed in the waking state
(owing to the exaggerated intensity of the im
pressions experienced in the dream1; and some
medical authors, who certainly did not believe
in the prophetic nature of dreams, have ad
mitted the significance of dreams, at least in so
far as the predicting of disease is concerned.
[Cf.
M.
Simon,
p.
31,
and
many
earlier
writers.2])
Even in our days there seems to be no lack
of authenticated examples of such diagnostic
achievements on
the part of
dreams. Thus
Tissie cites from Artigues (Essai sur la valeur
sdmSiologiquedes Reves) the history of a wom
an of forty-three, who, during several years of
apparently perfect health, was troubled with
anxiety-dreams, and in whom a medical exami
nation subsequently revealed an incipient af
fection of the heart, to which she presently
succumbed.
Serious derangements of the internal organs
clearly excite dreams in quite a number of per
sons. The frequency of anxiety-dreams in dis
eases of the heart and lungs has been generally
realized; indeed, this function of the dreamlife is emphasized by so many writers that I
1 Cf. above, p. 137.
2 In addition to the diagnostic valuation of dreams
(e.g., by Hippocrates) mention must also be made of
their therapeutic significance in antiquity.
Among the Greeks there were dream oracles, which
were vouchsafed to patients in quest of recovery. The
patient betook himself to
the temple of
Apollo or
Aesculapius;
there he was subjected to various cere
monies, bathed, rubbed and perfumed. A state of ex
altation
having
been
thus
induced,
he
was
made
to lie down in the temple on the skin of a sacrificial
ram. He
fell asleep and dreamed of remedies, which
he saw in their natural form, or in symbolic images
which the priests afterwards interpreted.
For
further
references
concerning
the
remedial
dreams of the Greeks, cf. Lehmann, i, 74;
BoucheLeclerq;
Hermann,
Gottesd.
Altert.
d.
Gr., §41;
Privataltert. § 38, 16; Bottinger in Sprengel's Beitr.
z. Gesch. d. Med., ii, p. 163, et seq.; W. Lloyd, Mag
netism and Mesmerism in Antiquity, London, 1877;
Dollinger, Heidentum und Judentum, p. 130.

[155b]
151
shall here content myself with a reference to
the literature
of
the
subject
(Radestock,
Spitta,
Maury,
M.
Simon,
Tissie).
TissiS
even believes that the diseased organs impress
upon the dream-content its characteristic fea
tures. The dreams of persons suffering from
diseases of the heart are generally very bnrief,
and end in a terrified awakening; death under
terrible circumstances
almost always find a
place in their content. Those suffering from
diseases of the lungs dream of suffocation, of
being crushed, and of flight, and a great many
of them are subject to the familiar nightmare
—which, by the way, Bonier has succeeded in
inducing experimentally by lying on the face
and covering the mouth and nostrils. In diges
tive disturbances
the
dream
contains
ideas
from the sphere of gustatory enjoyment and
disgust. Finally, the influence of sexual excite*
ment on the dream-content is obvious enough
in everyone's experience, and
provides
the
strongest confirmation of the whole theory of
dream-instigation by organic sensation.
Moreover, if we study the literature of dreams
it becomes quite evident that some writers
(Maury, Weygandt) have been led to
the
study of dream-problems by the influence their
own pathological state has had on the content
of their dreams.
.
The enlargement of the number of dreamsources by such undeniably established facts is,
however, not so important as one might be led
to suppose; for dreams are, after all, phenom
ena which occur in healthy persons—-perhaps
in all persons, and every night—and a patho
logical state of the organs is evidently not one
of the indispensable conditions. For us, how
ever, the
question is not whence
particular
dreams originate, but rather: what is the excit
ing cause of ordinary dreams in normal people?
But we have only to go a step farther to
find a source of dreams which is more prolific
than any of those mentioned above, and which
promises indeed to be inexhaustible. If it is es
tablished that the bodily organs become, in
sickness, an-exciting source of dreams, and if
we admit that the mind, when diverted during
sleep from the outer world, can devote more
of its attention to the interior of the body, we
may readily assume that the organs need not
necessarily become diseased in order to permit
stimuli, which in one way or another grow into
dream-images,
to
reach the
sleeping mind.
What in the waking state we vaguely perceive
as a general sensation, perceptible by its quali
ty alone—a sensation to which, in the opinion,

[156a]
r52
Sigmund Freud
of physicians, all the organic systems contrib
ute their share—this general sensation would
-;.at night attain a greater potency, and, acting
through its individual components, would con
stitute the most prolific as well as the most
usual
source
of
dream-representations.
We
should then haveto discover the laws by which
organic
stimuli are
translated into
dreamrepresentations.
r This theory of the origin of dreams is the
rone most favoured by all medical writers. The
obscurity which conceals the essence of our
heing--rthe."moi splanchnique"'as Tissie terms
it—from our knowledge, and the obscurity of
the origin of dreams, correspond so closely that
it was inevitable that they should be brought
into relation with one another. The theory ac-
:cording tor which the organic sensations are re^
sponsible for dreams has, moreover, another
attraction for
the physician, inasmuch a& it
favours the aetiological union of the dream with
mental derangement, both of which reveal so
many points of agreement in their manifesta
tions, since changes in the general organic mas
sive sensation and in the stimuli emanating
from the internal organs are also considered
to have a far-reaching significance as regards
the origin of the psychoses. It is therefore not
surprising that the organic stimulus theory can
be traced to several writers who have pro
pounded this theory independently.
A.number of writers have followed the train
of thought developed by Schopenhauer in 1851:
Our conception of the universe has its origin
in the recasting by the intellect of the impres-?
sions which reach it from without in the riioulds
of.time, space and causality. During the day
the stimuli proceeding from the interior of the
organism, from the sympathetic nervous sys
tem, exert at most an unconscious influence
on our-mood. At night, however, when the
overwhelming effect of the impressions of the
day is no longer operative, the impressions that
surge upward from within are able to force
themselves on our attention—just as in the
night we hear the rippling of(the brook that
was drowned in the clamour of the day. rBut
how else can the intellect react to these stimuli
than by transforming them in. accordance with
its
own function into things whith occupy
space and time and follow the lines of causali
ty?—and so a dream originates. Thus Schemer,
and after him Volkelt, endeavoured to discover
the more intimate relations between physical
sensations and dreamrpictures; but we, shall
reserve the discussion of this point for our

[156b]
chapter on the theory of dreams.
As a result of a singularly logical analysis, the
-psychiatrist
Krauss
referred
the
origin
of
dreams, and also of deliria and delusions, to
the same element, namely, to organically deter
mined sensations. According to him, there is
hardly any part of the organism which might
not become the startingrpoint of a dream or a
delusion. Organically determined sensations, he
•says,
"may be divided into two classes: (1)
general sensations-^those affecting the whole
system; (2) specific sensations—thosethat are
immanent in the principal systems of the vege
tative organism, and which may in turn be sub
divided into five groups:
(a) the muscular,
(b) the pneumatic, (c) the gastric;; (d) the sex
ual,(e) the peripheral sensations (p. 33 of the
second article)."
I
-The origin of the dream-image from physi
cal sensations is conceived by Krauss as fol
lows: The awakened sensation, in accordance
with some law of association, evokes an ide'a
or image bearing some relation to it, and com
bines with this idea or image, forming an or
ganic structure, towards which, however; the
consciousness does not maintain its normal at
titude. For it does not bestow any attention on
the sensation, but concerns itself entirely with
the accompanying ideas; and this explains wiry
the facts of the case have been so long mis
understood (p. 11 if.).. Krauss even gives this
process the special name of "transubstantiation
of the sensations into dream-images"
(p^ 24).
The influence of organic physical stimulidn
the formation of dreams is today almost 'uni
versally admitted, but the question as to the
nature of the law underlying this relation is
answered in various ways, and often obscurely.
On the basis of the theory of physical excita
tion the special task of dream-interpretation is
to trace back the content of a dream to tlje
causative organic stimulus, and if we do not
accept the rules of interpretation advanced %
Schemer, we shall often find ourselves con
fronted by the awkward fact that the organic
source of excitation reveals itself only in tlje
content of the dreams
;
i
A certainagreement, however, appears m tie
interpretation of the various forms of dreams
which have been designated as c%pical," be
cause they recur in so many persons with al
most the same content. Among these are the
well-known dreams of falling from a height*
of the dropping out of teeth,: of flying, and of
embarrassment because one is naked or scanti
ly clad. This last type of dream is said to be

[157a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
caused simply by the dreamer's perception, felt
in his sleep, that he has thrown off the bed
clothes and is uncovered. The dream that one's
teeth are dropping out is explained by "dental
irritation," which does not, however, of neces
sity imply a morbid condition of irritability in
the teeth. According to Striimpell, the flying
dream is the adequate,image employed by the
mind to interpret the quantum of stimulus ema
nating from the rising and sinking of the pulmor
nary lobes when the cutaneous sensation of the
thorax has lapsed into insensibility. This latter
condition causes the sensation which gives rise
to images of hovering in the air. The dream of
falling from a height is said to be due to the
fact that an arm falls away from the body, or
a flexed knee is suddenly extended, after un
consciousness of the
sensation of cutaneous
pressure has supervened, whereupon this sen
sation returns to consciousness, and the transi
tion from unconsciousness to consciousness em
bodies itself psychically as a dream of falling
(Striimpell, p. 118). The weakness of these
fairly plausible attempts at explanation clearly
lies in the fact that without any further eluci
dation they allow this or that group of organic
sensations to disappear from psychic percep
tion, or to obtrude themselves upon it, until
the constellation favourable
for the explana
tion has been established. Later on, however, I
shall have occasion to return to the subject of
typical dreams and their origin.
From a comparison of a series of similar
dreams, M. Simon endeavoured to formulate
certain rules governing the influence of organic
sensations on the nature of the resulting dream.
He says (p. 34): "If during sieep any organic
apparatus, which normally participates in the
expression of an affect, for any reason enters
into the state of excitation to which it is usu
ally aroused by the affect, the dream thus pro
duced will contain representations which har
monize with that affect."
Another rule reads as follows (p. 35): "If,
during sleep, an organic apparatus is in a state
of activity, stimulation, or disturbance, the
dream will present ideas which correspond with
the nature of the organic function performed
by that apparatus."
Mourly Void has undertaken to prove the
supposed influence of bodily sensation on the
production of dreams by experimenting on a
single physiological territory. He changed the
positions of a sleeper's limbs, and compared the
resulting dreams with these changes. He re
corded the following results:

[157b]
153
1. The position of a limb in a dream cor*
responds approximately to that of reality, i.e.,
we dream of a static condition of the limb
which corresponds with the actual conditions
2. When one dreams of a moving limb it al
ways happens that one of the positions occur
ring in the execution of this movement-corre
sponds with the actual position.
3. The position of one's own limb may in
the dream be attributed to another person.
4.
One may also dream that the movement
in question is impeded.
5. The limb in any particular position may
appear in the dream as an animal or monster,
in which case a certain analogy between the
two is established.
6. The behaviour of a limb may in the
dream incite ideas which bear some relation or
other to this limb. Thus, for example, if we are
using bur fingers we dream of numerals. =
Results such as these would lead me to con
clude that even the theory of organic stimula
tion cannot entirely abolish the apparent free
dom of the determination of the drean>picture
which will be evoked.1
4. Psychic sources of excitation
When considering the relation of dreams to
waking life, and the provenance of the ma
terial of dreams, we learned that the earliest as
well as the most recent investigators are agreed
that men dream of what they do during the
day, and of the things that interest them in
the waking state. This interest, continued from
waking life into sleep, is not only a psychic
bond, joining the dream to life, but it is also a
source of dreams whose importance must hot
be underestimated, and which, taken together
with those .stimuli which become active and of
interest during sleep, suffices to explain the ori
gin of all dream-images. Yet we have also heard
the very contrary of this asserted; namely, that
dreams bear the sleeper away from the inter
ests of the day, and that in most cases we do
not dream of things which have occupied our
attention during the day until after they have
lost, for our waking life, the stimulating force
of belonging to the present. Hence in the analy
sis of dream-life we are reminded at every step
that it is inadmissible to frame general rules
without making provision for qualifications by
introducing such terms as "frequently," "as a
1 See below for a further discussion of the two vol
umes of records
of dreams since published by this
writer.

[158a]
154
-•'"
SlGMUND
rule," "in most cases," and without being pre
pared to admit the validity of exceptions.
If interest during the waking state, together
with the internal and external stimuli that^oc
cur during sleep, sufficed to cover the whole
aetiology of dreams, we should be in a,position
to give a satisfactory account of the origin of
all the elements of a dream; the problem of
the dream-sources would then be solved, leav
ing us only the task of discriminating between
the part played by the psychic and that played
by
the
somatic
dream-stimuli in individual
dreams. But as a matter of fact no such com
plete solution of a dream has ever been achieved
in any case, and everyone who has attempted
such a solution has found that components of
the dream—and usually a great many of them
-—are left whose source he is unable to trace.
The.interests of the day as a psychic source of
dreams are obviously not so influential as to
justify
the
confident
assertion
that
every
dreamer continues the activities of his waking
life in his dreams.
Other dream-sources of a psychic nature are
not known. Hence, with the exception perhaps
of the explanation of dreams given by Schemer,
to which reference will be made later on, all the
explanations found in the literature of the sub
ject show a considerable hiatus whenever there
is a question of tracing the images and ideas
which are the most characteristic material of
dreams. In this dilemma the majority of au
thors have developed a tendency to belittle as
far as possible the share of the psychic factor,
which is so difficult to determine, in the evoca
tion of dreams. To be sure, they distinguish as
major divisions the nerve-stimulus dream and
the association-dream, and assert that the latter
has
its
source
exclusively
in
reproduction
(Wundt, p. 365), but they cannot dismiss the
doubt as to "whether they appear without any
impulsion from organic stimuli" (Volkelt, p.
i27).,And even the characteristic quality of
the pure association-dream disappears. To quote
Volkelt (p. 118): "In the association-dream
proper, there is no longer any question of such
a stable nucleus. Here the loose grouping pene
trates even to the very centre of the dream.
The imaginative life, already released from the
control of reason and intellect, is here no longer
held together by the more important psychical
and physical stimuli, but is left to its own un
controlled and confused divagations." Wundt,
too, attempts to belittle the psychic factor in
the evocation of dreams by asserting that "the
phantasms of the dream are perhaps unjustly

[158b]
Freud
regarded as pure hallucinations. Probably most
dream-representations are really illusions, inas
much as they-emanate from the slight sensory
impressions which are never extinguished dur
ing sleep"
(p. 359, et seq.). Weygandt has
adopted this view, and generalizes upon it. He
asserts that "the most immediate causes of all
dream-representations are sensory stimuli to
which reproductive associations then attach
themselves" (p. 17). Tissie goes still further
in suppressing the psychic sources of excita
tion
(p. 183): uLes reves aborigine absolument
psychique
n*existent
pas";1 and
elsewhere
(p. 6), "Les- pensees de nos reves nous viennent
de dehors...."2
Those writers who, like the eminent phi
losopher Wundt, adopt a middle course, do not
hesitate to assert that in most dreams there is
a cooperation of the somatic stimuli and psy
chic stimuli which are either unknown or are
identified with the interests of the day.
We shall learn later that the problem df
dream-formation may be solved by the dis
closure
of
an
entirely unsuspected psychic
source of excitation. In the meanwhile we shall
not be surprised at the over-estimation of the
influence of those stimuli which do not origi
nate in the psychic life. It is not merely be
cause they alone may easily be found, and even
confirmed by experiment, but because the so
matic conception of the origin of dreams en
tirely corresponds with the mode of thought
prevalent in modern psychiatry. Here, it is
true, the mastery of the brain over the organ
ism is most emphatically stressed; but every
thing that might show that the psychic life is
independent of demonstrable organic changes,
or spontaneous in its manifestations, is alarm
ing to the contemporary psychiatrist, as though
such an admission must mean a return to the
old-world natural philosophy and the meta
physical conception of the nature of the soul.
The distrust of the psychiatrist has placed the
psyche under tutelage, so to speak; it requires
that none of the impulses of the psyche shall
reveal an autonomous power. Yet this attitude
merely betrays a lack of confidence in the sta
bility of the causal concatenation between the
physical and the psychic. Even where on in
vestigation the psychic may be recognized as
the primary cause of a phenomenon, a more
profound comprehension of the subject will one
1 Dreams
do
not
exist
whose
origin
is
totally
psychic.—Ed.
2 The thoughts of our dreams come from outside.-—
Ed.

[159a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
day succeed in following up the path that leads
to the .organic basis x>f -the:.psychic. But where
the psychic must, in the present state of our
knowledge, be accepted as the terminus, it need
not on that account be disavowed.
D. Why Dreams Are Forgotten After Waking
That a dream fades away in the morning is
proverbial. It is, indeed, possible to recall it.
For we know the dream, of course, only by
recalling it after waking; but we very often be
lieve that we remember it incompletely, that
during the night there was more of it than we
remember. We may observe how the memory
of a dream which in the morning was still
vivid fades in the course of the day, leaving
only a few trifling remnants. We are often
aware that we have been dreaming, but we do
not know of what we have dreamed; and we
are so well used to this fact—that the dream is
liable to be forgotten—that we do not reject
as absurd the possibility that we may have been
dreaming even when, in the morning, we know
nothing either of the content of the dream or
of the fact that we have dreamed. On the other
hand, it often happens that dreams manifest
an extraordinary power of maintaining them
selves in the memory. I have had occasion to
analyse, with my patients, dreams which oc
curred to them twenty-five years or more pre
viously, and I can remember a dream of my
own which is divided from the present day by
at least thirty-seven years, and yet has lost
nothing of its freshness in my memory. All this
is very remarkable, and for the present incom
prehensible.
The forgetting of dreams is treated in the
most detailed manner by Striimpell. This for
getting is evidently a complex phenomenon; for
Striimpell attributes it not to a single cause,
but to quite a number of causes.
In the first place, all those factors which in
duce forgetfulness in the waking state deter
mine also the forgetting
of dreams. In the
waking state we commonly very soon forget a
great many sensations and perceptions because
they are too slight to remember, and because
they are charged with only a slight amount of
emotional feeling. This is true also of many
dream-images; they are forgotten because they
are too weak, while the stronger images in their
neighbourhood are remembered. However, the
factor of intensity is in itself not the only de
terminant of the preservation of dream-images;
Striimpell, as well as other authors (Calkins),
admits that dream-images are often rapidly for

[159b]
155
gotten although they are known to have been
vivid, whereas, among those that are retained
in the memory, there are many that are very
shadowy and unmeaning.Besides,in the waking
state one is wont to forget rather easily things
that have happened only once, and to remem
ber more readily things which occur repeat
edly. But most dream-images are unique ex
periences,1and this peculiarity wduld contribute
towards the forgetting of all dreams equally.
Of much greater significance is a third cause of
forgetting. In order that feelings, representa
tions, ideas and the like should attain a certain
degree of memorability, it is important that
they should not remain isolated, but that they
should enter into connections and associations
of an appropriate nature. If the words of a
verse of poetry are taken and mixed together,
it will be very difficult to remember them.
"Properly placed, in a significant sequence, one
word helps another, and the whole, making
sense, remains and is easily and lastingly fixed
in the memory. Contradictions, as a rule, are
retained with just as much difficulty and just
as rarely as things that are confused and dis
orderly." Now dreams, in most casesj lack sense
and order. Dream-compositions, by their very
nature, are insusceptible of being remembered,
and they are forgotten because as a rule they
fall to pieces the very next moment. To be
sure, these conclusions are not entirely consist
ent with Radestock's observation (p. 168), that
we most readily retain just those dreams which
are most peculiar.
According to Striimpell, other factors, de
riving from the relation of the dream to the
waking state, are even more effective in caus
ing us to forget our dreams. The forgetfulness
of dreams manifested by the waking conscious
ness is evidently merely the counterpart of the
fact
already
mentioned,
namely,
that
the
dream hardly ever takes over an orderly series
of memories from the waking state, but only
certain details of these memories, which it re
moves from the habitual psychic connections
in which they are remembered in the waking
state. The dream-composition, therefore, has
no place in the community of the psychic series
which fill the mind. It lacks all mnemonic aids.
"In this manner the dream-structure rises, as
it were, from the soil of our psychic life, and
floats in psychic space like a cloud in the sky,
quickly dispelled by the first
breath of re1 Periodically recurrent dreams have been observed
repeatedly. Compare the collection made by Chabaneix.

[160a]
156
Sigmund Freud
awakening life" (p. 87). This situation is ac
centuated by the fact.that, on waking, the
attention is immediately besieged by the; inrushing world of sensation, so that very few
dream-images are; capable of.withstanding, its
force. They fade away before the impressions
of the new day likethe stars before the light of
the sun:
v:
Finally, we should remember.that the fact
that most people take but little interest in their
dreams
is
conducive
to
the
forgetting
of
dreams.-Anyone who for. some time applies
himself
to the investigation of dreams, and
takes a special interest in them, usually dreams
more during that period than at any other; he
remembers his dreams more easily and more
frequently.
Two
other reasons for
the
forgetting of
dreams, which Bonatelli (cited by Benini) adds
to thos.e. adduced by Striimpeil, have already
been
included in
those
enumerated
above;
namely, (1) that the difference of the general
sensation in the sleeping and the waking state
is unfavourable to mutual reproduction, and
(2) that the different arrangement of the materiatin the dream makes the dream untrans
latable, so to speak, for the waking conscious
ness.
It is therefore, all the more remarkable, as
Striimpell himself observes, that, in spite of;all
these, reasons for forgetting the dream, so many
dreams are retained in the memory. The contin
ual efforts pf those who have written on the
subject to formulate laws for the remember
ing of dreams amount to an admission that
here, too, there is something puzzling and un
explained. Certain peculiarities relating to the
remembering of dreams have attracted partic
ular attention of late; for example, the fact
that the dream which is believed to be for
gotten in the morning may be recalled in the
course of the day on the occasion of some per
ception which
accidentally touches the for
gotten
content
of
the
dream
(Radestock,
Tissie). But the whole recollection of dreams
is open to an objection which is calculated
greatly to depreciate its value in critical eyes.
One may doubt whether our memory, which
omits so much from the dream, does not falsify
what it retains.
This doubt as to the exactness of the repro
duction of dreams is expressed by Striimpell
when he says: "It may therefore easily hap
pen that the waking consciousness involuntar
ily interpolates a great many things in the rec
ollection of the dream; one imagines that one

[160b]
has dreamt all sorts; of things which the actual
dream did not contain."
>.:
Jessen (p. 547) expresses himself,in very de
cided terms: "Moreover, we must not lose sight
of the fact, hitherto little heeded, that in the
investigation and interpretation pf coherent
and logical dreams we alihbst always take lib
erties with the truth when we recall a dreamto
memory. Unconsciously and unintentionally we
fill up the-gaps and supplement the dream-iniages. Rarely, and perhaps never, has a con
nected dream been as connected as it appears
to us in memory. Even the most truth-loving
person can hardly relate a dream without ex
aggerating and embellishing it in some degree.
The human mind so greatly tends to perceive
leverything in a connected form that it inten
tionally supplies the missing links in any dream
which is in some degree incoherent,"
The observations of V. Eggers, though of
course independently conceived, read almost
like a translation of Jessen's words:
1
". ., Uobservation des reves a ses difficultis
spiciales et le seul moyen d'dviter toute erreur
en pareille mattere est de confier au papier sans
le moindre retard ce que Von vient d'eprouver
et de remarquer; sinon, Voubli vient vite ou
total ou partiel; Voubli total est sans gravitS;
mais Voubli partiel est perfide: car si Von se
met ensuite a raconter ce que Von n'a pas
oublii, on est expose a computer par imagina
tion les fragments incoherents et disjoints fourni par la memoire . ... on devient artiste a son
insu, et le recit, pSriodiquement repitS s'impose
a la creance de son auteur, qui, de bonne foi, le
prSsente comme un fait authentique,dument
itabli selon les bonnes methodes... Jn
Similarly Spitta, who seems to think that it
is only in the attempt to reproduce the dream
that we bringorder and arrangement into loosbly associated dream-elements—"turning juxta
position into concatenation; that is, adding the
process of logical connection which is absent
inthe dream."
.;
Since we can test the reliability of our mem-
*. . .The observation of dreams has its special
difficulties, and the only way to avoid all error in such
matter is
to put on . paper without the least delay
what has just been experienced and noticed;
other
wise, totally or partially the dream is quickly forgot
ten;
total
forgetting
is
without
seriousness;
but
partial
forgetting
is
treacherous:
for,
if
one
then
starts to recount what has riot been forgotten,' one is
likely to supplement from the imagination the inco
herent
and
disjointed
fragments
provided by
the
memory .... unconsciously one becomes an artist,
and the story, repeated from time to time, imposes
itself on the belief of its author, who, in good faith,
tells it as authentic fact, regularly established accord
ing to proper methods. . . .-—Ed.

[161a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
m
ory only by objective means, and since such a
test is impossible in the case of dreams, which
are our Ownpersonal experience, and for which
we know no other source than our memory,
what value do our recollections of our dreams
possess?
E. The Psychological Peculiarities of Dreams
In our scientific investigation of dreams we
start with the assumption that dreams are a
phenomenon of our own psychic activity; yet
the completed dream appears to us as some
thing alien, whose authorship we are so little
inclined to recognize that we should be just as
willing to say "A dream came to me,".as "I
dreamed." Whence this "psychic strangeness"
of dreams? According to our exposition of the
sources of dreams, we must assume that it is
not determined by the material which finds its
way into the dream-content, since this is for the
most part common both to dream-life and wak
ing life. We might ask ourselves whether this
impression is not evoked by modifications of
the psychic processes in dreams, and we might
even attempt to suggest that the existence of
such changes is the psychological characteristic
of dreams.
No one has more strongly emphasized the
essential
difference
between
ckearn-life
and
waking life and drawn more far reaching con
clusions from this difference than G. Th. Fechner in certain observations contained in his
Elemente der Psychophysik (Part II, p. 520).
He believes that "neither the simple depression
of conscious psychic life under the main thresh
old," nor the distraction of the attention from
the influences of the outer world, suffices to
explain the peculiarities of dream-life as com
pared with waking life. He believes, rather,
that the arena of dreams is other than the arena
of the waking life of the mind. "If the arena
of psychophysical activity were the same dur
ing the sleeping and the waking state, the
dream, in my opinion, could only be a contin
uation of the waking ideational life at a lower
degree of intensity, so that it would have to
partake of the form and material of the latter*
Butthis is by no means the; ease."
What Fechner really meant by such a trans--
position of the psychic activity has never been
made clear, nor has anybody else* to my knowl
edge, fallowed the path which he indicates in
this remark. An anatomical interpretation in
the sense of physiological localization in the
brain, or even a histological stratification of
the cerebral cortex, must ofxpurse be excluded.

[161b]
The idea might, however, prove ingenious and
fruitful if it could refer to a psychical appara
tus built up of a number of successive and
connected systems.
Other authors have been content to
give
prominence to this or that palpable psycho*
logical peculiarity of the dream-life, and even
to take this as a starting-point for more com
prehensive attempts at explanation.
It has been justly remarked that one of the
chief:peculiarities of dream-life makes its ap
pearance even in the state of falling asleep, and
may be defined as the sleep-heralding phenome
non.
According to Schleiermacher (p. 351),
the distinguishing characteristic of the waking
state is the fact that its psychic activity occurs
in the form of ideas rather than in that of
images. But the dream thinks mainly in visual
images, and it may be noted that with the ap-*
proach of sleep the voluntary activities become
impeded in proportion as involuntary represen
tations make their appearance, the latter be
longing entirely to the category of images. The
incapacity for such ideational activities as we
feel to be deliberately willed, and the emer^
gence of visual images, which is regularly con
nected with this
distraction—these are
two
constant
characteristics of
dreams,
and
on
psychological analysis we are compelled to rec
ognize them
as
essential . characteristics
of
dream-life. As for the images themselves—the
hypnogogic hallucinations---we have- .learned
that even in their contentothey are identical
with dream-images.1
.y.• •*
Dreams, then, think preponderantly, but not?
exclusively, in visual images/:They make use
also of auditory images, andj to a lesser extent,
of the other sensory impressions. Moreover, in
dreams; as in the waking state, many things are
simply thought or imagined (probably with the
help of remnants of verbal conceptions). Char
acteristic of dreams, however, are only those
elements of their contents which behave like im^-
ages, that is, which more closely resemble per
ceptions than mnemonic representations. With
out entering upon a discussion of the nature^of
hallucinations—a discussion familiar to every
psychiatrist—we may say, with every well-inr
formed authority, that the dream hallucinates
—that is, that it replaces thoughts by halluci
nations. In this respect visual and acoustic im1 Silberer has shown by excellent examples how in
the state of falling asleep even abstract thoughts may
be
changed7finto
visible
plastic images,^ which,
of
course, express them. {Jahrbuch, Bleuier-Freud, vol. i,
1900.)" I shall' return to the discussion of his findings
lateron.,.
,
,_..

[162a]
iS8
SiGMUND Freud
pressions behave in the same way. It has been
observed that the recollection of a succession
of notes heard as we are falling asleep becomes
transformed, when we have fallen asleep, into
a hallucination of the same melody, to give
place, each time we wake, to the fainter and
qualitatively different representations of the
memory, and resuming, each time we doze off
again, its hallucinatory character.
The transformation of an idea into a hallu
cination is not the only departure of the dream
from the more or less corresponding waking
thought. From these images the dream creates
a situation; it represents something as actually
present; it dramatizes an idea, as Spitta (p.
145) puts it. But the peculiar character of this
aspect of the dream-life is completely intelli
gible only if we admit that in dreaming we do
not as a rule(the exceptions call for special ex
amination)
suppose ourselves to be thinking,
but actually experiencing; that is, we accept
the hallucination in perfectly good faith. The
criticism that one has experienced nothing, but
that one has merely been thinking in a peculiar
manner—dreaming—occurs to us only on wakr
ing. It is this characteristic which distinguishes
the genuine dream from the day-dream, which
is never confused with reality.
The characteristics of the dream-life thus far
considered have been summed up.by Burdach
(p. 476) as follows: "As characteristic features
of the dream we may state (a) that the sub
jective activity of our psyche appears as objec
tive, inasmuch as our perceptive faculties ap
prehend the products of phantasy as though
they were sensory activities ... (b) that sleep
abrogates our voluntary action; hence falling
asleep involves a certain degree of passivity.
... The images of sleep are conditioned by the
relaxation of our powers of will."
It now remains to account for the credulity
of the mind in respect to the dream-hallucina
tions which are able to make their appearance
only after the suspension of certain voluntary
powers. Striimpell asserts that in this respect
the psyche behaves correctly and in conform
ity with its mechanism. The dream-elements
are by no means mere representations, but true
and actual experiences of the psyche, similar to
those which come to the waking state by,jway
of the senses (p. 34). Whereas in the waking
state the mind thinks and imagines by means
of verbal images and language, in dreams it
thinks and imagines in actual perceptual images
(P- 35)' Dreams, moreover, reveal a spatial con
sciousness, inasmuch as in dreams, just as in

[162b]
the waking state, sensations and images are
transposed into outer space (p. 36). It must
therefore be admitted that in dreams the mind
preserves the same attitude in respect of im
ages and perceptions as in the waking state
(p. 43). And if it forms erroneous conclusions
in respect of these images and perceptions, this
is due to the fact that in sleep it is deprived of
that criterion which alone can distinguish ber
tween
sensory
perceptions
emanating
from
within and those coming from without. It is unr
able to subject its images to those tests which
alone can prove their objective reality. Fur
ther, it neglects to differentiate between those
images which can be exchanged at will and
those in respect of which there is no free choice.
It errs because it cannot apply the law of cau
sality to the content of its dreams (p. 58). In
brief, its alienation from the outer world is the
very reason for
its belief in its
subjective
dream-world.
'
Delbceuf
arrives
at
the
same
conclusion
through a somewhat different line of argument.
We believe in the reality of dream-pictures be
cause in sleep we have no other impression^
with which to compare them; because we are
cut off from the outer world. But it is not be
cause we are unable, when asleep, to test our
hallucinations that we believe in their reality.
Dreams can jnake us believe that we are apply
ing such tests—that we are touching, say, the
rose that we see in our dream; and yet we are
dreaming. According to Delbceuf there is nb
valid criterion that can show whether some
thing is a dream or a waking reality, except-^
and that only pragmatically—the fact of wak
ing. "I conclude that all that has been experi
enced between falling asleep and waking is a de
lusion, if I find on waking that I am lying un
dressed in bed" (p. 84). "I considered the
images of my dream real while I was asleep On
account of the unsleeping mental habit of as
suming an outer world with which I can con
trast my ego."1
\
,
* Haffner, like Delbceuf, has attempted to explain
the act of dreaming by the alteration which an ab
normally introduced condition must have upon the
otherwise correct functioning of the intact psychjic
apparatus; but he describes this condition-in some
what different terms, tie
states
that the first
dis
tinguishing mark of dreams is the abolition of time
and space, i.e., the emancipation of the representation
from the individual's position in thespatialand tem
poral order. Associated with this is the second funda
mental
character
of
dreams,
the
mistaking of
the
hallucinations,
imaginations,
and
phantasy-combina
tions for objective perceptions; "The sum-total of the
higher psychic functions,.particularly the formation of
concepts, judgments, and conclusions on the one hand,
and free self-determination on the other hand, combine

[163a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
If the turning-away from the outer world is
accepted as the decisive cause of the most con
spicuous characteristics of our dreams, it will
be worth our while to consider certain subtle
observations of Burdach's, which will throw
some light on the relation of the sleeping psy
che to the outer world, and at the same time
serve to prevent our over-estimating the im
portance of the above deductions. "Sleep," says
Burdach, "results only under the condition that
the mind is not excited by sensory stimuli . . .
yet it is not so much a lack of sensory stimuli
that conditions sleep as a lack of interest in
them;1 some sensory impressions are even nec
essary..in-so far-as .they serve to calm the
mind; thus the miller can fall asleep only when
he hears the clatter of his mill, and he who
finds it necessary, as a matter of precaution, to
burn a light at night, cannot fall asleep in the
dark" (p. 457).
"During sleep the psyche isolates itself from
the outer world, and withdraws from the peri
phery. ... Nevertheless, the connection is not
entirely broken; if one did not hear and feel
during sleep, but only after waking, one would
assuredly never be awakened at all. The con
tinuance of sensation is even more plainly
shown by the fact that we are not always
awakened by the mere force of the sensory im
pression, but by its relation to the psyche. An
indifferent word does not arouse the sleeper,
but if called by name he wakes . . . so that
even in sleep the psyche discriminates between
sensations.
. . . Hence one may even be
awakened by the obliteration of a sensory
stimulus, if this is related to anything of imwith the
sensory phantasy-images, and
at all times
have these
as
a
substratum. These
activities too,
therefore,
participate
in
the
erratic
nature
of
the
dream-representations. We say
they participate, for
our faculties of judgment and will are in themselves
unaltered during sleep. As far as their activity is con
cerned, we are just as shrewd and just as free as in
the waking state. A man cannot violate the laws of
thought; that is, even in
a dream he cannot judge
things to
be
identical which present themselves to
him as opposites. He can desire in a dream only that
which he regards as a good (sub ratione boni). But in
this application of the laws of thought and will the
human intellect is led astray in dreams by confusing
one notion with another. Thus it happens that in
dreams we formulate and commit the greatest of con
tradictions, while, on the other hand, we display the
shrewdest judgment and
arrive at
the
most logical
conclusions, and are able to make the most virtuous
and sacred resolutions. The lack of orientation is the
whole -secret- of our flights of phantasy in dreams, and
the lack of
critical
reflection
and
agreement with
other minds is the main source of the reckless extrava
gances
of
our
judgments,
hopes
and
wishes
in
dreams" (p. 18).
1 Compare with this the element of "DSsinteret" in
which ClapareJde (1905) finds the mechanism of falling
falling asleep.

[163b]
159
agined importance. Thus one man wakes when
the nightlight, is extinguished, and the miller
when his mill comes to a standstill; that is,
waking is due to the cessation of a sensory
activity, and this presupposes that the activity
has been perceived, but has not disturbed the
mind, its effect being indifferent, or actually
reassuring" (p. 46, etc.).
Even if we are willing to disregard these by
no means trifling objections, we must yet admit
that the qualities of dream-life hitherto con
sidered, which are attributed to withdrawal
from the outer world, cannot fully account for
the strangeness of dreams. For otherwise it
would be possible to reconvert the hallucina
tions of the dream into mental images, and the
situations of the dream into thoughts, and thus
to achieve the task of dream-interpretation.
Now this is precisely what we do when we re
produce a dream from memory after waking,
and no matter whether we are fully or only
partially successful in this retranslation, the
dream still remains as mysterious as before.
Furthermore, all writers unhesitatingly as
sume that still other and profounder changes
take place in the plastic material of waking life.
Striimpell seeks to isolate one of these changes
as follows:
(p. 17) "With the cessation of
active sensory perception and of normal con
sciousness, the psyche is deprived of the soil
in which its feelings, desires, interests, and ac
tivities are rooted.,Those psychic states, feel
ings, interests, and valuations, which in the
waking state adhere to memory-images, suc
cumb to an obscuring pressure, in consequence
of which their connection with these images is
severed; the perceptual images of things, per
sons, localities, events and actions of the wak
ing state are, individually, abundantly repro
duced, but none of these brings with it its
psychic value. Deprived of this, they hover in
the mind dependent on their own resources ..."
This annihilation of psychic values, which is
in turn referred to a turning away from the outer
world, is, according to Striimpell, very largely
responsible for the impression of strangeness
with
which
the
dream
is
coloured
in
our
memory.
We have seen that the very fact of falling
asleep involves a renunciation of one of the
psychic
activities-—namely,
the
voluntary
guidance of the flow of ideas. Thus the supposi
tion obtrudes itself (though it is in any case a
natural one) that the state of sleep may extend
even to the psychic functions. One or another of
these functions is perhaps entirely suspended;

[164a]
i6o
SlGMUND FfeEUD ;
we have now to consider whether the rest con*
tinue to operate undisturbed, whether they are
able to. perform their normal, work under the
circumstances. The idea occurs tons that the
peculiarities ofthe dream may be explained by
the restricted activity. of the' psyche during
sleep, and the impression made by the dream
upon our waking judgment tends to confirm
this view. The dream is incoherent; it recon
ciles, without hesitation, the worst contradic
tions; it admits impossibilities; it disregards
the authoritative knowledge of the waking state,
and it shows us as ethically and morally obtuse.
He who should behave in the waking state as
his dreams represent him as behaving would
be considered insane. He who in the waking
state should speak as he does in his.dreams, or
relate such things as occur in his dreams, would
impress us as a feeble-minded or muddleheaded person. It seems to us, then, that we
are merely speaking in accordance with the
facts of the case when we rate psychic activity
in dreams very low, and especially when we
assert that in dreams the higher intellectual
activities are suspended or at least greatly
impaired.
;
;
With unusual unanimity (the.exceptions will
be dealt with elsewhere) the writers on the sub
ject have pronounced such judgments as lead
immediately to a definite theory or explana
tion of dream-life. It is now time to supple-;
ment the resume which I have just given by a
series?of quotations from a number of authors
—philosophers and physicians—bearing upon
the psychological characteristics of the dream.
According to Lemoine, the incoherence of the
dream-images is the sole essential characteristic
of the dream.
Maury agrees with him (Le Sommeil, p,
163): "// n'y a pas des reves absolument
raisonnables et quine contiennentquelque inco
herence, quelque absurdit6?n
According to Hegel; quoted by Spitta, the
dream lacks any intelligible objective coher
ence.
Dugas says: l{Les reve, tyest Vanarchie psychique, affective et -mentale, c'est le feu des
fonctions livrSes a elles-memes et s'exergani
sans controle ei sans'but; dan's le reve Vesprit
est un automate spirituel."2
* There are no.dreams which are absolutely reason
able which do, not contain some incbherencej some
absurdity.—Eb:
;
2 The dream is psychic anarchy, emotional and in-'
tellectual, the playing of functions,- freed of themselves.
and performing without control and without end; in
tiie dream, the' mind is a spiritual automaton.—Ed*

[164b]
^The relaxation, dissolution,andpromiscuous
confusion of the world of ideas and images held
together in wakinglife by the logical, power;of
the central ego" is conceded even by: Volkelt
(p. 14); according to wbose theory^the psychic
activity during sleep appears to be by ho means
aimless. • •
r •
The absurdity of the associations of ideas
which occur in
dreams can hardly be more
strongly stigmatized than it was by Cicero (De
Divinatione, II. lxxi): "Nihil tarn praepostere,
tarn incondite, tarn monstruose cogitari potest,
quod non possimus somniare."*
' Fechner says (p. 522): "It is as though the
psychological activity of the brain of a reason
able person wereto migrateinto that of a fool."
Radestock (p. 145): "It seems indeed im
possible to recognize any stable laws in thi^
preposterous behaviour. Withdrawing itsejjf
from the strict policing of the rational will that
guides our waking ideas, and from the proc
esses of attention, the dream, in crazy sport,
whirls all things about in kaleidoscopic con
fusion."
p
Hildebrandt
(p.
45):
"What
wonderful
jumps the dreamer permits 1himself, for in
stance, in his chain of seasoning! With what
unconcern he sees the most familiar laws of
experience turned upside down! What ridicu
lous contradictions he is able to tolerate in the
order of. nature and of society, before things
go too far, and the very excess of nonsense
leads to an awakening! Sometimes we quite ih^
nocently calculate that three times three make
twenty; and we are not in the least surprised
if a dog recites poetry to us, if a dead person
walks to his grave, or if a rock floats on the
water. We solemnly go to visit the duchy of
Bernburg or the principality of Liechtenstein
in order to inspect its navy; or we allow our
selves to be recruited as a volunteer by Charles
XII just before the battle of Poltava."
(
Binz
(p.
33), referring to; the theory of
dreams resulting from these impressions, saysr
"Of ten dreams nine at least have an absurd
content. We unite in them persons or things
which do "not bear the slightest relation to o#e
another. In the next moment, as in a kaleido
scope, the grouping changes to: one, if possible,
evjen more nonsensical and irrational,than be*
fore; and so the shifting play of the drowsiy
brain continues, until we wake, put a hand to
our forehead, and ask ourselves whether we
8There is no imaginable thing too absurd, too in
volved, or too abnormal for us to dream about.-^-Ei>. -

[165a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
161
still really possess the faculty of rational.im
agination and thought."
Maury, Le Sommeil (p. 50) makes, in re
spect of the relation of the dream-image to the
waking thoughts, a comparison which a physi
cian will find especially impressive: "Lfrrproz
duction de ces images que chezVhomme ivMUd
fait le plus souvent naitre la volontS, corre*
spond, pour Vintelligence, h ce que sont pour la
motilitd certains mouvements que nous offrent
la chorSe et les affections paralytiques. . . ."*
For the rest, he considers the dream "toute me
serie de degradations de la faculti pensante et
raisonnante"2 (p. 27J.--.
It is hardly necessary to cite the utterances of
those authors who repeat Maury's assertion in re
spect of the higher individual psychic activities.
According
to
Striimpell,
in* dreams—and
even, of course, where the nonsensical nature
of the dream is not obvious—all the logical
operations of the mind,
based on; relations
and associations, recede into the background
(p. 26). According to Spitta (p. 148) ideas in
dreams are entirely withdrawn from the laws
of causality; while Radestock and others em
phasize the feebleness of judgment and logi
cal inference peculiar to dreams. According to
Jodl (p. 123), there is no criticism in;dreams>
no correcting of a series of perceptions by the
content of consciousness as a whole. The same
author states that "All the activities of con
sciousness occur in dreams, but they are^ im
perfect, inhibited, and mutually isolated." The
contradictions
of
our
conscious
knowledge
which occur in dreams are explainedby Strieker
and many others on the ground that facts are
forgotten in dreams, or that the logical rela
tions between ideas are lost (p. 98), etc., etc.
Those authors who, in general, judge ^so un
favourably of the psychic activities of the
dreamer nevertheless agree that dreams do re
tain a
certain remnant of psychic activity.
Wundt, whose teaching has influenced so many
other investigators of dream-problems, express*
ly admits this. We may ask, what are the na*
ture and composition of the remnants of nor
mal psychic life which manifest themselves in
dreams? It is pretty generally acknowledged
that the reproductive faculty,
the
memory,
seems to be the least affected in dreams; it mayj
.
xThe
production of
those
images
which,
in
the
waking man, most often excite the will, correspond,
for
the mind, to
those which are,
for the motility,
certain
movements that
offer
St.
Vitus'
dance
and
paralytic affections. . . .—Ed.
2 A whole series of degradations of the faculty of
thinking and reasoning.—Ed.

[165b]
indeed, show a certain superiority over the
same function in waking life, (see above, p.
141), evenlthough some pf the absurdities of
dreams are to be explained bythe forgetfulness
of dream-life. According to Spitta, it is the
sentimental life of the psyche whichris not af
fected iby sleep, and which thus directs our
dreams. By sentiment (Gemnt) he means "the
constant sum -of the: emotions as the inmiost
subjective essence of the man" (p. 84).
Scholz (p. 37) sees in dreams a psychic activ
ity which manifests itself in the"allegorizing
interpretation" to which the dream-material is
subjected. Siebeck (p. 11) likewise perceives
in
dreams
a
"supplementary interpretative
activity" of the psyche, which applies itself
to all that is observed and
perceived. Any
judgment of the part played in dreams by what
is presumed to be the highest psychical funcr
tion, i.e., consciousness, presents a peculiar dif
ficulty. Since it is only through consciousness
that we can1know anything of dreams, there
can be no doubt as to its being retained. Spitta,
however, believes that only consciousnessis;re
tained in the dream, but not self-co?isciousness.
Delboeuf confessesthat he is unable to compre
hend this distinction.
. ,iSi
The laws of association which connect our
mental images hold good also for what is repre
sented,in dreams; indeed, in dreams the domi
nance
of
these
laws
is
more
obvious
and
complete than in the-waking state. Strumpell
(p. 70). says:,"Dreams wouldappear to proceed
either exclusively in accordance with the laws
of pure representation, or in accordance with
the laws of organic stimuli accompanied by
such representations.; that is, without being in
fluenced by reflection, reason, aesthetic taste,
or moral judgment." The authors whose, opin
ions I here reproduce conceive the formation
of the dream, somewhat as follows: The sum of
sensory stimuli of varying origin (discussed
elsewhere) that are operative in sleep at first
awaken in the psyche a number of images
which present themselves as hallucinations (ac
cording to Wundt, it is more-correct to say "as
illusions," because of their origin in external
and internal stimuli). These combine with one
another in accordance with the known laws of
association, and, in accordance with the same
laws, they in turn evoke a new series 'of repre
sentations (images). The whole of this material
is then elaborated as far as possible by the still
active remnant of the thinking and organizing
faculties of the psyche (cf. Wundt and Weygandt). Thus far,' hbweyer, no one;:has beeii

[166a]
l62
Sigmund Freud
successful in discerning the
motive which
would decide what particular law of association
is to be obeyed by those images which do not
originate in external stimuli.
But it has been repeatedly observed that the
associations which connect the :dream-images
with one another are of a particular kind, dif
fering from those found in the activities of the
waking mind. ThusVolkelt (p. 15): "In dreams
the ideas chase and seize upon one another on
the strength of accidental similarities and bare
ly perceptible connections. All dreams are per
vaded by casual and unconstrained associations
of this kind." Maury attaches great value to
this characteristic of the connection of ideas,
for it allows him to draw a closer analogy be
tween the dream-life and certain mental., de*
rangements. He recognizes two main character
istics of "deliria": " (1) une action spontanSe
et comme automatique de Vesprit; (2) une
association vicieuse et irregulidre des idSes"1
(p. 126). Maury givesus two excellentexamples
from his own dreams, in which the mere simi
larity of sound decides the connection between
the dream-representations. Once he dreamed
that he was on a pilgrimage (pelerinage) to Je
rusalem, or to Mecca. After many adventures
he found himself in the company of the chem
ist Pelletier; the latter, after some conversa
tion,gavehim a galvanized shovel (pelle) which
became his great broadsword in the next por
tion of the dream (p. 137). In another dream
he was walking along a highway where he read
the distances on the kilometre-stones; presently
he found himself at a grocer's who had a large
pair of scales; a man put kilogramme weights
into the scales, in order to weigh Maury; the
grocer then said to him: "You are not in Paris,
but on the island Gilolo." This was followed by
a number of pictures, in which he saw the
flower lobelia, and then General Lopez, of
whose death he had read a little while previ
ously. Finally he awoke as he was playing a
game of lotto?
We are, indeed, quite well aware that this
low estimate of the psychic activities of the
dream has not been allowed to pass without
contradiction from various quarters. Yet here
contradiction would seem rather difficult. It is
not a matter of much significance that one of
the depredators of dream-life, Spitta (p. 118),
. i (1) An action of the mind spontaneous and as
though
automatic;
(2)
a
defective
and
irregular
association of ideas.—-Ed.
.
* Later on we shall be able to understand the mean
ing of .dreams like these which are full of words with
similar sounds or the same initial letters.

[166b]
should assure us that the same psychological
laws which govern the waking state rule the
dream also, or that another (Dugas) should
state: "Lereve n9est pas diraisonnim^metr^
raison pure,,,z so long as neither of them has
attempted to bring this opinion into harmony
With the psychic anarchy and dissolution of all
mental functions in the dream which they them
selves have described. However, the possibility
seems to have dawned upon others that the
madness of the dream is perhaps not without
its method—that it is perhaps only a disguise,
a dramatic pretence, like that of Hamlet, to
whose madness this perspicacious judgment re
fers. These authors must either have refrained
from judging by appearances, or the appear
ances were, in their case, altogether different.
Without lingering over its
superficial-ab
surdity, Havelock Ellis considers the dream as
"an archaic world of vast emotions and imper
fect thoughts," the study of which may ac
quaint us with the primitive stages of the
development of mental life. J. Sully (p. 362)
presents the same conception of the dream in a
still more comprehensive and penetrating fash
ion. His statements deserve all the more consid
eration when it is added that he, perhaps more
than any other psychologist, was convinced of
the veiled significance of the dream. "Now our
dreams are a means of conserving these succes
sive personalities. When asleep we go back to
the old ways of looking at things and of feeling
about them, to impulses and activities which
long ago dominated us." A thinker like Del
bceuf asserts—without, indeed, adducing proof
in the face of contradictory data, and hence
without real justification—"Dans le sommeil,
hormis la perception, toutes les facultSs de
Vesprit, intelligence, imagination, mimoire, volonte, moralite, restent intactes dans leur es
sence; seulement, elles s'appliquent a des objets
imaginaires et mobiles. Le songeur est un acteur qui joue a volonte les fous et les sages, les
bourreaux et les victimes,les nains et les geantp,
les demons et les anges"4, (p. 222). The Marquis
Hervey,6 who is flatly contradicted by Mau
ry, and whose essay I have been unable to ob
tain despite all my efforts, appears emphatiBThe dream is neither pure derangement nor pure
irrationality.—Ed.
* In sleep, excepting perception, all the faculties of
the mind—intellect, imagination, memory, will, mo
rality—remain intact in their essence; only, they are
applied to imaginary and variable objects. The dreamer
is an actor who plays at will the mad and the wise;
executioner and victim, dwarf and giant, devil and
angel.—Ed.
6 Hervey de St. Denys.

[167a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
cally to protest against the under-estimation of
the
psychic
capacity in the dream.
Maury
speaks of him as follows (p. 19): "M. le Mar
quis Hervey prete & Vintelligence durant le
sommeil toute sa liberie d'actionet d'attention,
et il ne semble faire consister le sommeil que
dans Vocclusion des sens, dans lew fermeture
awmonde exterieur; ertsorte que Vhomme qui
dort ne se distingue guere, selon sa maniere de
voir, de Vhomme quilaisse vaguer sa pensee en
se bouchant les sens; toute la difference qui
separe alors la pensee ordinaire du celle du dormeur c'est que, chez celui-ci, Videe prend une
forme visible, objective, et ressemble, a s'y
miprendre, d la sensation ddterminee par les
objets extSrieurs; le souvenir revet Vapparence
du fait prdsent."1
Maury adds, however, "quHl y a une diffS
rence de plus et capitale a savoir que les facultis
intellectuellesde Vhomme endotmin*offrent pas
Vequilibre* qu?elles
gardent
chez
Vhomme
iveille."*
In Vaschide, who gives us fully information
as to Hervey's book, we find that this author
expresses himself as follows, in respect to the
apparent incoherence of dreams: "Uimage du
reve est la copie de Videe. Le principal est
Videe; la vision n'est pas qu'accessoire. Ceci
Stabli,il faut savoirsuivre la marche des idees,
il faut savoir analyserletissu des reves; Inco
herence devient alors comprehensible, les con*
ceptions les plus fantasques deviennent des faits
simples et parfaitement logiques"3 (p. 146).
And (p. 147): "Lesreves les plus bizarres trouvent meme une explication des plus logiques
quand on sait les analyser."*
1 The Marquis Hervey attributes to the intelligence
during sleep all its freedom of action and attention,
and he seems to make sleep consist only of the shutting
of the senses, of their closing to the outside world;
except for his manner of seeing, the man asleep is
hardly distinguishable from the man who allows his
mind to wander while he obstructs his
senses;
the
whole difference, then, between ordinary thought and
that of
the sleeper, is that with the latter the idea
takes an objective and visible shape, which resembles,
to
all appearances, sensation determined by exterior
objects; memory takes on the appearance of present
fact.—Ed.
2 That there is a further and important difference
in that the mental faculties of the sleeping man do
not offer the equilibrium which they keep in the waking
state.—Ed.
3 The image in a dream is a copy of an idea. The
main thing is the idea;
the vision is only accessory.
This established, it is necessary to know how to fol
low the progression of ideas, how to analyse the tex
ture of the dreams; incoherence then is understandable,
the most fantastic concepts become simple and
per
fectly logical facts.—Ed.
* Even the most bizarre dreams find a most logical
explanation when one knows how to analyse them.—
Ed.

[167b]
163
J. Starke has drawn attention to the fact that
a similar solution of the Incoherence of dreams
was put forward in 1799 by an old writer, Wolf
Davidson, who was unknown to me (p. 136):
"The peculiar leaps of our imaginings in the
dream-state all have their cause in the laws, of
association, but this connection often occurs
very obscurely in the soul, so that we fre
quently seem to observe a leap of the imagi
nation where none really exists."
The evaluation of the dream as a psychic
product in the literature of the subject varies
over a very wide scale; it extends from the
extreme of under-estimation, as we have al
ready seen, through premonitions that it may
have a value as yet unrevealed, to an exag
gerated over-estimation, which sets the dreamlife far above the capacities of waking life. In
his psychological characterization of dreams
life, Hildebrandt, as we know, groups it into
three antinomies, and he combines in the third
of these antinomies the two extreme points of
this scale of values (p. 19): "It is the contrast
between, on the one hand, an enhancement,'an
increase of potentiality, which often amounts
to virtuosity, and on the other hand a decided
diminution and enfeeblement of the psychic
life, often to a sub-human level."
"As regards the first, who is there that can
not confirm from his own experience the fact
thatin the workingsand weavingsof the genius
of dreams, there are sometimesexhibiteda pro*
fundity arid sincerity of emotion, a tenderness
of feeling, a clearness of view; a.subtlety of ob
servation and a readiness of wit, such as we
should have modestly to deny that we always
possessed in our waking life? Dreams have a
wonderful poetry, an apposite allegory, an in
comparable sense of humour, a delightful irony.
They see the world in the light of a peculiar
idealization, and often intensify the effect of
their phenomena by the most ingenious under
standing of the reality underlying them. They
show us earthly beauty in a truly heavenly ra
diance, the sublime in its supremest majesty,
and that which we know to be terrible in its
most frightful form, while the ridiculous be
comes indescribably and drastically comical.
And on waking we are sometimes still so full
of one of these impressions that it will occur
to us that such things have never yet been of
fered to us by the real world."
One might here ask oneself: do these depre
ciatory remarks and these enthusiastic praises
really refer to the self-same phenomenon? Have
some writers overlooked the foolish and others

[168a]
164
Sigmund Freud
the profound and sensitive dreams? And if
both kinds of dreams do occur—that is, dreams
that merit both these judgments—does it not
seem idle to seek a psychological characteriza
tion of the dream? Would it not suffice to state
that everything is possible in the dream, from
the lowest degradation of the psychic life to its
flightto heights unknown in the waking state?
Convenient as such a solution might be, it has
this againstit: that behind the effortsof all the
investigators of dreams there seemsto lurk the
assumption that there is in dreams some char
acteristic which is universally valid in its essen
tial features, and which must eliminate all these
contradictions.
It is unquestionablytrue that the mental ca
pacities of dreams found readier and warmer
recognition in the intellectual period now ly
ing behind us, when philosophy rather than ex
act natural science ruled tie more intelligent
minds. Statements like that of Schubert, to
the effect that the dream frees the mind from
the power of external nature, that it liberates
the soul from the chains of sensory life, to^
gether with similar opinions expressed by the
younger Fichte* and others, who represent
dreams as a soaring of the mind to a higher
plane—all these seem hardly conceivable to
us today; they are repeated at present only by
mystics and devptees.? With the advance of a
scientific mode of thought a reaction took place
in the estimation of dreams. It is the medical
writers who.are most. inclined to underrate the
psychic activity in dreams, as being insignia
icant and valueless; while philosophers and un*
professional observers—amateur psychologists
—whose contributions to; the subject in especial
must not be
overlooked, have for the most
part, in agreement with popular belief, laid em
phasis on the psychological value of dreams.
Those who are inclined to underrate the psychic
activity of dreams naturally show a preference
for the somatic sources of excitation in the
aetiology of the dream; those who admit that
the dreaming mind may retain the greater part
of its waking faculties naturally have no mo
tive for denying the existence of autonomous
stimulations.
; Among the superior accomplishments which
one may be tempted, even on a sober compari1Cf. Haffner and Spitta.
• !''
2That brilliant mystic, Du Prel, one of
the
few
writers
for. the . omission of whose name in earlier
editions of this book I should like to apologize, has
said that, so far as the human mind is concerned, it
is not the waking state but dreams which are the
gateway
to
metaphysics
{Philosophic der
Mystik,
P. 59).
~

[168b]
son, to ascribe to the dream-life, that of mem
ory is the most impressive. We have fully dis
cussed the by no means rare experienceswhich
prove this superiority/Another privilege of the
dream-life, often extolled by the older writers
—namely, the fact that it can overstep the limi
tations of time and space—is easily recognized
as an illusion. This privilege, as Hildebrandt re
marks, is merely illusory; dreams disregard
time and space only as does waking thought,
and only because dreaming is itself a form of
thinking. Dreams are supposed to enjoy a fur
ther advantage in respect of time—to be in
dependent of the passage of time in yet another
sense. Dreams like Maury's dream of his exe
cution (p. 147above) seem to showthat the per
ceptual content which the
dream can com
press into a very short space of time far ex
ceeds that which can.be mastered by our
psychic activity in its waking thoughts. These
conclusions have, however, been disputed. The
essays of Le Lorrain and Egger on The Appar
ent Duration of Dreams gave rise to a long and
interesting discussion, which in all probability
has not yet found the final explanation of this
profound and delicate problem.8
That dreams are able to continue the intel
lectual activities of the day andto carry them
to a point which could not be arrived at during
the day4: that they may resolve doubts and
problems, and that they may be the source of
fresh inspiration in poets and composers, seems,
in the light of numerous records* and of the
collection of instances compiledby Chabaneix,
to be proved beyond question. But even though
the facts may be beyond dispute, their inter
pretation is subject to many doubts on wider
grounds.*
Finally, the alleged divinatory power of the
dream has become a subject of contention in
which almost insuperable objections are con
fronted by obstinate and reiterated assertions.
It is, of course, right that we should refrain
from denying that this view has any basis what
ever in fact, since it is quite possible that! a
number of such cases may before long be ex
plained on purely natural psychological grounds.
F. The Ethical Sense in Dreams
For reasons which will be intelligible only after
a consideration of my own investigations of
dreams, Lhave isolated from the psychology of
8 For the further literature of the subject, and a
critical discussion of these problems, the reader
is
referred to Tobowolska's dissertation (Paris, 1900).
* Compare Havelock Ellis's criticism in The World
of Dreams, p. 268.

[169a]
the
dream
the
subsidiary
problem
as
whether and to what extent the moral disposi
tions and feelings of waking life extend into
dream-life. The same contradictions which we
were surprised to observe in the descriptions by
various authors of all the other psychicactivi
ties will surprise us again here. Some writers
flatly assert that dreams know nothing of.moral
obligations; others as decidedly declare that
the moral nature of man persists even in his
dream-life.
Our ordinary experience of dreams seems to
confirm beyond all doubt the correctness of the
first assertion. Jessen says (p. 553): "Nor does
one become better or more virtuous during
sleep; on the contrary, it seemsthat conscience
is silent in our dreams, inasmuch as one feels
no compassion and
can
commit
the
worst
crimes, such as theft, murder, and homicide,
with perfect indifference and without subse
quent remorse."
Radestock (p. 146) says: "It is to be noted
that in
dreams associations are effected and
ideas combined without being in any way in
fluenced by reflection, reason, aesthetic taste,
and moral judgment; the judgment is extreme
ly weak, and
ethical indifference reigns su
preme."
Volkelt (p. 23) expresses himself as follows:
"As every one knows, dreams are especially un
bridled in sexual matters. Just as the dreamer
himself is shameless in the extreme, and whol
ly lacking in moral feeling and judgment, so
likewise does he see others, even the most re
spected persons, doing things which, even in his
thoughts, he would blush to associate with them
in his waking state."
Utterances like those of Schopenhauer, that
in dreams every man acts and talks in com
plete accordance with his character, are in
sharpest
contradiction
to
those
mentioned
above. R. Ph. Fischer1 maintains that the sub
jective feelings and desires, or affects and pas
sions, manifest themselves in the wilfulness of
the dream-life, and that the moral character
istics of a man are mirrored in his dreams.
Haffner says (p. 25): "With rare exceptions
... a virtuoiis main will be virtuous also in his
dreams; he will resist temptation, and show no
sympathy for hatred, envy, anger, and all other
vices; whereas the sinful man will, as a rule,
encounter in his dreams the images which, he
has; before him In the waking state." '
'
Scholz" (p^36): "In dreams there is truth;
..rilGrundauge\d<est^ysterns.der Anthropologic. ..Erlan*
gen, t8io~ fquofed%y Spitta).

[169b]
The Interpretation, of Dreams
165
subsidiary
problem
as
to
despite all camouflage of nobility or degradation, we recognize our own true selves... .The
honest man does not commit a dishonouring
crime even in his dreams, or, if he does, he is
appalled by it as by something foreign to his
nature. The Roman emperor who ordered one
of his
subjects
to
be executed because he
dreamed that he had cut off the emperor's head
was not far wrong in justifying his action oh
the ground that he who has such dreams must
have similar
thoughts while awake. Signif
icantly enough, we say of things that find no
place even in our intimate thoughts: 'I would
never even dream of such a thing.'"
Plato, on the other hand, considers that they
are the best men who only dream the things
which other men do.
Plaff,2 varying a familiar proverb, says: "Tell
me your dreams for a time and I will tell you
what you are within."
The little essay of Hildebrandt's from which
I have already taken so many quotations (the
best-expressed and most suggestive contribu
tion to the literature of the dream-problem
which I have hitherto discovered), takes for its
central theme the
problem of
morality in
dreams. For Hildebrandt, too, it is an estafc
lished rule that the purer the life, the purer the
dream; the impurer the life, the impurer the
dream.
The moral nature of man persists even in
dreams. "But while we are not offended or made
suspicious by an arithmetical error, no matter
how obvious, by a reversal of scientific fact, no
matter how romantic, or by an anachronism,
no matter how ridiculous, we nevertheless do
hot lose sight of the difference between good
and evil, right and wrong, virtue and vice. No
matter how -much of that which accompanies
us during the day may vanish in our hours of
sleep, Kant's categorical imperative dogs our
steps as an inseparable companion, of whom we
cannot rid ourselves even in our slumber:". . .
This can be explained only by the fact that the
fundamental element
of human nature, the
moral essence, is too firmly fixed to be sub
jected to the kaleidoscopic shaking-up to which
phantasy, reason, memory, and other faculties
of the same order succumb in our dreams"
<p.45;etcv).
In the further discussion of the subject we
find in bdth these groups of authors remarkable
evasion^ and inconsequences. Strictly speaking,
all interest in immoral dreams shotiid be at an
-.,?-Das, Traumlebeitjundi seine. Deutung, 1&68 :Ccifed
by Spitta, p. 192).J ''
" c
•••-'i
-' -'
- !iir 'l -

[170a]
i66
Sigmund Freud
end for those who assert that the moral per
sonality of the individual falls to pieces in his
dreams. They could as coolly reject all attempts
to hold the dreamer responsible for his dreams,
or to infeirfrom the immorality of his dreams
that there is an immoral strain in his nature, as
they have rejected the apparently analogous
attempt to prove from the absurdity of his
dreams the worthlessness of his intellectual life
in the waking state. The others, according to
whom the categorical imperative extends even
into the dream, ought to accept in toto the no
tion of full responsibility for immoral dreams;
and we can only hope that their own reprehen
sible dreams do not lead them to abandon their
otherwise firm belief in their own moral worth.
As a matter of fact, however, it would seem
that although no one is positively certain just
how good or how bad he is, he can hardly deny
that he can recollect immoral dreams of his
own. That there are such dreams no one denies;
the only question is: how do they originate?
So that, in spite of their conflicting judgments
of dream-morality, both groups of authors are
at pains to explain the genesis of the immoral
dream; and here a new conflict arises, as to
whether its origin is to be sought in the normal
functions of the psychic life, or in the somati
cally conditionedencroachments upon this life.
The nature of the facts compels both those who
argue for and those who argue against moral
responsibility in dream-life to agree in recog
nizing a special psychic source for the immor
ality of dreams.
Those who maintain that morality continues
to function in our dream-life nevertheless re
frain from assuming full responsibility for their
dreams. Haffner says (p. 24): "We are not re
sponsible for our dreams, because that basis
which alone gives our life truth and reality is
withdrawn -from our thoughts and our will.
Hence the wishes and actions of our dreams
cannot be virtuous or sinful." Yet the dreamer
is responsible for the sinful dream in so far as
indirectly he brings it about. Thus, as in wak
ing life, it is his duty, just before going to
sleep, morally to cleanse his mind.
The analysis of this admixture of denial and
recognition pf responsibility for the moral con
tent of dreams is carried much further by Hil
debrandt. After arguing that the dramatic meth
od of representation characteristic of. dreams,
the condensation of the most complicated procr
esses of reflection into the briefest periods of
time, and the debasement and confusion of the
imaginative elements of dreams, which even

[170b]
he admits must be allowed for in respect of the
immoral appearance of dreams, he nevertheless
confesses that there are the most serious ob
jections to flatly denying all responsibility for
the lapses and offenses of which we are guilty
in our dreams.
(P. 49): "If we wish to repudiate very de
cisively any sort of unjust accusation, and es
pecially one which has reference to our inten
tions and convictions, we use the expression:
'We should never have dreamt of such a thing.'
By-this, it is true, we mean on the one hand
that we consider the region of dreams the last
and remotest place in which we could be held
responsible for our thoughts, because there
these thoughts are so loosely and incoherently
connected with our real being that we can,
after all, hardly regard them as our own; but
inasmuch as we feel impelled expressly-to deny
the existence of such thoughts even in this re
gion, we are at the same time indirectly admit
ting that our justification would not be com
plete unless it extended even thus far. And,I
believe that here, although unconsciously, we
are speaking the language of truth."
(P. 52): "No dream-action can be imagined
whose first beginnings have not in some shape
already passed through the mind during our
waking hours, in the form of wish, desire, or
impulse." Concerning this original impulse we
must say: The dream has not discovered it-—
it has only imitated and extended it; it has only
elaborated into, dramatic form a scrap of his
torical material which it found already existing
within us; it brings to our mind the words jof
the Apostle—that he who hates his brother is
a murderer. And though, after we wake, being
conscious of our moral strength, we may smile
at the whole widely elaborated structure of the
depraved dreamy yet the original material ojut
of which we formed it cannot be laughed away.
One feels responsible for. the transgressions jof
one's dreaming self; not for the whole sum jof
them, but yet for a certain percentage. "In
short, if in this sense, which can hardly be im
pugned, we understand the words of Christ,
that out of the heart come evil thoughts, then
we can hardly help being convinced that every
sin committed in our dreams brings with it at
least a vague minimum of guilt."
;Tbus Hildebrandt finds the .source of the
immorality of dreams in the germs and hints
of evil impulses which pass through our minds
during the day as mental temptations,, and he
does not hesitate to include these immoral ele
ments in the ethical evaluation of the person-

[171a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
ality. These same thoughts,- and the same.evalu
ation of
these thoughts, have, as we know,
caused devout and holy men of all ages to la
ment that they were wicked sinners.1
The general occurrence of these contrasting
thoughts in the majority of men, and even in
other regions than the ethical, is of course es
tablished beyond a doubt. They have some
times been judged in a less serious spirit. Spitta
quotes a relevant passage from A. Zeller (Arti
cle "Irre," in the Allgemeine Encyklopadie der
Wissenschaften, Ersch and Griiber, p. 144):
"An intellect is rarely so happily organized as
to be in full command of itself at all times and
seasons, and never to be disturbed in the lucid
and constant processes of thought by ideas not
merely unessential, but absolutely grotesque
and nonsensical; indeed, the greatest thinkers
have had cause to complain of this dream-like,
tormenting and distressing rabble of ideas,
which disturbs their profoundest contempla
tions and their most pious and earnest medita
tions."
A clearer light is thrown on the psychologi
cal meaning of these contrasting thoughts by
a further observation of Hildebrandt's, to the
effect that dreams
permit us an occasional
glimpse of the deepest and innermost recesses
of our being, which are generally closed to us
in our waking state (p. 55). A recognition of
this fact is betrayed by Kant in his Anthro
pology, when he states that our dreams may
perhaps be intended to reveal to us not what
we are but what we might have been if we had
had another upbringing; and by Radestock (p.
84), who suggests that dreams disclose to us
what we do not wish to admit to ourselves, and
that we therefore unjustly condemn them as
lying and deceptive. J*. E. Erdmann asserts:
"A dream has never told me what I ought to
think of a person, but, to my great surprise, a
dream has more than once taught me what I
do really think of him and feel about him."
And J. H. Fichte expresses himself in a like
manner: "The character of our dreams gives a
far truer reflection of our general disposition
than anything that we can learn by self-obser
vation in the waking state." Such remarks as
this of Benini's call our attention to the fact
1 It is not uninteresting to consider the attitude of
the Inquisition to this problem. In the Tractatus de
Officio
sanctissimae Inquisitionis of Thomas Careiia
(Lyons edit., 1659) one finds the following passage:
"Should anyone utter heresies in his.dreams, the in
quisitors shall consider this a reason for investigating
his conduct in life, for that is wont to return in sleep
which occupies a man during the day" (Dr. Ehniger,
St. Urban, Switzerland).

[171b]
167
that the emergence of impulses which;are for
eign to our ethical consciousness is merely anal
ogous to the manner, already familiar to us,
in which the dream disposes of other represent
ative, material:
"Certe nostre inclinazioni che
si credevano soffocate e spente da un pezzo, si
ridestano; passionivecchie e sepolte revivono;
cose e persone a cui non pensiamo mat, ci vengono dinanzi"
(p. 149). Volkelt expresses him
self in a similar fashion: "Even ideas which
have entered into our consciousness almost un
noticed, and which, perhaps, it has never be
fore called out of oblivion, often announce their
presence in the mind through a dream" (p 105).
Finally, we may remember that according to
Schleiermacher the state of falling asleep is
accompanied by the appearance of undesired
imaginings.
We may include in such "undesired imagin
ings" the whole of that imaginative material
the occurrence of which surprises us in imr
moral as well as in absurd dreams. The only
important difference consists in the fact that
the undesired imaginings in the moral sphere
are in opposition to our usual feelings, whereas
the others merely appear strange to us. So far
nothing has been done to enable us to recon
cile this difference by a profounder under?-
standing.
But what is the significance of the emer
gence of undesired representations in dreams?
What conclusions can the psychology of the
waking and dreaming mind draw from these
nocturnal manifestations of contrasting ethical
impulses? Here we find a fresh diversity of
opinion, and also a different grouping of the
authors who have treated of .-the subject. The
line of thought followed by Hildebrandt, and
by others who share bis fundamental opinion,
cannot be continued otherwise than by ascrib
ing to the immoral impulses, even in the wak
ing state, a latent vitality, which is indeed in
hibited from proceeding to action, and by as
serting that during sleep something falls away
from us which, having the effect of an inhibi
tion, has kept us from becoming aware of the
existence of such impulses. Dreams, therefore,
reveal the true, if not the, whole, nature ofthe
dreamer, and are one means of making the
hidden life of the psyche accessible to our un
derstanding. It is only on such hypotheses that
Hildebrandt can attribute to the dream the role
of a monitor who calls our attention to the
secret mischief in the soul, just as, according
to the physicians, it; may announce a hitherto
unobserved physical disorder. Spitta, too, must

[172a]
168
be influenced by this conception when he re
fers, for example, to the stream of excitations
which flowin upon the psyche during puberty,
and consoles the dreamer by assuring him that
he has done all that is in his power to do if he
has led>a strictly virtuous life during his wak
ing state; if he has made an effort to suppress
the sinful thoughts as often as they arise, and
has kept them from maturing and turning into
action. According to this conception, we might
designate as "undesired imaginings" those that
are suppressed during the day, and we must
recognize in their emergence a genuine psychic
phenomenon.
According to certain other authors, we have
no right to draw this last inference. For Jessen
(p. 360) the undesired ideas and images, in the
dream as in the waking state, and also in the
delirium of fever/etc., possess "the character of
a voluntary activity laid to rest, and of a proces
sion, to some extent mechanical, of images
and ideas evoked by inner impulses." An im
moral dream proves nothing in respect of the
psychic life of the dreamer except that he has
somehow become cognizant of the imaginative
content in question; it is certainly no proof of
a psychic impulse of his own mind. Another
writer, Maury, makes us wonder whether he,
too, does not ascribe to the dream-state the
power of dividing the psychic activity into its
components, instead of aimlessly destroying it.
He speaks as follows of dreams in which one
oversteps the bounds of morality: "Ce sont nos
penchants qui parlentefqui nous font agif,
sdnsvque la conscience nous retienne, bien que
parfois elle nous avertisse.
Pai mes defauts
et mes penchants vicieux; a Vetat de veitle, je
tdche de lutter contre eux, et il m'arrive assez
souvent de n'y pas succomber. Mais dans mes
songes j'y succombe toujours, ou pour mieux
dire j'agis par leur impulsion, sans crainte et
sans remords. . . . Evidemment les visions qui
se deroulent devant ma pertsee, et qui consti
tuent le reve, me sont suggerees par les imita
tions que je ressens et que ma volbhte absente
ne
cherche pas a refouler."1—Le Sommeil
(p. 113).
j •-
•"----..
If one believed in the power of the dream to
*Our tendencies speak and make us act, without
being restrained by our conscience, although it some
times warns us. I have my faults and vicious tend
encies; awake I try to fight against them, and .often
enough I do not succumb to them. But in my dreams
I always succumb, or, rather, I act at their direction,
without fear or remorse. . . . -Evidently, the visions
which unfold in my thoughts, and which constitute
the dream, are suggested by the stimuli which I feel
and"which my absent will does not try to repel.—Ed.

[172b]
SlGMUND FEEUD
reveal an actually existing, but suppressed or
concealed, immoral disposition of the dreamer,
one could not express one's opinion more em
phatically than in the words of Maury (p. 115):
"En reve Vhomme se revble done tout entier a
soi-meme dans sa nudite et sa mishre natives.
Dhs qu'il suspend Vexercise de sa volonte, il
devient le jouet de toutes les passions contre
lesquelles, A V&tat de veille, la conscience, le
sentiment d'honneur, la crainte nous defevi
dent"2 In another place he makes the striking
assertion (p. 462): "Dansle reve, e'estsurtokt
Vhomme instinctif que se revile. . . . Vhomme
revient pour ainsi dire a Vetat denature quafid
il reve; mais moins les idees acquises ont
penetre dans son esprit, pliis xles penchants en
desaccoroV avec elles conservent encore suf lui
d'influence dans le reve.m He then mentions,
as an example, that his own dreams often re
veal him
as a victim of just those supersti
tions which he has most vigorously attacked in
his writings.
i
The value of all these acute observationsis,
however, impaired in Maury's case, because he
refuses to recognize in the phenomena which
be has so accurately observed anything more
than a proof of the automatisme psychologique
which in his own opinion dominates the dreamlife. He conceives this automatism as the com
plete opposite of psychic activity.
!
A passage in Strieker's Studien iiber das JSewussiseinreads: "Dreams do not consist purely
and simply of delusions; for example, if onejis
afraid of robbers in a dream, the robbers indeed
aireimaginary, but the fear is real." Our atten
tion is here called to the fact that the affective
development of a dream does not admit of the
judgment which one bestows upon therest jof
the dream-content, and the problem then arises:
What part of the psychic processes in a dream
may be real? That is to say, what part of thejm
may claim to be enrolled among the psychic
processes of the waking state?
G. Dream-Theories and the Function of the
Dream
..
A statement concerning the dream which seeks
to explain as many as possible of its o|b2 In a dream, a man is totally revealed to himself
in his naked and wretched state.
As he suspends the
exercise of his will, he becomes the .toy of alF the
passions
from
which, when
awake,
our conscience,
horror, and fear defend us.—Ed.
3 In a dream, it is above all the instinctive man
who is revealed. . . .. Man returns, so to speak, to
the natural state when he dreams; but the less-ac
quired ideas have penetrated into his mind, the more
his "tendencies to disagreement"' with them keep their
hold on him in his dreams.—Ed.

[173a]
served characteristics from a single point of
view, and which at the same time defines the
relation of the dream to a more comprehensive
sphere of phenomena, may be described as a
theory of the dream. The individual theories of
the dream will be distinguished from one an
other by their designating as essential this or
that characteristic of dreams, and relating there
to their data and their explanations. It is not
absolutely necessary that we should deduce
from the theory of the dream a function, i.e.,
a use or any such similar role, but expectation,
being as a matter of habit ideologically in
clined,will nevertheless welcome those theories
which afford us some insight into a function of
dreams.
We have already become acquainted with
many conceptions of the dream, which in this
sense are more or less deserving of the name of
dream-theories.
The
belief
of the
ancients
that dreams were sent by the gods in order to
guide the actions of man wasa complete theory
of the dream, which told them all that was
worth knowing about dreams. Since dreams
have become an object of biological research
we have a greater number of theories, some of
which, however, are very incomplete.
Provided we make no claim to completeness,
we might venture on the following rough group
ing of dream-theories, based on their funda
mental conception of the degree and mode of
the psychic activity in dreams:—
1. Theories, like those of Delbceuf, whichal
low the full psychic activity of the waking state
to continue in our dreams.
Here the psyche
does not sleep; its apparatus remains intact;
but under the conditions of the sleeping state,
which differ from those of the waking state, it
must in its
normal functioning give results
which differ from those of the waking state. As
regards these theories, it may be questioned
whether their authors are in a position to de
rive the distinction between dreaming and wak
ing thought entirely from the conditions of the
sleeping state. Moreover, they lack one pos
sible access to a function of dreams; one does
riot understand to what purpose one dreams—
why the complicated mechanism of the psychic
apparatus shouldcontinueto operate even when
it is placed under conditions to which it does
not appear to be adapted. There are only two
purposeful reactionsin the placeof the reaction
of dreaming: to sleep dreamlessly, or to wake
when affected by disturbing stimuli.
2. Theories which, on the contrary, assume
for the dream a diminution of the psychic ac

[173b]
The Interpretation of Dreams
169
tivity, a loosening of connections, and an im
poverishment of the available material. In ac
cordance with these theories, one must assume
for sleep a psychological character entirely dif
ferent from that given by Delbceuf. Sleep en
croaches widely upon the psyche; it does not
consist in the mere shutting it off from the
outer world • on the contrary, it enters into its
mechanism, and makes it for the time ber
ing unserviceable. If I may draw a comparison
from psychiatry, I would say that the first
group of theories construes the dream like a
paranoia, while the second represents it as a
type of mental deficiency or amentia.
The theory that only a fragment of the psy
chic activity paralysed by sleep finds expression
in dreams is that by far the most favoured by
medical writers, and by scientists in general. In
so far as one may presuppose a general interest
in dream-interpretation, one may indeed' de
scribe it as the most popular theory of dreams.
It is remarkable how nimbly this particular the
ory avoids the greatest danger that threatens
every dream-interpretation; that is, shipwreck
on one of the contrasts incorporated in dreams.
Since this theory regards dreams as the result
of a partial waking (or, as Herbart puts it in
his Psychologie uber den Traum, "a gradual,
partial, and at the same time very anomalous
waking"), it is able to cover the whole series,
from the inferior activities of dreams, which
betray themselves by their absurdity, to fully
concentrated intellectual activity, by a series
of states of progressive awakening* ending in
complete wakefulness.
Those .who find the physiological mode of
expression indispensable, or who deem it more
scientific, will find this theory of dreams sum
marized in Binz's description (p. 43):—
•"This state (of torpor), however, gradually
comes to an end in the hours of early morning.
The accumulated products of fatigue in the al
bumen of the brain gradually diminish. They
are slowly decomposed, or carried away by the
constantly
flowing blood-stream.
Here
and
there individual groups of cells can be distin
guished as being awake, while around them all
is still in a state of torpidity. The isolated work
of the individual groups now appeats before our
clouded consciousness, which is still powerless
to control other parts of the brain, which gov
ern the associations. Hence the pictures created,
which for the most part correspondto the ob
jective impressions of the immediate past, com
bine with one another in a wild and uncon
trolled fashion, As the number of brahvcells

[174a]
170
Sigmund Freud
set free constantly increases,; the irrationality
of the dream becomes constantly less."
•
The conception of the dream as an incom*
plete, partial waking state, or traces of the in
fluence of this conception, will of course be
found in the works of all the modern physio
logists and philosophers. It is most completely
represented by Maury. It often seems as though
this author conceives the state of being awake
or asleep as susceptible of shifting from one
anatomical region to,another; each anatomical
region seeming to him to be connected with a
definite psychic function. Here I will merely
suggest that even if the theory of partial waking
were confirmed, its finer superstructure would
still call for exhaustive consideration.
No function of dreams, of course, can emerge
from this
conception of the dream-life. On
the contrary; Binz, one of the chief proponents
of this theory, consistently enough denies that
dreams have any status or importance. He says
(P- 357) • "All the facts, as we see them, urge
us to characterize the dream as a physical pro
cess, in all cases useless, and in many cases
definitely morbid."
The
expression
physical
in
reference
to
dreams (the word is emphasized by the author)
points, of course, in more than one direction.
In the first place, it refers to the aetiology of
dreams, which was of special interest to Binz,
as he was studying the experimental production
of dreams by the administration of drugs. It is
certainly in keeping with this kind of dreamtheory to ascribe the incitement to dreaming,:
whenever possible, exclusively to somatic ori
gins. Presented in the most extreme form the
theory is as follows: After we have put our
selves to sleep by the banishment of stimuli,
there would be no need to dream, and no rea
son for dreaming until the morning, when the
gradual awakening through the fresh invasion
of stimuli might be reflected in the phenome
non of dreaming. But, as a matter of fact, it is
not possible to protect our sleep from stimuli;
like the germs of life of which Mephistopheles
complained, stimuli come to the sleeper from
all directions—from without, from within, and
even from all those bodily regions which never
trouble us during the waking state. Thus our
sleep is disturbed; now this, now that little cor
ner of the psyche is jogged intothe waking state,
and the psyche functions for a while with the.
awakened fraction, yet is thankful to fall asleep
again. The dream is the reaction to the disturb-f
ance of sleep caused by the stimulus, but it is,
when all is said, a purely superfluous reaction.

[174b]
The description of the dream—which, after
all, remains an activity of the psychic organ—
as a physical process has yet another connota
tion; So to describe it.is to deny that the dream
has the dignity of a psychic process. The old
simile of "the ten fingers of a person ignorant
of music running over the keyboard of an in
strument" perhaps best illustrates in what es
teem the dream is commonly held by the repre
sentatives of exact science. Thus conceived, it
becomes something wholly insusceptible of in
terpretation. How could the ten fingers of a
player ignorant of music perform a musical
composition?
i
The theory of partial wakefulness did not
escape criticism even by the earlier writers^
Thus Burdach wrote in 1830: "If we say that
dreaming is a partial waking, then, in the first
place, neither the waking nor the sleeping state
is explained thereby; secondly, this amounts
only to saying that certain powers of the mind
are active in dreams while others are at rest.
But such irregularities occur throughout life.
. . •" (P. 482).
The prevailing dream-theory which conceives
the dream as a "physical" process finds a cer
tain support in a very interesting conception of
the dream which was first propounded by Rob
ert in 1866, and which is seductive because jit
assigns to the dream a function or a useful re
sult. As the basis of his theory Robert takes
two
objectively observable
facts
which
we
have already discussed in our consideration pf
dream-material (p. 144 above). These facts are:
(1) that one very often dreams about the most
insignificant impressions of the day; and (2)
that one rarely carries over into the dream the
absorbing interests of the day. Robert asserts
as an indisputable fact that those matters which
have been fully settled and solved never evoke
dreams, but only such as lie incompleted in
the mind, or touch it merely in passing (p. 10).
"For this reason we cannot usually explain
our dreams, since their causes are to be found
in sensory impressions of the preceding day
which have not attained sufficient recognition
on- the part of the dreamer" The condition
permitting an impression to reach the dream
is, therefore, that this impression has been
disturbed in its elaboration, or that it was
too insignificant to lay claim.to such elabor
ation.
Robert therefore conceives the dream "as a
physical process of elimination which in its
psychic reaction reaches the consciousness."
Dreams are eliminations of thoughts nipped in

[175a]
the bud. "A man deprived of the capacity for
dreaming would in time become mentally un
balanced, because an immense number of un
finished and unsolved thoughts and superficial
impressions would accumulate in his brain, un
der the pressure of which all that should be in
corporated in the memory as a completed
whole would be stifled." The dream acts as a
safety-valve
for
the
over-burdened
brain.
Dreams
possess a healing and unburdening
power (p. 32).
We should misunderstand Robert if we were
to ask him how representation in the dream
could bring about an unburdening of the mind.
The writer apparently concluded from these
two peculiarities of the dream-material that
1during sleep such an elimination of worthless
impressions is effected somehow as a somatic
process; and that dreamingis not a specialpsy
chic process, but only the information which
we receive of such elimination. Moreover, elim-
. ination is not the only thing that takes place
in the mind during sleep. Robert himself adds
that the stimuli of the day are likewise elabor
ated, and "what cannot be eliminated from the
undigested thought-material lying in the mind
is bound up into a completed whole by mental
clues borrowed from the imagination, and is
thus enrolled in the memory as a harmless
phantasy-picture" (p. 23).
• But it is in his criticism of the sources of
dreams that Robert is most flatly opposed to
the prevailing theory. Whereas according to this
theory there would be no dream if the external
and internal sensory stimuli did not repeatedly
wake the mind, according to Robert the impulse
to dream lies in the mind itself. It lies in the
overloading of the mind, which demands dis
charge, and Robert considers, quite consistent
ly, that those causes conditioning the dream
which depend on the physical condition assume
a subordinate rank, and could not incite dreams
in
a
mind which
contained no
material for
dream-formation
.derived
from
the
waking
consciousness. It is admitted, however, that the
phantasy-images originating in the depths of
the mind may be influenced by nervous stimuli
(p. 48). Thus, according tb Robert, dreams are
not, after all, wholly dependent on the somatic
element. Dreaming is, of course, not a psychic
process, and it has no place among the psychic
processes of the waking state; it is a nocturnal
somatic process in the apparatus of mental ac
tivity, and has a function to perform, viz., to
guard this apparatus against excessive strain,
or, if we may be allowed to change the com

[175b]
The Interpretation of Dreams
171
parisonj to cleanse the mind.
Another author, Yves
Delage,
bases
his
theory on the same characteristics of the dream
—characteristics which are perceptible in the
selection of the dream-material, and it is in
structive to observe how a trifling twist in the
conception of the same things gives a finatarer
suit entirely (liferent in its bearings.
: ?*.r•
Delage, having lost through death a person
very dear to him, found that we either do.not
dream at all of what occupies us intently during
the day, or that we begin to dream of it only
after it is overshadowed by the other interests
of the
day. His investigations in respect of
other persons corroborated the universality of
this state of affairs. Concerning the dreams of
newly-married people, he makes a comment
which is admirable if it should prove to be
generally true: "Sfils ont ete fortement epris,
presque jamais Us nyont reve Vun de Vautre
avant le mariage ou pendant la lune de miel; et
sHls ont reve a"amour cyest pour Stre infideles
avec quelque personne indifferente ou odieuse."1
But of what does one dream? Delage recog
nizes that the material of our dreams consists of
fragments and remnants of impressions, both
from the last few days and from earlier pe
riods. All that appears in our dreams, all that
we may at first be inclined to consider the crea
tion of the dream-life, proves on closer investi
gation to be unrecognized reproduction, "sou
venirinconsdent." But this representative mat
erial reveals
one
common characteristic;
it
originates from impressions which have prob
ably affected our senses more forcibly than
our mind, or from which the attention has been
deflected soon after their occurrence. The less
conscious, and at the same time the stronger
an impression, the greater the prospect of its
playing a part in our next dream.
These two
categories of impressions—the
insignificant and the undisposed-of—are essen
tially the same as those which were emphasized
by Robert, but Delage gives them another sig
nificance, inasmuch as he believes that these
impressions are capable of exciting dreams not
because they are indifferent, but because they
are not disposed of. The insignificant impres
sions also are, in a sense, not fully disposed of;
they, too, owing to their character of new im
pressions,
are "autant de ressorts tendus,"2
1 If they are very much in love, they have almost
never dreamed of each other before the marriage or
during the honeymoon; and if they have dreamed of
love, it was to be unfaithful with someone unimportant
or distasteful.—Ed.
2 So many taut lines.—Ed.

[176a]
172
:
SlGMUND
which will be relaxed during*sleep. Still more
entitled to a role in the dream than a?weak and
almost unnoticed impression is a vivid impres
sion which has been accidentally retarded in
its elaboration, or intentionally repressed. The
psychic energy accumulated during the day by
inhibition or suppression becomes the main
spring of the dream at night. In dreams psy
chically suppressed material achieves expres
sion.1
Unfortunately Delage does not pursue this
line of thought any farther; he is able to as
cribe only the most insignificant role in our
dreamsto an independent psychic activity, and
thus, in his theory of dreams, he reverts to the
prevailing doctrine of a partial slumber of the
brain: "En somme le reve est le produit de la
pensee errante, sans but et sans direction, se
fixant successivement sur les souvenirs, qui ont
garde assez oVintensite pour se placer sur sa
route et Varreter au passage, etablissant entre
eux un lien tantot faible et indeds, tantot plus
fort et plus serre, selon que Vactivite actuelle
du cerveau est plus oumoins- abolie par le sommeil."*
••:•
3. In a third group we may include those
dream-theories which ascribe to the dreaming
mind the capacity for and propensity to special
psychic activities, which in the waking state
it is able to exert either not at all or imperfect
ly. In most cases the manifestation of these
activities is held to result in a useful function
of dreams. The evaluations of dreams by the
earlier psychologists fall chiefly within this
category. I shall content myself*however, with
quoting in their stead the assertion of Burdach,
to the effect that dreaming "is the natural ac
tivity of the mind, which is not limited by the
power of the individuality, nor disturbed by
self-consciousness, nor directed by self-deter
mination, but is the vitality of the sensible
focus indulging in free play" (p. 486).
Burdach and others evidently consider this
1A novelist, Anatole France, expresses himself to a
similar effect (Le Lys Rouge): "Ce que nous voyons
la nuit ce sont les testes malheureux que nous avons
nigligi dans la veille. Le reve est souvent la revanche
des choses qu'on miprise ou le reproche des itres abandonnis." [What we see at night are the unhappy relics
that we neglected while awake. The dream is often the
revenge of
things scorned or the reproach of beings
deserted.—Ed
2 In short, the dream is the product of wandering
thought, without end or direction, successively fixing
on memories which have retained sufficient intensity
to put themselves in the way and block the passage,
establishing between themselves a connection sometimes
weak and loose, sometimes stronger and closer, accord
ing to whether the actual work of the brain is more or
less suppressed by sleep.—tEd.

[176b]
Freud
revelling in the free Fuse of its own powers as a
state in which the mind refreshes itself .and
gathers fresh \strength i for
the day's work;
something, indeed, after the fashion of a vaca
tion. Burdach therefore cites with approval the
admirable words
in which the poet Novalis
lauds the power of the dream: "The dream is
a bulwark against the regularity and common
place character of life, a free recreation of the
fettered phantasy, in which it intermingles all
the images of life and interrupts the constant
seriousness of the adult by the joyful play of
the child. Without the dream we should surely
grow old earlier, so. that the dream may be
considered, if not precisely as a gift fromabove,
yet as a delightful exercise, a friendly compan
ion on our pilgrimage to the grave."
The
refreshing
and
healing
activity
of
dreams is even more impressively described by
Purkinje (p. 456). "The productive dreams in
particular would perform these functions. These
are the unconstrained play of the imagination,
and have no connection with the events of the
day. The mind is loth to continue the tension
of the waking life, but wishes to relax it and
recuperate from it. It creates, in the first place
conditions opposed to those of the waking state.
It cures sadness by joy, worry by hope said
cheerfully distracting images, hatred by love
and friendliness, and fear by courage and conr
fidence; it appeases doubt by conviction and
firm belief, and vain expectation by realization.
Sleep heals many sore spots in the mind, which
the day keeps continually open, by covering
them and guarding them against fresh irritation.
On this depends in. some degree the consoling
action of time." We all feel that sleep is bener
ficial to the psychic life, and the vague surmise
of the popular consciousness is apparently loth
to surrender the notion that dreaming is one of
the ways in which sleep bestows its benefits.
The most original and most comprehensive
attempt to explain dreaming as a special activity
of the mind, which can freely unfold itself only
in the sleeping state, is that made by Schemer
in 1861. Schemer's book is written in a heavy
and bombastic style and is inspired by an al
most intoxicated enthusiasm for;the subject,
which is bound to repel us unless it can carry
us away with it. It places so many difficulties
in the way of an analysis that we gladly resort
to the clearer and conciser presentation of
Schemer's theories made by the philosopher
Volkelt:
"From these
mystical conglomera
tions, from all these outbursts of splendour and
radiance, there indeed flashes and shines an

[177a]
The Intekpeetation of Dreams
ominous semblance of meaning; but the path
of the philosopher is hot illumined thereby."
Such is the-criticism of Schemer's^ exposition
by one of his own followers.;
,;
.• •
Schemer is not one of those writers for whom
the mind carries its undiminished faculties into
the dream-life. He even explains how, in our
dreams, the centrality and spontaneous energy
of the ego become enervated; how cognition,
feeling, will, and imagination are transformed
by this decentralization; how the remnant of
these psychic forces has not a truly intellectual
character, but is rather of the nature of a mech
anism. But, on the other hand, that activity of
the psyche which may be described as phantasy,
freed from all rational governance, and hence
no longer strictly controlled, rises to absolute
supremacy in our dreams. To be sure, it bor
rows all its building-material from the memory
of the waking state,; but with this material it
builds up structures which differ from those
of the waking state as day differs from night.
In our dreams it reveals itself as hot only re
productive but alsoproductive. Its peculiarities
give the dream-life its singular character. It
shows a preference for the unlimited, the exag
gerated, the prodigious; but by its liberation
from the inhibiting categories of thought, it
gains a greater flexibility and agility, and in
dulges in pleasurable turns. It is excessivly sen
sitive to the delicate emotional stimuli of the
mind, to its stirring and disturbing affects, and:
it rapidly recasts the inner life into an external,
plastic visibility.
The
dream-phantasy lacks
thelanguage of concepts. What it wishes to say
it must express invisible form; and since in this
case the concept does not exert-an inhibitory
control, it depicts it in all the fulness, power,
and breadth of visible form. But hereby its
language, plain though it is, becomes cumber
some, awkward, and prolix. Plain speaking is
rendered especially difficult by the fact that it
dislikes expressing an object by its actual im
age, but prefers to selectan alien image, if only
the latter is able to expressthat particular as
pect of the object which it is anxious to repre
sent. Such is the symbolizing activity of the
phantasy., r. It is, moreover, very significant
that the drean>phantasy reproduces objects
not in detail, but only in outline,1 and in the
freest possible manner. Its paintings, therefore,
are like light and brilliant sketches. The dreamphantasy, however, does not stop at the mere
representation of the object, but feels an inter
nal urge to implicate the dream-ego to some
extent tvith the object, and thus to give rise to

[177b]
173
action. The visual dream, for example, depicts
gold coins lying in the street; the dreamer
picks them up, rejoices, and carries them away/
I According to Schemer, the material upon
which the
dream-phantasy exerts its artistic
activity consists preponderantly, of the organic
sensory stimuli which are so obscure during
the day (cf. p. 151 above); hence it is that the
over-fantastic theory of Schemer, and perhaps
too matter-of-fact theories of Wundt and other
physiologists, though otherwise diametrically
opposed to each other, are in perfect agreement
in their assumptions with regard to dreamsources and dream-stimuli. But whereas, ac
cording to the physiological theory, the psychic
reaction to the inner physical stimuli becomes
exhausted with the arousing of any of the ideas
appropriate to these stimuli (as these ideas
then, by way of association, call to their aid
other ideas, so that on reaching this stage the
chains of psychic processes appears to termi
nate), according to Schemer, on the other hand,
the physical stimuli merely supply the psyche
with material which it may utilize in fulfilling
its phantastic intentions. For Schemer dream-!
formation begins where, according to the views
of other writers, it comes to an end.
What the dream-phantasy does with the
physical stimuli cannot, of course, be regarded
as purposeful. The phantasy plays a tantaliz
ing game with them, and represents the organic
source of the stimuli of the dream in question
by
any sort of plastic
symbolism.
Indeed,
Schemer holds—though'here Volkelt and others
differ from him—that the dream-phantasy has
a certain favourite symbol for the organism as
a whole: namely, the house. Fortunately, how
ever, for its representations, it does not seem
to limit itself to this material; it may also emv
ploy a whole series of houses to designate a
single organ; for example, very long streets of
houses for the intestinal stimulus.
In other
dreams particular parts of the house may actu
ally represent particular regionsof the body* as
in the headache-dre-am, when the ceiling of the
room (which the dream sees covered with dis
gusting toad-like spiders) represents the head.1
Quite apart from the symbol of the house,
any other suitable object may be employed ttf
represent those parts of the body which excite
the dream. "Thus the breathing lungs find their
symbol in the flaming stove with its windy
roaring, the heart in hollow chests and baskets,
the' bladder in around, balPshaped, :or simply
hollow objects- The man's dreams, when due to
the sexual 'stimulus, make the dreamer find in

[178a]
174
Sigmtjnd Freud
the street the upper portion of a clarinet, or
the mouthpiece of a tobacco-pipe, or, again, a
piece of fur. The clarinet and tobacco-pipe rep-;
resent the approximate form of the male sexual
organ, while the fur represents the pubic hair.
In the sexual dreams of the female, the tight
ness of the closed thighs may be symbolized by
a narrow courtyard surrounded by houses, and
the vagina by a very narrow, slippery and soft
footpath, leading through the courtyard, upon
which the dreamer is obliged to walk, in order
perhaps to carry a letter to a man" (Volkelt,
p. 39). It is particularly noteworthy that at the
end of such a physically stimulated dream the
phantasy, as it were, unmasks itself by repre
senting the exciting organ or its function un
concealed. Thus the "tooth-excited dream" usu
ally ends with the dreamer taking a tooth out
of his mouth.
The dream-phantasy may, however, direct
its attention not merely to the form of the ex
citing organ, but may even make the substance
contained therein the object of symbolization.
Thus, for example, the dream excited by the
intestinal stimuli may lead us through muddy
streetsj the dream due to stimuli from the blad
der to foaming water. Or the stimulus as such,
the nature of its excitation, and the object
which it covets, are represented symbolically.
Or, again, the dream-ego enters into a concrete
association with the symbolization of its own
state; as, for example, when in the case of
painful stimuli we struggle desperately with
vicious dogs or raging bulls, or when in a sex
ual dream the dreamer sees herself pursued by
a naked man. Disregarding all the possible pro
lixity of elaboration, a phantastic symbolizing
activity remains as the central force of every
dream. Volkelt, in his fine and enthusiastic
essay, attempted to penetrate still further into
the character of this phantasy, and to assign to
the psychic activity thus recognized its posi
tion in a system of philosophical ideas, which,
however, remains... altogether^ too
difficult of
comprehension for anyone who is hot prepared
by previous training for the intuitive compre
hension of philosophical modes of-thought.
Schemer attributes no useful function to the
activity of the symbolizing phantasy in dreams.
In. dreams the psyche plays with the stimuli
which are offered to it. One might conjecture
that it plays in a mischievous fashion. And we
might be asked whether our detailed considera^-
tion of Schemer's dream-theory, the arbitrari
ness, of which, and its deviation from the rules
of all forms of research are only too obvious,

[178b]
can lead to any useful results. We might fitly
reply that to reject Schemer's theory without
previous examination would be imposing too
arrogant a veto. This theory is based on the im
pressions produced by his dreams on a man
who paid close attention to them, and who
would
appear
to
be
personally
very
well
equipped for tracing obscure psychic phenom
ena. Furthermore, it treats of a subject which
(though rich in its contents and relations) has
for thousands of years appeared mysterious to
humanity, and
to
the elucidation of
which
science, strictly so called, has, as it confesses,
contributed
nothing
beyond
attempting—in
uncompromising opposition to popular senti
ment—to deny its content and significance.
Finally, let us frankly admit that it seems as
though we cannot very well avoid the phantastical in our attempts to explain dreams. We
must remember also that there is such a thing
as a phantasy of ganglion cells; the passage
cited (p. 87) from a sober and exact inves
tigator like Binz, which describes how the dawn
of awakening floods the dormant cell-masses of
the cerebral cortex, is not a whit less fanciful
and improbable than Schemer's attempts at
interpretation. I hope to be able to demonstrate
that there is something real underlying these
attempts, though the phenomena*which he de
scribes have been only vaguely recognized, and
do not possess the character of universality
that should entitle them to be the basis of a
theory of dreams. For the present, Schemer'stheory of dreams, in contrast to the medical
theory, may perhaps lead us to realize between
what, extremes the explanation of dream-life
is still unsteadily vacillating.
H. The Relation between Dreams and Mental
Diseases
When we speak of the relation of dreams to
mental derangement, we may mean threediffer
ent things: (1) aetiological and clinical rela
tions, as when a dream represents or initiates
a psychotic condition, or occurs subsequently j;o
such a condition;.(2) changes which the dreamlife undergoes in cases of mental disease; (3)
inner relations between dreams:Fand psychoses,
analogies which point to an intimate relation
ship. These manifold relations between the two
series of phenomena were in the early days of
medical science—and are once more at the
present time—a favourite theme of medical
writers, as we may leam from the literature on
the
subject
collated. by
Spitta, Radestock,
Maury, and Tissie. Recently Sante de Sanctis

[179a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
175
has directed his attention to this relationship.1
For the purposes of our discussion it will suffice
merely to glance at this important subject.
As to the clinical and aetiological relations
between dreams and the psychoses, I will re
port the following observations as examples:
Hohnbaum asserts (see Krauss) that the first
attack of insanity is frequently connected with
a terrifying, anxiety-dream, and that the pre
dominating idea is related to this dream. Sante
de Sanctis adduces similar observations in re
spect of paranoiacs, and declares the dream to
be, in some of them, "la vraie cause determi
nate de la folie."2 The psychosis may come to
life quite suddenly, simultaneously with the
dream that contains its effective and delusive
explanation, or it may develop slowly through
subsequent dreams that have still to struggle
against doubt. In one of de Sanctis's cases an
intensively moving dream was accompanied by
slight hysterical attacks, which, in their turn,
were followed by an anxious melancholic state.
Fere (cited by Tissie) refers to.a dream which
was followed by hysterical paralysis. Here the
dream is presented as the aetiology of mental
derangement, although we should be making a
statement equally consistent with the facts
were we to say that the first manifestation of
the mental derangement occurred in the dreamlife, that-the disorder first broke through in the
dream. In other instances, the morbid symp
toms are included in the dream-life, or the psy
chosis remains confined to the dream-lifel Thus
Thomayer calls our attention to anxiety-dreams
which must be conceived as the equivalent of
epileptic attacks. Allison has described cases
of nocturnal insanity (see Radestock), in which
the subjects are apparently perfectly well in
the
day-time,
while
hallucinations,
fits
of
frenzy, and the like regularly make their ap
pearance at night. De Sanctis and Tissie record
similar observations (the equivalent of a para
noic dream in an alcoholic, voices accusing a
wife of infidelity). Tissie records many obser
vations of recent date in- which behaviour of
a pathological character (based on delusory
hypotheses,
obsessive
impulses)
had
their
origin in dreams. Guislain describes a case in
which sleep was replaced by an intermittent in
sanity.
We cannot doubt that one day the physician
will concern himself not only with the psychol1 Among the more recent authors who have occupied
themselves
with
these
relations
are:
Fere,
Ideler,
Lasegue, Pichon, Regis Vespa, Giessler, Kazodowsky,
Pachantoni,
and
others.
2 The real determining cause of the madness.—Ed.

[179b]
ogy, but also with the psycho-pathology of
dreams.
In cases of convalescence from insanity, it
is often especially obvious that while the func
tions may be healthy by day the dream-life
may still partake of the psychosis. Gregory is
said to have been the first to call attention to
such cases (see Krauss). Maeario (cited by
Tissie) gives an account of a maniac who, a
week after his complete recovery, once more
experienced in dreams the flux of ideas and the
unbridled, impulses of his disease.
Concerning the changes which the dream-life
undergoes in chronic psychotics, little research
has been undertaken as yet.. On the other hand,
early attention was given to the inner relation
ship between dreams and mental disturbances,
a relationship which is demonstrated by the
complete agreement of the manifestations oc
curring in each. According to Maury, Cabanis,
in his Rapports du Physique et du Moral, was
the first to call attention to this relationship;
he was followed by Lelut, J. Moreau, and more
particularly the philosopher Maine de Biran.
The comparison between the two is of course
older still. Radestock begins the
chapter in
which he deals with the subject by citing a
number of opinions which insist on the analogy
between insanity and
dreaming. Kant says
somewhere: "The lunatic is a dreamer'in the •
waking state." According to Krauss, "Insanity
is a
dream in which the senses are awake."
Schopenhauer terms the dream a brief insanity,
and insanity a long dream. Hagen describes de
lirium as a dream-life which is inducted not by
sleep but by disease. Wundt, in his Physiologische Psychologie, declares: "As a matter of
fact we ourselves may in dreams experience
almost all the manifestations which we observe
in the asylums for the insane."
The specific points of agreement in conse
quence of which such a comparison commends
itself to
our
judgment are enumerated by
Spitta, who groups them (very much as Maury
has done) as follows: "(1) Suspension, or at
least retardation of self-consciousness, and con
sequently ignorance of the condition as such,
the impossibility of astonishment, and a lack
of moral consciousness. (2) Modified percep
tion of the sensory organs; that is, perception
is as a rule diminished in dreams, and greatly
enhanced in insanity. (3) Mutual combination
of ideas exclusively in accordance with the laws
of association and reproduction, hence auto
matic series-formations: hence again a lack of
proportion in the relations between ideas (ex-

[180a]
176
SlGMUND FKEUD
aggeratiotis; phantasms); and the results of all
this: (4) Changes in—for example, inversions
of—the personality, andsometimes of the idio
syncrasies of the character (perversities)."
Radestock adds a few additional data con
cerningthe analogous nature of the material of
dreams
and of mental derangement:: "The
greatest number of hallucinations and illusions
are found in the sphere of the senses of sight
and hearing and general sensation. As in
dreams, the fewest elements are supplied by
the senses of smell and taste. The fever-patient,
like the dreamer, is assailed by reminiscences
from the remote past; what the waking and
healthy man seems to have forgotten is recol
lected in sleep and in disease." The analogybe
tween dreams and the psychoses receives its
full value only when, like a family resem
blance, it is extended to the subtler points of
mimicry, and even the individual peculiarities
of facial expression.
"To him who is tortured by physical and
mental;sufferings the dream accords what has
been denied him by-reality, to wit, physical
well-being, and happiness; so, too, the insane
see radiant images of happiness, eminence, and
wealth. The supposed possession of estates and
the imaginary fulfilment of wishes, the denial
or destruction of which have actually been a
psychic cause of the insanity, often form the
main content of the delirium. The woman who
has lost a dearly beloved child experiences in
her delirium the joys of maternity; the man
who has suffered reverses of
fortune deems
himself immensely wealthy; and the jilted girl
sees herself tenderly beloved."
(This passage from Radestock is an abstract
of a brilliant exposition of Griesinger's (p. in),
which reveals, with the greatest clarity, wishfulfilment as a characteristic of the imagina-?
tion common to dreams and to the psychoses.
My own investigations have taught me that
here is to be found the key to a psychological
theory of dreams and of the psychoses.)
"Absurd combinations of ideas and weakness
of judgment are the main, characteristics of
the dream and of insanity." The over-estima
tion of one's own mental capacity, which ap
pears absurd to sober judgment, is found alike
in both, andthe rapid flux of imaginings in the
dream corresponds to the flux of ideas in the
psychoses. Both are devoid ofany measure of
time. The splitting of the personality in dreams,
which,
for
instance,
distributes
one's
own
knowledge between two persons, one of whom,
the strange person, corrects one's own ego in

[180b]
the dream, entirely corresponds with the wellknown splitting of the personality in hallucina
tory paranoia; the dreamer, too, hears his own
thoughts expressed by strange voices. Even the
constant delusive ideas'find their analogy in
the
stereotyped
and
recurring
pathological
dream (reve obsedani). After recovering from
delirium, patients not infrequently declare that
the whole period of their illness appeared to
them like an uncomfortable dream; indeed*they
inform us that sometimes during their illness
they have suspected that they were only dream
ing, just as often happens in the sleep-dream.
In view of all this, it is not surprising that
Radestock should summarize his own opinion,
and
that of many others, in
the following
words: "Insanity, an abnormal morbid phe
nomenon, is to be regarded as an enhancement
of the
periodically recurring normal dreamstate" (p. 228), -:
Krauss attempted to base the relationship
between the dream and insanity upon their
aetiology (or rather upon the sources of ex
citation), thus, perhaps, making the relation
ship even more intimate than was possible oh
the basis of the analogous nature of the phe
nomena manifested. According to him, the fun-,
damental element common to both is, as we
have already learned, the organically condi
tioned
sensation,
the
sensation of
physical
stimuli, the general sensation arising out: of
contributions from all the organs (cf. Peisse,
cited by Maury, p. 52)-
The undeniable agreement between drearhs
and
mental derangement; extending even to
characteristic details, constitutes one of the
strongest confirmations of the medical theory
of dream-life, according to which the dream
is represented as a useless and disturbing proc
ess, and as the expression of a diminished psy
chic activity. One cannot expect, for the pres
ent, to derive the final explanation of the dream
from the psychic derangements, since, as; is
well known, ourunderstanding of the origin jof
the latter is still highly unsatisfactory. ItIis
very probable, however^ that a modified con
ception of the dream must also influence our
views regarding the inner mechanism of mental
disorders, and hence we may say that we are
working towards the explanation of the psy-f
choses -when we endeavour to
elucidate the
mystery of dreams.1
•-•
••./•
=
Addendum 1909
I
shall have to
justify myself for not ex
tending my
summary
of
the
literature
of

[181a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
dream-problems to cover the period between
the first appearance of this book and the pub*
lication of the second edition. This justifica--
tion may not seem very satisfactory •tob the
reader; none the less; to me it was decisive. The
motives which induced me.to summarize the
treatment of; dreams in the literature of^the
subject have been exhausted by the foregoing
introduction; to have
continued this would
have cost me a great deal of effort and would
not have been particularly useful or instruc
tive. For the interval in question—a period of
nine years—has yielded nothing new or valu
able as regards
the
conception of dreams^
either in actual material or in novel points of
view. In most of the literature which has ap
peared since the publication of my own work
the latter has not been mentioned or discussed;
it has, of course, received the least attention
from
the
so-called
"research-workers
on
dreams," who have thus afforded a brilliant ex
ample of the aversion to learning anything new
so characteristic of the scientist. "Les savants
ne sont pas curieux,"1 said the scoffer Anatole
France. If there were such a thing in; science
as the right of revenge, I in my turn should be
justified in ignoring the literature which has ap
peared since the publication of this book. The
few reviews which have appeared in the scien
tific journals are so full of misconceptions and
lack of comprehension that my only possible
answer to my critics would be a request that
they should read this book over again—or per
haps merely that they should read it!
In the works of those physicians who make
use of the psycho-analytic method of treatment
a great many dreams have been recorded and
interpreted in accordance with my directions.
In so far as these works go beyond the con
firmation of-, my own assertions, I have noted
their results in the context of my exposition.
A supplementary bibliography at the end of
this volume comprises the most important of
these new publications. The comprehensive
work on the dream by Sante de Sanctis, of
which a
German translation appeared soon
after its publication, was produced simulta
neously with my own, so that I could not re
view his results, nor could he comment upon
mine. I am sorry to have to express the opinion
that this laborious work is exceedinglypoor in
ideas, so poor that one could never divine from
it the possibility of the problems which I have
treated in these pages.
,'.=
I can thing of only two publications which
xThe learned are not inquisitive.-^ED.

[181b]
177
touch on my own treatment of the dreamproblems. A young philosopher, H. Swoboda,
who has ventured to extend W. Fliess's dis
covery of ibiologieal periodicity (in series of
twenty-thr^e and twenty-eight, days) to the
psychic field, has produced art imaginative es
say,2 in which, among other things, he has
usedothis key: to solve the riddle of dreams;
Such a solution, however, would be an inade
quate estimate of the significance of dreams.
The material content of dreams would be ex
plained by the coincidence of all those memr
ories which, on the night of the dream, com
plete one of these biological periods for the
first or the wth time. A personal communica
tion of the author's led me to assume that he
himself no longertookthis theory very serious
ly. But it seems that I was mistaken in this
conclusion: I shall record in another place
some
observations
made
with
reference
to
Swoboda's thesis, which did not, however,
yield convincing results. It gave me far greater
pleasure to find by chance, in an unexpected
quarter, a conception of the dream which is in
complete agreement with the essence of my
own. The relevant dates preclude the possibil
ity that this conception was influenced by read
ing my book: I must therefore hail this as the
only demonstrable concurrence with the essen
tials of my theory of dreams to be found in:the
literature of the subject. The book which con^
tains the passage that I have in mind was pub
lished (in its second edition) in 191o, by Lynkeus, under the title Phantasien eines Realisten.3
Addendum 1914
The above apologia was written in 1909* Since
then, the state of affairs has certainly under
gone a change; my contribution to the "inter
pretation of dreams" is no longer ignored in
the literature of the subject. But the new situ
ation makes it even more impossible to continue
the foregoing summary. The Interpretation of
Dreams has evoked a whole series of new con
tentions and problems, which have been exr
pounded by the authors in the most varied
fashions. But I cannot discuss these works un^
til I have developed the theories to which their
authors have referred. Whatever has appeared
to me as valuable in this recent literature I
2 H.
Swoboda,
Die
Perioden
des
Menschlichen
Organismus, 1904.
•/;£ ;Cf>. Josef
Popper-Lynkeus
Traumes
(1923)
in
vol.
xi
Schriften.
und die
Theorie
des
of
my
Gesammelten

[182a]
Xy8
SlGMUND
have accordingly reviewed in the course of the
following exposition.
II. The Method of Dream Interpretation
The Analysis of a SpecimenDream
The epigraph on the title-page ofthis volume
indicates the tradition to which I prefer to ally
myself in my conception of the dream. I am
proposing to show that dreams are capable of
interpretation; and any contributions to the
solution of the problems which have already
been discussed will emerge only as possible byproducts'in the accomplishment of my special
task. On the hypothesis that dreams are sus
ceptible of interpretation, I at oncefind myself
in disagreement with the prevailing doctrine of
dreams—in fact, with all the theories of
dreams, excepting only that of Schemer, for
to interpret a dream is to specify its meaning,
to replace it by something whichtakes its posi
tion in the concatenation of our psychic activi
ties as a link of definite importance and value.
But, as we have seen, the scientific theories of
the dream leave no room for a problem of
dream-interpretation; since, in the"first, places
according to these theories, dreaming is not a
psychic activity at all, but a somatic process
which makes itself known to the psychic ap
paratus by means of symbols. Lay opinion has
always been opposed to these theories; It as
serts its privilege of proceedingillogically, and
although it admits that dreams are^ incompre^
hensible and absurd, it cannot summon up the
courage to deny that dreams have any signifi
cance. Led by a dim intuition, it seems rather
to assume that dreams have a meaning, albeit a
hidden one; that they are intended as a substi
tute for some other thought-process, and that
we have only to disclose this substitute cor
rectly in order to discover the hidden meaning
of the dream.
The unscientific world, therefore, has always
endeavoured to interpret dreams, and by ap
plying one or the other of two essentially differ
ent methods. The first of these methods en
visages the dream-content as a whole, and
seeks to replace it by another content, which
is intelligible and in certain respects analogous.
This is symbolic dream-interpretation; and of
course it goes to pieces at the very outset in
the case of those dreams which are not only
unintelligible but confused. The construction
which
the
biblical Joseph placed upon the
dream of Pharaoh furnishes an example of this
method. The seven fat kine, after which came

[182b]
Freud
seven lean ones that devoured the former, were
a symbolic substitute for seven years of famine
in the land of Egypt, which according to the -
prediction were to consumeall the surplus that
seven fruitful years had produced. Most of the
artificial dreams contrived by the poets1 are
intended for some such symbolic interpretation,
for they reproduce the thought conceived by
the poet in a guise not unlike the disguise
which we are wont to find in our dreams.
The idea that the dream concerns itself chief
ly with the future, whose form it surmises in
advance—a relic of the prophetic significance
with which dreams were once invested—now
becomes the motive for translating into the
future the meaning of the dream which has
been found by means of symbolic interpreta
tion.
A demonstration of the manner in which one
arrives at such a symbolic interpretation can
not, of course, be given. Success remains a
matter of ingenious conjecture; of direct intui
tion, and for this reason dream-interpretation
has naturally been elevated into an art which
seems to depend upon extraordinary gifts.2
The second of the two popular methods of
dream-interpretation entirely abandons such
claims. It might be described as the cipher
method, since it treats the dream as a kind of
secret code in which every sign is translated
into another sign of known meaning, according
to an established key.
For example, I have
dreamt of a letter, and also of a funeral or the
like; I consult a "dream-book," and I find that
"letter" is to be translated by "vexation" and
"funeral" by "engagement." It now remains; to
establish a connection, which I am again to' as
sume as pertaining to the future, by means of
the rigmarole which I have deciphered. An in
teresting variant of this
cipher procedure\ a
variant in which its character of purely meMn a novel Gradiva, by tjie poet W. Jensen,, I
chanced to
discover several fictitious dreams, which
were perfectly correct in their construction, and could
be interpreted as though they had not.been-invented,
but had been dreamt by actual persons. The poet de
clared, upon my inquiry, that he was unacquainted
with my theory of dreams. I have made: use of this
agreement between my investigations and the creations
of the poet as a proof of the correctness of my method
of dream-analysis {Der Wahn und die Traume in W.
Jensen's Gradiva, vol. i of the Schriften zur angewandien Seelenkimde, 1906, edited by myself, Ges. Schrif
ten, vol. ix).
2 Aristotle expressed himself in this connection by
saying that the best interpreter of .dreams is he who
can best grasp similarities. For dream-pictures', like
pictures in water, are disfigured by the- motion (of
the water)., so that he hits the target best "who is able
to
recognize the true picture in
the distorted
one
(Biichsenschutz, p. 65).

[183a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
chanical transference is to a certain extent
corrected, is presented in the work on dreaminterpretation by Artemidoros of Daldis1. Here
not only the dream-content, but also the per
sonality and social position of the dreamer are
taken into consideration, so that the
same
dream-content has a significance for the rich
man, the married man, or the orator, which is
different from that which applies to the poor
man, the bachelor, or, let us say, the^merchant.
The essential point, then, in this procedure is
that the work of interpretation is not applied
to the entirety of the dream, but to each
portion of the dream-content severally, as
though the
dream were a conglomerate in
whicheach fragment callsfor specialtreatment.
Incoherent and confused dreams are certainly
those that have been responsible for
the
^1 Artemidoros of Daldis, bornprobably in the begin
ning of
the
second century
of
our calendar, has
furnished
us
with
the .most
complete
and
careful
elaboration of dream-interpretation as it existed in
the Graeco-Roman world. As Gompertz has empha
sized, he ascribed great importance to the consideration
that dreams ought to be interpreted on the basis of
observation and
experience, and he drew a definite
line between his own art and other methods, which
he considered fraudulent. The principle of his art of
interpretation is, according to Gompertz, identical with
that of magic: i.e., the principle of association. The
thing dreamed meant what it recalled to the memory—
to the memory, of course, of the dream-interpreter!
This fact—that the dream may remind the interpreter
of various things, and every interpreter of different
things—leads, of course, to uncontrollable arbitrariness
and uncertainty. The technique which I am about to
describe differs from that ofthe ancients in one essen
tial point, namely, in that it imposes upon the dreamer
himself the work of interpretation. Instead of taking
into account whatever may occur to the dream-inter
preter, it considers only what occurs to the dreamer.in
connection with the dream-element concerned. Accord
ing to the recent records of the missionary, Tfinkdjit
(Anthropos, 1913), it would seem that the
modern
dream-interpreters
of
the
Orient
likewise
attribute
much importance to the co-operation of the dreamer.
Of the dream-interpreters among the Mesopotamian
Arabs this writer relates as follows: "Pourinterpreter
exactement un songe les oniromanciens les plus habiles
s'informent de
ceux qui les
consultent de
toutes les
circonstances qu'ils regardent nicessaires pour la bonne
explication. . . . En un mot, nDs oniromanciens ne
laissent aucune cirConstance leur ichapper et ne donnent Vinterpretation
disirie avant
d'avoir
parfaitement saisi et recu toutes les interrogations desirables."
[To interpret a dream exactly, the most practised in
terpreters
of dreams learn
from
those
who consult
them all circumstances which they regard as necessary
for a good explanation
In a word, our interpre
ters allow no. circumstance to be overlooked and do
not give the desired interpretation before perfectly
taking
and
apprehending all
desirable questions.]
Among these questions one always finds demands for
precise information in respect to near relatives (par
ents, wife, children) as well as the following formula:
habistine in hoc node copulam conjugalem ante vel
post somnium? [Did you this night have conjugal
copulation before or after the dream?] "L'idie dominante
dans
Vinterpretation
des
songes
consiste
a
expliquer le reve par son opposi." [The dominant
idea in the interpretation of dreams consists in ex
plaining the dream by its opposite.]

[183b]
179
invention of the cipher method.3
The worthlessness of both these popular
methods of interpretation does not admit of
discussion. As regards the scientific treatment
of the subject, the symbolic method is limited
in its application, and is not susceptible of a
general exposition. In the ciphermethod every
thing depends upon whether the key, the
dream-book, is reliable, and for that all guar
antees are lacking.So that one might be tempt
ed to grant the contention of the philosophers
and psychiatrists, and to dismiss the problem
of dream-interpretation as altogether fanciful.8
I have; however, come to think differently.
I have been forced to perceive that here, once
more, wehaveonebf thosenot infrequent eases
where an ancientand stubbornly retained pop
ular belief seems to have come hearer to the
truth of the matterthan the opinionof modern5
science, I must insist that the dream actually
does possess a meaning, and that a scientific
method of dream-interpretation is possible. I
arrived at my knowledge of this method in the
following manner:
For years I have been occupied with the res
olution of certain psycho-pathological struc
tures—hysterical phobias, obsessional ideas,
and the like—with therapeutic intentions. I
have been so occupied, in fact, ever since I
heard the significant statement of Joseph
2Dr. Alfred Robitsek calls my attention to the fact
that Oriental dream-books, of which ours are pitiful,
plagiarisms* commonly undertake the interpretation of
dream-elements in accordance with the assonance and
similarity of words.. Since these relationships must be
lost by translation into our language, the incompre
hensibility of the equivalents in our popular "dreambooks" is hereby explained. Information as
to
the
extraordinary significance of puns and the play upon
words in the old Oriental Cultures may be found in
the writings of Hugo Winckler.
The finest example
of a dream-interpretation which has come down to us
from antiquity is based on a play upon words. Artemi
doros relates the following (p. 225): "But it seems to:
me that Aristandros gave a most happy interpretation
to Alexander of Macedon. When the latter held Tyros
encompassed and in a state of siege, and was angry,
and depressed over the great waste of time, he dreamed
that he saw a Satyr dancing on his shield. It hap
pened that Aristandros was in the neighbourhood of
Tyros, and in the escort of the king, who was waging
war on the Syrians, By dividing the word Satyros into
o*d and xiJpog,he induced the king to become more
aggressive in the siege. And thus Alexander became
master of the city." (2d Ti>QOg=Thine is Tyros.)
The dream,
indeed, is so intimately connected with
verbal expression that
Ferenczi
justly remarks that
every tongue has its own dream-language. A dream is,
as a rule, not to be translated into other languages.
3 After the completion of my manuscript, a paper
by Stumpf came to my notice which agrees with my
work in attempting to prove that the dream is full of
meaning and capable of interpretation. But the inter
pretation is undertaken by means of an allegorizing
symbolism, and there is no guarantee that the pro
cedure is generally applicable.

[184a]
x8o
Sigmund Freud
Breuer, to the effect that in these structures,
regarded as morbid symptoms, solution and
treatment go hand in hand.1 Where it has. been
possible to trace a pathological idea back to
those elements in the psychic life of the patient
to which it owed its origin, this idea has crum
bled away, and the patient has been relieved of
it. In view of the failure of our other therapeu
tic efforts, and in the face of the mysterious
character of these pathological conditions, it
seemed to me tempting, in spite of all the diffi
culties, to follow the method initiated by Breuer
until a complete elucidation of the subject had
been achieved. I shall have occasion elsewhere
to give a detailed account p£ the form which
the technique of this procedure; has^finally as
sumed, and of the results of my efforts. In the
course of these psycho-analytic studies, I hap
pened upon the question of dream-interpreta^
tion.,My patients, after I had pledged them to
inform me of all the ideas and thoughts which
occurred to them in connection with a given
theme, related their dreams, and thus taught
me that a dream may be interpolated in the
psychic concatenation, which may be followed
backwards from a pathological idea into the
patient's memory. The next step was to treat
the dream itself as a symptom, and to apply,
to it the, method of interpretation which had
been worked out for such symptoms,
i-•• ,-
For this a certain psychic preparation on the
part of the patientis necessary. A twofold effort
is made* to stimulate his attentiveness in rer
spect of his psychic perceptions, and to elimi
nate the criticalspirit in which be isprdinarilyi
in the habit of viewing such thoughts as ;Conie
to the surface. For the purpose of self-observa
tion with concentrated attention it is advan
tageous that the patient should take up a rest
ful position and close his eyes; he must be ex
plicitly instructed to renounce all criticism of
the thought-formations which he may perceive.
He must also be told that the success of the
psychp-analysis depends upon his noting and
communicating everything that passes through
his mind, and that he must not allow himself.
to suppress one idea because it seems to him
unimportant or irrelevant to the subject, or
another because it seems nonsensical; He must
preserve an absolute impartiality in respect to
his ideas; for if he is unsuccessful in finding the
desired solution of the dream, the obsessional
idea, or the like, it will be because he permits
himself to be critical of them.
. xStudien uber Hysterie, 1895. [Gompare page 26
above.]

[184b]
I have noticed in the course of my psycho
analytical work that the psychological state of
a man in1an attitude of reflection is entirely
different from that of a man who is observing
his psychic processes. In reflection there is a
greater play of psychic activity than in the
most attentive self-observation; this is shown
even by the tense attitude and the wrinkled
brow of the man in a state of reflection, as
opposed to the mimic tranquillity of the man
observing himself. In both cases there must be
concentrated attention, but the reflective man
makes use of his critical faculties, with the re
sult that he rejects some of the thoughts which
rise into consciousness after he has become
aware of them, and abruptly interrupts others,
so that he does not follow the lines of thought
which they would otherwise open up for him;
while in respect of yet other thoughts he is
able to behave in such a manner that they do
not become conscious at all—that is to say,
they are suppressed before they are perceived.
In self-observation, on the other hand, he has
but phe task—that of suppressing criticism; if
he succeeds in doing this, an unlimited number
of thoughts enter his consciousness which
would otherwise have eluded his grasp. With
the aid ofthe material thus obtained—material
which is new to tne self-observer—it is pos
sible to achieve the interpretation of pathologi
cal ideas, and also that of dream-formations.
As will be seen, the point is-to induce a;psychic
state which is in some degree'analogous, asjregards the distribution of psychic energy (mo
bileattention),to the state"of the mind before
falling asleep—-and also, of course, to the-hyp
notic
state. On falling asleep the undesired
ideas emerge, owing to the slackening of a cer
tain arbitrary (and, of course, also critical) ac
tion, which is allowed to influence the trend of
our ideas; we are accustomed to speak of fa
tigue as the reason of this slackening; the
emerging undesired ideas are changed into vis
ual and auditory images. In the condition which
it utilized for the analysis of dreams and patho
logical ideas, this activity is purposely and de
liberately renounced, and the psychic energy
thus saved (or some part of it) is employed in
attentively tracking ,the
undesired
thoughts;
which now come
to
the
surface—thoughts
which retain their identity as ideas (in which
the condition differs from the state of falling
asleep). Undesired idtas are thus changed into
desired ones.
There are many people who do not seem to
find it easy to adopt the required attitude to>-

[185a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
181
ward the apparently "freely rising" ideas, and
to renounce the criticism which is otherwise
applied to them. The "undesired ideas" habit
ually evoke the most violent resistance, which
seeks to prevent them from coming to the
surface. But if we may credit our great poetphilosopher Friedrich
Schiller, the essential
condition of poetical creation includes a very
similar attitude. In a certain passage in his
correspondence with Korner (for the tracing of
which we are indebted to Otto Rank), Schiller
replies in the following words to a friend who
complains of his lack of creative power: "The
reason for your complaint lies, it seems to me,
in the constraint which your intellect imposes
upon your imagination. Here I will make an
observation, and illustrate it by an allegory.
Apparently it is not good—and indeed it hin
ders the creative work of the mind—if the in
tellect examines too closely the ideas already
pouring in, as it were, at the gates. Regarded
in isolation, an idea may be quite insignificant,
and venturesome in the extreme, but it may ac
quire importance from an idea which follows
it; perhaps, in a certain collocation with other
ideas, which may seem equally absurd, it may
be capable of furnishing a very serviceable link.
The intellect cannot judge all these ideas unless
it can retain them until it has considered them
in connection with these other ideas. In the
case of a creative mind, it seems to me; the
intellect has withdrawn its watchers from the
gates, and the ideas rush in pell-mell, and only
then does it review and inspect the multitude.
You worthy critics, or whatever you may call
yourselves, are ashamed or afraid of the mo^
mentary and passing madness which is found
in all real creators, the longer or shorter dura
tion of which distinguishes the thinking artist
from the dreamer. Hence your complaints of
unfruitfulness, for you reject too soon and dis
criminate too severely" (letter of December i,
1788).
And yet, such a withdrawal of the watchers
from the gates of the intellect, as Schiller puts
it, such a translation into the condition of un
critical self-observation, is by no means difficult.
Most of my patients accomplish it after my
first instructions. I myself can do so very com
pletely, if I assist the process by writing down
the ideas that flash through my mind. The
quantum of psychic energy by which the critical
activity is thus reduced, and by which the in
tensity of self-observation may be increased,
varies considerably^according .to tbe subjectmatter upon which the attention i$to he fixed,

[185b]
The first step in the application of this pro
cedure teaches us that one cannot make the
dreamasa whole the object of one's attention^
but only the individual components of its con
tent. If I ask a patient who is as yet unprac
tised: "What occurs to you in connection with
this dream?" he is unable, as a rule,to fixupon
anything in his psychic field of vision. I must
first dissect the dream for him; then, in con
nection with each fragment, he gives me a
number of ideas which may be described as the
thoughts behind this part of the dream. In this
first and important condition, then, the method
of dream-interpretation which I employ di
verges from the popular, historical and legen
dary method of interpretation by symbolism
and approaches more nearly to the second or
cipher method. Like this, it is an interpretation
in detail, not en masse; like this, it conceives
the dream, from the outset, as something built
up, as a conglomerate of psychic formations.
In the course of my psycho-analysis of neu
rotics I have already subjected perhaps more
than a thousand dreams to interpretation, but
I do not wish to use this material now as an
introduction to the theory and technique of
dream-interpretation. For quite apart from the
fact that I should lay myself open to the ob
jectionthat theseare the dreamsof neuropaths,
so
that
the
conclusions
drawn
from
them
wouldnot apply to the dreams of healthy per
sons, there is another reason that impels me
to
reject them. The theme to
which these
dreams point is, of course, always the history
of the malady that is responsible for the neu
rosis. Hence every dream would require a very
long introduction, and an investigation of thenature and aetiological conditions of the psy
choneuroses, matters which are in themselves
novel-and
exceedingly
strange,
and •which
would* therefore distract
attention. from the
dream-problem proper. My piurpose is rather
to prepare the way, by the solution of the
dream-problem, for the solution of.the more
difficult problems of the psychology of the
neuroses. But if I eliminate the dreams of neu
rotics, which constitute my principal material,
I cannot be too fastidious in my treatment'of
the rest. Only those dreams are left which have
been incidentally related to me by healthy per
sons of my acquaintance, or which I find given
as examples in the literature of
dream-life^
Unfortunately, in all these dreams I am:cleprived of the analysis without which I cannot
find: the meaning of the dream. My mode of
procedure is, of course, less easy than that ojfc

[186a]
the popular. cipher method, which translates
the given dream-content by reference to an
established key; I, on the contrary, hold that
the same dream-content may conceal a different
meaning in the case of different persons, or in
different connections. I must, therefore, re
sort to my own dreams as a source of abun
dant and convenient material, furnished by a
person who is more or less normal, and con
taining references to many incidents of every
day life. I shall certainly be confronted with
doubts as to the trustworthiness of these selfanalyses and it will be said that arbitrariness
is by no means excluded in such analyses. In
my own judgment, conditions are more likely
to be favourable in self^observation than in
the observation of others; in any case, it is
permissible to investigate how much can be
accomplished in the matter of dream-interpre
tation by means of self-analysis. There are
other
difficulties
which
must
be
overcome
in my own inner self. One has a comprehensible
aversion to exposing so many intimate details
of one's own psychic life, and one does not
feel secure against the misinterpretations of
strangers. But one must be able to transcend
such
considerations.
"Tout
psychologiste,"
writes Delbceuf, "est oblige de faire Vaveu
meme de ses faiblesses s'il croit par Id jeter du
jour sur quelque probleme obscur."1 And I
may assume for the reader that his initial in
terest in the indiscretions which I must commit
will very soon give way to an exclusive engross
ment in the psychological problems elucidated
by them.2
I shall therefore select one of my own dreams
for the purpose of elucidating my method of
interpretation. Every such dream necessitates
a preliminary statement; so that I must now
beg the reader to make my interests his own
for a time, and to become absorbed, with me,
in the most trifling details oLmy life; for an
interest in the hidden significance of dreams
imperatively demands just such a transference.
Preliminary Statement
In the summer of 1895.1 had treated psychoanalytically a young lady who was an intimate
friend of mine and of my family. It will be un
derstood that such complicated relations may
1 Every psychologist is obliged to admit even his
own weaknesses, if he thinks by that he may throw
light on a difficult problem.—Ed.
2 However, I will not omit to mention, in qualifica
tion of the above statement, that I have practically
never reported a complete interpretation of a dream
ofmy own. And I was probably right hot to trust too
far to the reader's discretion.

[186b]
l82
SlGMTJND Freud
excite manifold feelings in the physician, and
especially the psychotherapist. The personal
interest of the physician is greater, but bis
authority less. If he fails, his friendship with
the patient's relatives is in danger of being un
dermined. In this case, however, the treatment
ended in partial success; the patient was cured
of her hysterical anxiety, but not of all her so
matic symptoms. At that time I was not yet
quite sureof the criteriawhich denote the final
cure of an hysterical case, and I expected he*
to accept a solution which did not seem accept
able to her. In the midst of this disagreement,
we discontinued the treatment for the summer
holidays. One day a younger colleague, one of
my most intimate friends, who had visited the
patient—Irma—and her family in their coun
try residence, calledupon me. I askedhim how
Irma was^and receivedthe reply: "SheJs bet
ter, but not quite well." I realize that these
words of my friend Otto's, or the tone of voice
in which they were spoken, annoyed me. I
thought I beard a reproach in the words, per
haps to the effect that I had promised the pa
tient too much, and—rightly or wrongly—I at
tributed Otto's apparent taking sides against
me to the influence of the patient's relatives,
who, I assumed, had never approved of my
treatment. This disagreeable impression, how
ever, did not become clear to me, nor did I
speak of it. That same evening I wrote the
clinical history of Irma's case, in order to give
it, as though to justify myself, to Dr, M, a
mutual friend, who was at that time the leading
personality in our circle. During the night (or
rather in the early morning) I had the follow
ing dream, which I recorded immediately after
waking.8
Dream of July 23—24, 1895
A great hall—a number of guests, whom we
are receiving—among them Irma, whom I im
mediately take aside, as though to answer her
letter, and to reproach her for not yet accepting
the "solution." I say to her: "If you still have
pains, it is really only your own fault."—She
answers: "If you only knew what, pains I have
now in the throat, stomach, and abdomen—/
am choked by them" I am startled, and look at
her. She looks pale and puffy. I think that after
all I must be overlooking some organic affec*
Hon. I take her to the window and look into
her throat. She, offers some resistance Jo. this,
like a woman who has a set of false teeth. I
8This is the first tiream which I subjected to an
exhaustive interpretation.

[187a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
183
thinkj surely, she doesn't need them.—The
mouth then opens- wide, and I find a large
white spot on the right, and elsewhere I see ex
tensive grayish-white scabs adhering to curious
ly
curled
formations,
which are
evidently
shaped like the turbinal bones of the nose.—
/ quickly call Dr. M, who repeats the exami
nation and confirms it
Dr. M looks quite un
like his usual self; he is very pale, he limps,
and his chin is clean-shaven
Now my friend
Otto, too, is standing beside her, and my friend
Leopold percusses her covered chest, and says
"She has a dullness below, on the left," and
also calls attention to an infiltrated portion of
skin on the left shoulder (which I can feel, in
spite of the.dress)....M says: "There's no
doubt that it's an infection, but it doesn't mat
ter; dysentery will follow and the poison will
be eliminated.".. .We know, too, precisely how
the infection originated. My friend Otto, not
longago, gave her, when she was feelingunwell,
an injection of a preparation of propyl—pro
pyls. . .propionic acid.. .trimethylamin
(the
formula of which I see before me, printed in
heavy type). ...One doesn't give suchinjections
so rashly...Probably, too, the syringe was
not clean.
This dream has an advantage over many
others. It is at once obvious to what events of
the preceding day it is related, and of what
subject it treats. The preliminary statement
explains these matters. The news of Irma's
health which I had received from Otto, and
the clinical history, which I was writing late
into the night, had occupied my psychic activi
ties even during sleep. Nevertheless, no one
who had read the preliminary report, and had
knowledge of the content of the dream, could
guess what the dream signified. Nor do I my
self know. I am puzzled by the morbid symp
toms of which Irma complains in the dream,
for they are not the symptoms for which I
treated her. I smile at the nonsensical idea of
an injection of propionic acid, and at Dr. M's
attempt at consolation. Towards the end the
dream seems
more obscure and quicker in
tempo than at the beginning. In order to learn
the significance of all these details I resolve to
undertake an exhaustive analysis.
Analysis
The hall—a number of guests, whom we are
receiving. We
were
living
that
summer at
Bellevue, an isolated house On one of the hills
adjoining the Kahlenberg. This house was orig

[187b]
inally built as a place of entertainment, and
therefore has unusually lofty, hall-like rooms.
The dream was dreamed in Bellevue,' a few
days before my wife's birthday. During the
day my wife had mentioned that she expected
several friends, and among them Irma, to come
to us as guests for her birthday. My dream,
then, anticipates this situation: It is my wife's
birthday, and we are receiving a number of
people, among them Irma, as guests in the
large hall of Bellevue.
I reproach Irma for not having accepted the
"solution." I say, "If you still have pains, it is
really your own fault." I might even have said
this while awake; I may have actually said it.
At that.time I was-of the opinion,(recognizjed
later to be incorrect) that my task was limited
to informing patients of the hidden meaning
of their symptoms. Whether they then accepted
or did not accept the solution upon which suc
cess depended—for that I was not responsible.
I am grateful to this error, which, fortunately,
has now been overcome, since it made life
easier for me at a time when, with all my un
avoidable ignorance, I was expected to effect
successful cures. But I note that, in the speech
which I make to Irma in the dream, I
am
above all anxious that I shall not be blamed
for the pains which she still suffers. If it is
Irma's own fault, it cannot be: mine. Should
the purpose of the dream be looked for in this
quarter?
Irma's complaints-^-pains in the neck, abdo
men, and stomach; she is choked by them.
Pains in the stomach belonged to the symptomcomplex of my patient, but they were not very
prominent;-'' she complained rather of qualms
and a feeling of nausea. Pains in the neck arid
abdomen and constriction of the throat played
hardly any part in her case. I wonder why I
have decided upon this choice of symptoms in
the dream; for the moment I cannot discover
the reason.
She looks pale and puffy. My patient had al
ways a rosy complexion. I suspect that here
another person is being substituted for her.
/ am startled at the idea that I may have
overlooked some organic affection. This, as the
reader will readily believe, is a constant fear
with the specialist who sees neurotics almost
exclusively, and who is accustomed to ascribe
to hysteria so many manifestations which other
physicians treat as organic. On the Qtherjband,
I am haunted by a faint doubt—I do not know
whence it comes—whether my alarm is alto
gether honest. If Irma's pains are indeed of

[188a]
184
SlGMUNDiFiREOD
\V,L
organic origin, it is riot myidutyto cure them;
My treatment, of course; removes only hyster^
ical pains. It seems to me, in fact, that I wish
toi find an error in the diagnosis; for then I
could not be reproached with failure to effect a
cure.
/
take her to the window in order to look
into her throat. She resists a little, like a woman
who has false- teeth. I think to myself, she
does not need them. I had never had occasion
to inspect Irma's oral cavity. The incident in
the dream reminds me of an examination, made
some time before, of a governess who at first
produced an impression of youthful beauty,
but who, upon opening her mouth, took certain
measures to conceal her denture. Other memo
ries of medical examinations; and of petty se
crets revealed!by them, to the embarrassment
of both physician and patient, associate them
selves with this case.—"She surely does not
need them," is perhaps in the first place a com
pliment to Irma; but I suspect ryet another
meaning. In a careful-analysis one is able to:
feel whether or not the arriere-penseeswhich
are to be expected have all been exhausted.
The way in which Irma stands at the window
suddenly reminds me of another experience.
Irma has an intimate woman friend of whom
I think very highly. One evening, on paying
her a visit, I found her at the window hi; the
position reproduced in the dream, and her phy
sician, the same Dr. M, declared that she had a
diphtheritic membrane. The person of Dr. M
and the membrane return, indeed, in the course
of the dream. Now it occurs to me that during
the past few months I have had every reason
to suppose that this lady too is hysterical. Yes,
Irma herself betrayed the fact to me. But what
do I know of. her condition? Only the one
tiling, that like Irma in the dream she suffers
from hysterical choking. Thus, in the dream-I
have replaced my patient by her, friend. Now
I remember that I have often played with the
supposition, that this lady, too, might ask me
to relieve her of her symptoms. But even at
the time I thought it improbable, since she is
extremely- reserved. She resists, as the dream
shows. Another explanation might .be that, she,
does not need it; in fact, until now she has
shown herself strong enough to master her con
dition witbput ^outside help. Now only a few
features remainj which J can assign neither to
Irmamor to her friend;- pale,puffy, false teeth.
The false teeth led me to the governess; I now
feel, inclined;.to, be satisfied with bad teeth.
Here another person, to whom these features

[188b]
may-allude; occurs to me; She is not my pa-^
tient^ and Irdd not wish hen to be my patient,
for I have noticed that she is>not at her ease
with me, and I do not consider her a docile
patient., She is generally pale, and once, when
she had not felt particularly well, she was
puffy.1 I have thus compared my patient Irma
with two
others, who. would likewise resist
treatment. What is the meaning of the fact
that I have exchanged her for her friend in the
dream? Perhaps that I wish to exchange her;
either her friend arouses in me stronger sym
pathies, or I have a higher regard for her in
telligence. For I consider Irma foolish because
she does not accept my solution. The other
woman would be more sensible,
and would
thus be more likely to yield. The mouth then
opens readily; she would tell more than Irma.2
What I see in the throat: a white spot and
scabby turbinal bones. The white spot recallsdiphtheria, and thus Irma's friend, but it alsdi
recalls the grave illness of my eldest daughter,
two years earlier, and all the anxiety of that
unhappy time. The scab on the turbinal bones
reminds me of my anxiety concerning my owrij
health. At that time I frequently used cocaine;
in order to suppress distressing swellings in the.
nose, and I had heard a few days previously
that a lady patient who did likewise had con
tracted an extensive necrosis of the nasal mu-i
cous membrane. In 1885 it was I who had rec-j
ommended the use of cocaine, and I had been,
gravely reproached in consequence. A dear,
friend, who had died before the date of thisj
dream, had hastened his end by the misuse ofj
this remedy.
/ quickly callDr. M, who repeats the exam-\
ination. This would simply correspond to the!
position which M occupied among us. But thef
word quickly is striking enough to demand a;
special examination. It reminds me of a sad
medical experience. By continually prescribing^
a drug, (sulphonal), which at that time,was?
still considered harmless, I was once;respqnsi-j
ble for a condition of acute poisoning in the.
*The complaint of pains, in the abdomen, :as yet;
unexplained, may also be. referred to this third person^
It is my own wife,rof course, who is in question; the
abdominal pains remind' hie\ 6i one of the occasions^
on which her shyness, became:evident .to-me., I must
admit that I do not treat Irma and my wife/very
gallantly in this dream, but let it be said, in TOy de-'
fence, that I am measuring both of them against the
ideal of the courageous .and .docile female patient.
2 I suspect that the interpretation of this portion
• has not heen carried far-enough to follow every hidden
meaning. If I were to continue the comparison' of the
three women, I should go far afield. Every dream has
it' least ohe point at which it is unfathomable; a cen
tral point,, as it wbre,- connectingvit with the unknown.'

[189a]
case of a woman patient* and hastily turned
for assistance to my older and more experi
enced colleague. The fact that I really had this
case in mind is confirmed by a subsidiary cir
cumstance. The patient, who succumbed to the
toxic effects of the drug, bore the same name
as my eldest daughter. I had never thought of
this until now; but now it seems to me almost
like a retribution of fate—as though the sub
stitution of persons had to be continued in
another sense: this Matilda for that Matilda;
an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth. It is as
though I were seeking every opportunity to
reproach myself for a lack of medical consci
entiousness.
Dr. M is pale; his chin is shaven, and he
limps. Of this so much is correct, that his un
healthy appearance often arouses the concern
of his friends. The other two characteristics
must belong to another person. An elder bro
ther living abroad occurs to mej for he, too,
shaves his chin, and if I remember him rightly,
the M of the dream bears on the whole a cer
tain resemblance to him. And some days previa
ously the news arrived that he was limping on
account of an arthritic affection of the. hip.
There must be some reason why I fuse the two
persons into one in my dream.. I remember
that, in fact, I was on bad terms with both of
them for similar reasons. Both had rejected a
certain proposal ^which I had •recently
made
them.
My friend Otto is now standing next to the
patient, and my friend Leopold examines her
and calls attention to a dulness low down on
the left side. My friend Leopold also is a phy
sician, and a relative of Otto's. Since the two
practice the same specialty, fate has made
them competitors, so that they are constantly
being comparedwith one another. Both of them
assisted me for years, while I was still direct
ing, a public clinic for neurotic children. There,
scenes like that reproduced in my dream had
often taken place. While I would be discussing
the diagnosis of a case with Qtto, Leopold
would examine the child anew and make an
unexpected contribution towards our decision.
There was a difference of character between
the two men like that between Inspector Brasig and his friend Karl. Otto was remarkably
prompt and alert;
Leopold was slow and
thoughtful, but thorough. If I contrast Otto
and the cautious Leopold in the dream I do so,
apparently, in order to extol Leopold. The conv
parison is like that made above between the
disobedient patient Irma and her friend, who

[189b]
The Interpretation of Dreams
185
was believed to be more sensible. I now become
aware of one of the tracks along which the
association of ideas in the dream proceeds:
from the sick child to the children's clinic.
Concerning the dulness low on the left side,
I have the impression that it corresponds with
a certain case of which all the details were
similar, a case in which Leopold impressed me
by his thoroughness. I thought vaguely, too,
of something like a metastatic affection, but it
might also be a reference to the patient whom
I should have liked to have in Irma's place.
For this lady, as far as I can gather, exhibited
symptoms which imitated tuberculosis.
An infiltrated portion of skin on the left
shoulder. I know at once that this is my own
rheumatism of the shoulder, which I always
feel if I lie awake long at night. The very
phrasing
of the
dream
sounds ambiguous:
Something- which I can feel, as he does, in spite
of the dress. "Feel on my own body" is intend
ed. Further, it occurs to me how unusual the
phrase infiltrated portion of skin sounds. We
are accustomed to the phrase: "an infiltration
of the upper posterior left'*; this would refer
to the lungs, and thus; once more, to tuber
culosis.
.In spite of the dress. This, to be sure* is
only an interpolation. At. the clinic the chil
dren were, of course, examined undressed; here
we have some contrast to the manner in which
adult female patients have to be examined. The
story used to be told of an eminent physician
that he always Examined his'patients through
their clothes. The rest is obscure to me; I
have, frankly, no inclination to follow the mat
ter further.
Dr. M says: "It's an infection, but it doesn't
matter; dysentery will follow, and the poison
will be eliminated." This, at first, seems to me
ridiculous; nevertheless, like everything else,
it must be carefully analysed; more.closely ob
served it seems after all to have a sort of mean
ing. What I had found in the patient was a
local diphtheritis. I remember the discussion
about diphtheritis and diphtheria at the time
of mydaughter's'illness. Diphtheria is the gen
eral infection which proceeds from local diph
theritis. Leopold demonstrates the existence of
such a general infection by the dulness, which
also suggests a metastatic focus. I belieye, how
ever, that just this kind of metastasis does not
occur in the case of diphtheria. It reminds me
rather of pyaemia.
It doesn't matter is a consolation. I believe
it fits in as follows: The last part of the dream

[190a]
i86
Sigmund Freud
has yielded a content to the effect that the pa
tient's sufferings are the result of a serious or
ganic affection. I begin to suspect that by this
I am only trying to shift the blame from my
self. Psychic treatment cannot be held respon
sible for the continued presence of a diphthe
ritic affection. Now, indeed, I am distressed by
the thought of having invented such a serious
illness for Irma, for the sole purpose of ex
culpating myself. It seems so cruel. According
ly, I need the assurance that the outcome will
be benign, and it seems to me that I made a
good choice when I put the words that con
soled me into the mouth of Dr. M. But here I
am placing myself in a position of superiority
to the dream; a fact which needs explanation;
But why is this consolation so nonsensical?
Dysentery. Some sort of farfetched theo
retical notion that the toxins of disease might
be eliminated through the intestines. Am I
thereby trying to make fun of Dr. M's remark
able store of far-fetched explanations, his habit
of conceiving curious pathological relations?
Dysentery suggests
something
else.
A
few
months ago I had in my care a young man who
was suffering from remarkable intestinal trou
bles; a case which had been treated by other
colleagues as one of "anaemia with malnutri
tion." I realized that it was a case of hysteria;
I
was unwilling to use my psycho-therapy
on him, and sent him off on a sea-voyage. Now
a few days previously I had received a despair
ing letter from him; he wrote from Egypt, say
ing that he hadjhad a fresh attack, which the
doctor had declared to be dysentery. I suspect
that the diagnosis is merely an error on the
part of an ignorant colleague, who is allowing
himself to be fooled by the hysteria; yet I can
not help reproaching myself for putting the
invalid in a position where he might contract
some organic affection of the bowels in addition
to his hysteria. Furthermore, dysentery sounds
not unlike diphtheria, a word which does not
occur in the dream.
Yes, it must be the case that with the con
soling prognosis, Dysentery will develop, etc.,
I am making fun of Dr. M, for I recollect that
years ago he once jestingly told a very similar
story of a colleague. He had been called in to
consult with him in the case of a woman who
was very seriously ill, and he felt obliged to
confront his colleague, who seemed very hope
ful, with the fact that he found albumen in
the patient's urine. His colleague, however, did
not allow this to worry him, but answered
calmly: "That does not matter, my dear sir;

[190b]
the albumen will soon be excreted!" Thus-!
can no longer doubt that this part of the dream
expresses derision for those of my colleagues
who are ignorant of hysteria. And, as though
in-confirmation; the thought enters my mind:
"Does Dr. M know that the appearances in
Irma's friend, his patient, which gave him rea
son to fear tuberculosis, are likewise due to
hysteria? Has he recognized this hysteria, or
has he allowed himself to be fooled?"
-
• But what can be my motive in treating this
friend so badly? That is simple enough: Dr.
M agrees with my solution as little as does
Irma herself. Thus, in this dream I have al
ready revenged myself on two persons: on
Irma in the words,// you still have pains, it is
your own fault, and on Dr. M in the wording
of the nonsensical consolation which has been
put into his mouth.
sl
We know precisely how the infection origin
nated. This precise knowledge in the dream is
remarkable. Only a moment before this we did
not yet know of the infection, since it was first
demonstrated by Leopold.
My friend Otto gave her an injection not
longago,when she wasfeeling unwell. Otto had
actually related during his short visit to Irma's
family that he had been called in to a neigh
bouring hotel in order to give an injection to
someone who had, been suddenly taken ill. In
jections remind me once more of the unfortu
nate friend who poisoned himself with cocaine.
I had recommended the remedy for internal
use only during the withdrawal of morphia;
but he immediately gave himself injections of
cocaine.
With a preparation of propyl... propyls .
propionic acid. How on earth did this occur to:
me? On the evening of the day after I had
written the clinical history and dreamed about
the case, my wife opened a bottle of liqueur
labelled "Ananas,"1 which was a present from
our friend Otto. He had, as a matter of fact,!
a habit of making presents on every possible!
occasion; I hope he will some day be cured of'
this by a wife.2 This liqueur smelt so strongly
of fusel oil that I refused to drink it. My wife
suggested: "We will give the bottle to the
servants," and I, more prudent, objected, with
the philanthropic remark:
"They shan't be
1 "Ananas," moreover, has a remarkable assonance
with the family name of my patient Irma.
2 In this the dream did not turn out to be prophetic.
But in another sense it proved correct, for the "un
solved" stomach pains, for which I did not want to be
blamed, were the forerunners of a serious illness, due
to gall-stones.

[191a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
poisoned either." The smell of fusel oil (amyl
. . .) has now;apparently awakened*my-mem
ory of the whole series: propyl, methyl, etc.,
which furnished the preparation of propyl men
tioned in the dream. Here, indeed, I have ef
fected a substitution: I dreamt of propyl after
smelling amyl; but substitutions of this kind
are perhaps permissible, especially in organic
chemistry.
Trimethylamin. In the
dream
I
see the
chemical formula of this substance—which at
all events is evidence of a great effort on the
part of my memory—and the formula is even
printed in heavy type, as though to distinguish
it from the context as something of particular
importance. And where does trimethylamin,
thus forced on my attention, lead me? To a
conversation
with
another
friend,
who
for
years has been familiar with all my germinat
ing ideas, and I with his. At that time he had
just informed me of certain ideas concerning
a sexual chemistry, and had mentioned, among
others, that he thought he had found in trimeth
ylamin one of the products of sexual metab
olism. This substance thus leads me to sexu
ality, the factor to which I attribute the great
est significance in respect of the origin of these
nervous affections which I am trying to cure.
My patient Irma is a young widow; if I am
required to excuse my failure to cure her, I
shall perhaps do best to refer to this condition,
which her admirers would be glad to terminate.
But in what a singular fashion such"a dream
is fitted together! The friend who in my dream
becomes my patient in Irma's place is likewise
a young widow.
I surmise why it is that the formula of tri
methylamin is so insistent in the dream. So
many important things are centered about this
one word: trimethylamin is an allusibn, not
merely to the all-important factor of sexuality,
but also to a friend whose sympathy I remem
ber with satisfaction whenever I feel isolated
in my opinions. And this friend, who plays such
a large part in my life: will he not appear yet
again in the concatenation of ideas peculiar to
this dream? Of course; he has a special knowl
edge of the results of affections of the nose and
the sinuses, and has revealed to science several
highly remarkable relations between the tur
binal bones and the female sexual organs. (The
three curly formations in Irma's throat.) I got
him to examine Irma, in order to determine
whether her gastric pains were of nasal origin.
But he himself suffers from suppurative^rhin
itis, which gives me concern, and to this per-

[191b]
is?
haps there is an allusion in pyaemia, which
hovers .rbefore.-• me in the metastasis *of the
dream.
One doesn't give such injections so rashly.
Here the reproach of rashness is hurled di
rectly at my friend Otto. I believe I had some
such thought in the afternoon, when he seemed
to indicate, by word and look, that he had
taken sides against me. It was, perhaps: "How
easily he is influenced; how irresponsibly he
pronounces judgment." Further, the above sen
tence points once more to my deceased friend,
who so irresponsibly resorted to cocaine injec
tions. As I have said, I had not intended that
injections of the drug should be taken: I note
that in reproaching Otto I once more touch
upon the story of the unfortunate Matilda,
which was the pretext for the same reproach
against me. Here, obviously, I am collecting
examples of my conscientiousness, and also of
the reverse.
Probably too the syringe was not clean. An
other reproach directed at Otto, but originating
elsewhere. On the previous day I happened to
meet the son of an old lady of eighty-two, to
whom I am obliged to give two injections of
morphia daily. .At.present she is in the country,
and I have heard that she is suffering from
phlebitis.
I
immediately
thought
that
this
might be a case of infiltration caused by a
dirty syringe. It is my pride that in two years
I have not given her a single infiltration; I am
always careful, of course, to see that the syr
inge is perfectly clean. For I am conscientious.
From the phlebitis I return to my wife, wha
once suffered •from thrombosis during a period
of pregnancy, and now three related situations
come to the surface in my memory, involving
my wife, Irma, and the dead Matilda, whose
identity has apparently justified my putting
these three persons in one another's places.
Thave now completed the interpretation of
the dream.1 In the course of this interpretation
I have taken great pains to avoid all those no
tions which must have been suggested by a
comparison of
the
dream-content with the
dream-thoughts hidden behind this
content.
Meanwhile the
meaning of
the dream has
dawned upon me. I have noted an intention
which is realized through the dream, and which
must have been my motive in dreaming. The
dream fulfills several wishes, which were awak
ened within me by the events of the previous
1 Even if I have not, as might be expected, account-;
ed for everything that occurred to me.in connection
with the work of interpretation.

[192a]
i88
evening (Otto'i
clinical history). For the result of the dream is
that it is not I who am to blame for the pain
which Irma is still suffering, but that Otto is to
blame for it. Now Otto has annoyed me by Ms7
remark about Irma's imperfect cure; the dream
avenges me upon him; in that it turns the re
proach upon himself. The dream acquits me of
responsibility for Irma's condition, as it refers
this condition "to other causes (which do, in
deed, furnish quite a number of explanations).
The dream represents a certain state of affairs,
such as I might wish to exist; the content of
the dream is thus the fulfilment of a wish; its
motive is a wish.
. This much is apparent at first sight. But
many other details of the dream become intel
ligible when regarded from the standpoint of
wish-fulfilment. I take my revenge on Otto,
not merely for too readily taking sides against
me, in that I accuse him of careless medical
treatment (the injection), but I revenge my
self also for the bad liqueur which smells of
fusel oil, and I find an expression in the dream
which unites both these reproaches: the injec
tion of a preparation;of propyl. Still I am not
satisfied, but continue to avenge myself by
comparing him with his more reliable colleague^
Thereby I seem to say: "I like him better than
you." But Otto is not the only person who
must be made to feel the weight of my anger. I
take my revenge on the disobedient patient, by
exchanging her for a more sensible and more
docile one. Nor do I pass over Dr. M's contra
diction; for I express, in an obvipus allusion,
my opinion of him: namely, that his attitude in
this case; is that of an ignoramus (Dysentery:
will develop, etc^). Indeed, it seems as though
I were appealing from him to someone better
informed (my friend, who told me about tri
methylamin), just as I have turned from Irma
to her friend, and from Otto to Leopold. It is
as though I were to say: Rid me of these three
persons, replace them by three., others of my
own choice, and I shall be rid of the reproaches
which I am not willing to admit that I deserve!
In my dream the unreasonableness of these
reproaches is demonstrated for me in the most
elaborate manner. Irma's pains are not attrib
utable to me, since she herself is to blame for
them, in that she refusesto accept my solution.
They do not concern me, for being astheyare
of an organic nature, thejr cannot possibly be
cured by psychic treatment. Irma's sufferings
are satisfactorily explained by her widowhood
(trimethylamin!); a state which I cannot al-

[192b]
Sigmtjnd Freud
news, and the writing of the
ter. Irma's illness has been causedby an incautious injection administered by Otto, an in
jection of an unsuitable drug, ^such as I should
never have administered. Irma's complaint is
the result Of an injection made with an unclean
syringe, like the phlebitis of my old lady pa*
tient, whereas my injections have never caused
any ill effects. I am aware that these explana
tions of Irma's illness, which unite in acquit
ting me, do not agree with one another; that
they even exclude one another. The whole plea
—for this dream is nothing else—recalls viv
idly the defence offered by a man who was ac
cused by his neighbour of haying returned a;
kettle in a damaged condition. In the first
place, he had returned the kettle undamaged;
in the second place it already had holes in it
when he borrowed it; and in the third place,«
he had never borrowed it at all. A complicated;
defence, but so much the better; if only-one of
these three lines of defence is recognized as;
valid, the man must be acquitted.
•!
Still other themes play a part in the. dreamy
and their relation to my non-responsibility for
Irma's illness is not so apparent: my daughr?
ter's illness, and that of a patient with the same
name; the harmfulness of cocaine; the affec
tion of my patient, who was traveling in Egypt;
concern^ about the
health of
my wife; my
brother, and Dr. M; my own physical troubles,!
and anxiety concerning my absent friend, who;
is suffering from suppurative rhinitis. But if I
keep all these things in view, they combine in4
to a single train of thought, which might be
labelled: Concern for the nealth of myself and
others; professional conscientiousness. I recall
a vaguely disagreeable feeling when Otto gave
me the news of Irma's condition. Lastly, I am
inclined, after the event, to find an expression
of this fleeting sensation in the train of thoughts
which forms part of the dream. It is as though
Otto had said to me: "You do not take your
medical duties seriously enough; you are not
conscientious; you do not perform what you
promise." .Thereupon this
train of: thought
placed; itself at my service, in order .that I
might give proof of my extreme conscientious
ness, of my intimate concern about the health
of my relatives, friends and patients. Curiously
enough, there are also some painful memories
in this material, which confirm the blame at
tached to Otto rather than my own!exculpa
tion. The material is apparently impartial, but:
the connection between this broader tnaterial,
on which the dream, is based, and the more
limited theme from which emerges the wish to-:

[193a]
be innocent ol Irma's illness, is; nevertheless,
unmistakable;
'
;
I do not wish to assert that I have entirely
revealed the meaning of the dream, orthat my
interpretation is flawless.
;
w
>
.,.[
I could still spend much time upon it; I
could draw.further explanations from it, and
discuss further problems which it seems to pro
pound. I can even perceive the points from
which further mental associations might be
traced; but such considerations as are always
involved in every dream of one's own prevent
me from interpreting it farther. Those who are
overready to condemn such reserve should
make the experiment of trying to be more
straightforward. For the present I am content
with the one fresh discovery which hasi just
been made: If the method of dream-interpre
tation here indicated is followed^ it will be
found that dreams do really possess a meaning,
and are by no means the expression of a dis
integrated cerebral activity, as the writers on
the subject would haveus believe. When the
work of interpretation has been completed the
dream can be recognized as a wish fulfilment.
III. The Dream as Wish-Fulfilment
When, after passing through a narrow defile,
one suddenly reaches a height beyond which
the ways part and a rich prospect lies outspread
in different directions, it is well to stop for a
moment and consider whither one shall turn
next. We are in somewhat the same position
after we have mastered this first interpretation
of a dream. We find ourselves standing in the
light of a sudden discovery. The dream is not
comparable to the irregular sounds of a musi
cal instrument, which, instead of being played
by the hand of a musician, is struck by some
external force; the dream is not meaningless,
not absurd, does not presuppose that one part
of our store of ideas is dormant while another
part begins to awake. It is a perfectly valid
psychic phenomenon, actually
a wish-fulfill
ment; it may be enrolled in the continuity of
the intelligible psychic activities of the waking
state; it is built up by a highly complicated in
tellectual activity. But at the very moment
when we are about to rejoice in this discovery
a host of problems besets us. If the dream, as
this
theory defines it;
represents a fulfilled
wish, what is the cause of the striking and un
familiar1 manner in which this fulfilment is
expressed? What transformation has occurred
in our
dream-thoughts
before the manifest
dream, as we remember it on waking, shapes

[193b]
The lNTEia>BiETATioN of Dreams
189
itself out of them? How has this transforma
tion taken place? Whence- comes the material
that is worked up into the dream? What causes
many of the peculiarities which are to be ob
served in our dream-thoughts; for example,
how is it.that they, are. able to contradict one
another? :Is the dream capable of teaching us
something ,new' concerning ourdnternal psychic
processes and can itecontent^correcti opinions
which we have held during the day? I suggest
that for the present all these problems;be laid
aside, and that a single path be pursued.- We
have found that the dream represents a wish
as fulfilled. Our next purpose should be to as
certain whether this is a general characteristic
of dreams, or whether it is only the accidental
content of: the particular dream; (the dream
about Irma's injection) with: which we have
begun our analysis;, for even if we conclude
that every dream has a meaning and psychic
value, we must nevertheless allow for the pos
sibility that this meaning may not be the same
inevery dream. The first dream-which we have
considered was the fulfilment of a wish; an
other may turn put to be the realization of an
apprehension; a third may have a reflection as
its content; a fourth may simply reproduce.a
reminiscence. Are there, then dreams other than
wish-dreams;
or
are .there none but wishdreams?
It is easy to show that the wish-fulfilment in
dreams is often undisguised and easy to jrecogr
nize, so that one may wonder why the language
pf dreams has not long since been understood.
There is, for example, a dream which I can
evoke as often as I please, experimentally,, as
it were. If, in the evening, I eat anchovies,
olives, or other strongly salted foods, I am
thirsty.at night, and therefore I wake. The
waking, however, is preceded by a dream, which
has always the same content, namely, that I
am drinking. I am drinking long draughts of
water; it tastes as delicious as only a cool
drink can taste when one's throat is parched;
and then I wake, and find that I have an actual
desire to drink. The cause of this dream is
thirst, which I perceive when I wake. From
this sensation arises the wish to drink, and the
dream shows1 me this wish;as fulfilled. Itthere
by serves a function; the nature of which I
soon surmise. I sleep well, and am not accus
tomed tp being waked by a bodfly^heepV.If I
succeed in appeasing my thirst by means/of the
dream that I.am drinking, I need not wake up
in order to satisfy that thirst. It is thus a

[194a]
dream of'convenience. The dream takes the
place of action* as elsewhere in life. Unfortu
nately, the need of water to quench the thirst
cannot be satisfied by a dream, as can my
thirst for revenge upon Otto and Dr. M, but
the intention is the same.. Not long ago I had
the same dream in a somewhat modified form.
On this occasion I felt thirsty before going to
bed, and emptied the glass of water which
stood on the little chest beside my bed. Some
hours later, during the night, my thirst re
turned, with the consequent discomfort. In or
der to obtain water, I should have had to get
up and fetch the glass which stood on my
wife's beddable. I
thus
quite .appropriately
dreamt that my wife was giving me a drink
from a vase; this vase was an Etruscan ciner
ary urn, which I had brought home from Italy
and had since given away. But the water in it
tasted so salt (apparently on account of the
ashes) that I was forced to wake. It may be
observed how conveniently the dream is capa
ble of arranging matters. Since the fulfilment
of a wish is its only purpose, it may be per
fectly egoistic. Love of comfort is really not
compatible with consideration for others. The
introduction of the cinerary urn is probably
once again the fulfilment of a wish; I regret
that I no longer possess this vase; it, like the
glass of water at my wife's side, is inaccessible
to me. The cinerary urn is appropriate also in
connection with the sensation of an increas
ingly salty taste, which I know will compel me
to wake.1
Such
convenience-dreams
came
very fre
quently to me in my youth. Accustomed as I
had always been to working until late at night,
early waking was always a matter of difficulty.
I used then to dream that I was out of bed and
standing at the wash-stand. After a while I
could no longer shut out the knowledge that I
was not yet up; but in the meantime I had
continued to sleep. The same sort of lethargy1 The facts relating to dreams of thirst were known
also to Weygandt, who speaks, of them as
follows;
"It is just this sensation of thirst which is registered
most accurately: of all; it always causes a representa
tion of quenching the thirst. The manner in which the
dream represents the act of quenching the
thirst is
manifold, and is
specified in
accordance with some
recent recollection. A universal phenomenon noticeable
here is the; fact that the representation of quenching
the thirst is immediately followed by disappointment
in the inefficacy of >the; imagined refreshment." But
he overlooks the universal character of the reaction
of the dream to the stimulus. If other persons who
are troubled by thirst at night awake without dream
ing beforehand, this does not constitute an; objection
to my experiment, but characterizes them as persons
who sleep less soundly. Cf. Isaiah, 29. 8.

[194b]
SlGMWD FrEXJD
dream was dreamed by a young colleague of
mine, who appears to share my propensity for
sleep. With him it assumed a particularly amus
ing form. The landlady with whom he was
lodging in the neighbourhood of the hospital
had strict orders to wake him every morning at
a given hour, but she found it by no means
easy to carry out his orders. One morning sleep
was especially sweet to him. The woman called
into his room: "Herr Pepi, get up; you've got
to go to the hospital." Whereupon the sleeper
dreamt of a room in the hospital, of a bed in
which he was lying, and of a chart pinned over
his head, which read as follows: "Pepi M,
medical, student, 22 years of
age." He told
himself in the dream: "If I am already at the
hospital, I don't have to go there," turned
over, and slept on. He had thus frankly ad
mitted to himself his motive for dreaming.
Here is yet another dream of which the stimn
ulus was active during sleep: One of my women
patients, who had been obliged to undergo an
unsuccessful operation
on the jaw, was inr
structed by her physicians to wear by day and
night a coolingapparatus on the affected cheek;
but she was in the habit of throwing it.off as
soon as she had fallen asleep. One day I was
asked to reprove her for doing so; she had
again thrown the apparatus on the floor. The
patient defended herself as follows: "This time
I really couldn't help it; it was the result of a
dream which I had during the night. In the
dream I was in a box at the opera, and was
taking a lively interest in the performance. But
Herr Karl Meyer was lying in the sanatorium
and complaining pitifully on account of pains
in his jaw. I said to myself, 'Since I haven't the
pains, I don't need the apparatus either'; that's
why I threw it away." The dream of this poor
sufferer reminds me of an expression
which
comes to our lips when we are in a disagreeable
situation: "Well, I can imagine more amusing
things!" The dream presents these "more amus*
ing things!" Herr Karl Meyer, to whom the
dreamer attributed her pains, was the most
casual/acquaintance of- whom she could think.
It is quite as simple a matter to discover the
wish-fulfilment in several other dreams which
I have collected from healthy persons. A friend
who was acquainted with my theory of dreams,
and had explained it to his wife, said to me one
day: "My wife asked me to tell you that she
dreamt yesterday that she was having her men
ses.
You
will know what that means."
Of
course I know: if the young wife dreams that
she is having her menses, the menses have

[195a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
191
stopped. I can well imagine that she would
have liked to enjoy her freedom a little longer,
before the discomforts of maternity began. It
was a clever way of giving notice of her first
pregnancy. Another friend writes that his wife
had dreamt not long ago that she noticed milkstains on the front of her blouse.,.This also.is
an indication of pregnancy, but not of the first
one; the young mother hoped she would have
more nourishment for the second child than
she had for the first.
A young woman who for weeks had been cut
off from all society because she was nursing a
child who was suffering from an infectious dis
ease dreamt, after the child had recovered, of a
company of people in which Alphonse Daudet^
Paul Bourget, Marcel Prevost and others were
present; they were all very pleasant to her and
amused her enormously. In her dream these
different authors had the features which their
portraits give them. M. Prevost, with whose
portrait she is not familiar, looked like the
man who had disinfected the sickroom the day
before, the first outsider to enter it for a long
time. Obviously the dream is to be translated
thus: "It is about time
now for something
more entertaining than this eternal nursing."
Perhaps this collection will sufficeto prove
that frequently, and under the most complex
conditions, dreams may be noted which can be
understood only as wish-fulfilments, and which
present their content without concealment. In
most cases these are short and simple dreams,
and they stand in pleasant contrast tp the con
fused
and
overloaded dream-comppsitions
which have almost exclusively attracted the
attention of the writers on the subject. But it
will repay us if we give some time to the ex
amination of these simple dreams. The simplest
dreams of all are, I suppose, to be expected in
the case of children whose psychic activities
are certainly less complicated than those of
adults. Child psychology, in my opinion, is
destined to render the same services to the
psychology of adults as a study of the struc
ture or development of the lower animals ren
ders to the investigation of the structure of the
higher orders of animals. Hitherto but few de
liberate efforts have been made to make use
of the psychology of the child for such a pur
pose.
The dreams of little children are often sim
ple fulfilments of wishes, and for this reason
are, as compared with the dreams of adults;
by no meansinteresting. They present no prob
lem to be solved, but they are invaluable as

[195b]
affording proof that the dream, in its inmost
essence, is the'fulfilment of a wish. I have been
able to collect several examples of such dreams
from the material furnished by my own chil
dren.
For two dreams, one that of a daughter of
mine, at that time eight and a half years of
age, and the other that of a boy of five and a
quarter, I am indebted to an excursion to Hall
statt, in the summer of 1896. I must first ex
plain that we were living that summer on a
hill near Aussee, from which, when the weather
was fine, we enjoyed a splendid view of the
Dachstein. With a telescope we could easily
distinguish
the
Simony
hut.
The
children
often tried to see it through the telescope—
I do not know with what success. Before the ex
cursion I had told the children that Hallstatt
lay at the foot of the Dachstein. They looked
forward to the outing with the greatest delight.
From Hallstatt we entered the valley of Eschern, which enchanted the children with its
constantly changing scenery. One of them, how
ever, the boy of five, gradually became discon
tented. As often as a mountain came into view,
he would ask: "Is that the Dachstein?" where
upon I had to reply: "No, only a foot-hill."
After this question had been repeated several
times he fell quite silent, and did not wish to
accompany us up ~the steps leading to. the-waterfall. I thought he was tired. But the next
morning he came to me, perfectly happy, and
said: "Last night I dreamt that we went to the
Simony hut." I. understood him now; he had
expected, when I spoke of the Dachstein, that
on our excursion to Hallstatt he would cHmb
the mountain, and would see at close quarters
the hut which had been so often mentioned
when the telescope was used. When he learned
that he was expected to content himself with
foot-hills and a waterfall he was disappointed,
and became discontented. But the dream com
pensated him for all this. I tried to learn some
details of the dream; they were scanty. "You
go up steps for six hoursj" as he had been told.
On this excursion the girl of eight and a half
had likewise cherished wishes which had to be
satisfied by a dream. We had taken with us to
Hallstatt our neighbour's twelve-year-old boy;
quite a polished little gentleman, who, it seemed
to me, had already won the little woman's sym
pathies. Next morning she related the follow
ing dream: "Just think, I dreamt that Emil was
one of the family, that he said
'papa' and
'mamma' to you, and slept at our house, in the
big room, like one of the boys. Then mamma

[196a]
192
SlGMUND
came into the room arid threw a handful of
big bars of chocolate, wrapped in blue and
green paper, under our beds." The girl's bro
thers, who evidently had hot inherited:an un
derstanding of dream-interpretation, declared,
just as the writers we have quoted would have
done: "That dream is nonsense." The girl de
fended at least one part ofthe dream, and from
the standpoint of the theory of the neuroses it
is interesting to learn which part it was that
she defended: "That Emil was one of the fam
ily was nonsense, but that about the bars of
chocolate wasn't." It was just this latter part
that was obscure to me, until my wife furnished
the explanation. Oh the way home:from the
railway-station the. children had stopped in
front of a slot-machine, and had wanted ex
actly such bars of chocolate, wrapped in paper
with a metallic lustre, such as the machine, in
their experience, provided.
But the mother
thought^ and rightly so, that the
day had
brought
them
enough wish-fulfilments, and
therefore left this wish to be satisfied in the
dream. This little scene had escaped me. That
portion of the dream which had been con
demned by my daughter I understood without
any difficulty. I myself had heard the well-ber
haved little guest enjoining the children, as
they were walking ahead of us, to wait until
"papa" or "mamma" had come up. For the lit
tle girl the dream turned this temporary rela
tionship into a permanent adoption, Her affec
tion could not as yet-conceive of any other
way of enjoying her friend's company perma
nently than the adoption pictured in her dream,
which was suggestedcby'her brothers. Why the
bars of chocolate were thrown under the bed
could
not, of
course, be
explained without
questioning the child.
From a friend I
have learned of a dream
very much like that of my little boy. It was
dreamed by a little girl of eight. Her father,
accompanied by seyeral children, had started
on a walk to Dornbach, with the intention of
visiting the Rohrer hut, but had turned back,
as it was growing late, promising the;children
to take them some other time.; On the: way
back: they passed, a signpost which pointed to
the Hameau. The children now asked him to
take them to the Hameau, but once more, and
for the same reason, they had tp be content
with the promise that they sho.uldgo there some
other day. Next morning the little girl went to
her father and told him, with a satisfied air:
"Papa, I dreamed last night that yon were with
us at the Rphrer hut, and on, the: Hameauv"

[196b]
Fkeud
Thus, in the dream her impatience had antiei*
pated the fulfilment of the promise made by
her father.
: Another dream, with which the picturesque
beauty of the Aussee inspired;my daughter^ at
that time three and a quarter years of age, is
equally straightforward. The little girl had
crossed the lake for the first time,, and the trip
had passed too quickly for her. She did not
want to leave the boat at the landing, and
cried bitterly. The next morning she told us:
"Last night I was sailing on the lake." Let us
hope that the duration of this dream-voyage
was more satisfactory to her.
My eldest boy, at that time eight years of
age, was already dreaming of the realization of
his fancies. He had ridden in a chariot witfi
Achilles, with Diomedes as charioteer. On the
previous day he had shown a lively interest in
a book on the myths of Greece which had been
given to his elder sister^
If it can be admitted that the talking of
children in their sleep belongs to the sphere of
dreams, I can relate the following as one of the
earliest dreams in my collection: My youngest
daughter, at: that time nineteen months old;
vomited ond:morning, arid was therefore kept
without food all day. During the night she was
heard to call excitedly in her sleep: "Anna
F(r)eud, Si'awbewy,wild st'awbewy, om'lette^
papf} She used her name in this way in order
to express the act of appropriation; the menu
presumably included everything that would
seem to her a desirable meal; the fact, that
two(Varieties of strawberry appeared in it was
a demonstration against the sanitary regula
tions of the household, and was based on the
circumstance, which she hadbynomeans over
looked, that the nurse had- ascribed her indis
position to an over-plentiful consumption of
strawberries; so in her dream she avenged her^
self for this opinion which met with her disap
proval.1
;
.When we call childhood happy because it
does not yet know sexual desire, we must not
forget what a fruitful source of disappqintment
and renunciation, and therefore of dream-stim
ulation, the other great vital impulse may be
1 The dream afterwards accomplished the same pur
pose in the case of the child's grandmother, who is
older than the child by about seventy years. After, she
had t>een forced to go hungry for,a day'on account of
the restlessness of-her floating kidney, she dreamed,
being apparently translated into fthe happy, years of
her girlhood, that she had. been asked out, invited to
lunch and dinner; and had at each meal been served
with the most delicious titbits;

[197a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
193
for the child.1 Here is a second example; My
nephew, twenty-two months of age, had been
instructed to congratulate me on my birthday,
and to give me a present of a small basket of
cherries, which at that time of the year were
scarce, being hardly in season. He seemed to
find the task a difficult one, for he repeated
again and again: "Cherries in it," and could
not be induced to let the little basket go out
of his hands. But he knew how to indemnify
himself. He had, until then, been in the habit
of telling his mother every morning that he
had dreamt of the "white soldier," an officer
of the guard;in a white cloak, whom he had
once admired in the street. On the day after
the sacrifice on my birthday he woke up joy
fully with the announcement, which could have
referred only to a dream: "He \r\man eaten
all the cherries!"2
What animals dream of I do not know. A
proverb, for which I am indebted to one of my
pupils, professes to tell us, for it asks the ques-r
tion: "What does the goose dream of?" and
answers: "Of maize."8 The whole theory that
the dream is the fulfilment of a wish is con
tained in these two sentences.*
;
We now perceive that we should have
reached our theory of the hidden meaning of
dreams by the shortest route had. we merely
consulted the vernacular. Proverbial wisdom,
it is true, often speaks contemptuously enough
of dreams—it- apparently seeks to justify the
scientists when it says that "dreams are bub
bles"; but in colloquial language the dream is
predominantly the gracious fulfiller of wishes.
"I should never have imagined that in my
wildest dreams," we exclaim in delight if we
find that the reality surpasses our expectations.
IV. Distortion in Dreams
If I now declare that wish-fulfilment is the
meaning of every dream, so that there cannot
1 A more searching investigation into the phychic
life of the
child teaches us,
of course,
that sexual
motives, in infantile forms, play a very considerable
part, which has been too long overlooked, in the psy
chic,activity of the child. This permits us to doubt to
some extent the happiness of the child, as imagined
later by adults. Cf. Three Contributions to the Theory
of Sex.
2 It should be mentioned that young children often
have more complex and obscure dreams, while, on the
other hand, adults, in certain circumstances, often have
dreams of a simple and infantile character. How rich
in unsuspected content the dreams of children no more
than four or five years of age may be is shown by the
examples in my "Analysis of a Phobia in a five-yearold Boy," Collected Papers, •m, and Jung's "Experi
ences Concerning the
Psychic Life
of the; Child,"
translated by Brill, American Journal of Psychology.
April, 1910. For analytically interpreted dreams of

[197b]
children, see also yon Hug-Hellmuth, Putnam, Raaltej
Spielrein, and Tausk; others by Banchieri, Busemann,
Doglia, and especially Wigam, who
emphasizes the
wish-fulfilling tendency of such dreams. On the other
hand, it seems that dreams of an infantile type reappear
with especial frequency in adults who are transferred
into the midst of unfamiliar conditions. Thus
Ottp
Nordenskjold, in his book, Antarctic (1904, vol. i, p.
336), writes as follows of
the crew who spent the
winter with him: "Very characteristic of the trend of
our
inmost .thoughts were our
dreams,
which
were
never more vivid and more numerous. Even those of
our comrades with whom dreaming was formerly ex
ceptional had long stories to tell in the mornjngj when
we exchanged our experiences in the world of phan
tasy, They'all had
reference to that outside world
which was now so; far removed from us, but they often
fitted into our immediate, circumstances. An especially
characteristic dream was that in which one
of
bur
comrades believed himself back at school, where the
task was assigned to him of skinning miniature seals>
which were manufactured especially for purposes of in
struction. Eating and drinking constituted the
pivot
around which TnaosJ of our dreams revolved. One of us,
who was especially fond of going to big dinner-parties,
was delighted if he could report in the morning 'that
he had had a three-course dinner.' Another dreamed of
tobacco,
whole
mountains of
tobacco;
yet
another
dreamed of a ship approaching on the open sea under
full sail. Still another dream deserves to be mentioned:
The postman brought the post and gave a long ex
planation of why it was so long delayed; he had de
livered it at the wrong address, and only with great
trouble was he able to get it back. To be sure, we were
often occupied in our sleep with still more impossible
things, but the lack of phantasy in almost all the
dreams which I myself dreamed, or heard others relate,
was quite striking. It would certainly have been of
great psychological interest if all these dreams could
have been recorded. But one can readily understand
how we longed for sleep. That alone, could afford us
everything that we all most ardently desired." I will
continue by a quotation from Du Prel (p. 231): "M\in?
go Park, nearly dying of thirst on one of his.African
expeditions, dreamed constantly of the well-watered
valleys and meadows of his home. Similarly Trenck,
tortured by hunger in the fortress of Magdeburg, saw
himself surrounded by copious meals. And George Back,
a member of Franklin's first expedition, when he was
on the point of death by starvation, dreamed continu
ally and invariably of plenteous meals."
8 A Hungarian proverb cited by Ferenczi states more
explicitly that "the pig dreams of acorns, the goose of
maize." A Jewish proverb asks: "Of what does the hen
dream?"—"Of
millet"
(Sammlung jud.
Sprichw. u.
Redensarien., edit, by Bernstein; 2nd ed:, p. 116).
*I am far from wishing to assert that no previous
writer has ever thought of tracing a dream to a wish.
(Cf. the first passages of the next chapter.) Those in
terested in the subject will find that even in antiquity
the physician Herophilos, who lived under the First
Ptolemy, distinguished between three kinds of dreams:
dreams sent by the gods; natural dreams—those which
come about whenever the
soul creates for itself an
image of that which is beneficial to it, and will come
to pass; and mixed dreams — those which originate
spontaneously from the juxtaposition of images,when we
see that which we desire. From the examples collected
by Schemer, J. Starcke cites a dream whichwas described
by the author himself as a wish-fulfilment (p. 239).
Schemer says: "The phantasy immediately fulfills the
dreamer's wish, simply because this existed vividly in the
mind." This dream belongs to the "emotional dreams."
Akin to it are dreams due to "masculine and feminine
erotic longing," and to "irritable moods." As will
readily be seen, Schemer does not ascribe to the wish
any further significance for the dream than to any other
psychic condition of the waking state; least of alldpes
he insist on the connection between the wish and tlie
essential nature of the dream.

[198a]
194
Sigmtjnd Freud
be any dreams other than wish-dreams, I know
beforehand that I shall meet with the most em
phatic contradiction. My critics will object:
"The fact that there are dreams which are to
be understood as fulfilments of wishes is not
new, but has long since been recognized by such
writers as Radestock, Volkelt, Purkinje, Griesinger and others.1 That there can be no other
dreams than those of wish-fulfilments is yet
one
more
unjustified
generalization,
which,
fortunately,
can
be
easily
refuted. Dreams
which present the most painful content, and
not the least trace of; wish-fulfilment, occur
frequently enough. The pessimistic philosopher,
Eduard von Hartmann, is perhaps most com
pletely opposed to the theory of wish-fulfil
ment. In his Philosophy of the Unconscious,
Part II (Stereotyped German edition, p. 344),
he says: 'As regards the dream, with it all the
troubles of waking life pass over into the sleep
ing state; all save the one thing which may in
some degree reconcile the cultured person with
life—scientific and artistic enjoyment. . . .'
But even less pessimistic observers have em
phasized the fact that in our dreams pain and
disgust
are
more
frequent
than
pleasure
(Scholz, p. 33;
Volkelt, p. 80, et al.). Two
ladies, Sarah Weed and Florence Hallam, have
even worked out, on the basis of their dreams,
a numerical value for the preponderance: of
distress and discomfort in dreams. They find
that 58 per cent of dreams are disagreeable,
and only 28.6 positively pleasant. Besides those
dreams that convey into our sleep the many
painful
emotions
of
life,
there
are
also
anxiety-dreams, in which this most terrible of
all..the painful emotions torments us until we
• wake. Now it -is precisely by these anxietydreams that children are so often haunted (cf.
Debacker on Pavor nocturnus); and yet it was
in children that you found the wish-fulfilment
dream in its most obvious form."
The anxiety-dream does really seem to pre
clude a generalization of the thesis deduced
from the examples given in the last chapter,
that dreams are wish-fulfilments, and even to
condemn it as an absurdity.
Nevertheless, it is not difficult to parry these
apparently invincible objections. It is merely
necessary to observe that our doctrine is not
based upon the estimates of the obvious dreamcontent, but relates to the thought-content,
which, in the course of interpretation, is found
1 Already Plotinus, the neo-Platonist, said: "When
desire bestirs itself, then comes phantasy, and presents
to us, as it were, the object of desire" (Du Prel, p.
276).

[198b]
to lie behind the dream. Let us compare and
contrast the manifest and the latent dreamcontent. It is true that there are dreams the
manifest content of which is of the most pain
ful nature. But has anyone ever tried to in
terpret these dreams—to discover their latent
thought-content? If not, the two objections to
our doctrine are no longer valid; for there is
always the possibility that even our painful and
terrifying dreams may, upon interpretation,
prove to be wish fulfilments.2
In scientific research it is
often advanta
geousj if the solution of one problem presents
difficulties, to add to it a second problem; just
as it is easier to crack two nuts together instead
of separately. Thus, we are confronted not
only with the problem: How can painful and
terrifying dreams be the fulfilments of wishes?
but we may add to this a second problem which
arises from the foregoing discussion of the
general problem of the dream: Why do not
the dreams that show an indifferent content,
and -yet-turn outto be.iwish.-fulfilments, reveal
their meaning without disguise? Take the ex
haustively treated dream of Irma's injection:
it is by no means of a painful character, and
it may be recognized, upon interpretation, as
a striking wish-fulfilment. But why is an in
terpretation necessary at all? Why does not
the dream say directly what it means? As a
matter of fact, the dream of Irma's injection
does not at first produce the impression that
it represents a wish of the dreamer's as fulfilled;
The reader will not have received this impres
sion, and even I myself was not aware of the
fact until I had undertaken the analysis. If we
call this peculiarity of dreams—namely, that
they need elucidation — the phenomenon of
distortion in dreams, a second question then
arises: What is the origin of this distortion in
dreams?
If one's first thoughts on this subject were
2 It is quite incredible with what obstinacy readers
and critics have excluded this consideration and dis
regarded the fundamental differentiation between the
manifest and the latent dream-content. Nothing in the
literature of the subject approaches so closely to my
own conception of dreams as a passage in J. Sully's
essay, Dreams as a Revelation (and it is not because
I do not think it valuable that I allude to it here for
the first time): "It would seem then, after all, that
dreams are not the utter nonsense they have been said
to be by such authorities as Chaucer, Shakespeare, and
Milton. The chaotic aggregations of our night-fancy
have a significance and communicate new knowledge.
Like some letter in cipher, the dream-inscription when
scrutinized closely loses its first look of balderdash and
takes on the aspect of a serious, intelligible message.
Or, to vary the figure slightly, we may say that, like
some palimpsest, the dream discloses beneath its worth
less surface-characters traces of an old and precious
communication"
(p. 364).

[199a]
Preliminary Statement
In the spring of 1897 I learnt that two pro
fessors of our university had proposed me for
the title of Professor Extraordinarius (assistant
professor). The news came as a surprise to me,
and pleased me considerably as an expression
of appreciation on the part of two eminent
men which could not be explained by personal
interest. But I told myself immediately that I
must not expect anything to come of their
proposal. For someyears past the Ministry had
disregarded such proposals, and several col
leagues of mine, who were my seniors and at
least my equals in desert, had been waiting in
vain all this time for the appointment. I had
no reason to suppose that I should fare any
better. I resolved, therefore, to resign myself
to disappointment. I am not, so far as I know,
ambitious, and I was following my profession
with gratifying success even without the rec
ommendation of a professorial title. Whether
I considered the grapes to be sweet or sour did
not matter, since they undoubtedly hung too
high for me.
One evening a friend of mine called to see
me; one of those colleagues whose fate I had
regarded as a warning. As he had long been a
candidate for promotion to the professorate
(which in our society makes the doctor a demi
god to his patients), and as he was less resigned
than I, he was accustomed from time to time
to remind the authorities of his claims in the
hope of advancing his interests. It was after
one of these visits that he called on me. He
said that this time he had driven the exalted
gentleman into a corner, and had asked him
frankly whether considerations of religious de
nomination were not really responsible for the
postponement of his appointment. The answer
was: His Excellency had to admit that in the
present state of public opinion he was not in
a position, etc. "Now at least I know where I
stand," my friend
concluded his
narrative,
which told me nothing new, but which was cal

[199b]
culated to confirm me in my resignation. For
the same denominational considerations would
apply to my own case.
On the morning after my friend's visit I had
the following dream, which was notable also
on account of its form.
It consisted of two
thoughts and two images, so that a thought
and an image emerged alternately. But here
I shall record only the first half of the dream,
since the second half has no relation to the
purpose for which I cite the dream.
I. My friend R is my uncle—I have a great
affection for him.
II. I see before me his face, somewhat altered.
It seems to be elongated; a yellow beard,
which surrounds it, is seen with peculiar
distinctness.
Then follow the other two portions of the
dream, again a thought and an image, which I
omit.
The interpretation of this dream was arrived
at in the following manner:
When I recollected the dream in the course
of the morning, I laughed outright and said,
"The dream is nonsense." But I could not get
it out of my mind, and I was pursued by it all
day, until at last, in the evening, I reproached
myself in these words: "If in the course of a
dream-interpretation
one
of
your
patients
could find nothing better to say than 'That is
nonsense,' you would reprove him, and you
would suspect that behind the dream there was
hidden some disagreeable affair, the exposure
of which he wanted to spare himself. Apply
the same thing to your own case; your opinion
that the dream is nonsense probably signifies
merely an inner resistance to its interpretation.
Don't let yourself be put off." I then proceeded
with the interpretation.
R is my uncle. What can that mean? I had
only one uncle, my uncle Joseph.1 His story,
to be sure, was a sad one. Once, more than
thirty years ago, hoping to make money, he
allowed himself to be involved in transactions
of a kind which the law punishes severely, and
paid the penalty. My father, whose Jbair turned
grey with grief within a few days, used always
to say that uncle Joseph had never been a bad
man, but, after all, he was a simpleton. If,
then, my friend R is my uncle Joseph, that is
1 It is astonishing to see how my memory here re
stricts itself—in the waking stateI—for the purposes of
analysis. I have known five of my uncles and I loved
and honoured one of them. But at the moment when I
overcame my resistance to
the interpretation of
the
dream, I said to myself: "I have only one uncle, the
one who is intended in the dream."

[200a]
iq6
Sigmtjnd Freud
equivalent to saying: "Ris a simpleton." Hard
ly credible, and very disagreeable! But there is
the face that I saw in the dream, with its
elongated features and its yellow beard. My
uncle actually
had such a face—long, and
framed in a handsome yellow beard. My friend
R was extremely swarthy, but when blackhaired people begin to grow grey they pay for
the glory of their youth. Their black beards
undergo an unpleasant change of colour, hair
by hair; first they turn a reddish brown, then
a yellowish brown, and then definitely grey.
My friend R's beard is now in this stage; so,
for that matter, is my own, a fact which I note
with regret. The face that I see in my dream
is at once that of my friend R and that of my
uncle. It is like one of those composite photo
graphs of Gallon's;
in order to emphasize
family resemblances Galtpn had several faces
photographed on the same plate. No doubt is
now possible; it is really my opinion that my
friend R is a simpleton—like my uncle Joseph.
I have still no idea for what purpose I have
worked out this relationship. It is certainly one
to which I must unreservedly object. Yet it is
not very profound, for my uncle was a crim
inal, and my friend R is not, except in so far
as he was once fined for knocking down an ap
prentice with his bicycle. Can I be thinking of
this offence? That would make the comparison
ridiculous. Here I recollect another conversa
tion, which I had some days ago with another
colleague, N; as a matter of fact, on the same
subject. I met N in the street; he, too, has
been nominated for a professorship, and hav
ing heard that I had been similarly honoured
he congratulated me. I refused his congratula
tions, saying; "You are the last man to jest
about the matter, for you know from your own
experience what the nomination is worth."
Thereupon he said, though probably not in
earnest: "You can't be sure of that. There is
a special objection in my case. Don't you know
that a woman once brought a criminal accusa
tion against me? I need hardly assure you that
the matter was put right. It was a mean at
tempt at blackmail, and it was all I could do
to save the plaintiff from punishment. But it
may be that the affair is remembered against
me at the Ministry. You, on the other hand,
are above reproach." Here, then, I have the
criminal, and at the same time the interpreta
tion and tendency of my dream. My uncle Jos
eph represents both of my colleagues who have
not been appointed to the professorship-^the
one as a simpleton, the other as a criminal.

[200b]
Now, too, I know for what purpose I need
this representation. If denominational consid
erations are a determining factor in the post
ponement of my two friends' appointment, then
my own appointment is likewise in jeopardy.
But if I can refer the rejection of my two
friends to other causes, which do not apply
to my own case, my.hopes are unaffected. This
is the procedure followed by my dream:
it
makes the one friend R; a simpleton, and the
other, N, a criminal. But since I am neither
one nor the other, there is nothing in common
between us. I have a right to enjoy my appoint
ment to the title of professor, and have avoided
the distressing application to my own case of
the information which the official gave to my
friend R.
I must pursue the interpretation of this
dream still farther; for I have a feeling that
it is not yet satisfactorily elucidated. I still
feel disquieted by the ease with which I have
degraded two respected colleagues in order to
clear my own way to the professorship. My
dissatisfaction
with
this
procedure has, of
course, been mitigated since I have learned to
estimate the testimony of dreams at its true
value. I should contradict anyone who sug
gested that I really considered R a simpleton,
or that I
did not believe N's account of the
blackmailing incident. And of course I do not
believe that Irma has been made seriously ill
by an injection of a preparation of propylad^
ministered by Otto. Here, as before, what the
dream expresses is only my wish that things
might be so. The statement in which my wish
is realized sounds less absurd in the second
dream than in the first; it is here made with a
skilful use of actual points of support in es
tablishing something like a plausible slander,
one of which one could say that "there is some
thing in it." For at that time my friend R had
to contend with the adverse vote of a univer
sity professor of his own department, and my
friend N had himself, all unsuspectingly, pro
vided me with material for the calumny. Nev
ertheless, I repeat, it still seems to me that
the dream requires further elucidation.
I remember now that the dream contained
yet another portion which has hitherto been
ignored by the interpretation. After it occurred
to me that my friend R was my uncle, I felt in
the dream a great affection fot him. To whom
is this feeling directed? For my uncle Joseph,
of course, I have never had any feelings of
affection. R has: for many years been a dearly
loved friend, but if I were to go to him and

[201a]
THE iNTERPRETATIOlSr xde Dreams
197
express my affection for him in terms approach
ing the degree of-affection which I; felt in the
dream, he would undoubtedly be surprised: My
affection, if it was for him, seems/false and ex
aggerated, as does my judgment of his tintellec
tual qualities, which I expressed by merging his
personality in thatnofi my. uncle^but exagger^
ated inrthe opposite direction.cNaw; however, a
new state of ^affairs dawns> upon ,me. The affec
tion'in the dream does not belong to the latent
content;: to the thoughts ibehind the dream; it
stands in opposition tor this content; it is cal
culated to conceall the. knowledge conveyed by
the interpretation. Probably this is precisely
its function. I remember with what reluctance
I undertook the Uinterpretation, how long I
tried to postpone it, and how I: declared the
dream to be sheer nonsense. I know from my
psycho-analytic practice howsuch a condemna
tion is to be interpreted. It has no informative
value, but''merely, expresses an -affect. If my
little daughter does not like/an apple which is
offered her, she asserts that the apple is bitter,
without even tasting it. If my patients behave
thus, I know that we are dealing with an idea
which they are trying to repress. The same
thing applies to my dream. I do not want to
interpret it because there is something in the
interpretation to which I object. After the in
terpretation of the dream is completed, I dis
cover what it was to which I objected; it was
the assertion that R is a simpleton. I can refer
the affection which I feel for R not to the latent
dream-thoughts, but rather to this unwilling
ness of mine. If my dream, as compared with
its latent content, is disguised at this point, and
actually
misrepresents
things by
producing
their opposites, then the manifest affection in
the dream serves the purpose of the misreprer
sentation;
in other words, the distortion is
here shown to be intentional—it is a means of
disguise. My dream-thoughts of R are deroga
tory, and so that I may not become aware of
this the very opposite of defamation—a tender
affection for him—enters into the dream.
This discovery imay prove to be generally
valid. As' the examples in Chapter rn have
demonstrated, there are, of
course* dreams
which are undisguised wish-fulfilments.. Wheriever a wish-fulfilment is unrecognizable and
disguised there must be-present a tendency to
defend oneself against this wish, and in conse
quence of this defence the wish is unable to
express itself save in a distorted form. 1 will
try to find a parallel in social life to this occur
rence in the inner psychic life. Where in social
life can a similar misrepresentation be found?
Only;where two^persjons are concerned, one of
whom possesses a certain power while the other
has to act with a certain consideration on ac
count of thisi power..The second person will
then distort Jbis psychic-actions; or, as we say,
he will mask himself. -The politeness which I
practise every day is largely a:disguise of this
kind ;v.if:I1interpret my dreams lor therbenefit
of my .readers, I am forced to make misrepre
sentations of 'this kind. The poet even complains of the1 necessity of such misrepresenta*
tion: Das Beste, was du wissen kannst, darfst
du denrSuben dock nicht sagenr "The best
that/thou:canst know thou mayst not tell to
boys.";;-'
;.:'
The
political
writer who
has unpleasant
truths to tell to those in power finds Mmself in
a like position. If he tells everything'Without
reserve, the Government will suppress them—
retrospectively in the case of a verbal expres
sion of opinion, preventively if they are to be
published: in the Press. The writer stands in
fear ofthe censorship; he therefore moderates
and disguises the expression of his opinions.
He finds himself compelled, in accordance-with
the sensibilities of the censor, either to refrain
altogether from certain forms of attack, or to
express himself in allusions instead of by direct
assertions; nr he must:conceal his objectionable
statement in an apparently innocent disguise.
He may; for instance* tell of a contretemps be
tween two Chinese mandarins, while he really
has in mind the officials of his own country.
The stricter the domination of the. censorship,
the more thorough becomes the disguise^ and,
often enough, the moire ingenious the means
employed to put the reader on the track of the
actual meaning.
: The
detailed
correspondence between the
phenomena of censorship and the phenomena
of dream-distortion justifies us in presupposing
similar •.- conditions for both. We should then
assume that in every human being there exist,
as the primary cause of dream-formation, two
psychic forces (tendencies or systems), one of
which forms the wish expressed by the dream,
while the other exercises a censorship over this
dream-wish, thereby, enforcing on it a distor
tion. The question is: What is the nature of
the authority 6£;t&s Second agency by virtue
of which it is able to exercise its censorship?
If we rememberthat the latent dream-thoughts
are not conscious before analysis, but that the
manifest dream-content emerging from them
is consciously remembered, it is not a.far-

[202a]
198
SlGMUND PeETJD
fetched assumption that admittance to the con
sciousness is the prerogative of the second
agency. Nothing can reach the consciousness
from the first system which has not previously
passed the second instance; and the second in
stance lets nothing pass without exercising its
rights, and forcing such modifications as are
pleasing to itself upon the candidates for ad
mission to consciousness. Here we arrive; at a
very definite conception of the essence of con
sciousness; for us the state of becoming con
scious is a special psychic act, different from
and independent of the process of becoming
fixed or
represented, and
consciousness ap*
pears to us as a sensory organ which perceives
a content proceeding from another source. It
may be shown that psycho-pathology simply
cannot
dispense with these fundamental as
sumptions. But we shall reserve for another
time a
more exhaustive examination of the
subject.
^
If I bear in mind the notion of the two psy
chic instances and their relation to the con
sciousness, I find in the sphere of politics a
perfectly appropriate analogy to the extraor
dinary affection which I feel for my friend R,
who is so disparaged in the dream-interpreta
tion. I refer to the political life of a State in
which the ruler, jealous of his rights, and an
active public opinion are in mutual conflict.
The people, protesting against the actions of
an unpopular official, demand his dismissal.
The autocrat, on the other hand, in order to
show his contempt for the popular will, may
then deliberately confer upon the official some
exceptional distinction which otherwise would
not have been conferred. Similarly, my second
instance, controlling the access to my conscious
ness, distinguishes my friend R with a rush
of extraordinary affection, because the wishtendencies of the first system, in view of a
particular interest on which they are just then
intent, would like to disparage him as a sim
pleton.1
1 Such hypocritical dreams are not rare; either with
me or with others. While I have been working at a cer
tain scientific problem, I have been visited for several
nights, at quite short intervals, by a somewhat con
fusing dream which has as its content a reconciliation
with a friend dropped long ago. After three or four
attempts I finally succeeded in grasping the meaning
of this dream. It was in the nature of an encourage
ment to give up the remnant of consideration still sur
viving for the person in question, to make myself quite
free
from, him, but it hypocritically disguised itself in
its antithesis. I have recorded a "hypocritical Oedipus
dream" in which the hostile feelings and death-wishes
of the dream-thoughts were replaced by manifest ten
derness
C'Typisckes Beispiel eines verkappten Oedipustraumes." Zentralblatt fur Psychoanalyse, Vol. I,

[202b]
We may now perhaps>begin to suspect that
dream-interpretation is capable of yielding in
formation concerning the structure of our psy
chic apparatus which we have hitherto vainly
expected from philosophy. We shall not, how
ever, follow up this trail, but shall return to
our original problem as soon as we have eluci
dated the problem of dream-distortion, f The
question arose, how dreams with a disagreeable
content can be analysed as wish-fulfillments.
We see now that this is possible where a dreamdistortion has occurred, when the disagreeable
content
serves
only to
disguise
the
thing
wished
for. With regard to our assumptions
respecting the two psychic instances, we can
now also say that disagreeable dreams contain,
as a matter of fact, something which is disa
greeable to the second instance, but which at
the same time fulfills a wish of the first instance.
They are wish-dreams in so far as every dream
emanates from the first instance, while the sec
ond instance behaves towards the dream only in
a defensive, not in a constructive manner.3
Were we to limit ourselves to a consideration
of what the second instance contributes to the
dream we should never understand the dream,
and all the problems which the writers on the
subject have discovered in the dream would
have to remain unsolved.
That the dream actually has a secret mean
ing, which proves to be a wish-fulfillment, must
be proved afresh in every case by analysis. I
will therefore select a few dreams which have
painful contents, and
endeavour to
analyse
them. Some of them are dreams of hysterical
subjects, which therefore call for a long pre
liminary statement, and in some passages an
examination of the psychic processes occur
ring in hysteria. This, though it will complicate
the presentation, is unavoidable.
When I treat a psychoneurotic patient ana
lytically, his dreams regularly, as I have said,
become a theme of our conversations. I must
therefore give him all the psychological ex
planations with whose aid I myself have suc
ceeded in understanding his symptoms. And
here I encounter unsparing criticism, which is
perhaps no less shrewd than that which I have
to expect from:my colleagues. With perfect
uniformity, my patients contradict the doctrine
that dreams are the fulfillments of wishes. Here
No. I-II [1910]). Another class of hypocritical dreams
will be recorded in another place (see Chap, vi, "The
Dream-Work").
2 Later on we shall become, acquainted with cases in
which, on the
contrary, the dream expresses a wish
of this second instance.

[203a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
are several examples of the sort of dream-ma
terial which is adduced in refutation of my
theory.
"You are always saying that a dream is a
wish fulfilled," begins an intelligent lady pa
tient. "Now I shall tell you a dream in which
the content is quite the opposite, in which a
wish of mine is not fulfilled. How do you rec
oncile that with your theory? The dream was
as follows: / want to give a supper, but I have
nothing available except some smoked salmon.
I think I will go shopping, but I remember
that it is Sunday afternoon, when all the
shops are closed. I then try to ring up a few
caterers, but the telephone is out of order.
Accordingly I have to renounce my desire to
give a supper."
I reply, of course, that only the analysis can
decide the meaning of this dream, although I
admit that at first sight it seems sensible and
coherent and looks like the opposite of a wishfulfilment. "But what occurrence gave rise to
this dream?" I ask. "You know that the stimu
lus of a dream always lies among the experi
ences of the preceding day."
Analysis
The patient's husband, an honest and capable
meat salesman, had told her the day before
that he was growing too fat, and that he meant
to undergo treatment for obesity. He would
rise early, take physical exercise, keep to a
strict diet, and above all accept no more in
vitations to supper. She proceeds jestingly to
relate how her husband, at a table d'hote, had
made the acquaintance of an artist, who in
sisted upon painting his portrait, because he,
the painter, had never seen such an expressive
head. But her husband had answered in his
downright fashion, that while he was much ob
liged, he would rather not be painted; and he
was quite convinced that a bit of a pretty
girl's posterior would please the artist better
than his whole face.- She is very much in love
with her husband, and teases him a good deal.
She has asked him not to give her any caviar.
What can that.mean?
As a matter of fact, she had wanted for a
long time to eat a caviar sandwich every morn
ing, but had grudged the expense. Of course
she could get the caviar from her husband at
once if she asked for it. But she has, on the
contrary, begged him not to give her any cav-
... * To. sit for the painter.
Goethe:
And if he has.no backside,
How can the nobleman sit?

[203b]
*»
iar, so that she might tease him about it a little
longer.
(To me this explanation seerns thin. Unconfessed motives are wont to conceal themselves
behind just such unsatisfying explanations. We
are reminded of the subjects hypnotised by
Bernheim, who carried out a post-hypnotic
order, and who, on being questioned as to their
motives, instead of answering: "I do not know
why I did that," had to invent a reason that
was obviously inadequate. There is probably
something similar to this in the case of my pa
tient's caviar. I see that in waking life she is
compelled to invent an unfulfilled wish. Her
dream also shows her the non-fulfillment of
her wish. But why does she need an unfulfilled
wish?)
The ideas elicited so far are-insufficient for
the interpretation of the dream. I press for
more. After a short pause, which corresponds
to the overcoming of a resistance, she reports
that the day before she had paid a visit to a
friend of whom she is really jealous because
her husband is always praising this lady so
highly. Fortunately this friend is very thin and
lanky, and her husband likes full figures. Now
of what did this thin friend speak? Of course,
of her wish to become rather plumper. She also
asked my patient: "When are you going to in
vite us again? You alwayshave such good food,"
Now the meaning of the dream is clear, I
am able to tell the patient: "It is just as though
you had thought at the moment of her asking
you that: 'Qf course, I'm to invite you so that
you can eat at my bouse and get fat and be
come still more pleasing to my husband! I
would rather give no more suppers! 'The dream
then tells you that you cannot give a supper,
thereby fulfilling your wish not to contribute
anything to the rounding out of your friend's
figure. Your husband's resolution to accept no
more invitations to supper in order that he may
grow thin teaches you that one grows fat on
food eaten at other people's tables." Nothing
is lacking now but some sort of coincidence
which will confirm the, solution. The smoked
salmon in the dream has not yet been traced.-r-
"{low did you come to think of salmon in
your dream?"—"Smoked salmon is my friend's
favourite dish," she replied. It happens that
I know the lady, and am able to affirm that she
grudges herself salmon just as
my ipatient
grudges herself caviar*
This dream admits of yet another and more
exact interpretation—one which is actually ne*
cessitated only by a subsidiary circumstance.

[204a]
200
7
SlGMOTDuFKEUD'
The twb interpretations db^not contradict one
another, but rather dovetail into one another,
and furnish an excellent example' of the usual
ambiguity of dreams, as of all other psychopathological formations. We have heard that
at the time of her dream of a denied wish the
patientwasimpelled to denyherselfa real wish
(the wishto eat caviarsandwiches). Her friend,
too, had expresseda wish,namely, to get fatter,
and it would not surprise us if our piatient had
dreamt that this wish of her friend's^-the wish
to increase in weight—was not to be fulfilled;
Instead of this, however, she dreamt that one
of her own wishes was not fulfilled. The dream
becomes capable of a new interpretation if in
the dream she does not mean herself, but her
friend, if she has put herself in the place of her
friend, or, as we may sayj has identified herself
with her friend.
I think she has actually done this, and as a
sign of this identificatibn she has created for
herself in real life an unfulfilled wish. But
what is the meaning of this hysterical indentification? To elucidate this a more exhaustive
exposition.is necessary. Identification is a high
ly important motive in the mechanism of hys
terical symptoms; by this means patients are
enabled to express in their symptoms not mere
ly their own experiences,but the experiences of
quite a number of other persons; they can
suffer, as it were, for a whole mass of people,
and fill all the parts of a drama with their own
personalities. It will here be objected that this
is
the well-known hysterical imitation, the
ability of hysterical subjects to imitate all the
symptoms which impress them when they oc
cur in others, as though pity were aroused to
the point of reproduction..This, however, only
indicates the path which the psychic process
follows in hysterical imitation; But the path it
self and the psychic act which follows this path
are two different matters. The act itself is
slightly more complicated than we are prone
to believe the imitation of the hysterical to
be; it corresponds to an unconscious end-proc
ess, as an example- will show. The ^physician
who has, in the same ward with other patients*
a female patient suffering from a particular
kind of twitching, is not surprised if one morn
ing he learns that this peculiar hysterical affec^
tion has found imitators. He merely tells him^
self: The others have seen^her, and have imk
tated her; this is psychic infection. Yes, but
jpsyehic infection: occurs1 soinewhat in- the fol
lowing manner-As a rule, patients know more
about one another than the physician knows

[204b]
about any one of theiri, and they are concerned
about one another when the doctor's visit is
over. One of them has an attack to-day: at
once it is known to the rest that a letter from
home, a recrudescence of lovesickness, or the
like, is the cause. Their sympathy is aroused,
and although it does not emerge into conscious
ness they form the following conclusion: "If
it is possible to suffer such an attack from such
a cause, I too may suffer this sort of an attack,
fori have the same occasion for it." If thiswere a conclusion capable of becoming con
scious, it would perhaps
express itself in
dread of suffering a like attack; but it is formed
in another psychic region, and consequently
ends in the realization of the dreaded symp
toms. Thus identification
is
not mere imita
tion, but an assimilation based upon the same
aetiological claim; it expresses a just like, and
refers to some common condition which has
remained in the unconscious.
>
In hysteria, identification is most frequently
employed to express a sexual community. -Thd
hysterical
woman
identifies
herself by her)
symptoms most readily—though not exclusive4
ly—with persons with whom she has had sexual
relations, or who have had sexual intercourse
with the same persons as herself. Language
takes cognizance of this tendency: two lovers^
are said to be "one." In hysterical phantasy, ai
well as in dreams, identification may ensue if
Onesimply thinks of sexual relations; they need
not necessarily become actual. The patient is
merely following the rules of the hystericalproc
esses of thought when she expresses her jealousy
of her friend (which, for that matter, she her
self admits to be unjustified) by putting herself
in her friend's place in her dream, and identify
ing herself with her by fabricating"a symptom
(the denied wish). One might further elucidate
the process- by saying: In the dream she puts
herself in the place of her friend, because her
friend has taken her own place in relation to
her husband, and because she would like to
take her friend's place in faer husband's esteem.*
The contradiction of my theory of dreams
on the part of another female patieiitj the mbst
intelligent of all my dreamers, was solved in a
simpler fashion, though still in accordance with
the-principle that the non-fulfilment of one
11 myself regret the inclusion of such passages from
th& psycho-pathology of hysteria, which;because of
their fragmentary presentation, and because they are
torn out of their context, cannot prove to be very il
luminating. If these passages are capable of throw
ing any
light upon
the
intimate5 relations' between
dream and the psycho-neurosis, they have served the
intention with which I have included them.

[205a]
The Interpretation; of Dreams
wish signified the fulfilment of another. I had
one day explained to her that a dream is a wishfulfilment. On the following day she related a
dream to the effect that she was travelling with
her mother-in-law to the place in which they
were both to spend the summer. Now I knew
that she had violently protested against spend
ing the summer in the neighbourhood of her
mother-in-law, I also knew that she had fortu
nately been able to avoid doing so, since she
had recently succeeded in renting a house in a
place quite remote from that to which her
mother-in-law was going. And now the dream
reversed this desired solution. Was not this a
flat contradiction of my theqry of wish-fulfil
ment? One had only to draw the inferences from
this dream in order to arrive at its interpret
tation. According to this dream, I was wrong;
but it was her wish that I should be:wrong, and
this wish the dream showed her as fulfilled.
But the wish that I should be wrong, which
was fulfilled in the theme of the country house,
referred in reality to another and more serious
matter. At that time I had inferred, from the
material furnished by her analysis, that some
thing of significance in respect to her illness
must have occurred at a certain time in her
life. She had denied this, because it was not
present in her memory. We soon came to see
that I was right. Thus her wish that I should
prove to be wrong, which was transformed into
the dream that she was going into the country
with her mother-in-law, corresponded with the;
justifiable wish that those things which were
then only suspected had never occurred.
Without an analysis, and merely by means
of an assumption, I took the liberty of inter
preting a little incident in the life of a friend,
who had been my companion through eight
classes at school. He once heard a lecture of
mine, delivered to a small audience, on the
novel idea that dreams are wish-fulfilments.
He went home, dreamt that he had lost all his
lawsuits—he was
a lawyer—and then com
plained to me about it. I took refuge in the
evasion: "One can't win all one's cases"; but
I thought to myself: "If, for eight years, I sat
asr primus on the first bench, while he moved
up and down somewhere in the middle of the.
class, may he not naturally have had the wish,
ever since his boyhood, that I too might for
once make a fool of myself?"
Yet another dream of a more gloomy char
acter was offered me by a female patient in
contradiction of my theory of the wish^dream.
This patient, a young girl, began as follows:

[205b]
2Q*
"You remember that my sister has now only
one.boy,,Charles. She lost the elder one, Otto,
while I was still living with her. Otto was my
favourite; it was I who really brought him up.
I like the other little fellow,too, but, of course;
not nearly as much as his dead brother. Now
I dreamt last night that I Saw Charles lying
deadbefore me. Hewas lyingin hislittle coffin,
his hands folded; therewere candles all about;
and, in short, it was just as it was at the time
of little Otto's death, which gave me such a
shock. Now tell me, what does this mean? You
know me—am I really so bad as to wish that
my sister should lose the only child she has
left? Or does the dream mean that I wish that
Charles had died rather than Otto, whom I
liked so much better?"
:>-»•-
I assured her that this latter interpretation
was impossible. After some reflection, I was
able to give her the interpretation of the
dream, which she subsequently confirmed. I
was able to do so because the whole previous
history of; the dreamer was known to me.
Having* become an orphan at an early age,
the girl had been brought up in the home of a
much older sister, and had met, among the
friends and visitors who frequented the house,
a man who made a lasting impression upon her;
affections: It looked for a time as though these
barely explicit relations would end in marriage*
but this happy culmination was frustrated ~by
the sister,
whose motives were never com
pletely explained. After the rupture the man
whom my patient loved avoided the house;
she herself attained her independence some
time after the death of little Otto, to whom,
meanwhile, her affections had turned. But she
did not succeed in freeing herself from the der.
pendence due to her affection for her sister's
friend. Her pride bade her avoid him, but she
found it impossible to transfer her love to the
other suitors who successively presented them
selves. Whenever the man she loved, who was
a member of the literary profession, announced
a lecture anywhere, she was certain to be found
among the audience; and she seized every other
opportunity of seeing him unobserved. I re
membered that on the previous day she had
told me that the Professor was going to a cerr
tain concert, and that she too was going, in
order to enjoy the sight of him. This was on
the day before the dream; and the concert was
to be given on the day oh which she told me
the dream. I could now easily see the correct
interpretation, and I asked her whether she
could think of any particular event which had

[206a]
202
occurred after Otto's death. She replied imme
diately: "Of course; the Professor returned then,
after a long absence, and I sawhim once more be
side little Otto's coffin." It was just as I had ex
pected. I interpreted the dream as follows: "If
now the other boy were to die, the same thing
would happen again. You would spend the day
with your sister; the Professor would certainly
come to offer his condolences, and you would
see him once more under the same circum
stances as before. The dream signifies nothing
more than this wish of yours to see him again—
a wish against which you are fighting inwardly.
I know that you have the ticket for today's
concert in your bag. Your dream is a dream of
impatience; it has anticipated by several hours
the meeting which is to take place to-day."
In order to disguise her wish she had ob
viously selected a situation in which wishes of
the sort are commonly suppressed—-a situation
so sorrowful that love is not even thought of.
And yet it is entirely possible that even in the
actual situation beside the coffin of the elder,
more dearly loved boy, she had not been able
to suppress her tender affection for the visitor
whom she had missed for so long.
A different explanation was found in the case
of a similar dream of another patient, who in
earlier life had been distinguished for her quick
wit ancTher"cheerful disposition, and who still
displayed these qualities, at all events in the
free associations which occurred to her during
treatment. In the course of a longer dream, it
seemed to this lady that she saw her fifteenyear-old daughter lying dead before her in a
box. She was strongly inclined to use
this
dream-image as an objection to the theory of
wish-fulfilment, although she herself suspected
that the detail of the box must lead to a differ
ent conception of the dream1 For in the course
of the analysis it occurred to her that on the
previous evening the conversation of the people
in whose company she found herself had turned
on the English word :60a;, and rupon the numer
ous translations of it into German such as
Schachtel (box), Loge (box at the theatre),
Kasten (chest), Ohrfeige (box on the ear), etc.
From other components of the same dream it
was now possible to add the fact that the lady
had guessed at the relationship between the
English word "box" and the German Buchse,.
and had then been haunted by the recollection
that Buchse is used in vulgar parlance to de
note the female genitals. It was therefore pos1 As in the dream of the deferred supper and the
smoked salmon.

[206b]
sible, treating her knowledge of topographical
anatomy with a certain indulgence, to assume
that the child in the box signified a child in
the mother's womb.At this stage of the explan
ation she rio longer denied that the picture in
the dream actually corresponded with a wish of
hers. Like so many other young women, she
was by no means happy on finding that she was
pregnant, and she had confessed to me more
than once the wish that her child might die
before its birth; in a fit of anger, following a
violent scene with her husband, she had even
struck her abdomen with her fists, in order to
injure the child within. The dead child was
therefore, really the fulfilment of a wish, but
a wish which had been put aside for fifteen
years, and it is not surprising that the fulfil
ment of the wish was no longer recognized after
so long an interval. For there had been many
changes in the meantime.
The group of dreams
(having as content
the death of beloved relatives) to which belong
the last two mentioned
will be
considered
again under the head of "Typical Dreams." I
shall then be able to show by new; examples
that in spite of their undesirable content all
these dreams must be interpreted as wish-ful
filments. For the following dream, which agairi^
was told me in order to deter me from a hasty\
generalization of my theory, I am indebted,
not to a patient, but to an intelligent jurist of
my acquaintance. "/ dream," my informant
tells me, "that I am walking in front of my
house with a lady on my arm. Here a closed,
carriage is waiting; a man steps up to me,
shows me his authorization as a police officer,
and requests me to'follow him. I ask only for'
time in which to arrange my affairs." The jurist:
then asks me: "Can you possibly suppose that
it is my wish to be arrested?"—"Of course
not," I have to admit. "Do you happen to know
upon what charge you were arrested?"—"Yes;
I believe for infanticide."—"Infanticide? But:
you know that only a mother can commit this
crime upon her new-born child?"—"That is>
true."2—"And under what circumstances did
you dream this? What happened on the eve
ning before?"—"I would rather not tell you—
it is a delicate matter."—"But I need it, other
wise we must forgo the interpretation of the
dream."—"Well, then, I will tell you. I spent
2 It often happens that a dream is told incompletely,
and that a recollection of the omitted portions appears
only in the course of the analysis. These portions, when
subsequently fitted in, invariahly furnish the key to
the interpretation. Cf. Chapter VII, on forgetting of
dreams.
-

[207a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
the night, not at home, but in the house of a
lady who means a great deal to me. When we
awoke in the morning, something again passed
between us. Then I went to sleep again, and
dreamt, what I have told you."—"The woman
is married?"—-"Yesi"—"Aiid you do not wish
her to conceive?"—"No; that might betray
us.'—"Then you do not practice normal co
itus?"—"I take the precaution to withdraw
before ejaculation."—"Am I to assume that
you took this precaution severd--tunes;.during
the night, and that in the morning you were
not quite sure whether you had succeeded?"—
"That might be so."—"Then your dream is the
fulfilment of a wish. By the dream you are as
sured that you have not begotten a child, or,
what amounts to the same thing,-that-you have
killed the child. I can easily demonstrate the
connecting-links. Do you remember, a few days
ago we were talking about the troubles of mat
rimony, and about the inconsistency of permit
ting coitus so Jong as no impregnation takes
place, while at the same time any preventive
act committed after the ovum and the semen
meet and a foetus is formed is punished as
a
crime? In this connection we recalled the
medieval controversy about the moment of
time at which the soul actually enters into the
foetus, since the concept of murder becomes
admissible only from that point onwards. Of
course, too, you know the gruesome poem by
Lenau, which puts infanticide and birth-control
on the same plane."—"Strangely enough,
I
happened, as though by chance, to think of
Lenau this morning."—"Another echo of your
dream. And now I shall show you yet another
incidental wish-fulfilment in your dream. You
walk, up to your house with the lady on your
arm. So you take her home, instead of spending
the night at her house, as you did in reality. The
fact that the wish-fulfilment, which is the es
sence of the dream, disguises itself in such an
unpleasant form*has perhaps more than one ex
planation. From my essay on the aetiology of
anxiety neurosis, you will see that I note coitus
interruptus as one of the factors responsible for
the development of neurotic fear. It would
be consistent with this if, after repeated coitus
of this kind, you were left in an uncomfortable
frame of mind, which now becomes an element
of the composition of your dream. You even;
make use of this uncomfortable state ,of mind
to conceal the wish-fulfilment. At the same time,
the mention of infanticide has not yet been ex
plained. Why does this crime, which is peculiar
to females^ occur to you?"—"I will confess to

[207b]
203
you that I was involved in such an affair years
ago. I was responsible; for the fact that a girl
tried to protect herself from the consequences
of a liaisonwith me by procuring an abortion. I
had nothing to do with the carrying out of her
plan, but for a long time I was naturally wor
ried in case the affairmight be discovered.'—"I
understand. This recollection furnished a second
reason why the supposition that you had per
formed coitus interruptus clumsily must have
been painful to you."
A young physician, who heard this dream re
lated in my lecture-room, must have felt that
it fitted him, for he hastened to imitate it by
a dream of his own, applying its mode of think
ing tp another.theme. On the previous fjay.he,
had furnished a statement of his income; a
quite straightforward statement, because he
had little to state. He dreamt that an acquaint
ance of his came from a meeting of the tax
commission and
informed him that all the
other statements had passed unquestioned, but
that his own had aroused general suspicion,
with the result that he would be punished with
a heavy fine. This dream is a poorly disguised
fulfilment of the wish to be known as a phy^
sician with a large income. It also calls to mind
the story of the young girl who was advised
against accepting her suitor because he was a
man of quick temper, who would assuredly
beat her after their marriage. Her answer was:
"I wish he would strike me!" Her wish to be
married was so intense that she had taken into
consideration the discomforts
predicted for
this marriage; she had even raised them to the
plane of a wish.
If I group together the very frequent dreams
of this sort, which seem flatly to contradict
my. theory, in that they embody the denial of
a wish or some occurrence obviously undesired,
under the head of counter-wish-dreams, I find
that they may all.be referred to two principles,
one of which has not yet been mentioned,
though it plays a large part in waking as well
as dream-life. One of the motives inspiring
these dreams is the wish that I should appear
in the wrong. These dreams occur regularly; in
the course of treatment whenever,the patient
is in a state of resistance; indeed,:I can with a
great degree of certainty count on evoking such
a dream once I have explained to the patient
my theory that the dream is a wish-fulfilment.1
Indeed, I have reason to expect that many of
1 Similar counter-wish-dreams have been repeatedly;
reported to me within the last few years, by those who
attend my lectures, as their reaction to their first en
counter with the wish-theory'..of dreams*

[208a]
204
SiGMtfisn* Ereud
my readers will have such dreams, merely to
fulfil the wish that I rhay prove to be wrong.
The last dream which *I shall recount from
among those occurringiin :the course of treat
ment once more demonstrates this very thing.
A young girl who had struggled hard to con
tinue my tteatirient^ against the will of her rel
atives and the authorities whomihey had con
sulted, dreamt the following dream: At home
she is forbidden to come to ms any more. She
then reminds me of the promise I made her to
treat her for nothing if necessary, and I tell her:
"I can show no consideration in money matters."
It is not at all easy in this case to demon
strate the fulfilment of a wish, but in all cases
of this kind there is a second" problem, the
solution of which helps also to solve the first.
Where does she get the words which she puts
into my mouth? Of course, I have never told
her anything of the kind; but one of her broth
ers, the on£ who has the greatest influence
oveV.faer,-has been kind enough to make this
remark about me. It is then the purpose of the'
dream to show that her brother is right; arid
she does not try to justify this brother merely
in the dream; it is her purpose in life and the
motive of her illness.
A dream which at first sight presents pecu
liar difficulties for the theory of wish-fulfilment
was dreamed by a physician (Aug. Starcke)
and interpreted by him: "I Have and see oh
the last phalange of my left forefinger a pri
mary syphilitic affection"
One may perhaps be inclined to refrain from
analysing this dream, since it seems clear and
coherent, except for its unwished-fof content.
However, if one takes the trouble to make an
analysis, one learns that primary affection re
duces itself to prima affectio (first love), arid
that the repulsive sore, inthe words of Starcke,
proves to be "the representative of wish-ful-"
filments charged with intense emotion."1
The other motive for counter-wish-clreams
is so clear that there is a danger of overlooking
it, as happenedin my own case for a long time.
In- the sexual constitution of many persons
there is a^masochistic 'component, which has
arisen through the conversion of the aggres
sive, sadistic component into its opposite. Such
people are called ideal masocnists if they seek
pleasure not in the bodily pain which may be
inflicted upon them, but in humiliation'arid;
psychic chastisements It is obvious that such
persons, may have
counter-wish-dreams
and
chsagreelable. dreams, yet 'these^ are for them;
1Zentralblattfur Psychoanalyse, Jahrgi II, 1911-12.

[208b]
nothing m^re than wish-fulfilments, which sat-'
isfy their masochistic inclinatioris. Here is such
a dream: A youngmail,whoInearlier youth
greatly tormented hisv elder brother, toward
whom, he was homosexually inclined^ but who;
has since undergone a complete change of char
acter, has the following dfearn, which cprisists
of three parts: (1) He is "teased" by his bra-,
ther. (2) Two adults are caressing each oftiet
with homosexual intentions. (3) His brother1
hassold the businessthe management of which
the young man had reserved for his own future:
From this last dream he
awakens with the1
most unpleasant feelings; and yet it is a maso
chistic wish-dream, which might be translated:
It would serve me right if my brother were to
make that sale against my interests. It would
be my punishment for all the torments he has
suffered at my hands."
11
I hope that the examples1 given above will
suffice—until some further objection' appears
—to make it seem credible that even breams
with a painful content are to be analysed as
wish-fulfilments.2 Nor should it ne considered
a mere matter of chance that, in the course of
interpretation, one always happens urion sub
jects about which one does not like to speak
or think. Thedisagreeable sensation which such;
dreams arouse is of course precisely identical
with the antipathy which would, and usually
does, restrain us from treating or discussing
such subjects—an antipathy which must be
overcome by all of us if we find ourselves ob
liged to attack the problem of such dreams.
But this disagreeable feeling which recurs in
our dreams does not preclude the existence of
a wish; everyone has wishes which he wouldnot like to confess to others, which he'does riot
care to admit even to himself. On the other:
hand, we feel justified in connecting the un
pleasant character of ali these dreams with the
fact of dream-distortion, and in concluding'
that these dreams are distorted/ and that their1
wish-fulfilment is disguised beyond recognition;^
precisely because there is a strong revulsion
against—a will to repress—the subject-rriatter
of the dreamy or the wish cheated byit. Dream-1
distortion, then, proves in reality to be an act
ofcensorship. We shall have included every-;
thingwhich the analysis of disagreeable dreams1
has brought to lightif we reword pur formula"
thus: The dream is the(MsgulsM) fulfilment\
of-a (suppressed, repressed) iMsh.3
":?-'
'
21will here observe that we.have not yetdispose^ of!
this therne; we shall discuss it again-later;
'"j-":*
l•?' A- great contemporary; poetK who*;&:am. told; willj
hear
nothing
of
psycho-analysis
and
dream-inter-

[209a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
Now there still remain to-be-considered* as
a particular sub-jorder of dreams with painful
content, the anxiety-dreams; the inclusion of
which among the wish-dreams will be still less
acceptable to-the uninitiatedv1 Brit I can here
deal very cursorily with the problem of anxi
ety-dreams; what they have to reveal is not a
new aspect of the dream-prdblem; here the
problem
is that of understanding
neurotic
anxiety in general. The anxiety which we ex
perience in dreams is only apparently explained
by the dream-content. If we subject that con
tent to analysis, we become aware that the
dream-anxiety is no more justified by the
dream-cdntent than the anxiety in a phobia is
justified by the idea to which the phobia is at
tached. For example, it is true that it is pos
sible to fall out of a window, and that a cer
tain care should be exercised when one is at a
windowV but it is not obvious why the anxiety
in the correspondingphobia is so great, and why
it torments its victims more than its cause
would warrant. The same explanation which ap
plies to the phobia applies also to the anxietydream. In either case, the anxiety is only fas
tened oh to the idea which accompanies it, and
is derived from another source.
pretation, has nevertheless derived from his own ex
perience an almost identical formula for the nature
of the dream: "Unauthorized emergence of suppressed
yearnings, under! false features and names^ (G. Spitteler,
"Meine
friiftesten
Erlebnisse"
in
Suddeutsche
Mondtskefte, October, 1913)-.
I will here anticipate by citing the amplification and
modification of this fundamental formula propounded
by Otto Rank: "On the basis of and with the aid of
repressed infantile-sexual material, dreams
regularly
represent as fulfilled current, and as a rule also erotic,
wishes in a disguised and symbolic form" (Ein Traum,
der sich selbst deutet).
Nowhere have I said that I have accepted this for
mula of Rank's. The shorter version: contained in the
text seems to me sufficient. But the fact that I merely
mentioned Rank's modification was enough to expose
psycho-analysis to the oft-repeated reproach that it
asserts that all dreams have a sexual content. If one
understands this sentence as it is intended to be un
derstood, it only proves* how little conscientiousness
our critics are wont to
display, and how ready our
opponents are to overlook statements if they do hot
accord with their aggressive inclinations. Only a few
pages back I mentioned the manifold wish-fulfilments
of children's dreams
(to make an excursion on land
or water, to make up for an omitted meal, etc.). Else
where I have mentioned dreams excited by thirst and
the desire to evacuate, and mere comfort- or conveni
ence-dreams. Even Rank does not make an absolute as
sertion. He says "as a rule- also erotic wishes," and
this can be .completely confirmed in the case of most
dreams of adults;
The matter has, however, a different aspect if we
employ the word sexual in the sense of Eros, as the
word is understood by psycho-analysts. But the in
teresting
problem
of
whether
all
dreams
are
not
produced ,:by
libidinal
motives
(in
opposition
to
destructive ones) has hardly been considered by our
opponents.

[209b]
^03
On
account of
this
intimate
relation, of
dream-anxiety to neurbtic anxiety, the discus
sion of the former obliges me to refer to the
latter. In a little essay on Anxiety Neurosis,1
written in 1895,1 maintain that neurotic anxiety
has its origin in the sexual life, and corresponds
to a libido which has been deflected from its
object and has found no employment. The ac
curacy of this formula has since then been dem
onstrated with ever-increasing certainty. From
it we may deduce the doctrine that anxietydreams are dreams of sexual content, and that
the libido appertaining to this content has been
transformed into anxiety. Later on I shall have
an opportunity of confirming this assertion by
the analysis of several dreams of neurotics.
In my further attempts to arrive at a theory of
dreams I shall again have occasion to revert to
the conditions of anxiety-dreams and their com
patibility with the theory of wish-fulfilment.
V. The Material and Sources of Dreams
Having realized, as a result of analysing the
dream of Irma's injection, that the drearri was
the fulfilment of a wish, we were immediately
interested to ascertain whether we had thereby
discovered a general characteristic of dreams,
and for the time being we put aside every other
scientific problem which, may have, suggested
itself in the course of the interpretation; Now
that we have reached the goal on this one path,
we may turn back and select a hewpoint of de
parture for exploring dream-problems, even
though we may for a time lose sight of the
theme of wish-fulfilment, which has still to be
further considered.
Now that we are able, by applying our proc
ess of interpretation, to detect a latent dreamcontent whose significance far surpasses that
of the manifest dream-eorttent, we are natur
ally impelled to return
to
the individual
dream-problems, in order to gee whether the
riddles and
contradictions which seemed to
elude us when we had only the manifest con
tent to work upon may not now be satisfac
torily solved.
The opinions of previous writers on the re
lation of dreams to waking life, and1 the origin
of the material of dreams, have not been given
here. We may recall howeverthree peculiari
ties of the memory in dreams, which have been
often noted, but never explained:
'
1. That the dream clearly prefers the im
pressions of the last few days (Robert,
Strumpell, Hildebrandt; also Weed-Half
lam);
1See p. 87 above.
- -

[210a]
206
Sigmund Freud
2.
That it makes a selection in accordance
with principles other than those govern
ing our wakingmemory,in that it recalls
not essential and important, but subor
dinate and disregarded things;
3. That it has at its disposal the earliest
impressions of our childhood, and brings
to light details from this period of life,
which, again, seem trivial to us, and
which in waking life were believed to
have been 4ong since.forgotten.1
These peculiarities in the dream's choice of
material have, of course, been observed by
previous writers in the manifest dream content.
A. Recent and Indifferent Impressions
in the Dream
If I now consult my own experience with re
gard to the origin of the elements appearing in
the dream-content, I must in the first place
express the opinion that in every dream we
may find some reference to the experiences of
the preceding day. Whatever dream I,turn to,
whether my own or somone else's, this experi
ence is always confirmed. Knowing this, I may
perhaps begin the work of interpretation by
looking for the experience of the preceding day
which has stimulated the dream; in many cases
this is indeed the quickest way. With the two
dreams which I subjected to a close-analysis in
the last chapter (the dreams of Irma's injec
tion, and of the uncle with the yellow beard)
the reference to the preceding day is so evident
that it needs no further elucidation. But in
order to show how constantly this reference
may be demonstrated, I shall examine a por
tion of my own dream-chronicle. I shall relate
only so much of the dreams as is necessary for
the detection of the dream-source in question.
1. I pay a call at a house to which I gain
admittance only with difficulty, etc., and mean
while I am keeping a woman waiting for me.
Source: A conversation during the evening
with a female relative to the effect that she
would have to wait for a remittance for which
she had asked, until . . . etc.
2. I have written a monograph on a species
(uncertain) of plant.
Source: In the morning I had seen in a book
seller's window a monograph on the genus
Cyclamen.
1 It is evident that Robert's idea—that the dream is
intended to rid our memory of the useless impressions
which it. has received during the day—is.no longer
tenable if indifferent memories of our childhood ap
pear in our dreams with some degree of frequency. We
should be obliged to conclude that our dreams generally
perform their prescribed task very inadequately.

[210b]
3. I see two women in the street, mother and
ddugfiter, the latter being a patient.
Source: A female patient who is under treat
ment had told me in the evening what difficul
ties her mother puts in the way of her continu
ing the treatment.
4. At S and R's bookshop I subscribe to a
periodical which costs 20 florins annually.
Source:
During the day my wife has re
minded me that I still owe her 20 florins of her
weekly: allowance.
5. 7 receive a communication from the Sor
cial Democratic Committee, in which I am ad
dressed as a member.
Source: I have received simultaneous com
munications from the Liberal Committee on
Elections and from the president of the Hu
manitarian Society, of which latter I am ac
tually a member.
6. A man on a steep rock rising from the
sea, in the manner of Bocklin.
Source: Dreyfus on Devil's Island; also news
from my relatives in England, etc.
The question might be raised, whether a
dream invariably refers to the events of the
preceding day only, or whether the reference
may be extended to include impressions.from
a longer period of time in the immediate past.
This question is probably not of the first in>
portance, but.I am inclined to decide in favour
of the exclusive priority of the day before the
dream (the dream-day). Whenever I thought I
had found a case where an impression two or
three days old was the source of the dream, I
was able to convince myself after careful in?
vestigation that this impression had been re
membered the day before; that is, that a de
monstrable reproduction on the day before
had been interpolated between the day of the
event and the time of the dream;,and further,
I was
able to
point to the recent occasion
which might have;given rise to the recollectiorj
of the older impression. On the other hand, I
was unable to convince myself that a regulaf
interval of biological significance (H. Swoboda
gives the first interval of this kind as eighteen
hours) elapses between the dream-exciting dayv
time impression and
its recurrence
in
the
dream.
I believe, therefore, that for every dream a
dream-stimulus may be found among those
experiences "on which one has not yet slept."
Havelock Ellis, who has likewise given at
tention to this problem, states that he has not
been able to find any such periodicity of re
production in his dreams, although he has

[211a]
looked for it. He relates a dream in which he
found himself in Spain; he wanted to travel to
a place called Daraus, Varaus, or Zaraus. On
awaking he was unable to recall any such placenames, and thought no more of the matter. A
few months later he actually found the name
Zaraus;
it was that of a railway-station be
tween San Sebastian and Bilbao, through which
he had passed in the train eight months (250
days) before the date of the dream.
Thus the impressions of the immediate past
(with the exception of the day before the night
of the dream) stand
in the same, relation to
the dream-content as those of periods indefi
nitely remote. The dream may select its ma
terial from any period of life, provided only
that a chain of thought leads :back from the
experiences of the day of the dream (the recent impressions) of that earlier period.
But why this preference for recent impres
sions? We shall arrive at some conjectures on
this point if we subject one of the dreams al
ready mentioned to a more precise analysis.
I select the
Dream of the Botanical Monograph
I have written a monograph on a certainplant:
The book lies before me; I am just turning
overa folded coloured plate.A dried specimen
of the plant, as though from a herbarium, is
bound up with every copy.
Analysis
In the morning I saw in a bookseller's window
a volume entitled The Genus Cyclamen, appar
ently a monograph on this plant.
The cyclamen is my wife's favorite flower.
I reproach myself for remembering so seldom
to bring her flowers, as she would like me to
do. In connection with the theme of giving her
flowers, I am reminded of a story which I re
cently told some friends of mine in proof of
my assertion that we often forget in obedience
to a purpose of the unconscious, and that for
getfulness always enables us to form a deduc
tion about thejsecret disposition of the fdrgetful person. A young woman who has been
accustomed to receive a bouquet of
flowers
from her husband on her birthday misses this
token ofaffection on one of her birthdays, and
bursts into tears. The husband comes in, and
cannot ^understand why she is crying until she
tells Turn: "Today is my birthday." He claps
his hand' to his forehead, and exclaims: "Oh,
forgive me, I had completely forgotten it!"
and proposes to go out immediately in order to

[211b]
The Interpretation of Dreams
2©7
get her flowers. But she refuses to be consoled;
for she sees in her husband's forgetfulness a
proof that she no longer plays the same part in
his thoughts as she formerly did. This Frau L
met my wife two days ago, told her that she
was feeling well, and asked after me. Some
years ago she was a patient of mine.
Supplementary facts:
I did once actually
write something like a monograph on a plant,
namely, an essay on the coca plant, which at
tracted the attention of K. Koller to the anaes
thetic properties of cocaine. I had hinted that
the alkaloid might be.employed as an anaes
thetic, but I was not thorough enough to pur
sue the matter farther. It occurs to me, too,
that on the morning of the day following-the
dream (for the interpretation of which I. did:
not find time until the evening) I had thought
of cocaine in a kind of day-dream. If I were
ever afflicted with glaucoma, I would go to
Berlin, and there undergo an operation, incog
nito, in the house of my Berlin friend, at the
hands of a surgeon whomhe would recommend.
The surgeon,who wouldnot know the name of
his patient, would boast, as usual, how easy
these operations had become since the intro
duction of cocaine; and I should not betray
the fact that I myself had a share in this dis
covery. With this- phantasy were connected
thoughts of how awkward it really is for a
physician to claim the professional services of
a colleague. I should be able to pay the Berlin
eye specialist, who did not know me, like any
one else. Only after recalling this day-dream
do I realize that there is concealed behind it
the memory of a definite event. Shortly after
Keller's discovery, my father contracted glau
coma; he was operated on by my friend Dr.
Koenigstein, the eye specialist. Dr. Koller was
in charge of the cocaine anaesthetization, and
he made the remark that on this occasion all
the three persons who had been responsible
for
the
introduction
of
cocaine
had
been
brought together.
My thoughts now pass on to the time when
I was last reminded of the history of cocaine.
This was a few days earlier, when I received a
Festschrift, a publication in which grateful pu
pils had commemorated the jubilee of their
teacher and laboratory director. Among the
titles to fame of persons connected with the
laboratory I found a note to the effect that tlie
discovery of the anaesthetic properties of cbcairie had been due to K. Koller. Now I sud
denly oecome aware that the dream is con
nected
with an experience of the previous

[212a]
268
Sigmund Freud
eveningi I had just accompanied; Br^ Koenig^-
stein to his home, and had entered into a dis-:
cussion of a subject which excites me greatly
whenever it is mentioned. While I was talking
with him in the entrance-hall Professor Gartner
and his young wife came up. I could not re
frain
from
congratulating them both upon
their blooming appearance. Now Professor
Gartner is one of the authors of the Festschrift
of which I have just spoken, and he may well
have reminded me of it. And Frau L, of whose
birthday disappointment I spoke a little way
back, had been mentioned, though of course in
another connection, in my conversation with Dr.
Koenigstein.
.1I shall now try to elucidate the other deter
minants of the dream-content. A dried speci
men of the plant accompanies the monograph,
as though it were a herbarium. And herbarium
reminds me of the Gymnasium. The director of
our Gymnasium once called the pupils of the
upper classes together, in order, that they might
examine and clean the, Gymnasium herbarium;
Small insects had been found—book-worms.
The director seemed to have little confidence
in my ability to assist, for he entrusted me
with only a few of the pages. J know to this
day that there were erueifers on them. My
interest in botany was never very great. At
my preliminary examination in botany I was
required.to identify a crucifer,:and failed to
recognize it; had not my theoretical knowledge
come to my aid, I should have fared badly jn^
deed. Crucifers suggest composites. The arti
choke is really a composite, and in actual fact
one which I might call my favourite flower.
My wife, more thoughtful than I, often brings
this favourite flower of .mine home from the
market.
I see the monograph which I have written
lying before me. Here again there is an associ
ation. My friend wrote to me yesterday from
Berlin: "I am thinking,a great deal about your
dream-book. I see it lying before me, com
pleted,: and I turn the pages." How, I envied
hiim this power of; vision! If\ only I could see
it lying before me, akeady.completed!
The folded coloured .plate. When I was a
medical student I suffered a sort of craze for
studying monographs exclusively. In spite of
my hmited means, I subscribed to a number, of
the medical periodicals, whose coloured plates.
afforded me much:delight.,£ .was- rather proud
of Tthis incliriation to thoroughness. When; I
subsequently began 4:o; publish books.myself,
I had to draw th,eplates for my own treatises,

[212b]
and I remember one of .them turned out rso
badly that a well-meaning colleague ridiculed
me for it. With this is^associated, I do not; ex
actly know how, a very early memory of; my
childhood. My father, by the way of a jest,
once gave my elder sister and myself a book
containing coloured plates (the book was a
narrative'of a journey through Persia) in order
that we might destroy it. From an educational
point of view this was hardly to be commended^
I was at the: time five years old,, and my sister
less than three, and the picture of us two chil
dren blissfully tearing the book to pieces (I
should add,: like an artichoke, leaf by leaf),
is almost the only one from this period of my
life which has remained vivid ia my memory.
When T afterwards became a student, I devel
oped a conspicuous fondness for collecting and
possessing books (an analogy to the inclina
tion for studying from monographs, a hobby
alluded' to in my dream-thoughts, in connection
with cyclamen and artichoke). I
became••&
book-worm (cf. herbarium). Ever since.I have
been engaged in introspection I have always
traced this earliest passion of my life to this
impression of my childhood: or rather, I have
recognized in this childish scene a screen or
concealing memory for my subsequent bibliophilia.1And of course I learned at an early age
that our passions often become our misforr
tunes. When I was seventeen, j tran up a very
considerable account at the bookseller's, with
no means with which to settle it, and my father
would hardly accept it as. an excuse that my;
passion was at least a respectable one.. But the
mention of this experience of my youth .brings,
me back,• to my conversation with rmy friend
Dr.; Koenigstein on the evening preceding the
dream; for one of the themes of this conver
sation was the same old reproach—that I am
much too absorbed in my hobbies.
For reasons which are not relevant here I
shall not continue the interpretation of this;
dream, but will merely indicate the path which
leads tO; it. In the course of the interpretation
I wa| reminded of my conversation with Pr.
Koenigstein, and, indeed, of more than one por*
tion
of
it.
When
I
consider
the
subjects
touched upon in this conversation, the.meaning
of the dream immediately becomes clear to me.
AH the trains of thought which have been
started^^my; owninclinations, and those of my
wife, tl^e cocaine^ the awkwardness of-securing
medical treatment from one's own colleagueSji
1 Cf. The Psycho-pathology'of Everyday Lifel

[213a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
£99
my preference for monographical studies; and
my neglect of certain subjects, such as botany
—all these are continued in and lead up to
one branch or another of this widely-ramified
conversation. The dream once more assumes
the character of a justification, of a plea for
my rights (like the dream of Irma's injection,
the first to be analysed); it even continues the
theme which that dream introduced, and dis
cusses it in association with the new subjectmatter which: has been added in the interval
between the two dreams. Even the dream's
apparently indifferent form of expression at
once acquires a meaning; Now it means: "I am
indeed the man who has written that valuable
and successful treatise (on cocaine)," just as
previously I declared in self-justification; "I
am after all a thorough and industrious stu
dent"; and in both instances I find the mean
ing: "I can allow myself this."-But I may
dispense with the further interpretation of.the
dream, because my, only purpose in: recording
it was to examine the relation of the dreamr
content to the experience of the previous.day
which arouses it. As long as I know only the
manifest content of this dream, only one re
lation to any impression of the day.is obvious;
but =after I have completed the interpretation,
a second source of the dream becomes appar
ent in another experience of the same dayi The
first of these impressions to which the dream
refers is an indifferent one, a subordinate cir
cumstance. I see: a book in a; shop window
whose title holds me for a moment, but whose
contents would hardly interest me. The second
experiencewas of great psychic value; I talked
earnestly with my friend, the eye specialist,
for about an hour; I made allusions in this
conversation which must have ruffled the feel
ings of both of us, and which in me awakened
memories in connection with which I was aware
of a great variety of inner stimuli; Further,
this conversation was broken off unfinished,
because some acquaintances joined us. What,
now, is the relation of these two impressions of
the day to one another, and to the dream
which followed during the night?
In the manifest dream-content I find merely
an allusion to the indifferent impression, and
I am thus able to reaffirm that the dream pre
fers to take up into its content experiences of
a non-essential character. In the dream-inter
pretation, on the
contrary, everything con
verges
upon
the
important
and
justifiably
disturbing event. If I judge the sense of the
dream in the only correct way, according to
the latent content which is brought to light
in the analysis^ I find that I have unwittingly
lighted upon a new and important discovery.
I see that the puzzling theory that the dream
deals only with the worthless odds arid ends
of
the day's experiences has no justification;
I am also compelled to contradict the asser
tion that; the psychic' life of the, waking- state
is not continued in the dream, and that henpe,
the dream wastes our psychic energy on trivial
material; The Very opposite-is:true; what has
claimed our attention during the day dominates
our dream-thoughts also,; and we take pains to
dream only, in connectionyyvith such matters as
have given us food for thought during the day>
Perhaps the most immediate explanation of
the fact that I dream of the indifferent impres
sion of the day, while the impression which has
with good reason excited me causes me to
dream, is that here again we are dealing with
the phenomenon of dream-distortion, which we
have referred to as a psychic force playing the
part of a censorship. The recollection of the
monograph on the, genus cyclamen is utilized
as•; though, it were an allusion to the conver
sation with my friend, just as the mention of
my patient's" friend in the dream of the de
ferred supper is represented by the allusion
smoked.salmon. The only question is: by what
intermediate links can] the impressionr of the
monograph come to assume the relation of air
Jusionto the conversation with the eye special
ist, since such a relation is not at first percep
tible?. In the example of the deferred supper,
the relation is evident at the outset; smoked
salmon, as the favourite dish of the patient's
friend, belongs to the circle of ideas which the
friend's personality would naturally evoke in
the mind of the dreamer. In our new example
we are dealing with two entirely separate im
pressions, which at first glance seem to have
nothing in common, except indeed that they
occur on the same day. The monograph at
tracts my attention in the morning: in the
evening I take part in the conversation. The
answer furnished by the analysis is as follows?
Such relations between the two impressions as
do not exist from
the first are
established
subsequently between the idea-content of the
one impression and the idea-content of the
other. I have already picked out the intermedi
ate links emphasized in the course of writing
the analysis. Only under some outside influence,
perhaps the recollection of the flowers missed
by Frau L, would the idea of the monograph
on the cyclamen have attached itself to the

[214a]
210
Sigmtjnd Freud
idea that the cyclamen is my wife's favourite
flower. I do not believe that these inconspicuous
thoughts would have sufficed to evoke a dream.
There needs no ghost, my lord, come
from the grave
To tell us this,
as we read in Hamlet; But behold! in the an
alysis I am reminded that the name of the man
who, interrupted our conversation was Gartner
(gardener), and that I thought his wife looked
blooming; indeed, now I evert remember that
one of my female patients, who bears the pretty
name of Flora, was fof a time the main subject
of our conversation; It must have happened
that by means of these intermediate links from
the sphere of botanical ideas the association
was effected between the two events of the
day, the indifferent one and the stimulating
one. Other relations were then established, that
of cocaine for example, which can with perfect
appropriateness form a link between the per
son of Dr. Koenigstein and the botanical mon
ograph which I have written, and thus secure
the fusion of the two circles of ideas, so that
now a portion of the first experience may be
used as an allusion to the second.
I am prepared to find this explanation at
tacked as either arbitrary or artificial. What
would have happenedif Professor Gartner and
his blooming "wife had not appeared, and if the
patient who was under discussion had been
called, not Flora, but Anna? And yet the an
swer is not hard to find.
If these thoughtrelations had not been available, others would
probably have been
selected. It is easy to
establish relations of this sort, as the jocular
questions
arid
conundrums
with
which
we
amuse ourselves suffice to show. The range of
wit is unlimited. To go a step farther: if no
sufficiently fertile associations between the two
impressions of the day could have been estab
lished, the dream would simply have followed a
different course;
another of
the
indifferent
impressions of the day, such as come to us in
multitudes and are forgotten, would have taken
the place of the
monograph in the
dream,
would have formed an association with the
content of the conversation, and would have
represented this in the dream. Since it was
the impression of the monograph and no other
that was fated to perform this function, this
impression was probably that most suitable for
the purpose. One need not, like Lessing's Hanschen Schlau, be astonished that "only the rich
people of the world possess the most money."

[214b]
..." Still the psychological process by which, ae?
cording to our exposition, the indifferent ex*
perience substitutes itself for the psychologi
cally important one seems to us odd and open
to question. In a later chapter we shall under
take the task of making the peculiarities of
this seemingly incorrect operation more intel
ligible. Here we are concerned*only with the
result of this process, which we were compelled
to accept by constantly recurring experiences
in the analysis of dreams. In.this process it is
as though, in the course of the intermediate
steps, a displacement occurs—let us say, of
the psychic accent—-until ideas of feeble poten
tial, by taking over the
charge *from ideas
which have a stronger initial potential, reach a
degree of intensity which enables them to force
their way into consciousness. Such displace^
ments do not in the least surprise us when it
is a question of the transference of affective
magnitudes or of motor activities. That the
lonely spinster transfers her affection to ani
mals, that the bachelor becomes a passionate
collector, that the soldier defends a scrap of
coloured
cloth—his flag—with his life-blood,
that in a love-affair a clasp of the hands a
moment longer than usual evokes a sensation
of bliss, or that in Othello a lost handkerchief
Causes an outburst of rage—all these are ex
amples of psychic displacements which to us
seem incontestable. But if, by the same means,
and in accordance with the same fundamental
principles, a decision is made as to what is
to reach our consciousness and what is to be
withheld from it—that is to say, what we are
to think—this gives us the impression of mor*
bidity, and if it occurs in waking life we call
it an error of thought. We may here anticipate
the result of a discussion which will be under
taken later, namely, that the psychic process
which we have recognized in dream-displace
ment proves to be not a morbidly deranged
process, but one merely differing from
the
normal, one of a more primary nature.
Thus we interpret the •fact that the dreamcontent takes up remnants of trivial experiences
as a manifestation of dream-distortion (by
displacement), and
we thereupon remember
that we have recognized this dream-distortion
as the work of a censorship operating between
the two psychic instances. We may therefore
expect
that
dream-analysis
will
constantly
show us the real and psychically significant
source of the dream in the events of the day,
the memory of which has transferred its ac
centuation to some indifferent memory. This

[215a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
conception is in complete opposition to Rob
ert's theory, which consequently has no further
value for us. The fact which Robert was trying
to explain simply does not exist; its assump-:
tion is based on a misunderstanding, on a fail
ure to substitute the real meaning of the dream
for its apparent meaning. A further objection
to Robert's doctrine is as follows: If the task
of the dream were really to rid our memory,
by means of a special psychic activity, of the
slag of the day's recollections, our sleep would
perforce be more troubled, engaged in more
strenuous work, than we can suppose it to be,
judging by our waking thoughts. For the num
ber of the indifferent impressions of the day
against which we should have to protect pur
memory is obviously immeasurably large; the
whole night would not be long enough to dis
pose of them all. It is far more probable that
the forgetting of the indifferent: impressions
takes place without any active interference on
the part of our psychic powers.
Still, something cautions us against taking
leave of Robert's theory without further con
sideration. We have left unexplained the fact
that one of the indifferent impressions of the
day—indeed, even of the previous day—con
stantly makes a
contribution to the dreamcontent. The relations between this impression
and
the
real
source
of
the
dream
in
the
unconscious do not always exist from the out
set; as.we have seen, they are established
subsequently, while the dream is actually at
work, as though to serve the purpose of the
intended displacement. Something, therefore,
must necessitate the opening up of connections
in the direction of the recent but indifferent
impression; this impression must possess some
quality that gives it a special fitness. Otherwise
it would be just as easy for the dream-thoughts
to shift their accentuation to some inessential
component of their own sphere of ideas.
Experiences such as the following show us
the way to
an explanation: If the day has
brought us two or more experiences Which are
worthy to evoke a dream, the dream will blend
the allusion of both into a single whole: it
obeys a compulsion to make them into a single
whole. For example: One summer afternoon I
entered a railway carriage in which I. found
two acquaintances, of mine who were unknown
to one another. One of them was an influential
colleague, the other a member of a distin
guished family which I had been attending in
my professional capacity. I introduced the two
gentlemen to each other; but during the long

[215b]
211
journey they conversed with each other through
me, so that I had to discuss this or that topic
now with one, now.with the other. I.asked my
colleague to recommend a mutual acquaintance
who had just begun to practise as a physician.
He replied that he was convinced of the young
man's ability, but that his undistinguished ap
pearance would make it difficult for him to
obtain patients in the upper ranks of society.
To this I rejoined: "That is precisely why he
needs recommendation." A little later, turning
to my pther fellow-traveller, I inquired after
the health of his aunt—the mother of one of
my patients—who was at this time prostrated
by a serious illness. On the night following this
journey I dreamt that the young friend whom
I had asked one of my companions to recom
mend was in a fashionable drawing-room, and
with all the bearing of a man of the world was
making—before a distinguished company, in
which I recognized all the rich and aristocratic
persons of my acquaintance—a funeral oration
over the old lady (who in my dream had al
ready died) who was the aunt of my second
fellow-traveller. (I confess frankly that I had
not been on good terms with this lady.) Thus
my dream had once more found the connection
between the two impressions of the day, and
by means of the two had constructed a unified
situation.
•In view of many similar experiences, I am
persuaded to advance the proposition that a
dream works under a kind of compulsion which
forces it to combine, into a unified whole all
the sources of dream-stimulation which are
offered to it.1 In a subsequent chapter (on the
function of dreams) we shall consider this im
pulse of combination as part of the process
of
condensation,
another
primary
psychic
process.
I shall now consider the question whether
the dream-exciting source to which our analy
sis leads us must always be a recent (and sig
nificant) event, or whether a subjective experi
ence—that is to say, the recollection of
a
psychologically significant event, a train of
thought—may assume the role of a dreamstimulus. The very definite answer, derived
from numerous analyses, is as follows: The
stimulus of the dream may be a subjective
transaction, which has been made recent, as it
were, by the mental activity of the day.
1 The tendency of the dream at work to blend every
thing present of interest into a single transaction has
already been noticed by several.authors, lor instance,
by Delage and Delbceuf.

[216a]
212
And this is perhaps the best time to sum-,
marize in schematic form the different condi
tions
under
which
the
dream-sources
are
operative.
The source of a dream may be:
(a) A recent and psychologically significant
event which is directly represented in the
dream.1
(b) Several recent and significant events,
which are combined by the dream in a single
whole.2
(c) Oneormore recentandsignificant' events,
which are represented in the dream-content by
allusion
to
a
contemporary but
indifferent
2vent.8
(d) A
subjectively significant experience
(recollection, train of thought), which is con
stantly represented in the dream by allusion to
a recent but indifferent impression.*
As may be seen, in dream-interpretation the
condition is always fulfilled that one compo
nent of the dream-content repeats a recent
impression of the day of the dream. The com
ponent which is destined to be represented in
the dream may either belong to the same circle
of ideas as the dream-stimulus itself (as an
essential or even an inessential 'element of the
same), or it may originate in the neighbour
hood of an indifferent impression, which has
been brought by more or less abundant associ
ations
into relation with the sphere of the
dream-stimulus. The apparent multiplicity of
these conditions results merely from the alter
native, that 3l displacement has or has not oc
curred, and it may here be noted that this
alternative enables us to explain the contrasts
of the dream quite as readily as the medical
theory of the dream
explains the series of
states from the partial to the complete waking
of the brain cells.
In considering this series of sources we note
further that the psychologically significant but
not recent element (a train of thought, a recol
lection) may be replaced for the purposes of
dream-formation by a recent but psycholog
ically indifferent
element, provided the two
following
conditions
are
fulfilled:
(i)
the
dream-content
preserves
a
connection with
things recently experienced;
(2) the dreamstimulus is still a psychologically significant
1The'dream of Irma's injection; the dream of*the
friend who is my uncle.
2 The dream of the funeral oration delivered by the
young physician.
8 The dream of the botanical monograph.
4The dreams of my patients during analysis are
mostly of this kind.

[216b]
event. In one single case (a) both these con^
ditions are fulfilled by the same impression.
If we now consider that these same indifferent
impressions, which are utilized for the dream
as long as they are recent, lose this qualifica
tion as soon as they are a day (or at most
several days) older, we are obliged to assume
that the very freshness of an impression gives
it a certain psychological value for dreamformation, somewhat equivalent to the value
of emotionally accentuated memories or trains
of thought. Later on, in the light of certain
psychological considerations, we shall be able
to divine the explanation of this importance
of recent impressions in dream formation.5
Incidentally our attention is here called to
the fact that at night, and unnoticed by our
consciousness, important changes may occur in
the material comprised by our ideas and mem
ories. The injunction that before making a final
decision in any matter one should sleep on it
for a night is obviously fully justified. But at
this point we find that we have passed from
the psychology of dreaming to the psychology
of sleep, a step which there will often be
occasion to take.
At this point there arises an objection which
threatens to invalidate the conclusions at which
we have just arrived. If indifferent impressions
can find their way into the dream only so long
as they are of recent origin, how does it happen
that in the dream-content we
find elements
also from earlier periods of our lives, which;
at the time when they were still recent, pos
sessed, as Striimpell puts it, no psychic valueand which, therefore, ought to have been for
gotten long ago; elements, that is, which are
neither fresh nor psychologically significant?
This objection can be disposed of completely
if we have recourse to the results of the psycho
analysis of neurotics. The solution is as follows:
The
process of shifting and
rearrangement
which replaces material of psychic significance
by material which is indifferent (whether one
ifc dreaming or thinking)
has already taken
place in these earlier periods of life, and has
since become fixed in the memory. Those ele
ments which were originally indifferent are in
fact no longer so, since they have acquired the
value of psychologically significant material.
That which has actually remained indifferent
can never be reproduced in the dream.
From the
foregoing exposition the reader
may rightly conclude that I assert that there
are no indifferent dream-stimuli, and therefore
6 Cf. Chap. VII on "transference."

[217a]
The Inteepjretation: of Dreams
no guileless dreams. This I absolutely and un
conditionally believe to be the case, apart from
the dreams-, of children, and perhaps the brief
dream-treactions to nocturnal sensations. Apart
.from these exceptions, whatever one dreams is
jeither plainly recognizable as being psychically
significant, or it is distorted and can be judged
correctly only after complete interpretation,
when it proves,/after alh, toibei of; psychic!:sig>«
riificance. The dream never;conteras.itselfhvith
trifles; we do •not allow-rsleep tor be disturbed
by trivialities.'1 Breams;;which are apparently
guileless turn out to be the reverse of innocent,
if one takes the trouble to interpret them; If
I may be permitted the expression, they all
show "the: mark of the beast" Since this is an
other point oh which I may expect contradic
tion^ and since I am glad of an opportunity to
show dream-distortion at work, I ^shallvhere
subject to analysis a number of guileless dreams
from:my collection.
' •
-
'
r^
An intelligent and refined young woman, Who
in real life is distinctly reserved, one of those
people of whom one says that "still waters run
deep," relates tne following dream::"I dreamt
that I arrived at the market too late, and could
get nothing from either the butcher or ihe
greengrocer woman" Surely a guileless dream,
but as it has not the appearance of a real dream
I induce her to relate it in detail. Her report
then runs as follows VShe goes to the market
with her cook, who carries the basket. The
butcher tells her, after she has asked him for
something: "That is no longer to be obtained"
and wants to give her something-else, with the
remark: "That is good, too." She refuses, and
goes to the greengrocerwoman. The latter tries
to sell her a peculiar vegetable, which is bound
up in bundles, aridis black in colour. She says:
"I don't'know-that, I won't take it"- '
;;( ;
The connection of the dream with the pre
ceding day is simple enough. She had really
gone1 to the market too late, and had been un
able to buy anything; The meatshop was' al
ready closed, comes into5 one's mind as a de
scription of the experience.''lBut wait, is not
that ja very vulgar phrase which—or rather,
tne opposite of which---dehdtes a certain neg-
!vaHaVelock Ellis, a kindly critic of The_Interpreta
tion
of
Dreams,
writes
in
The
World
of
Dreams
(p: 169): "From this point on, not many of us will
beriable to follow FL" But Mr. Ellis has not undertaken'
any analyses of dreams, and wiU not ..believe how un
justifiable it is to juiclge them by the manifest dreamcontent.
-
:--i''
•'•'-
•-'•:•'
:""

[217b]
2T%
leet •.with -•. regard
to. man's
clothing?
The
idreamer has not used these words; she has
perhaps avoided them; but let us look for the
interpretation of the details contained in the
dream.
;r When in a dream something has. the-chafeacter tof a spoken utterancer—that :-is, •iwfieii; it
is said'or heard, not merely thought^and the
distinction can usually be made;with certainty
%^then it Originates in the oitterances of Waldng
•life;uwhich i have, of course, been treated as
raw>material, dismembered;.aridslightly altered,
and above all removed from their context.2 In
the work of interpretation we may take such
utterances as our starting-point. Where^ then,
does the butcher's statement, That is no longer
to be obtained? come from? From myself;, I
had explained to her some days previously ffthat
the oldest experiences of childhood are no long
er to be obtained as such, but will be replaced
in the;analysis 'by transferences and dreams*"
Thus, I am the butcher, and she refuses to ac
cept these transferences to the present of: old
ways jof thinking and feeling. Where does her
dream utterance, J don't know-that, I won't
take it, come from? For the purposes of the
analysis this has to be dissected / don't know
that she herself had •said to her cook, with
whom she had a dispute on the previous day,
but she had then added: Behave yourself de
cently.Mere a displacement is palpable; of the
two sentences which she spoke to her cook,
she included the insignificant onein her dream;
but the suppressed sentence, Behave yourself
decently! alone fits in with the rest of the
dream-content. Ope might use the words to a
man who was making indecent .overtures, and
had neglected "to close his meat-shop.'' That
we have really hit upon the trail of the interpre
tation is proved by its agreement with the al
lusions made by the incident with the green
grocer woman; A vegetable which is sold tied
up in bundles (a longish vegetable, as she sub
sequently adds),.and is,also black': what can
this be but a dream-combination of asparagus
and black radish? I need not interpret aspara
gus to the initiated; and the ptier vegetable,
too (think of the exclamation: "Blacky, save
yourself!"), seems to.me to point to the sex?
ual theme at which we guessed in the beginning,
when we wanted to replace; the\ storyy6f the
dreamby "the meat-shopis closed." We aire not
2 Cf. .what is said of speech in dreams in the chapter
on "The Dream-Work." Only one of the writers on the
subject—Delboeuf—seems to have recognized the ori
gin of the speeches heard in
dreams;
he
compares
them with cliches.

[218a]
214
Sigmund Freud^
here concerned with the full meaning of the
dreamy so much is certain, that it is full of
meaning and by no means guileless.1
n
Another guileless dream of the same patient,
which in,some respects is a pendant to the
above* Ret husband asks her:."Oughtn't we to
have the piano 4uned?" She replies: "It's not
worth while, the hammers would have to be
rebuffed as well." Again we havethe reproduc
tion of an actual event of the preceding day.
Her husband had asked her such a question,
and she had answered it in such words. But
what is the meaning of her dreaming it? She
says of the piano that it is a disgustingold box
which has a bad tone; it belonged to her hus
band before they were married,2 etc., but the
key to the true solution lies in the phrase: It
isn't worth while. This has its origin in a call
paid yesterday to a woman friend. She was
asked to take off her coat, but declined, say
ing: "Thanks, it isn't worth while, I must go
in a moment." At this point I recall that yes
terday, during the analysis, she suddenly took
hold of her coat, of which a button had come
undone. It was as though she meant to say:
"Please don't look in, it isn't worth while."
Thus box becomes chest, and the interpretation
of the dream leads to the years when she was
growing out of her childhood, when she began
to be dissatisfied with her figure. It leads us
back, indeed, to earlier periods, if we take into
consideration the disgusting and the bad tone,
and remember how often in allusions and in
dreams the two small hemispheres of the fe
male body take the place-t-as a substitute and
an antithesis—of the large ones.
m
I will interrupt the analysis of this dreamer
in order to insert a short, innocent dream which
1 For the curious, I may remark that behind the
dream there is hidden a phantasy of indecent, sexually
provokfrtg conduct on my part, and of repulsion on the
part of the lady. If this interpretation should seem
preposterous, I would remind the reader of the numer
ous cases in which physicians have been made the ob
ject of such charges by hysterical women, with whom
the same phantasy has not appeared in
a distorted
form as a dream, but has bedome undisguisedly con
scious
and delusional. With this dream the patient
began her psycho-analytical treatment. It was only la
ter that I learned that with this dream she repeated the
initial trauma in which her neurosis originated, and
since then I have noticed the same behaviour in other
persons who in their childhood were victims of sexu
al attacks, and now, as it were, wish in their dreams
for them to be repeated.;
a A substitution by the opposite, as will be clear after
analysis.

[218b]
was dreamed by a young man. He dreamt that
he was putting on his winter overcoat again;
this was terrible. The occasion for this dream
is apparently the sudden advent of cold wea
ther; On more careful examination we note that
the two brief fragments of the dream do not
fit together very well, for what could be terjible about wearing a thick or heavy coat in
cold weather? Unfortunately for the inriocency
of this dreamy the first association, under anal
ysis, yields the recollection that yesterday a
lady had confidentially confessed to him that
her last child owed its existence to the split
ting of a condom.
He now reconstructs his
thoughts in accordance with this suggestion:
A thin condom is dangerous, a thick one is bad.
The condom is a "pullover" (Ueberzieher=
literally pullover), for it is pulled over some
thing: and Ueberzieher is the German term for
a light overcoat. An experience like that re
lated by the lady would indeed be terrible for
an unmarried man.
We will now return to our other innocent
dreamer.
rv
She puts a candle into a candlestick; but the
candle is broken, so that it does not stand up.
The girls at schoolsay she is clumsy; but she
replies that it is not her fault.
Here, too, there is an actual occasion for
the dream; the day before she had actually
put a candle into a candlestick; but this one
was not broken. An obvious symbolism has here
been employed. The candle is an object which
excites the female genitals; its being broken,
so that it does not stand upright, signifies im
potence on the man's part (it is not her fault).
But does this young woman, carefully brought
up, and a stranger to all obscenity, know of such
an application of the candle? By chance she is
able to tell how she came by this information.
.While paddling a canoe on the Rhine, a boat
passed her which contained somestudents, who
were singing rapturously,
or .rather yelling:
"When the Queen of Sweden, behind closed
shutters, withthe candies^ ofApollo. ..."
She does- not hear or .else understand the
last word. Her husband was asked to give her,
the required explanation. These verses are then
replaced in the dream-content by the innocent
recollectionof a task whichshe onceperformed
clumsily;.. at
her boarding-school, because of
the closed shutters. The connection between the
theme of masturbation and that of iinpotence is
clear enough. Apollo in the latent dream-con-

[219a]
The Interpretation ot Dreams
**S
tent connects this dream with an earlier one
in which the virgin Pallas figured. All this is
obviously not innocent.
Lest it may seem too easy a matter to draw
conclusions from dreams concerning the dream
er's real circumstances, I add another dream
originating with the same person, which once
moire appears innocent. "I dreamt of doing
something," she relates, "which I actually did
during the day, that is to say, I filled a little
trunk so full of books that I had difficulty in
closing it. My dream was just like the actual
occurrence." Here the dreamer herself empha
sizes the correspondence between the dream
and the reality. All such criticisms of the
dream, and comments on the dream, although
they have found a place in the waking thoughts,
properly belong to the latent dream-content, as
further examples will confirm. We are told,
then, that what the dream relates has actually
occurred during the day. It would take us too
far afield to show how we arrive at the idea
of making use of the English language to help
us in the interpretation of this dream. Suffice
it to say that it is again a question of a little
box (cf. p. 202, the dream of the dead child
hi the box) which has been filled so full that
nothing can go into it.
In all these "innocent" dreams the sexual
factor as the motive of the censorship is very
prominent. But this is a subject of primary
significance, which we must consider later.
B. Infantile Experiences as the
Source of Dreams
As the third of the peculiarities of the dreamcontent, we have adduced the fact, in agree
ment with all
other writers on the subject
(excepting Robert), that impressions from our
childhood may appear in dreams, which do not
seem to be at the disposal of the waking mem
ory. It is, of course, difficult to decide how
seldom or how frequently this occurs, because
after waking the origin of the respective ele
ments of the dream is not recognized. The
proof that we are dealing with impressions of
our childhood must thus be adduced objec
tively, and only in rare instances do the con
ditions favour such proof. The story is told
by A. Maury, as being particularly conclusive,
of a man who decides to visit his birthplace
after an absence of twenty years. On the night
before his departure he dreams that he is in
a totally unfamiliar locality, and that he there

[219b]
meets a strange man with whom he holds a con
versation. Subsequently, upon his return home,
he is able to convince himself that this strange
locality really exists in the vicinity of his
home, and the strange man in the dream turns
out to be a friend of his dead father's, who is
living in the town. This is, of course, a con
clusive proof that in his childhood he had •seen
both the man and the locality. The dream,
moreover, is to be interpreted as.a dream of
impatience, like the dream of the
girl who
carries: in her pocket the ticket for a concert,
the dream of the child whose father had prom
ised him an excursion to the Hameau (p. 192),
and so forth. The motives which reproduce
just these impressions of
childhood for the
dreamer cannot, of course, be discovered with
out analysis*
One of my colleagues, who attended my lec
tures, and who boasted that his dreams were
very rarely subject to distortion, told me that
he had sometime previously seen, in a dream,
his former tutor in bed with his nurse, who
had remained in the household until his elev
enth year. The actual location of this scene was
realized even in the dream. As he was greatly
interested, he related the dream to his elder
brother, who laughingly confirmed its reality.
The brother said that he remembered the af
fair very distinctly, for he was six years old
at the time. The lovers were in the habit of
making him, the elder boy, drutik with beer
whenever circumstances were favourable to
their nocturnal intercourse. The younger child,
our dreamer, at that time three years of age,
slept in the same room as the nurse, but was
not regarded as an obstacle.
In yet another case it may be definitely es
tablished, without the aid of dream4nterpretation, that the dream contains elements from
childhood—namely, if the dream is a so-called
perennial dream, one which, being first dreamt
in childhood, recurs again and again in adult
years. I may add a few examples of this sort
to those already known, although I have no
personal knowledge of perennial dreams: A
physician, in his thirties, tells me that a yellow
lion, concerning which he is able to give the
precisest information, has often appeared in his
dream-life, from his earliest childhood up to the
present day. This Hon, known to him from his
dreams, was one day discovered in natura, as
a long-forgotten china animal.-The young man
then learned from his motherthat the lion had
been his favourite toy in early childhood, a
fact which he himself could no longer remember.

[220a]
2l6
0 Sigmund Freud
If we now turn from the manifest dream-
..content to the dream-thoughts which are re
vealed only".on analysis, the
experiences of
childhood may be found
to Tecur even in
dreams whose content would not have led us
to suspect anything of the sort; I owe a par
ticularly delightful and instructive example of
such a dream to my esteemed colleague: of the
"yellow lidh." ;After* reading: Nansen's account
of his polar ^expedition, he dreamt that he was
giving!^the ^mtrepid explorer electrical treat
ment,on an ice-floe for the.'sciatica of- which
the latter complained I During the analysis of
this dream he remembered an incident: of his
childhood, without wnich the dream would be
wholly unintelligible. When he was three or
four years of age he was one day listening at
tentively to the conversation of his elders;*: they
were talking of exploration, and he presently
asked his father whether exploration was.a bad
illness. He had apparently confounded Reisen
(journey, trips) with Reissen (gripes, tearing
pains), and, the derision of his brothers and
sisters prevented his ever forgetting the humili
ating experience.
;
We have a precisely similar case when, in
the analysis of the dream of the monograph oh
the genus cyclamen, I stumble upon a memory,
retained
from childhood,_ to Lthe effect that
when I was five years old my father allowed
me to destroy a book embellished with1coldured
plates. It will perhaps be doubted whether this
recollection really entered into the composi
tion ;of the dream-content, and it may.be sug
gested that the connection was established sub
sequently by the analysis. But the abundance
and intricacy of
the associative connections
vouch for the-truth of my explanation: cycla
men—favourite;; flower—rfavourite
dish^—arti
choke; to pick to pieces like an artichoke, leaf
by leaf (a phrase which at that time ;one heard
daily, a propos of the dividing up of the,Chinese
empire);
nerbariumT--bookworm,
whose
fa
vourite f oodisrbooks. I can further assure the
reader that the ultimate meaning of the dream,
.which I have not given here, is most intimately
connected with-: the contents of the scene of
childish destruction.
In" another series of dreams we learn from
analysis that the very wish which has given rise
tO: the dream, and whose fulfilment .-the dream
proves to be, has itself originated in•:childhoodj so that one is astonished to find that the
[child^ with: all his impulses survives in the
drecm.:
;,;.•,
;
**.
I shall now- continue the interpretation of a

[220b]
dream which has already proved instructive:
2 refer to thedream iri which my friend R is my
uncle. We have carried its interpretation far
enough for the wish-motive—the wish to be
appointed professor—to assert itself palpably;
and we have' explained the affection felt for
my friend R in the dream as the outcome of
opposition^ to, and defiance of, the two col
leagues who appear in the dream-thoughts.' The
dream was my own; I.may, thereforey;continue
the analysis by stating that I did not feel quite
satisfied with' the solution arrived at. I knew
that my Opinion of these colleagues, who weije
so badly treated in my drearh-thoughts; wouljd
have been expressed in very different language
in my waking life; the intensity of^the wish
that: I might not share their fate as regards
the appointment seemed:to me too'slight fully
to account for the discrepancy between, my
dream-opinion and my waking opinion. If the
desire to be addressed by another title were
really so intense, it would be proof of; a mor
bid ambition, which I do not think I cherish,
and which I believe I was far from entertain
ing. I do not know how others who think they
know me would judge me; perhaps I really
was' ambitious; but if I was, my ambition,has
long since been transferred to objects other
than the rank and title of Professor extrdordinarius.
. -•
,
u Whence, then^ the ambition which the dream
has ascribed to me? Here I am reminded: ofJa
story which I heard often in my childhood,
that at my birth an old peasant woman had
prophesied to my happy mother (whose first
born I was) that she had brought a great man
into the world. Such prophecies must be made
very, frequently;
there are so many happy
and expectant mothers, and so many old peas
ant women, and other old women who, since
their mundane powers have deserted them, turn
their eyes toward the future; and the prophet
ess is not likely to suffer-for her prophecies. Is
it possible that my thirst for greatness has orig
inated from this source? But here I recollect
an impression from the later years ofmy child
hood, which might serve even better as an ex
planation. One evening, at:a restaurant on the
Prater, where my parents were accustomed to
take me when I was eleven or twelve years of
age, we noticed aTman who was going from ta
ble to table/and^.for a small sum^ improvising
verses upon any: subject that was:given him. I
was sent to bring the poet to-, our table, and he
showed tas;gratitude. Before asking Jor a sub
ject he threw off a ifew rhymes about myself,

[221a]
and told us that if he could trust his inspira
tionI should probablyoneday become a minis
ter. I can still distinctly remember the impres
sionproduced by this second prophecy. It was
in the days of the "bourgeois Ministry"; my
father had recently brought home the portraits
of the bourgeois university graduates, Herbst,
Giskra, Unger, Berger and others, and we il
luminated the house in their honour. There
wereeven Jews among them; sothat every dil
igent Jewish schoolboy carried a ministerial
portfolio in his satchel. The impression of that
timemust be responsible for the fact that until
shortly before I went to theuniversity I wanted
to study jurisprudence, and changed miy mind
only at the last moment. A medical man has
no chance of becoming a minister. And now
for my dream: It is only now that I begin to
see that it translates me from the sombre pres^
ent to the hopeful days of the bourgeoisMinis
try, and completely fulfils what was then my
youthful ambition. In treating my two estim
able and learned colleagues, merely because
they are Jews, so badly, oneas though he were
a simpleton and the other as though he were
a criminal, I am acting as though I were the
Minister; I haveput myself in his place. What
a revenge I take upon his Excellency! He re
fuses to appoint me Professor extraordinarius,
and so in my dreamI put myself in his: place.
In another case I note the fact that although
the wish that excites the dream is a contem
porary wish it is nevertheless greatly rein
forced by memories of childhood. I refer to a
series of dreams which are based on the long
ing to go to Rome. For a long time to come I
shall probably have to satisfy this longing by
means of dreams, since, at the season of the
year when I should be able to travel, Rome is
to be avoided for reasons of health.1 Thus I
once dreamt that I saw the Tiber and tne bridge
of Sant' Angelo from the window of a railway
carriage; presently the train started, and I
realized that I had never entered the city at
all. The view that appeared in the dream was
modelled after' a well-known engraving which
I had casually noticed the day before in the
drawing-room of one of my patients. In an
other dream someone took me up a hill and
showed me Rome half shrouded in mist, and
so distant that I was astonished at the distinct
ness of the view. The content of this dream
is too rich to be fully reported here. The mo-
*I long ago learned that the fulfilment of such
wishes only called for a little courage, and I then
became a zealous pilgrim to Rome.

[221b]
The Interpretation'of Dreams
z*7
tive, "to see the promised land afar," is here
easily recognizable. The city which I thus saw
in the mist is Lubeck; the original of the hill
is thei Gleichenberg. In a third dream I am at
last in Rome. To my disappointment the scen
ery is anything but urban: it consists of a little
stream of black water,.on one side of which are
black rocks, while on the other are meadows
with large white flowers. I notice a certain
HerrZucker (with whom I am superficially ac
quainted), and resolve to ask him to show me
the way into the city. It is obvious that I am
trying in vain to see in my dream a city which
I have never seen in my waking life. If I re
solve the landscape into its elements, the white
flowers point to Ravenna, which is known to
me, and which once, for a time, replaced Rome
as the capital of Italy. In the marshes around
Ravenna we had found the most beautiful wa
ter-lilies in the midst of black pools of water;
the dream makes them grow in the meadows,
like the narcissi of our own Aussee, because
we found it so troublesome to cull them from
the water. The black rock so close to the water
vividly recalls the valley of the Tepl at Karls
bad. Karlsbad now enables me to account for
the peculiar circumstance that I ask Herr
Zucker to show me the way. In the material of
which the dream is woven I am able to recog
nize two of those amusing Jewish anecdotes
which conceal such profound: and, at times,
such bitter worldly wisdom, and which we are
so fond of quoting in our letters and conversa
tion. One is the story of the constitution; it
tells 'how a poor Jew sneaks into the Karlsbad
express without a ticket; how he is detected;
and is treated more and more harshly by the
conductor at each succeeding call for tickets;
and how, when a friend whom he mets at one
of the stations during his miserable journey
asks him where he is going, he answers: "To
Karlsbad—if my constitution holds out." Asr
sociated in memory with this is another story
about a Jew who is ignorant of French, and
who has express:instructions to ask m Paris
for the Rue Richelieu. Paris was for many
yearsthe goal of my own longing, andI regard
ed the satisfaction with which I first set foot
on the pavements of Paris as a warrant that I
should attain to the fulfilment of other wishes
also. Moreover, asking the way is a direct air
lusion to Rome, for, as we know, "all roads
lead to Rome." And further, the name Zucker
(sugar )again points to Karlsbad, whither we
send persons afflicted with the constitutional
disease,
diabetes
(Zuckerkrankheit,
sugar-

[222a]
2l8
SlGMUND FREUO,
disease). The occasion for this dream was the
proposal of my Berlin friend that we should
meet in Prague at Easter. A further association
with sugar and diabetes might be found in the
matters which I had to discuss with him.
A fourth dream, occurring shortly after the
last-mentioned, brings me back to Rome. I
see a street corner before me, and am aston
ished that so many German placards should be
posted there. On the previous day, when writ
ing to my friend, I had told him, with truly
prophetic vision, that Prague would probably
not be a comfortable place for German travel
lers. The dream, therefore, expressed simulta
neously the wish to meet him in Rome instead
of in the Bohemian capital, and the desire,
which probably originated during my student
days, that the German language might be ac
corded more tolerance in Prague. As a matter
of fact, I must have understood the Czech lan
guage in the first years of my childhood, for
I was born in a small village in Moravia, amidst
a Slav population. A Czech nursery rhyme,
Which I heard in my seventeenth year, became,
without effort oh my part, so imprinted upon
my memory that I can repeat it to this day,
although I have no idea of its meaning. Thus
in these dreams also there is no lack of mani
fold relations to the impressions of my early
childhood.
During my last Italian journey, which took
rne past Lake Trasimenus, I at length discov
ered, after I had seen the Tiber, and had relue*
tantly turned back some fifty miles from Rome,
what-a reinforcement my longing for the Eter^
nal City had received from the impressions of
my childhood. I had just conceived a plan of
travelling to Naples via Rome the following
year when this sentence, which I must have
read in one of our German classics, occurred
to me:1 "It is a question which of the two
paced to and fro in his room the more impa
tiently after he had conceived the plan of go
ing to Rome—Assistant Headmaster Winckelmann or the great General Hannibal." I my
self had walked in Hannibal's footsteps; like
him I was destined never to see Rome, and;he
too had gone to Campania when all were ex
pecting him in Rome. Hannibal, with whom I
had achieved this point of similarity, had been
my favourite hero
during my years at. the
Gymnasium; like so many boys of my age, I
bestowed my sympathies in the Punic war not
on the
Romans, but on the
Carthaginians.
1The writer in whose works I found this passage
l7as probably Jean Paul Richtef.

[222b]
Moreover, when I finally came to realize the
consequences of belonging to an alien race,
and was forced by the anti-Semitic feeling
among my class-mates to take a definite stand,
the figure of the Semitic commander assumed
still greater proportions in my
imagination.
Hannibal and Rome symbolized, in my youth
ful eyes, the struggle between the tenacity of
the Jews and the organization of the Catholic
Church. The significance for our emotional
life which the anti-Semitic movement has singe
assumed helped to fix the thoughts and inkpressions of those earlier days. Thus the de
sire to go to Rome has in my dream-life be
come the mask and symbol for a number of
warmly cherished wishes, for whose realization
one had to work with the tenacity and singlemindedness of the Punic general, though their
fulfilment at times seemed as remote as Han
nibal's life-long wish to enter Rome.
And now, for the first time, I happened upon
the youthful experience which even to-day still
expresses its power in all these emotions and
dreams. I might have been ten or twelve years
old when my father began to take me with
him on his walks, and in his conversation to
reveal his views on the things of this world.
Thus it was that he once told me the following
incident, in order to show me that I had been
born into happier times than he: "When I was
a young man, I was walking one Saturday along
the street in the village where you were born;
I was well-dressed, with a new fur cap on my
head, tip comes a Christian, who knocks my
cap into the mud, and shouts, 'Jew, get off the
pavement!'"—"And what did you do?"—^T
went into the street and picked up the cap,"
he calmly replied. That did not seem heroic
on the part of the big, strong man who was
leading me, a little fellow, by the hand. I con
trasted this situation, which did not please me,
with another, more in harmony with my senti
ments—the scene in which Hannibal's father,
Hamilcar Bareas, made his son swear before
the household altar to take vengeance on the
Romans.3 Ever since then Hannibal has, had
a place in "my phantasies.
1 think I can trace my enthusiasm for the
Carthaginian general still further back into my
childhood, so that it is probably only an instance
of an already established emotional relation be
ing transferred to a new vehicle. One of the
first books which fell into my childish hands
2 In the
first edition of this book I gave here the
name "Hasdrubal," an amazing error, which
I ex
plained in my Psycho-pathology of Everyday Life.

[223a]
after I learned to read was Thiers' Consulate
and Empire. I remember that I pasted on the
flat backs of my wooden soldiers little labels
bearing the names of the Imperial marshals,
and that at that time Massena (as a Jew*,
Menasse) was already my avowed favourite.1
This preferenceis doubtlessalsoto be explained
by the fact of my having been born, a hundred
years later, on the same date. Napoleon him
self is associated with Hannibal through the
crossing of the Alps. And perhaps the devel
opment of this martial ideal may be traced
yet farther back, to the first three years of
my childhood, to wishes which my alternately
friendly and hostile relations with a boy a'year
older than myself must have evoked in the
weaker of the two playmates.
The deeperwegointo the analysisof dreams,
the more often are we put on the track of
childish experiences which play the part of
dream-sources in the latent dream-content.
We have learned that dreams very rarely
reproduce memories in such a manner as to
constitute, unchanged and unabridged, the sole
manifest dream-content. Nevertheless, a few
authentic examples which show such reproduc
tion have been recorded, and I can add a few
new ones, which once more refer to scenes of
childhood. In the case of one of my patients
a dream once gave a barely distorted repro
duction of a sexual incident, which was im
mediately recognized as an accurate recollec
tion. The memory of it had never been com
pletely lost in the waking life, but it had been
greatly obscured, and it was revivified by the
previous work of analysis. The dreamer had
at the age of twelve visited a bedridden school
mate, who had exposed himself, probably only
by a chance movement in bed. At the sight of
the boy's genitals he was seized by a kind of
compulsion, exposed himself, and took hold of
the member of the other boy who, however,
looked at him in surprise and indignation,
whereupon he became embarrassed and let it
go. A dream repeated this scene twenty-three
years later, with all the details of the accom
panying emotions, changing it, however, in this
respect, that the dreamer played the passive
instead of the active role, while the person of
the schoolmate was replaced by a contempo
rary.
As a rule, of course, a scene from childhood
is represented in the manifest dream-content
only by an allusion, and must be disentangled
xThe Jewish descent of the Marshal is somewhat
doubtful.

[223b]
The Interpretation of Dreams
219
from the dream by interpretation. The citation
of examples of this kind cannot be very con
vincing, because any guarantee that they are
Teally experiences of childhood is lacking; if
they belong to an earlier period of life, they
are no longer recognized by our memory. The
conclusion that such childish experiences re
cur
at all in dreams is justified in psycho
analytic work by a great number of factors,
which in their combined results appear to be
Sufficiently reliable. But when, for the pur
poses of dream-interpretation, such references
to childish experiences are torn out of their
context, they may not perhaps seem very im
pressive, especially where I do not even give
all th£ material upon which the interpretation
is based. However, I shall not let this deter me
from giving a few examples.
With one of my female patients all dreams
have the character of hurry; she is hurrying so
as to be in time, so as not to miss her train,
and so on. In one dream she Jtas to visit a girl
friend; hermother hadtold herto ride andnot
walk; she runs, however, and keeps on calling.
The material that emerged in the analysis al
lowed one to recognize a memory of childish
romping, and, especially for one dream, went
back to the popular childish game of rapidly
repeating the words of a sentence as though
it was all one word, All these harmless jokes
with little friends were remembered because
they replaced other lessharmless ones.2
The following dream was dreamed by another
female patient: She is in a large room in which
there are all sorts of machines; it is rather like
what she would imagine an orthopaedic insti
tute to be. She hears that I am pressed for
time, and that she must undergo treatment
along with five others. But she resists, and is
unwilling to lie down on the bed—or whatever
it is—which is intended for her. She stands in
a corner, and waits for me to say "It is not
true." The others, meanwhile, laugh at her, say
ingit is all foolishness on her part. At the same
time, it is as though she were called upon to
make a number of little squares.
The first part of the content of this dream
is an allusion to the
treatment and to
the
transference to myself. The second contains an
In the original this paragraph contains many plays
:hewordJ2e/z (hurry, chase, scurry, game, etc.).—
on the
TR

[224a]
220
allusion to a scene of childhood;the two por
tions are connected by the mention of the bed.
The orthopaedic institute is. an allusion to one
of my talks, in which I compared the treat
ment, with regard to its duration and its na
ture, to an orthopaedic treatment. At the be
ginning of the treatment I had to tell her that
for the present Ihad'little time tq give her,
but that:later on I would devote a whole hour
to her daily. This aroused in her the old sensitivenessj which is a leading characteristic of
children who are ^destined to become hysterical.
Their desire for love is insatiable. My patient
was the youngest of six brothers and sisters
(hence, with five\ others), and as such her
father's
favourite,: but in
spite of this
she
seems to have felt that her beloved father de
voted far too little time and attention to her.
Her waiting for me to say It is not true was
derived as follows: A little tailor's apprentice
had brought her a dress, and she had given
him the money for it. Then she asked her hus
band whether she would have to pay the money
again if the boy were to lose it. To tease her,
her husband answered "Yes" (the teasing in
the dream), and she asked again and again,
and waited for him to say "It is not true."The
thought of the latent dream-content inay now
be construed as follows: Will she have to pay
me double the amount when I devote twice as
much time to her?—a thought.whichris stingy
or filthy (the uncleanliness
of
childhood is
often replaced in dreams by greed for money;
the word filthy here supplies the bridge). If
all the passage referring to her waiting until I
say It is not true is intended in the dream as a
circumlocution for the word dirty, the standing-in-the-corner and not lying-down-on-thebed are in keeping,with this word, as compon
ent parts of a scene of her childhood in which
she had soiled her bed, in punishment
for
which she was put into the corner,with a warn
ing that papa would not love her any more,
whereupon her brothers and sisters laughed at
her, etc. The little squares refer to her young
niece, who showed her the arithmetical trick
of writing figures in nine squares (I think) in
such a way that on being added together in
any direction they make fifteen.
ni
Here is a man's dream: He seestwo boys tuss
ling with each other; they are cooper's boys,
as he concludes from the tools which are lying
about; one of the boys has thrown the other
down; the prostrate boy is wearing ear-rings

[224b]
Sigmund Freud,
with blue stones. He runs towards the assail
ant with lifted cane, in order to chastise him.
The boy takes refuge behind a woman, as
though she were his mother, who. is standing
against a wooden fence. She is the wife of a
day-labourer', and she turns her back to the
man who is dreaming. Finally she turns about
and stares at him with a horrible look, so that
he tuns away in terror; the red flesh of the
lower lid seems to standout from her eyes.
This dream has made abundant use of triv
ial occurrences from the previous day, in the
course,of which he actually saw two boys in
the street, one of whom threw the other down.
When he walked up to them in order to settle
the quarrel, both of them took to their heels.
Cooper's boys—this is explained only by a
subsequent dream, in the analysis of which he
used the proverbial expression: "To knock the
bottom out of the barrel." Ear-rings with blue
stones, according to his observation, are worn
chiefly by prostitutes. This suggests a familiar
doggerel rhyme about two boys: "The other
boy was called Marie": that is, he was a girl.
The woman standing by the fence:: after the
scene with the two boys he went for a walk
along the bank of the Danube and, taking ad
vantage of being alone, urinated against a
wooden fence. A little farther on a respectably
dressed, elderly lady smiled at himverypleas
antly and, wanted to hand him her carp! with
her address.
Since, in the dream, the woman stood as he
had stood while urinating,.there is an allusion
to a woman urinating, and this explains the
horrible look and the prominence of the red
flesh, which can only refer to the genitals
gaping in a squatting posture; seen in child
hood, they had appeared in later recollection
as proud flesh, as a wound. The dream unites
two occasions upon which, as a little boy, tne
dreamer was enabled to see the genitals of
little girls, once by throwing „the little girl
down, and once wliile the child was urinating;
and, as is shownby another association, he had
retained in his memory the punishment admin
istered or threatened by his father on account
of these manifestations of sexual curiosity.
rv
A great mass of childish memories, which have
been hastily combined into a phantasy, may
be found behind the following dream of an
elderly lady: She goes out in a hurry to do
some shopping. On the Graben she sinks to
her knees as though she had broken down. A

[225a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
number of people collect around her, especially
cab-drivers, but no one helps her to get up.
She makes many vain attempts; finally she
must have succeeded, for she is put into a cab
which is to take her home. A large, heavily
laden basket (something like a market-basket)
is thrown after her through the window.
This is the woman who is always harassed in
her dreams; just as she used to be harassed
when a child. The first situation of the dream
is apparently taken from the sight of a;fallen
horse; just as broken down points torhorseracing. In her youth she was a rider- still
earlier she was probably also a horse. With the
idea of falling down is connected her first
childish reminiscence of the
seventeen-yearold son of the hall porter, who had an epileptic
seizure in the street and was brought home in
a cab. Of this, of course, she had only heard,
but the idea of epileptic fits, of falling down,
acquired a great influence over her phantasies,
and later on influenced the form of her own hys
terical attacks. When a person of the female
sex dreams of falling, this almost always has a
sexual significance;
she becomes
a fallen
woman; and, for the purpose of the dream
under
consideration,
this
interpretation
is
probably the leastdoubtful, for she falls in the
Graben, the street in Vienna which is known
as the concourse of prostitutes. The marketbasket admits-of'more than one interpretation;
in the sense of refusal (German, Korb=basket
=snub, refusal)-it reminds her of-the many
snubs which she at first administered to her
suitors and which; she thinks, she herself re
ceived later. This agrees with the detail: no one
will help herup, which she herself interprets as
being disdained. Further* the market-basket re
calls phantasies which have already appeared
in the course of analysis, in which she imagines
that she has married far beneath her station
and how goes to the market as a marketwoman. Lastly; the market-basket might be
interpreted as the mark of a servant: This sug
gests further memories of her childhood—of a
cook who was discharged because she stoleshe, too, sank to Mr knees and begged for
mercy. The dreamer was at that time twelve
years of age. Then emerges a recollection of
a chamber-maid; who was dismissed hecause
she had an affair with the coachman of the
household, who; incidentally, marriedher after
wards. This recollection^ therefore, gives us a
clue to the cab-drivers in the dream (who, in
opposition to the: reality, d&'not ;$tahcl by the
fallen woman). But there sM'remains to he

[225b]
221
explained the throwing of the basket; in par
ticular, why it is thrown through the window?
This reminds her of the forwarding of luggage
by rail, to the custom of Fensterln1 in the
country, and to trivial impressions of a sum
mer resort, of a. gentleman who threw some
blue plums into the window of a lady's room,
and of her little sister, who was frightened
because an idiot who was passing looked in
at the window. And now, from behind all this
emerges an obscure recollection from her tenth
year of a nurse in the country to whom one of
the men-servants made love (and whose conduct
the child may have noticed), and who was sent
packing, thrown out, together with her lover
(in the dream we have the expression: thrown
into); an incident which we have been ap
proaching by several other paths. The luggage
or box of a servant is disparagingly described;
in Vienna as "seven plums." "Pack up your
seven plums and get out!"
My collection, of course, contains a plethora
of such patients' dreams, the analysis of which
leads back to impressions of childhood, often
dating back to the first three years of life,
which are remembered obscurely, or not at all.
But it is a-questionable proceeding to draw
conclusions from; these and apply them
to
dreams in general, for they are mostly dreams
of neurotic, and especially hysterical, persons;
and the part played in; these dreams by child
ish scenes might be;conditioned by the nature
of the neurosis^ and not by the nature of
dreams in general. In the interpretation of my
own dreams, however^ which is assuredly not
undertaken on account of grave symptoms of|
illness-it happens just as frequently that in
the latent dream-content I am, unexpectedly
confronted with a scene of my childhood^ and
that a whole series of my dreams will suddenly
converge upon the paths proceeding from a
single childish experience. I have already given
examples of this, and I shall give.yet more in
different connections. Perhaps I cannot close
this chapter more fittingly than by citing sev
eral dreams of my own, in which recent events
and long-foxgottenv experiences of my child
hood appear together as.»dream-sources.
I.-After I have,;been travelling,, and have
1FensUrtfi is the custom, now falling into' disuse,
found in- rutfal ^districts of the German Schwarzwald,
of-lovers wbowwoo their sweethearts at their bedroom
windows, to'which they ascend by means of"a lad
der,-]ehi6ying^such intimacy that the relation prac
tically amounts to a trial marriage. The^reputatjon of
the young woman,never suffers on account$.,Fen
sterln, unless she becomes intimateJ with tbo matijf
SUitors.^-TR.
-.:••-
'-.•

[226a]
222
gone to bed hungry and tired, the prime neces
sities of life begin to assert their claims in
sleep, and I dream as follows:
/ go into a
kitchen in order to ask for some pudding.
There three women are standing, one of whom
is the hostess; she is rolling something in her
hands, as though she were making dumplings.
She replies that I must wait until she has fin
ished (not distinctly as a speech). / become
impatient, and go away affronted. I want to put
on an overcoat; but the first I try on is too
long. I take it off, and am somewhat aston-.
ished to find that it is trimmed with fur. A
second coat has a long strip of cloth with a
Turkish design sewn into it. A stranger with
a long face and a short, pointed beard comes up
and prevents me from putting it on, declaring
that it belongs to him. I now show him that it
is covered all over with Turkish embroideries.
He asks: "How do the Turkish (drawings^
strips of cloth . . .) concern you?" But we
soon become quite friendly.
in the analysis of this dream I remember,
quite unexpectedly, the first novel which I ever
read, or rather, which I began to read from
the end of the first volume, when I was per
haps thirteen years of age. I have never learned
the name of the novel, or that of its author,
but the end remains vividly in my memory.
The hero becomes insane, and continually calls
out the names of the three women who have
brought the greatest happiness and the great-.1
est misfortune into his life, Pelagie is one of
these names. I still do not know what to make
of this recollection during the analysis. To
gether with the three women there now emerge
the three Parcae, who spin the fates of men,
and I know that one of the three women, the
hostess in the dream, is the mother who gives
life, and who, moreover, as in my own case,
gives the child its first nourishment. Love and
hunger meet at the mother's breast. A young
man—so
runs
an
anecdote—who
became
a
great admirer of womanly beauty, once tibn
served, when the conversation turned upon the
handsome wet-nurse who had suckled him as
a child, that he was sorry that he had not taken
better advantage of his opportunities. I am in
the habit of using the anecdote to elucidate
the factor of retrospective tendencies in the
mechanism of the psychoneurosesJ?£ne of the
Parcae, then, is rubbing the palms ofher hands
together, as though she were making dumplings.
A strange occupation for one of the Fates, and
urgentjy ii?. heed of 'explanation! This explana
tion is furnished by another and earlier mem-

[226b]
Sigmund Freud
ory of my childhood. When I was six years old,
and receiving my first lessons from my mother,
I was expected to believe that we are made of
dust, and must, therefore, return to dust. But
this did not please me, and I questioned the
doctrine. Thereupon my mother rubbed the
palms of her hands together—just as in making
dumplings, except that there was no dough be
tween
them—and
showed
me
the
blackish
scales of epidermis which were thus rubbed off,
as a proof that it is of dust that we are made.
Great was my astonishment at this demonstra
tion ad oculos, and I acquiesced in the idea
which I was later to hear expressed in the
words: "Thou owest nature a death."1 Thus
the women to whom I go in the kitchen, as I
so often did in my childhood when I was.hun
gry and my mother, sitting by the fire, admon
ished me to wait until lunch was ready, are
really the Parcae. And now for the dumplings!
At least one of my teachers at the University—
the very one to whom I am indebted for my
histological knowledge (epidermis)—would be
reminded by the name Knddl (Knodl means
dumpling), of a person whom he bad to pros
ecute for plagiarising his writings.. Committing
a plagiarism, taking anything
one can lay
hands on, even though it belongs to another,
obviouslyleads to the second part of the dream,
in which I am treated like the overcoat thief
who for some time plied his trade in the lec
ture-halls. I have written the wor&plagiarism—
Without definite intention—because it occurred
to me, and now I see that it must belong to
the latent dream-content and that it will serve
as a bridge between the different parts of the
manifest dream-content. The chain of associa
tions— Pilagie — plagiarism — plagiostomi2
(sharks)—fish-bladder—connects the old novel
with the affair of KnSdl and: the overcoats
(German:
Uberzieher=pullover, overcoat or
condom), whichobviously refer to an appliance
appertaining to the technique of sex. This, it
is true, is a very forced and irrational connec
tion, but it is nevertheless one which I could
not have established in waking life if it had not
already been established by the dream-work.
Indeed, as though nothing, were sacred to this
impulse to enforce
associations, the beloved
name, Brilcke (bridge of words, see above),
1 Both the affects pertaining to these childish scenes
—astonishment and resignation to the inevitable—ap
peared in a dream of slightly earlier date, which first
reminded me of this incident of my childhood.
''
-
?I do not.bring in .the plagiostomi arbitrarily; they
recall a painful incident of disgrace before the same
teacher.7'
*
.'•
.
.
-

[227a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
now serves to remind me of the very institute
chase, at
Spalato
in which I spent my happiest hours as a stu
dent, wanting for nothing. "So will you at the
breasts of Wisdom every day more pleasure
find"), in the most complete contrast to the
desires which plague me (German: plagen)
while I dream. And finally, there emerges the
recollection of another dear teacher*
whose
name once more sounds like something edible
(Pleischl—Fleisch==meat—like Knodl=dump
lings), and of a pathetic scene in which the
scales of
epidermis play a part
(mother—
hostess), and mental derangement (the novel),
and a remedy from the Latin pharmacopeia
(Kuche=kitchen) which numbs the -sensation
of hunger, namely, cocaine.
In this manner I could follow the intricate
trains of thought still farther, and could fully
elucidate that part of the dream which is lack
ing in the analysis; but I must refrain, be
cause the personal sacrifice which this would
involve is too great. I shall take up only one
of the threads, which will serve to lead us di
rectly to one of the dream-thoughts that lie
at the bottom of the medley. The stranger with
the long face and pointed beard, who wants to
prevent me from putting on the overcoat, has
the features of a tradesman of Spalato, of
whom my wife bought a great deal of Turkish
cloth.
His
name was Popovic, a suspicious
name, which even gave the humorist Stettenheim a pretext for a suggestive remark: "He
told me his name, and blushingly shook my
hand."1 For the rest, I find the same misuse of
names as above in the case of Pelagic,.Knodl,
Brucke, Pleischl. No one will deny that such
playing with names is a childish trick; if I in
dulge in it the practice amounts to an act of
retribution, for my own name has often enough
been the subject of such feeble attempts at
wit. Goethe once remarked how sensitive a
man is in respect to his name, which he feels
that he fills even as he fills his skin; Herder
having written the following lines on his name:
Der du von Gottern abstammst, .von
Gothen oder vom Rote.
So seid ihr Gotterbilder auch zu Staub.
[Thou who art bornof the gods,of the
Goths, or of the mud.
Thus are thy godlike images even
dust.]
£ realize that this digression on the misuse of
names was intended merely to justify this
complaint. But here let us stop. . . . The pur-
(Possibly another person would not have rec
ognized the tune.) '
The whole evening I was in a high-spirited,
pugnacious mood; I chaffed the waiter and the
cab-driver, I hope without hurting their feel
ings; and now all kinds of bold and revolutionLPo^o^'backside," in German nursery language.
arv thoughts came into my mind, such as

[227b]
223
reminds
me
of
another
purchase at Cattaro, where I was too cautious,
and missed the opportunity of making an ex
cellent bargain. (Missing an opportunity at the
breast of the wet-nurse; see above.) One of
the dream-thoughts occasioned by the sensa
tion of hunger really amounts to this: We
should let nothing escape; we should take what
we can get, even if we do a Httle wrong; we
should never let an opportunity go by; life is
so shorti,and,death inevitable. Because this is
meant even sexually, and because desire is un
willing to check itself before the thought of
doing wrong, this philosophy of carpe diemhas
reason to fear the censorship, and must con
ceal itself behind a dream. And so all sorts
of counter-thoughts find expression* with rec
ollections of the time when spiritual nourish
ment alone was sufficient for the dreamer, with
hindrances of every kind and even threats of
disgusting sexual punishments.
II. A second dream requires a longer pre
liminary statement:
I had driven to the Western Station in order
to start on a holiday trip to the Aussee, but
I went on to the platform in time for the Ischl
train, which leaves earlier. There I saw Count
Thun, who was again going to see the Emperor
at Ischl. In spite of the rain he arrived in an
open carriage, came straight through the en
trance-gate for the local trains, and with a
curt gesture and not a word of explanation he
waved back the gatekeeper, who did not know
him and wanted to take his ticket. After he
had left in the Ischl train, I was asked to
leave the platform and return to the waitingroom; but after some difficulty I obtained per
mission to remain. I passed the time noting
how many people bribed the officials to secure
a compartment; I fully intended to make a
complaint—that is, to demand the same privi
lege. Meanwhile I sang something to myself,
which I afterwards recognized as the aria from
The Marriage of Figaro:
If my lord Count would tread a measure,
tread a measure,
Let him but say his pleasure,
And I will play the tune.

[228a]
224
SiGMU&D Freud
would fit themselves to:the words of Figaro,
and to memories of !Beaumarchais' comedy, of
whichI had seena performanceat the Comedie
Frangaise. Thespeech about the greatinenwho
have taken the trouble to be born; the seigneurial right which Count Almaviva wishesrto
exercise with regard to Susanne; the jokes
which our malicious Opposition journalists
make on the name of Count Thuh"(German,
thun=do),
calling
him
Graf
Nichtsthun,
Count-Do-Nothing. I really do not envy him;
he now has a difficult audience with the Em
peror before him, and it is I who am the real
Count-Do-Nothing, for I am going off for a
holiday. I make all sorts of amusing plans for
the vacation. Now a'gentleman arrives whom
I know as a Government representative at the
medical examinations, and who has won the
flatteringnickname of "the Governmental bed
fellow" (literally, by-sleeper) by his activities
in this capacity. By insisting on his official
status he
secured half a
first-class compart
ment, and I heard one guard say to another:
"Where are we going to put the gentleman
with
the
first-class
half-compartment?"
A
pretty sort of favouritism! I am paying for a
whole first-class compartment. I did actually
get a whole compartment to myselfj but not in
a through carriage, so there was no lavatory at
my disposal during the night. My complaints
to the guard were fruitless; I revenged myself
by suggesting that at least a hole be made in
the floor of this compartment, to serve the
possible needs of passengers. At a quarter to
three in the morning I wake, with an urgent
desire to urinate, from the following dream:
A crowd, a students' meeting. . . . A certain
Count (Thun or Taaffe) is making a speech.
Being asked to say something about the Ger
mans, he declares, with a contemptuous ges
ture, that their favourite flower is coltsfoot,
and he then puts into his buttonhole something
like a torn leaf, really the crumpled skeleton of
a leaf. I jump up, and I jump up,1 but I am
surprised at my implied attitude. Then, more
indistinctly: It seems as though this were the
vestibule (Aula); the exits are thronged, and
one must escape. I make my way through a
suite of handsomely appointed rooms, evident
ly ministerial apartments, with furniture of a
colour between brown and violet, and at last
I come to a corridor in which a housekeeper,
a fat, elderly woman, is seated. I try to avoid
1 This repetition has crept into the text of the dream,
apparently through absent-mindedness, and I have left
it because analysis shows that it has a meaning.
'

[228b]
speaking to her, but she apparently thinks I
have aright to pass this wayybecause she asks
-whether she shall accompany me with the lamp.
I indicate with a gesture, of tell her, that she is
to remain standing on the stairs, and it seems
to me that I dm very clever, for after all I am
evading detection. Now I am downstairs, and I
find a narrow, steeply rising path, which I fol
low:
Again indistinctly: It is as though my second
task were to get away from the city, just as
my first was to get out of the building. I am
riding in a one-horse cab, and I tell the driver
to take me to a railway station. "I can't drive
with you on the railway line itself," I say, when
he reproaches me as though I had tired him
out. Here it seems as though I had already
made a journey in his cab which is usually
made by rail. The stations are crowded; I am
wondering whether to go to Krems or to Znaim,
but I reflect that the Court will be [there, and I
decide in favour of Graz or some such place.
Now I am seated in the railway carriage, which
is rather like a tram, and I have in my button
hole a peculiar long braided thing, on which
are violet-brown violets of stiff material, which
makes a great impression on people. Here the
scene breaks off:
1 am once more in front of the railway sta
tion, but I am in the company of an elderly
gentleman. I think out a scheme for remaining
unrecognized, but I see this plan already be
ing carried out. Thinking and experiencing are
here, as it were, the same thing. He pretends
to be blind, at least in one eye, and I hold be
fore him a male glass urinal (which we have
to buy in the city, or have bought). I am thus
a sick-nurse, and have to give him the urinal
because he is blind. If the conductor sees us
in this position, he must pass us by without
drawing attention to us. At the same time the
position of the elderly man, and his urinating
organ, is plastically perceived. Then I wake
with a desire to urinate.
j
The whole dream seems a sort of phantasy,
which takes the dreamer back to
the
year
of .revolution, 1848, the
memory of which
had been revived by the jubilee of 1898, as
well as by a little excursion to Wachau, on
which I visited Emmersdorf, the refuge of the
student leader Fischof,2 to whom several fea
tures
of the manifest dream-content might
refer. The association of ideas then leads me to
2This is an error and not a slip, for I learned later
that the Emmersdorf in Wachau is not identical with
the refuge of the revolutionist Fischof, a place of the
same name.

[229a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
a'i'sr
England, tb- the house of my: brother, who
used in jest to twit his Wife with the title of
Tennyson'spoemFifty Years Ago, whereupon
the children were used to correct Mm: Fifteen
Years. £go: This1 phantasy; however, which aitacheS itself to the thoughts evoked by thje:
sight of Count Thun, is, like the facade of an
Italian
church,
without
organic
connection
with the structure behind it, but unlike such
a facade it is full of gaps, and confused, and in
many places portions of the interior break
through. The first situation of the dream is
made up of a number bf scenes, into which I
am able to dissect it. The arrogant attitude of
the Count in the dream is copied from a scene
at my school which occurred in my fifteenth:
year. We had hatched a conspiracy against an
unpopular and ignorant teacher; the leading
spirit in this conspiracy was a schoolmate who
since that time seems to have taken Henry VIII
of England as his rhodel. It fell to me to carry
out the coup d'etat, and a. discussion1 of the im
portance of the Danube (German, Bqnau) to
Austria (Wachau!) was ink occasion of an open
revolt. One of our fellow-:Cohspirators was our
only
aristocratic schoolmate—he was called
"the giraffe" oh account of his conspicuous
height—and while he was being reprimanded
by the tyrant of the school, the professor of the
German language, he stood just as the Count
stood in the dream. The explanation of the
favourite flower, and the putting into a button
hole of something that musthave been a flower
(which recalls the orchids which 1 had given
that day to a friend, and also a rose of Jericho);
prominently recalls the incident in Shake
speare's historical play which opens the civil
warsof the Red and the WhiteRoses; the men
tion of HenryVlli: has payed the way to this
reminiscence. Now it is not very far from roses
to red and white carnations. (Meanwhile two
little rhymes, the one German, the other Span
ish, insinuate themselves into the;analysis: Ro^
sen, Tulpen, Netken,.alle Blumen welken,1 and
isdbeiita, nolldres, que se marchitan lasflores?
'the Spanish line occurs hi Figaro.) Here in
Vienna white cafnations have become the badge
of the Anti-Semites, red ones of of the Social
Democrats. Behind this is the recollection of an
anti-Semitic challenge during a railway journey
in beautiful Saxony (Ariglb-Saxon). The third
scene contributing to the formation of the first
situation in the dream dates from iny early stux.(loses, tulips,.and carnations, flowers all will wither.
2<I)o not cry, little' Isabella because your flowers
have faded.

[229b]
dent days. There was a debate in a German stu
dents' club about the relation Ofphilosophy tb
the general sciences: Being a green youth, full of
materialistic doctrihes, I thrust myself forward1
in order°t6! defend an extremely one-sided posi
tion: Thereupon a sagacious bider fellbw-studeritywho has since then shown his capacity for
leading men and organizingthe masses,aridwho,
moreover, bears a name belongingto the anindal
kingdom, rose and gave us a thorough dressingdown; he too, he said, had herded swine in his
youth, and had then returned repentant to his
father's house.7 jumped up (as in the dream),
becarhe piggishly rude, and retorted that since
I knew he had herded swine, Iwas not surprised
at the tone of his discourse. (In the dream I
am surprised at my German Nationalistic feel
ings.) There Was a great commotion, and an
almost general demand that I should retract
my words, but 1 stood iny ground. Theinsulted
student was too sensible to take the advice
which was offered him, that he should send me
a challenge, and let the matter drorj.
The remaining elements of this scene of the
dream are of more remote origin. What does it
mean that the Count should make a scornful
reference to coltsfoot? Here I must question
my train of associations. Coltsfoot (German:
Hufldttich), Lattice (lettuce), Salathund (the
dog that grudges others what he cannot eat him
self). Here plenty of opprobrious epithets may
be discerned: Gir-affe (German: Affe—mon
key, ape), pig, sow, dog; I might even arrive,
by way of the name, at donkey, arid thereby
pdixr contempt upon an academic professor.
Furthermore, I translate coltsfoot ((Huftaitich)
—-I do mot know whether I do so correctly—
hy-pisse-en-lit. I get•this idea from Zola's Ger
minal, inwhich some children are told to bring
some dandelion salad with them; The dog-^—
chien—h&s a name sounding not unlike the verb
for the ihajor function (chier, as pisser stands^
for the minor One). Now we shall, soph have
the indecent in all its three physical5 categories,
for in the same Germinal, which deals with the
future revolution, there is a description of a
very peculiar contest, which relates to the pro
duction of the gaseous excretions known as
flatus.* And now I cannot but observe how the
way to this flatus has been prepared a long
while since, beginning with the flowers, and pro
ceedingto the SpanishrhyrheofIsabeliid,to Fer
dinandand Isabella, and, by way of HenryVIII,
: s Not in Germinal, but in La Terre—a. mistake of
which',I became aware only in the analysis. iKere I.
would call attention to the identity of letters in MitL
fiattich and Flatus.

[230a]
226
Sigmund Freud
to English history at the time of the Armada,
after the victorious termination of which the
English struck a medal with the inscription;
Flavit et dissipatisunt, for the storm had scat
tered the Spanish fleet/ I had thought of using
this phrase, half jestingly, as the title of a
chapter on "Therapy," if I should ever succeed
in giving a detailed account of my conception
and treatment of hysteria.
I cannot give so detailed an interpretation
of the second scene of the dream, out of sheer
regard for the censorship. For at this point I
put myself in the place of a certain eminent
gentleman of the revolutionary period, who had,
an adventure with an eagle (German: Adler)
and who is said to have suffered from incon
tinence of the bowels, incontinentia alvi, etc.;
and here I believe that I should not be justified
in passing the censorship, even though it was
an aulic councillor (aula, consiliarius aulicus)
who told me the greater part of this history.
The suite of rooms in the dream is suggested
by his Excellency's private saloon carriage, into
which I was able to glance; but it means, as it
so often does in dreams, a woman,2The person
ality of the housekeeper is an ungrateful allu
sion to a witty old lady, which ill repays her
for the good times and the many good stories
which I have enjoyed in her house. The incident
of the lamp goes back to Grillparzer, who notes
a charming experience of a similar nature, of
which he afterwards. made use in Hero and
Leander (the waves of the sea and of love—
the Armada and the storm).
I must forego a detailed analysis of the two
remaining portions of the dream; I shall single
out only those elements which lead me back
to the two scenes of my ehiletfiood for the sake
of which alone I have selected the dream. The.
reader will rightly assume that it is sexual, ma
terial whichnecessitates the suppression; but he
may not be content with this explanation. There
are many thpgs of which one makes no secret
to oneself,, but which must be treated as secrets
in addressing others, and here we are concerned
not with the reasons which induce me to con
ceal the solution, but.with the motive of the
inner censorship which conceals the real cpn1 An unsolicited
biographer,
Dr.
F. Wittels,
re
proaches me for having omitted the name of Jehovah
from- the above motto. The English medal contains thename of the Diety, in Hebrew letters, on the. back
ground of a cloud, and placed in such a manner that
one may equally well regard it as part of the picture
or as part of the inscription.
2 Frauenzimmer, German, Zimmer-room, is appended
to Frawew-woman, in order to imply a slight contempt.
—TR.
'
"•'•v.
v"."

[230b]
tent of the dream even from myself. Concern
ing this, I will confess that the analysis reveals
these three portions of the dream, as imperti
nent boasting, the exuberance of an absurd
megalomania, long ago suppressed in, my wak
ing fife, which, however, dares to show itself,
with individual ramifications,.even in the mani
fest dream-content (it seems to me that I am a
cunning fellow), makingthe high-spirited mood
of the evening before the dream perfectly in
telligible. Boasting of every kind, indeed; thus,
the mention of Graz points to the phrase:
"What price Graz?" which one is wont to use
whenone feels unusually wealthy. Readerswho
recall Master Rabelais's inimitable description
of the life and deeds of Gargantua and his son
Pantagruel will be able to enroll even the sug-,
gested content of the first portion of the dream
among the boasts to which I have alluded. But
the following belongs to the two scenes of child
hood of which I have spoken: I had bought a
new trunk for this journey, the colour of which,
a brownish violet, appears in the dream sev
eral times (violet-brown violets of a stiff cloth,
on an object which is known as a girl-catcher1the furniture in the ministerial chambers). Chil
dren, we know, believe that one attracts people's
attention with anything new. Now I have been
told of the followingincident of my childhood;
my recollection of the occurrence itself has
been replaced by my recollection of the story.
I am told that at the age of two I still used
occasionally to wet my bed, and that when I
was reproved for doing so I consoled my fa
ther by promising to buy him a beautiful new
red bed in N (the nearest large town). Hence,
the interpolation in the. dream, that, yjehdd
bought the urinal in the city or had to buy it;
one must keep one's promises. (One should
note, moreover, the association pf the male
urinal and the woman's trunk, box.) All the
megalomania of the child is contained in this
promise.The significance of dreams of urinary
difficulties in the case of children has already
been considered in the interpretation of ah
earlier/ dream
(cf. the dream on p. 20S).
The^psycho-analysis of neurotics has taught us
to recognize the intimate connection between
wetting the bed and the character trait of ambi
tion.
Then, when Iwas seven or eight years of age
another domestic
incident occurred
which I
remember very well. One evening, before going
to bed, I had disregarded the dictates of discre
tion, and had satisfied my needs in my parents'
bedroom, and in their presence. Reprimanding

[231a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
227
me for this delinquency, my father remarked:
"That boy wilt never amount to anything."
This must
have
been
a
terrible
affront
to
my ambition, for allusions to this scene recur
again and again in my dreams, and are con
stantly coupled with enumerations of my ac
complishments and
successes, as
though I
wanted to say: "You see, I have amounted to
something after all." This childish scene fur
nishes the elements for the last image of the
dream, in which the r61es are'interchanged, of
course for the purpose of revenge. The elderly
man obviously my father, for the blindness
in one eye signifies his one-sided glaucoma,1 is
now urinating before me as I once urinated
before him. By means of the glaucoma I re
mind my father of cocaine, which stood him
in good stead during his operation, as though
I had thereby fulfilled my promise. Besides, I
make sport of him; since he is blind, I must
hold the glass in front of him, and I delight in
allusions to my knowledge of the theory of
hysteria, of which I am proud.2
1 Another interpretation: He is one-eyed like Odin,
the father of the gods^—Odin's consolation. The conr
solation in the childish scene: I will buy him a new
bed.
2 Here is some more material
for
interpretation:
Holding the urine-glass recalls the story, of a peasant
(illiterate)
at
the optician's, who
tried on now one
pair of spectacles, now another,.;bu-t was:still, unable to
read.—(Peasant-catcher—girl-catcher in the preceding
portion of the dream.)—The peasants' treatment of
the
feeble-minded
father, in
Zola's La
Terre^—r-The
tragic atonement,
that in
his last days my
father
soiled his bed like a child; hence, I am his nurse in
the dream.—"Thinking and experiencing are here, as
it were, identical"; this recalls a highly revolutionary
closet drama by Oscar Panizza, in which God, the
Father, is ignominiously treated as a palsied greybeard.
With Him will and deed are one, and in the .book he
has to be restrained by His archangel, a sort of Gany
mede, from scolding and swearing, because His curses
would immediately be fulfilled.—Making plans is a re
proach against my father, dating from a later period
in the development of the critical faculty, much as the
whole rebellious content of the dream, which commits
Use majesti and scorns authority, may be traced to a
revolt against my father. The sovereign is called the
father of his country (Landesvater), and the father
is the first and oldest, and for the child the only au
thority,
from whose absolutism the other social au
thorities have evolved in the course of the history of
human civilization (in so far as mother-right does not
necessitate a qualification of
this doctrine). —
The
words which occurred to me in the dream, "thinking
and experiencing are the same thing," refer to the ex
planation
of
hysterical
symptoms,
with
which
the
male urinal
(glass)
is
also associated.—I need not
explain the principle of Gschnas to a Viennese; it con
sists
in
constructing objects of rare and costly ap
pearance out of trivial, and preferably comical and
worthless material—for example, making suits of ar
mour out of kitchen utensils, wisps of straw and Salzstangeln (long rolls), as our artists are fond of doing
at their jolly parties. I
had learned that hysterical
subjects do the same thing; besides what really hap
pens to them, they unconsciously conceive for
them
selves horrible or
extravagantly
fantastic
incidents,

[231b]
If the two childish scenes of urination are,
according to my theory, closely associated with
the desire for greatness, their resuscitation on
the journey tc the Aussee was further favoured
by; the accidental circumstance that my com
partment had no lavatory, and that I must be
prepared to postpone relief during the journey>
as actually happened in the morning when I
woke with the sensation of a bodily need; I
suppose one might be inclined to credit this
sensation with being the actual stimulus of the
dream; I should, however, prefer a different
explanation, namely, that the dream-thoughts
first gave rise to the desire to urinate. It is quite
unusual for me to be disturbed in sleep by any
physical need, least of all at the time when I
woke on this occasion—a quarter to four in
the morning. I would forestall a further objec
tion by remarking that I have hardly ever felt
a desire to urinate after waking early on other
journeys made under-more comfortable circum*-
stances. However, I can leave this point unde
cided without weakening my argument.
Further, since experience in dream-analysis
has drawn my attention to the fact that even
from dreams the interpretation of which seems
at first sight complete,
because the dreamsources and the wish-stimuli are easily demon
strable, important trains of thought proceed
which reach back into the
earliest years iof
childhood, I had to ask myself-whether this
characteristic does not even constitute an es
sential condition of dreaming. If it were per
missible to generalize this notion, I should say
that every dream is connected through its mani
fest
content with recent experiences, while
through its latent content it is connected with
the most remote experiences; and I can actually
show in the analysis of hysteria that these re
mote experiences have in a very real sense
remained recent right up to the present. But I
still find it very difficult to prove this conjec
ture; T shall have to return to the probable
r61ein dream-formation of the earliest experi
ences of our childhood in another connection
(chapter vn).
Of the three peculiarities of the dream-mem^
which they build up out of the most harmless and
commonplace material of actual experience. The symp
toms attach themselves primarily to these phantasies,
not to the memory of real events, whether serious or
trivial. This explanation had helped me to overcome
many difficulties, and afforded me much pleasure. I
was able to allude to it by means of the dream-ele
ment "male urine-glass," because I had been told that
at the last Gschnas evening a poison-chalice of Lucretia Borgia's had been exhibited, the chief constitu
ent of which had consisted of a glass urinal for men,
such as is used in hospitals.

[232a]
228
SiGMUND Freud
pry considered above, one—the preference for
the unimportant in the dream-content—has
been satisfactorily explained by tracing it back
to
dream-distortion. We
have
succeeded in
establishing the existence of the other two pe
culiarities—the preferential selection of recent
and also of infantile material—but we have
found it impossible to derive them from the
motives of the dream. Let us keep in mind
these two characteristics, which we still have to
explain or evaluate; a place; will have to be
found for them elsewhere, either in the discus
sion of the psychology of the sleeping state, or
in the consideration of the structure ofthe psy
chic apparatus—which we shall undertake later
after we have seen that by means of dream-in
terpretation we are able to glance as through
an inspection-hole into the interior of this ap
paratus.
But here and now I will emphasize another
result of
the last
few
dream-analyses, The
dream often appears to have several meanings ;
not only may several wish-fulfilments be com
bined in it, as our examples show, but one
meaning or one ;wish-fulfilment, may conceal
another, until in the lowest stratum one comes
upon the fulfilment of a wish from the earliest
period of childhood; and here again it may be
questioned whether theword often at the begin
ning of this sentence may not more correctly
be replaced by constantly.1
C. The Somatic Sources of Dreams
If we attempt to interest a cultured layman
in the problems of dreams, and if, with this
end in view, we ask him what he believes to be
the source of dreams, we shall generally find
that he feels quite sure he knows at least this
part of the solution. He thinks immediately of
the influence
exercised on the
formation of
dreams by a disturbed or impeded digestion
("Dreams come from the stomach"), an aeci*
dental position of the body, a trifling occur
rence during sleep. He does not seem to suspect
that even after all these; factors have been duly
considered something still remains to be ex
plained.
In the introductory chapter we examined at
1 The stratification of the meanings of dreams is one
of the most delicate but also one of the most fruitful
problems of dream-interpretation. Whoever forgets the
possibility of such stratification is likely to go astray
and to make untenable assertions concerning the na
ture of dreams. But hitherto this subject has been
only {oo imperfectly investigated. So far, a fairly or
derly stratification of symbols in dreams due to urinary
Stimulus has been subjected to a thorough evaluation
only hy Otto Rank.

[232b]
length the opinion of scientific writers on the
role of somatic stimuliin the formation of
dreams, so that here we need only recall the re
sults of this inquiry. We have seen that three
kinds of somatic stimuli will be distinguished:
the objective sensory stimuli which proceed
from external objects, the inner states of ex
citation of the sensory organs, having only a
subjective reality, and the bodily stimuli aris
ing within the body; and we have also noticed
that the writers on dreams are inclined to thrust
into the background any psychic sources of
dreams which may operate simultaneously with
the somatic stimuli, or to exclude them alto
gether. In testing the claims made on behalf
of these somatic stimuli we have learned that
the significance of the objective excitation of
the sensory, organs—-whether accidental stim
uli operating during sleep, or such as cannot be
excluded from the dormant relation of these
dream-images and ideas to the internal bodily
stimuli and confirmed by experiment; that the
part played by the subjective sensory stimuli
appears to be demonstrated by the recurrence
of hypnagogic sensory images in dreams; and
that, although the broadly accepted relation of
these dream-images and ideas to the internal
bodily stimuli cannot be exhaustively demon
strated, it is at all events confirmed by the
well-known influence which an excited state of
the digestive, urinary and sexual organs exer
cises upon the content of bur dreams.
Nerve stimulus md bodily stimulus would
thus be the anatomical sources of dreams; that
is, according to many writers, the sole and ex
clusive sources of dreams.
But we have already considered a number'of
doubtful points, which seem to question,not, so
much the correctness of the somatic theory as
its adequacy.
However confidentthe representatives of this
theory may be of its factual basis—especially
in respect of the accidental and external nervestimuli, which may without difficulty be rec
ognized
in
the
dream-content—nevertheless
they have all come near to admitting that the
rich content of ideas found in dreams cannot
be
derived
from
the
external
nerve-stimuli
alone. In this connection Miss Mary Whiton
Calkins tested her own dreams, and those of a
second person, for a period of six weeks, and
found that the element of external sensory per
ception was demonstrable in only 13.2 per cent
and 6.7 per cent of these dreams respectively.
Only two dreams in the whole collection could
be referred to organic sensations. These statis-

[233a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
tics confirm what a cursory survey of our own
experience would:already have led us to suspect.r
A distinction has often; been made between
nerve-stimulus dreams which have already been
thoroughly investigated, and other forms of
dreams.
Spitta, for example, divided; dreams
into nerve-stimulus dreams and
associationdreams. But it was obvious that this solution
remained unsatisfactory unless the fink between
the somatic sources of dreams and their idea
tional content could be indicated:
: "
In addition to the first objection, that of the
insufficient frequency of the external sources
of stimulus, a second objection presents itself,
namely, the inadequacy of the explanations of
dreams afforded by this category, of dreamsources. There are two things which the repre
sentatives of this theory have failed to explain:
firstly,why the truenature of the external stim
ulus is not recognized in the dream, but is con
stantly mistaken for something else; and sec
ondly, why the result of the reaction of the
perceiving mind to this,misconceived stimulus
should be so indeterminate and variable. We
have seen that Striimpell, in answer to these
questions, asserts that the mind, since it turns:
away from the outer world during sleep,is not.
in a position to give the correct interpretation
of the objective sensory stimulus, but is forced
to construct illusions on the basis of the indef
inite stimulation arriving from
many direct
tions. In his own words (Die •Natur und Entstehung der Traume,p. 108).
"When by an external or internal nerve-stim-;
ulus during sleep a feeling,or a complexOf feel
ings, or any sort of psychic process arises in
the mind, and is perceived by the mind* this
process calls up from the mind perceptual
images belonging to the sphere of the waking
experiences, that is to say, earlier perceptions,
either unembellished, or with the psychic values
appertaining to. them. It collects about itself,
as it were; a greater or* lesser number of such
images,; from which cthe impression resulting
from rthe nerve-stimulus receives its .psychic
value. In this connection it is commonly said;
as in ordinary language we say of the waking!
procedure, that the mind interprets in sleep
the impressions of nervous stimuli. The result
of this interpretation is the so-called nervestimulus dream—that, is, a dream the compo
nents of'which are conditioned by the fact that
a nerve-stimulus produces its psychical effect
in the life of the mind in accordance with the
laws of reproduction,"
>
r In.:all essential;points identical,withthis dpa-

[233b]
2«2g
trine is Wundt's statement that the concepts
of dreams proceed, at all events for the most
part, fromsensory stimuli, and especially from
the stimuli of general sensation, and are there
fore mostly phantastic illusions-^-probably only
to a small extent pure memory-conceptions
raised to the condition of hallucinations. To il
lustrate the relation between dream-content and
dreaniTstimuli which follows from this theory,
Striimpell makes use pf an exceUehtosimile. It
is "as though the ten fingers of a person igno--
rant iof music were to stray over the keyboard
of an instrument;'? The implication is that the
dream is not a psychic phenomenon, originate
ing from psychic motives, but the result of a
physiological stimulus, which expresses itself
in.psychic symptomatology because the appara
tus affected by the stimulus is not capable of
any other mode of expression. Upon a similar
assumption is based the explanation of obses
sions,which Meynert attempted in his famous
simile of- the dial on which individual figures
are most deeply embossed.
:Popular though this theory of the somatic
dream-stimuli
has
become,. and
seductive
though it may seem, it is none the less easy to
detect its weak point Every somatic dreamstimulus which provokes the psychic appara
tus in sleep to interpretation by the formation
of illusions may evoke an incalculable number
of such attempts at interpretation. It may con^
sequently be represented in the dream-content
by an extraordinary number of different con
cepts.1 But the theory of Striimpell and Wundt
cannot point to
any sort of
motive which
controls
the
relation
between
the
external
stimulus and
the
dream-concept chosen
to
interpret it, and therefore it cannot explain the'
"peculiar choice"; which the stimuli- "often:
enoughmake in the course of their productive
activity" (Lipps, Grundtatsachen des Seelen^
lebens, p. 170). Other objections may be raised"
against: the
fundamental
assumption behindthe theory of illusions—the assumption that
during sleep the mind is hot in a condition tO>
recognize the real nature of the objective sen?r
sory
stimuli. The old-physiologist Burdach
shows us that the mind is quite capable evenduring sleep of a correct interpretation of the
?• I' would "advise everyone to read the exact and de-'
tailed
records
(collected
in
two
volumes)
.of. the
dreams experimentally produced by Mourly Void in
order to convince himself how little the conditions of
the /-experiments help to explain the content of the in
dividual dream,-and how little such experiments help
ud towardsjttoi'understanding of; the problems of;
dreams;;;
:•
:
vsr ::.vj.'.,
.':•
. ">. -jlyy^u^ r-

[234a]
230
SlGBlUND
sensory impressions which reach it, and of
reacting in accordance with this correct inter
pretation, inasmuch as he demonstrates that
certain sensory impressions which seem im
portant to the individual may be excepted
from the general neglect of the sleeping mind
(as in the example of nurse and child), and
that one is more surely awakened by one's own
name than by an indifferent auditory impres
sion; all of which presupposes, of course, that
the mind discriminates between sensations, even
in sleep. Burdach infers from these observations
that we must not assume that the mind is in
capable of interpreting sensory stimuli in the
sleeping state, but rather that it is not sufficiently interested in them. The arguments which
Burdach employed in 1830 reappear unchanged
in the works of Lipps (in the year 1883), where
they are employed for the purpose of attack
ing the theory of somatic stimuli. According to
these arguments the mind seems to be like the
sleeper in the anecdote, who, on being asked,
"Are you asleep?" answers "No," and on being
again addressed with the words: ''Then lend me
ten florins," takes refuge in the excuse: "I am
asleep."
The inadequacy of the theory of somatic
dream-stimuli may be further demonstrated hr
another way. Observation shows that external
stimuli do not oblige me to dream, even though
these stimuli appear in the dream-content as
soon as I begin to dream—supposing that I do
dream. In response to a touch or pressure-stim
ulus experienced while I am asleep, a variety
of reactions are at my disposal. I may overlook
it, and find on waking that my leg has become
uncovered, or that I have been lying on an arm;
indeed, pathology offers me a host of examples
of powerfully exciting sensory and motor stim
uli of different kinds which remain ineffective
during sleep. I may perceive the sensation dur^
ing sleep; and through my sleep, as it were, as
constantly happens in the case of pain stimuli,
but without weaving the pain into the texture
of a dream. And thirdly, I may wake up in re
sponse to the stimulus, simply in order to avoid
it. Still another, fourth, reaction is possible:
namely, that the nerve-stimulus may cause me
to dream; but the other possible reactions oc
cur quite as
frequently as the reaction of
dream-formation. This, however, would not be
the case if the incentive to dreaming did not
lie outside the somatic dreamrsources.
Appreciating the importance of the abovementioned lacunae in the explanation of dreams
by somatic stimuli, other writers—Schemer, for

[234b]
Freud
example, and, following him, the philosopher
Volkelt—endeavoured to determine more pre
cisely the nature of the psychic activities which
cause the many-coloured images of our dreams
to proceed from the somatic stimuli, and in so
doing they approached the problem of the es
sential nature of dreams as a problem of psy
chology, and regarded dreaming as a psychic
activity. Schemer not only gave a poetical,
vivid and glowingdescription of the psychic pe
culiarities
which
unfold
themselves
in
the
course of dream-formation, but he also believed
that he had hit upon the principle of the method
the mind employs in dealing with the stimuli
which are offered to it. The dream, according
to Schemer, in the free activity of the phan
tasy, which has been released from the shackles
imposed upon it during the day, strives to rep
resent
symbolically the nature of the organ
from which the stimulus proceeds. Thus there
exists a sort of dream-book, a guide to the in
terpretation of dreams, by means of which
bodily sensations, the conditions of the organs,
and states of stimulation, may be inferred from
the dream-images. "Thus the image of a cat ex
pressed extreme ill-temper; the image of pale,
smooth pastry the nudity of the body. The hu
man body as a whole is pictured by the phan
tasy of the dream as a house, and the individ^
ual organs of the body as parts of the house.
In toothache-dreams a vaulted vestibule cor
responds to the mouth, and a staircase to the
descent from the pharynx to the oesophagus;
in the headache-dream a ceiling covered with
disgusting toad-like spiders is chosen to denote
the upper part of the head." "Many different
symbols are employed by our dreams for the
same organ: thus the breathing lung finds its
symbol in a roaring stove, filled with flames,
the heart in empty boxes and baskets, and the
bladder in round, bag-shaped or merely hollow
objects. It is of particular significance that at
the close of the dreamf the stimulating organ
or its function is often represented without dis
guise and usually on the dreamer's own bodjp.
Thus the toothache-dream commonly ends by
the dreamer drawing a tooth out of his mouth."
It cannot be said that this theory of dream-in
terpretation has found much favour with other
writers. It seems, above all, extravagant; and
so Schemer's readers have hesitated to give it
even the small amount of credit to which it is,
in my opinion, entitled. As will be seen, it tends
to a revival of dream-interpretation by means
of symbolism, a method employed by the an
cients; only the province from which the in-

[235a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
231
terpretation is to be derived is restricted to the
human body. The lack of a scientifically com
prehensible technique of interpretation must
seriously limit the applicability of Schemer's
theory. Arbitrariness in the interpretation of
dreams would appear to be by no means ex
clude^ especially since in this case also a stim
ulus may be expressed in the dream-content by
several Tepresentative
symbols;
thus
even
Schemer's follower Volkelt was unable to con
firm the representation of the body as a house.
Another objection is that here again the.dreamactivity is regarded as a useless and aimless ac
tivity of the mind, since, according to this the
ory, the mind is content with merely forming
phantasies around the stimulus with which it
is dealing, without even remotely attempting
to abolish the stimulus.
Schemer's theory of the symbolization of
bodily stimuli by the dream is seriously dam
aged by yet another objection. These bodily
stimuli are present at all times, and it is gen
erally assumed that the mind is more acces
sible to them during sleep than in the waking
state. It is therefore impossible to understand
why the mind does not dream continuously all
night long, and why it does riot dream every
night about all the organs. If one attempts to
evade this objection by positing the condition
that special excitations must proceed from the
eye, the ear, the teeth, the bowels, etc., in or
der to arouse the dream-activity, one is con
fronted with the difficulty of proving that this
increase of stimulation is objective; and proof
is possible only in a very few cases. If the
dream of flying is a symbolization of the up
ward and downward motion of the pulmonary
lobes, either this dream, as has already been re
marked by Striimpell, should be dreamt much
oftener, or it should be possible to show that
respiration is more active during this dream.
Yet a third alternative is possible—and it is the
most probable of all—namely, that now and
again special motives are operative to direct
the attention to the visceral sensations which
are constantly present. But this would take us
far beyond the scope of Schemer's theory.
The value of Scherner's and Volkelt's dis
quisitions resides in their calling our attention
to a number of characteristics of the dreamcontent which are in need of explanation, and
which seem to promise fresh discoveries. It is
quite true that symbolizations of the bodily or
gans and functions do occur in dreams: for ex
ample, that water in a dream often signifies a
may be represented by an upright staff, or a
pillar, etc. With dreams which exhibit a very
animated field of vision and brilliant colours,
in contrast to the dimness of other-dreams, the
interpretation that they are "dreams due to visual stimulation" can hardly be dismissed, nor
can we dispute the,participation:of illusions
formation in dreams -which contain noise and
a medley of voices. A dream like that of Scher/-
nei%: that two rows of fair handsome boys
stood facing one another on a bridge, attack
ing one another, and then resuming their posi
tions, until finally the dreamer himself sat down
on a bridge and drew a long tooth from his
jaw; or a similar dream of Volkelt's, in which
two rows of drawers played a part, and which
again ended in the extraction of a tooth; dreamformations of this kind, of which both writers
relate a great number, forbid our dismissing
Schemer's; theory as an idle invention without
seeking the kernel of truth which may be con*
tained in it. We are therefore confronted with
the task of finding a different explanation of the
supposed symbolization of the alleged dental
stimulus.
Throughout our consideration of the theory
of the somatic sources of dreams, I have re
frained from urging the argument which arises
from our analyses of dreams. If, by a procedure
which has not been followed by other writers
in their investigation of dreams, we can prove
that the dream possesses intrinsic value as psy
chic action, that a wish supplies the motive'of
its formation, and that the experiences of the
previous day furnish the most obvious mate
rial of its content, any other theory of dreams
which neglects such an important method of
investigation—and accordingly makes the dream
appear a useless and enigmatical psychic reac
tion to
somatic
stimuli—may be
dismissed
without special criticism. For in this case there
would have to be—and this is highly improb
able—two entirely different kinds of dreams, of
which only one kind has come under our ob
servation, while the other kind alone has been
observed by the earlier investigators. It only
remains now to find a place in our theory of
dreams for the facts on which the current doc
trine of somatic dream-stimuli is based;
We have already taken the first step in this
direction in advancing the thesis that the dream^
work is under a compulsion to elaborate into
a unified whole all the dream-stimuli which are
simultaneously present (p. 211above). We have
seen that when two or more experiences cadesire to urinate, that the male genital organ
pable of making an impression on the mind have

[235b]


[236a]
2#2
SigmundFreud
been left overrafrom the previous day,v the
wishes that result^from them are unitedirito
one- dream;^similarly, that the impressions
possessing psychic value and the indifferent
experiences-of-the previous day unite in the
dream-material;provided that connecting/ideas
between the; twocan be*established. Thus the
dream appears^o be:a>reaction to everything
which is-simultaneously present as actual'in the
sleeping mind;rAs-far as we have hithertocana^-
lysedthe dream-material, we-have discovered
it to be a collection of[psychic remnants and
memory-traces,which we were obligedto cred
it (on.account of the preference shown for re
cent and for infantile material) with a char
acter of psychological actuality, though the
-nature of this; actuality was not"'at the time
determinable;1-We shall now have little diffi
culty in predicting what will happen when to
these actualities of the memory fresh material
in the form of sensations is added during sleep.
These stimuU, again, are of importance to the
dream because they are actual; they are united
'with the other psychic actualities to provide
the material for dream-formation. To express it
in other words, the stimuli which occur dur
ing sleep are elaborated into a wish-fulfilment,
of which the other components are the psychic
remnants of daily experience with which we
are already familiar. This ?combination, how^
ever, is not inevitable; we have seen that more
than one kind ofhehaviour toward the physical
stimuli received during sleep is possible. Where
this combination is effected, a conceptual ma
terial for the dream-content has been found
which
will represent both kinds of dreamsources, the somatic as well as the psychic.
The nature of the dream is not altered when
somatic material is added to the psychic dreamsources ; it still remains a wish-fulfilment, no
matter how its expression is determined by the
actual material available.
I should like to find room here for a number
of peculiaritiesjwhich are able to modify the
significance of external;'stimuli for the dream.
I:imagine that a co-operation of individual,
physiological and accidental: factors, which der
pendonthe. circumstances of the moment, de
termines how; one will behave in individual
cases of more- Intensive objective stimulation
during sleep;
habitual or accidental profun
dity pf sleep, in conjunction with the intensity
of the stimulus, will in one case make it pos
sible so to suppress the stimulus that it will not
disturb the sleeper, while in another case it
will force the sleeper to wake, or will assist the

[236b]
attempt to subdue-the stimulus by weaving it
into the texture of the dream. In accordance
with the multiplicity of these-constellations:,
external objective stimuli will be; expressed
more rarely or more frequently in the case of
one-person than in that ofJanother. In my own
case, since. I am .an excellent sleeper; and ob
stinately refuse: to allow myselfto be disturbed
during sleep on any pretext whatever, this in
trusion of external causes of excitation into my
dreams is very rare,; whereas ipsychic motives
apparently cause me to dream very easily. In
deed,! have notedionly a single dream in which
an objective; painful .source of stimulation is
demonstrable, and'it will be highly instructive
to jsee what effect/the external stimulus had in
this particular dream, ;• -
-.^i
I am riding a gray horse, at first timidly and
awkwardly, as though I were merely carried
along. Then I meet a colleague; P, also on
horseback, and dressed in:tough frieze f he is
sitting ere'ct in the saddle; he calls my atten
tion to something (probably to the fact that I
have a very bad seat). Now I begin to feel
more and more at ease on the back of my high
ly intelligent horse; I sit more comfortably,
and I find that I am quite at home up here. My
saddle is a sort of pad, which completely fills
the space between:the neck and the rump of the
horse. I ride between two vans,.and just man
age to clear them. Afterriding up the street for
some distance, I turn round and wish to dis
mount, at first in front of a little: open chapel
which is built facing onto the street. Then I
do really dismount in front of a chapel which
stands near the first one; the hotel is in the
same street; I might let the horse go there by
itself, but I prefer to lead it, thither. It seems
as though 1[should be ashamedto^arrive there
on horseback. In front of the hotel there stands
ct page-boy, who shows me a note of mine
which has been found, and ridicules me on ac
count of it. On the note is written, doubly
underlined, <(Eat nothing," and then a second
sentence (indistinct): something like "Do not
work"; at the same time a hazy idea that I am
in a strange city, in which I do no work.
. It will not at once••he
apparent that this
dream originated under the influence, or rather
under the compulsion, of a pain-stimulus. The
day befpre, however,-! had]suffered; from boils,
which made every movement a torture, and;at
last a boil had; grown, to;the size;of an apple at
the root of the scrotum^ and had caused me
the most intolerable pains at every step; a fev
erish lassitude, lack of appetite, and the hard

[237a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
m
work which I had nevertheless done during the
day, had conspired with the pain to upset me.
I was not altogether in a condition to discharge
my duties as a physician, but in view of the na
ture and the location of the malady, it was pos
sible to imagine something else for which I was
most of all unfit, namely riding. Now it is this
very activity of riding into which I am plunged
by the dream; it is the most energetic denial
of the pain which imagination could conceive.
As a matter of fact, I cannot ride; I do not
dream of doing so; I never sat on a horse but
once—and then without a saddle—and I did not
like it. But in this dream I ride as though I
had no boil on the perineum; or rather, I ride,
just because I want to have none. To judge
from the description, my saddle is the poultice
which has enabled me to fall asleep. Probably,
being thus comforted, I did not feel anything
of my pain during the first few hours of my
sleep. Then the painful sensations made them
selves felt, and tried to wake me; whereupon
the dream came and said to me, soothingly:
"Go on sleeping, you are not going to wake!
You have no boil, for you are riding on horse
back, and with a boil just there no one could
ride!" And the dream was successful; the pain
was stifled, and I went on sleeping.
But the dream was not satisfied with "sug
gesting away" the boil by tenaciously holding
fast to an idea incompatible with the malady
(thus behaving like the hallucinatory -insanity'
of a iriother who has lost her child, or of a
merchant who has lost his fortune). In addi
tion, the details of the sensation denied and of
the image used to suppress it serve the dream
also as a means to connect other material ac
tually present in the mind with the situation in
the dream, and to give this material represen
tation. I am riding on a gray horse—the colour
of the horse exactly corresponds with the pep
per-and-salt suit in which I last saw my col
league P in the country. I have been warned
that highly seasoned food is the cause of boils,
and in any case it is preferable as an aetiolog
ical
explanation to
sugar, which
might be
thought of in connection with furunculosis. My
friend P likes to ride the high horse with me
ever since he took my place in the treatment
of a female patient, in whose case I had per
formed great feats (Kunststucke: in the dream
I sit the horse at first sideways, like a trick-rid
er, Kunstreiter), but who really, like the horse
in the story of the Sunday equestrian, led me'
wherever she wished. Thus the horse
comes
to be a symbolic representation of a lady pa*

[237b]
tient (in the dream it is highly intelligent). I
feel quite at home refers to the position which
I occupied in the patient's household until I was
replaced by my colleague P. "I thought you
were safe in the saddle up there," one of my
few well-wishers among the eminent physicians
of the city recently said to me, with reference
to the same household. And it was a feat to
practise psychotherapy for eight to ten hours
a day, while suffering such pain, but I know
that I cannot continue my peculiarly strenu
ous work for any length of time without perfect
physical health, and the dream is full of dismal
allusions to the situation which would result if
my illness continued (the note, such as neuras
thenics carry and show to their doctors): Do
not work, do not eat. On further interpretation
I see that the dream-activity has succeeded in
finding its way from the wish-situation of rid
ing to some very early childish quarrels which
must have occurred between myself and a neph
ew, who is a year older than I, and is now liv
ing in England. It has also taken up elements
from my journeys in Italy: the street in the
dream is built up out of impressions of Verona
and Siena. A still deeper interpretation leads
to sexual dream-thoughts, and I recall what the
dream-allusions to that beautiful country were
supposed to mean in the dream of a female
patient who had never been to Italy (to Italy,
German:
gen Italien^Genitalien—genitals);
at the same time there are references to the
house in which I preceded my friend P as physi^
cian, and to the place where the boil is located,
In another dream, I was similarly successful
in Warding off a threatened disturbance of m^
sleep; this time the threat came from a sensory
stimulus. It was only chance, however, that en
abled me to discover the connection between
the dream and the accidental dream-stimulus;
and in this way to understand the dream. One
midsummer morning in a Tyrolese mountain
resort I woke with the knowledge that I had
dreamed: The Pope is dead. I was not able
to interpret this
short, nbn-visual dreahi. T
could remember only one possible basis of the
dream, namely, that shortly before this the
newspapers had reported that His Holiness was
slightly indisposed. But in the course of the
morning my wife asked me: "Did you hear the
dreadful tolling of the church bells this morn
ing?" I had no idea that I had heard it, but
now I understood my dream. It was the reac
tion of my need for sleep to the noise by which
the pious Tyroleans were trying to wake me.
I avenged myself on them by the concliisiorr

[238a]
234
SlGMUND
which formed the content.of my dream, and
continued to sleep, without any further inter
est in the tolling of the bells.
Among the dreams mentioned in the previous
chapters there are several which might serve
as examples of the elaboration of so-called
nerve-stimuli. The dream of drinking in long
draughts is such an example; here the somatic
stimulus seems to be the sole source of the
dream, and the wish arising from the sensation
•—thirst—the only motive for dreaming. We
find much the same
thing in other simple
dreams, where the somatic stimulus is able of
itself to generate a wish. The dream of the sick
woman who throws the cooling apparatus from
her cheek at night is an instance of an unusual
manner of reacting to a pain-stimulus with a
wish-fulfilment; it seems as though the patient
had temporarily succeeded in making herself
analgesic, and accompanied this by ascribing
her pains to a stranger.
My dream of the three Parcae is obviously a
hunger-dream, but it has contrived to shift the
need for food right back to the child's longing
for its mother's breast, and to use a harmless
desire as a mask for a more serious one that
cannot venture to express itself so openly. In
the dream of Count Thun we were able to see
by what paths an accidental physical need was
brought into relation with the strongest, but
also the most rigorously repressed impulses of
the psychic life. And when, as in the case re
ported by Gamier, the First Consul incorpor
ates the sound of an explodinginfernal machine
into a dream of battle before it causes him
to wake, the true purpose for which alone
psychic activity concerns itself with sensations
during sleep is revealed with unusual clarity. A
young lawyer, who is full of his first great bank
ruptcy case, and falls asleep in the afternoon,
behaves just as the great Napoleon did. He
dreams of a certain G. Reich in ffussiatyn,
whose acquaintance he has made in connection
with the bankruptcy case, but Hussiatyn (Ger
man: husten, to cough) forces itself upon his
attention still further; he is obliged to wake,
only to hear his wife—who is suffering from
bronchial catarrh—violently coughing.
Let us compare the dream of Napoleon I—
who, incidentally, was an excellent sleeper—
with that of the sleepy student, who was awak
ened by his landlady with the reminderthat he
had to go to the hospital, and who thereupon
dreamt himself into a bed in the hospital, and
then slept on, the underlying reasoning being
as follows: If I am already in the hospital, I

[238b]
Freud
needn't get up to go there. This is obviously a
convenience-dream; the sleeper frankly admits
to himself his motive in dreaming; but he
thereby reveals one of the secrets of dreaming
in general. In a certain sense, all dreams are
convenience-dreams; they serve the purpose of
continuing to sleep instead of waking.
The
dream is the guardian of sleep, not its disturber.
In another place we shall have occasion to jus
tify this conception in respect to the psychic
factors that make for waking; but we can al
ready demonstrate its applicability to the ob
jective external stimuli. Either the mind does
not concern itself at all with the causes of sen
sations during sleep, if it is able to carry this
attitude through as against the intensity of the
stimuli, and their significance, of which it is
well aware; or it employs the dream to deny
these stimuli; or, thirdly, if it is obliged to
recognize the stimuli, it seeks that interpreta
tion of them which will represent the actual
sensation as a component of a desired situation
which is compatible with sleep. The actual sen
sation is woven into the dream in order to de
prive it of its reality. Napoleon is permitted to
go on sleeping; it is only a dream-memory of
the thunder of the guns at Arcole which is try
ing to disturb him.1
The wish to sleep, to which the conscious
ego has adjusted itself, and which (together
with the dream-censorship and the "secondary
elaboration" to be mentioned later) represents
the ego's contribution to the dream, must thus
always be taken into account as a motive of
dream-formation, and everysuccessful dream is
a fulfilment of this wish. The relation of this
general,
constantly
present,
and
unvarying
sleep-wish to the other wishes of which now
one and now another is fulfilled by the dreamcontent, will be the subject of later considera
tion. In the wish to sleep we have discovered
a motive capable of supplying the deficiency
in the theory of Striimpell and Wundt, and of
explaining the perversity and capriciousness of
the interpretation of the external stimulus. The
correct interpretation, of which the sleeping
mind is perfectly capable, would involve active
interest, and would require the sleeper to wake;
hence, of those interpretations which are pos
sible at all, only such are admitted as are ac
ceptable to the,.dictatorial censorship .of the
sleep-wish. The logic of dream situations would
run, for example: "It is the nightingale, and.
not the lark." For if it is the lark, love's night
1The two sources from which I know of this dream
do not entirely agree as to its content.

[239a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
235
is at an end. From among the interpretations
of the stimulus which are thus admissible, that
one is selected which can secure the best con
nection with the wish-impulses that are lying
in wait in the mind. Thus everything is definite
ly determined, and nothing is left to caprice;
The misinterpretation is not an illusion, but—if
you will—an excuse. Here again, as in substitu
tion by displacement in the service of the
dream-censorship, we have an act of deflection
of the normal psychic procedure.
If the external nerve-stimuli and the inner
bodily stimuli are sufficiently intense to com
pel psychic attention, they represent—that is,
if they result in dreaming at all, and not in
waking—a fixed point for dream-formation, a
nucleus in the dream-rmaterial, for which, an
appropriate wish-fulfilment is sought, just as
(see above) mediating ideas between two psy
chical dream-stimuli are sought. To this ex
tent it is true of a number of dreams that the
somatic
element dictates the
dream-content.
In this extreme case even a wish that is not
actually present may be aroused'for the pur
pose of dream-formation. But the dream can
not do otherwise than represent a wish in some
situation as fulfilled; it is, as it were, con
fronted with the task of discovering what wish
can be represented as fulfilled by the given
sensation. Even if this given material is of a
painful or disagreeable character, yet it is not
unserviceable for the purposes of dream-forma
tion. The psychic life has at its disposal even
wishes whose
fulfilment
evokes
displeasure,
which seems a contradiction, but becomes per
fectly intelligible if we take into account the
presence of two sorts of psychic instance and
the censorship that-subsists between them.
In the psychic life there exist, as we have
seen, repressed wishes, which belong to the first
system, and to whose fulfilment the second sys
tem is opposed. We do not mean this in a his
toric sense—that such wishes have once existed
and have subsequently been destroyed. The doc
trine of repression, which we need in the study
of psychoneuroses, asserts,that such repressed
wishes still exist, but simultaneously with an in
hibition which weighs them down. Language has
hit upon the truth when it speaks of the sup
pression (sub-pression, or pushing under) of
such impulses. The psychic mechanism which
enables such suppressed wishes to force their
way to realization is retained in being and in
working order. But if it happens that such a
suppressed wish is fulfilled, the vanquished in
hibition of the second system (which is ca

[239b]
pable of consciousness) is then expressed as
discomfort. Arid, in order to
conclude this
argument:
If
sensations
of
a
disagreeable
character which originate from somatic sources
are present during sleep, this constellation is
utilized by the dreams-activity to procure the
fulfilment—^-with more or less maintenance of
the
censorship—of an otherwise suppressed
wish.
This state of affairs makes possible a certain
number of anxiety-dreams, while others of these
dream-formations which are unfavourable to
the wish-theory exhibit a different mechanism.
For the anxiety in dreams may of course be Of
a psychoneurotic character, originating in psy
cho-sexual excitation, in which case, the anx
iety corresponds to repressed libido. Then this
anxiety, like the whole anxiety-dream, has the
significance of a neurotic symptom, and we
stand at the dividing-line where the wish-fuL<
filling tendency of dreams is frustrated. But in
other anxiety-dreams the feeling
of anxiety
comes from somatic sources (as in the case of
persons suffering from pulmonary: or cardiac
trouble, with occasional difficulty in breathing)-,
and then it is used to help such strongly sup
pressed wishes to attain fulfilment in a dream,
the dreaming of which from psychic motives
would have resulted in the same release of anx
iety. It is not difficult to reconcile these two
apparently contradictory cases. When two psy
chic formations, an affective inclination and a
conceptual content, are intimately connected,
either one being actually present will evoke the
other, even in a dream; now the anxiety of so
matic origin evokes the suppressed conceptual
content, now it is the released conceptual con
tent, accompanied by sexual excitement, which
causes the release of anxiety. In the one case,
it may be said that a somatically determined
affect is psychically interpreted; in the other
case, all is of psychic origin, but the content
which has been suppressed is easily replaced
by a somatic interpretation which fits the anx
iety. The difficulties which lie in the way1 of
understanding all this, have little to do with
dreams; they are due to the fact that in dis
cussing these points we are touching upon the
problems of the development of anxiety and of
repression.
The general aggregate of bodily sensation
must undoubtedly be included among the domi
nant dream-stimuli of
internal bodily origin.
Not that it is capable of supplying the dreamcontent; but it forces the dream-thoughts tp
make a choice from the material destined to

[240a]
236
SlGMTJNDFkEUD
serve the purpose of representation in the
dream-content, inasmuch as it brings within
easy reach that part of the material which is
adapted to its own character, and holds theTrest
at a distance* Moreover, this general feeling*
which survives from the preceding day,.is of
course connected with the psychic residues that
are significant for the dream. Moreover, this
feeling itself may be either maintained or over
come in the:dream, so that it may, if it is pain
ful^ veer round into its opposite.
If the somatic sources of excitation during
sleep—that is, the sensations of sleep-r-are not
of unusual intensity, the part which they play
in dream-formation is, in my judgment, sim
ilar to that of those impressions of the day
which are still recent, but of no great signifi
cance. I mean that they are utilized for the
dream-formation, if they are of such a kind
that they can be united with the conceptual
content of the psychic dream-source, but not
otherwise. They are treated as a cheap everready material, which can be used whenever
it is needed, and not as valuable material which
itself prescribes the manner in which it must
be utilized. I might suggest the analogy of a
connoisseur giving an artist a rare stone, a piece
of onyx, for example, in order that it may be
fashioned into a work of art. Here the size of
the stone, its colour, and its markings help to
decide what head or what scene shall be rep
resented; while if he is dealing with a uniform
and abundant material such as marble or sandstone^ the artist is guided only: by the idea
which takes shape in his mind. Only in this
way, it seems to me, can we.explain the fact
that the dream-content furnished by physical
stimuli of somatic origin which are not unusu
ally accentuated does not make its appearance
in all dreams and every night.1
Perhaps an example which takes us back to
the interpretationof dreams will best illustrate
my meaning. One day I was trying to under
stand the significance of the sensation of being
inhibited, of not being able to move from the
spot, of not being able to get something done,
etc., which occurs so frequently in dreams, and
is so closely allied to anxiety. That night I had
the following dream: I am very incompletely
dressed, and I go from a flat on the groundfloor up a flight of stairs to an upper story.In
1 Rank has shown, in a number of studies, that cer
tain awakening-dreams provoked by organic stimuli
(dreams of urination and ejaculation) are especially
calculated to demonstrate the conflict between the need
for sleep and the demands of the organic need, as well
as the influence of the latter on the dream-content.

[240b]
doing this I jump_ up three stairs at a time, and
I dm glad to find that I can mount the stairs
so quickly. Suddenly I notice that a servantmaid is coming down the stairs—that is, to
wards, me. I am ashamed, and try to hurry
away, and now comes this feeling of being in
hibited; I am. glued to the stairs, and cannot
move from\ the.spot.
>
Analysis.'/Thesituation of the dream is taken
from an every-day reality. In a house in Vienna
I have two apartments* which are connected
only; by the main .staircase. My consultationrooms and my study are on the raised groundfloor j and my living-rooms are on the first floor.
Late at night, when I have finished my work
downstairs, I go upstairs to my bedroom. On
the evening before the dream I had actually
gone this short distance with my garments in
disarray—that is, I had taken off my collar, tie
and cuffs; but in the dream this had changed
into a more advanced, but, as usual, indefinite
degree of undress. It is a habit of mine to run
up two or three steps at a time; moreover,
there was a wish-fulfilment recognized even in
the dream, for the ease with which I run up
stairs reassures me as to the condition of my
heart. Further, the manner in which I run up
stairs is an effective contrast to the sensation
of being inhibited, which occurs in the second
half of the dream. It shows me—what needed
no proof—-that dreams have no difficulty in
representing motor actions fully and completely
carried out; think, for example, of flying in
dreams!
But the stairs up which I go are not those of
my own house; at first I do not recognize them;
only the person coming towards me informs
me of their whereabouts. This woman is the
.maid of an old lady whom I visit twice daily
in order to give her hypodermic injections; the
stairs, too, are precisely similar to those which
I have to climb twice a day in this old lady's
house.
How do these stairs and this woman get into
my dream? The
shame of not
being fully
dressed is undoubtedly of a sexual character;
the servant of whom I dream is older than I,
surly, and by no means attractive. These, ques
tions remind me
of
the following incident:
When I pay my morning visit at this house I
am usually seized with a desire to clear my
throat; the sputum falls on the stairs. There
is no spittoon on either of the two floors, and
I consider that the stairs should be kept clean
not at my expense, but rather by the provision
of a spittoon. The housekeeper, another elder-

[241a]
The Interpretation m
Dreams
237
ly, curmudgeonly person, but, as I willingly ad^-
mit, a woman of cleanly instincts* takes a difr
ferent view of the matter. She lies in wait for
me, to see whether I shall take the liberty re
ferred to, and, if she sees that I do, I can dis
tinctly hear her growl. For days thereafter,
when we meet she refuses to greet me with the
customary signs of respect. On the day before
the dream the housekeeper's attitude, was rein
forced by that of the maid. I had just finished
my usual hurried visit to the patient when the
servant confrontedI me in the ante-room, ob
serving: "You might as well have wiped. your
shoes today, doctor, before you came into the
room. The red carpet is all dirty again from
your feet." This Is the only justification for the:
appearance,of the stairs and the maid in my
dream.
Between my leaping upstairs and my spitting
on the stairs there is an intimate connection.
Pharyngitis
and
cardiac
troubles
are
both
supposed to be punishments for the vice of
smoking, on account of which vice my own
housekeeper does not credit me with excessive
tidiness, so that my reputation suffers in both
the houses which my dream fuses into one.
I must postpone.the further interpretation
of this dream until I can' indicate the origin of
the typical dream of being incompletely clothed.
In the meantime, as a provisional deduction
from the dream just related, I note that the
dream-sensation of inhibited movement is ak
ways aroused at a point where a certain con
nection requires it. A peculiar condition of my
motor system during sleep cannot be respon
sible for this dream-content, since a moment
earlier I found myself, as though in confirma-*
tion of this fact, skipping lighty up the stairs.
D. Typical Dreams
Generally.speaking, we are not in a position to
interpret another person's dream if he is un
willing
to
furnish us
with the unconscious
thoughts which lie behind the dream-content,
and for this reason the practical applicability
of our method of dream?interpretation is often
seriously
restricted;1 - But there are
dreams
which exhibit a complete contrast to the in
dividual's
customary
liberty to
endow
his
dream-world with a special individuality, there1 The statement that our method of dream-interpre
tation is inapplicable when we have not at our disposal
the dreamer's association-material must be
qualifiedIn one case our work of interpretation is independent
of these associations: namely, when the dreamer makes
Use of symbolic elements in his: dream. We'then em
ploy what is,
strictly speaking, a second auxiliary!
method of
dream-interpretation. (See below);
•;•<

[241b]
by making it inaccessible to an alien under-r
standing: there are a number of dreams which
almost every one has dreamed in the same
manner, and of which we are accustomed t:o
assume that they have the same significance
in the case of everyi dreamer. A peculiar inter
est attaches to these typical dreams, because^
no matter who dreams them^ they presumably
all derive from the same sources, so that they
would seem to be particularly fitted to provide
us with information as to the sources of dreams.
With quite special expectations, therefore, we
shall proceed to test our technique of dreaminterpretation on these typical dreams, and only
with extreme reluctance: shall we admit that
precisely in respect of this material our meth^
odis not fully verified. In the interpretation of
typical dreams we as a rule fail to obtainthose
associations from the dreamer which in other
cases have led us to comprehension of the
dream, or else these associations are confused
and inadequate, so-"thatthey do not help us to
solve our problem.
Why this is the case, and how we can remedy
this defect in our technique, are points which
will be discussed in a later chapter. The reader
will then understand why I can deal with only
a few: of the group of typical dreams in this
chapter, and why I have postponed the discus
sion of the others.
„,(a.):The embarrassment-Dream of
Nakedness
,
In a dream in which one »is naked or scantily
clad in the presence of strangers, it sometimes
happens that one is not in the least ashamed of
one's condition. But the dream of nakedness
demands, our attention only when shame and
embarrassment are felt in it, when one wishes
to escape or to hide, and when one feels the
strange inhibition of being unable to stir from
the spot, and of being utterly powerless to al
ter the painful situation. It is only in this con
nection that' the dream is typical; otherwise
the nucleus of its content may be involved in
all sorts of other connections, or may be -re
placed by individual amplifications. The essen
tial ipoint is that one has a painful feeling; of
shame, and is anxious to hide one's nakedness,
usually by means of locomotion, but is abso
lutely unable- to do soal believe that the great
majority of my readers will at some time have
found themselves in this situation in a dream.
The nature;;and ^manner of the exposure is
usually rather >Vague. The dreamer will say,
perhaps, "I was in my chemise,": but this;.ls;

[242a]
238
Sigmund Freud
rarely a clear image; in most cases the lack of
clothing is so indeterminate that it is described
in narrating the dream by an alternative: "I
was in my chemise or my petticoat." As a rule
the deficiency in clothing is not serious enough
to justify the feeling of shame attached to it.
For a man who has served in the army, naked
ness is often replaced by a manner of dressing
that is contrary to regulations. "I was in the
street without my sabre, and I saw some offi
cers approaching," or "I had no collar," or "I
was wearing checked civilian trousers," etc.
The persons before whom one is ashamed
are almost always strangers; whose 'faces re
main indeterminate. It never happens, in the
typical dream, that one is reproved or even no-*
ticed on account of the lack of clothing which
causes one such embarrassment. On the con
trary, the people in the dream appear to be
quite indifferent; or, as I was able to note in
one particularly vivid dream, they have stiff
and solemn expressions. This gives us food for
thought.
The dreamer's embarrassment and the spec
tator's
indifference
constitute
a
contradition
such as often occurs in dreams. It would be
more in keeping with the dreamer's feelings if
the strangers were to look at him in astonish
ment, or were to laugh at him, or be outraged.
I think, however, that this obnoxious feature
has been displaced by wish-fulfilment, while
the embarrassment is for some reason retained,
so that the two components are not in agree
ment. We have an interesting proof that the
dream which is partially distorted by wish-ful
filment has not been properly understood; for
it has been made the basis of a fairy-tale fa
miliar to us all in Andersen's version of The
Emperor's New Clothes, and it has more re
cently received poetical treatment by Fulda in
The Talisman. In Andersen's fairy-tale we are
told of two impostors who weave a costly gar
ment for the Emperor, which shall, however,
be visible only to the good and true. The Em
peror goes forth clad to this invisible garment,
and since the imaginary fabric serves as a sort
of touchstone, the people are frightened into,
behaving as though they did not notice the Em
peror's nakedness.
- But this is really the situation in our dream.
It is not very venturesome to assume that-the
unintelligible dream-content has provided an
incentive to invent a state of undress which
gives meaning to the situation present inithe
memory. This situation is thereby-robbed of its
original meaning, and made to serve alien ends.

[242b]
But we shall see that such a misunderstanding
of the dream-content often occurs through the
conscious activity of a second psychic system,
and is to be recognized as a factor of the final
form of the dream; and further, that in the de
velopment of obsessions and phobias similar
misunderstandings—still, of course, within the
same psychic personality—play-a decisive part.
It is even possible to specify whence the ma
terial for the fresh interpretation of the dream
is taken. The impostor is the dream, the Em
peror is the dreamer himself, and the moraliz
ing tendency betrays a hazy knowledge of the
fact that there is a question, in the latent
dream-content, of forbidden wishes, victims of
repression. The connection in which such dreams
appear during my analysis of neurotics proves
beyond a doubt that a memory of the dream
er's earliest childhood lies at the foundation of
the dream. Only in our childhood was there:a
time when we were seen by our relatives, as
well as by strange nurses, servants and visitors,
in a state of insufficient clothing, and at that
time we were not ashamed of our nakedness.1
In the case of many rather older children it
may be observed that being undressed has an
exciting effect upon them, instead of making
them feel ashamed. They laugh, leap about,
slap or thump their own bodies; the mother, or
whoever is present, scolds them, saying: "Fie,
that is shameful—you mustn't do that!" Chil
dren often show a desire to display themselves;
it is hardly possible to pass through a village in
country districts without meeting a two-or
three-year-old child who lifts up his or her
blouse or frock before the traveller, possibly
in his honour. One of my patients has retained
in his conscious memory a scene from
his
eighth year, in which, after undressing for bed,
he wanted to dance into his little sister's room
in his shirt, but was prevented by the servant.
In the history of the childhood of neurotics,
exposure •before children of the opposite sex
plays a prominent part; in paranoia, the delu
sion of being observed while dressing and un
dressing may be directly traced to these experi
ences; and among those who have remained
perverse, there is a class in whom the childish
impulse is accentuated into a symptom: the
class of exhibitionists.
This age of childhood, in which the sense of
shame is unknown, seems a paradise when we
look back upon it later, and paradise itself is
1 The child appears in the fairy-tale also, for there a
little child suddenly cries out: "But he hasn't anything
on at all!"

[243a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
239
nothing but the mass-phantasy of the child
hood of the individual. This is why in paradise
men are naked and unashamed, until the mo
ment arrives when shame and fear awaken; ex
pulsion follows, and sexual life and cultural de
velopment begin. Into this paradise dreams can
take us back every night; we have already ven
tured the conjecture that the impressions of
our earliest childhood (from the prehistoric
period until about the end of the third year)
crave reproduction for their own sake, per
haps without further reference to their con
tent, so that their repetition is a wish-fulfilment.
Dreams of nakedness, then, are
exhibitiondreams.1
The nucleus of anr exhibition-dream is fur
nished by one's own person, which is seen not
as that of a child, but as it exists in the pres
ent, and by the idea of scanty clothing which
emerges indistinctly, owing to the superimposition of so many later situations of being par
tially clothed, or out of consideration for the
censorship; to these elements are added the
persons in whose presence one is ashamed. I
know of no example in which the actual spec
tators of these infantile exhibitions reappear
in a dream; for a dream is hardly ever a sim
ple recollection. Strangely enough, those per
sons who are the objects of our sexual interest
in childhood are omitted from all reproduc
tions, in dreams, in hysteria or in obsessional
neurosis; paranoia alone restores the specta
tors, and is fanatically convinced of their pres
ence, although they remain unseen. The substi
tute for these persons offered by the dream,
the number of strangers who take no notice of
the spectacle offered them, is precisely the
counter-wish to that single intimately-known
person for whom the exposure was intended.
"A number of strangers," moreover, often oc
cur in dreams in all sorts of other connections;
as a counter-wish they always signify a secret.2
It will be seen that even that restitution of the
old state of affairs that occurs in paranoia com
plies with this counter-tendency. One is no
longer alone;
one is
quite positively being
watched; but the spectators are a number of
strange, curiously indeterminate people.
Furthermore, repression finds a place in the
exhibition-dream. For the disagreeable sensa1 Ferenczi
has
recorded
a
number
of
interesting
dreams of nakedness in women which were without
difficulty traced to the infantile delight in exhibition
ism, but which differ in many, features from the typical
dream of nakedness discussed above.
2 For obvious reasons
the
presence of
the whole
family in the dream has the same significance.

[243b]
tion of the dream is, of course, the reaction on
the part of the second psychic-instance to the
fact that, the exhibitionistic scene which has
been condemned by the censorship has never
theless succeeded in presenting itself. The only
wav, to avoid this sensation would be to refrain
from reviving the scene.
In a later chapter we shall deal once again
with the feeling of inhibition. In our dreams it
represents to perfection a conflict of the will, a
denial. According to our unconscious purpose,
the exhibition is to proceed; according to the
demands of the censorship, it is to come to an
end.
The relation, of our typical-dreams to fairy
tales and other fiction and poetry is neither
sporadic nor accidental. Sometimes the pene
trating insight of the poet has analytically rec
ognized the process of transformation of which
the poet is otherwise the instrument, and has
followed it up in the reverse direction; that is
to say, has traced a poem to a dream. A friend
has called my attention to the following pas
sage in G. Keller's Der Grune Heinrich: "I do
not wish, dear Lee, that you should ever come
to realize from experience the exquisite and
piquant truth in the situation of Odysseus,
when he appears, naked and coveredwith mud,
before Nausicaa and her playmates! Would
you like to know what it means? Let us for a
moment consider the incident closely. If you
are ever parted from your home, and from all
that is dear to yoUj and wander about in a
strange country; if you have seen much and ex
perienced much; if you have cares and sorrows,
and are, perhaps, utterly wretched and forlorn,
you will some night inevitably dream that you
are approaching your home; you will see it
shining and glittering in the loveliest colours;
lovely and gracious figures will come to meet
you; and then you will suddenly discover that
you are ragged, naked, and covered with dust.
An indescribable feeling of shame and fear
overcomes you; you try to cover yourself, to
hide, and you wake up bathed in sweat. As long
as humanity exists, this will be the .dream of
the carerladen, tempest-tossed man, and thus
Homer has drawn this situation from the profoundest
depths
of
the
eternal' nature
of
humanity."
What, are the profoundest depths of the
eternal nature of humanity, which the poet
commonly hopes to awaken in his listeners, but
these stirrings of the psychic life which are
rooted in that age of childhood, which subse
quently becomes prehistoric? Childish wishes,

[244a]
240
Sigmtjnd Freud
how suppressed and forbidden, break into the
dream behind the •unobjectionable and permis
sibly conscious0wishes of the homeless man,
and it is for this reason that the dream which
is objectified in the legend of Nausicaa regu
larly develops into an anxiety-dream.
«'
.My own dream of hurrying upstairs, rwhich
presently changed intobeing glued to thestairs,
is likewise an exhibition-dream, for it reveals
the essential ingredients of such a dream. It
must therefore be possible to trace it back to
experiences in my childhood, and the knowl
edge of these should enable us to conclude how
far the servant's behaviour to me (i.e., her re
proach that I had soiled the carpet) helped her
to secure the position which she occupies in the
dream. Now I am actually able to furnish the
desired explanation. One learns in a psycho
analysis to interpret temporal proximity by
material connection; two ideas which are ap
parently without connection, but which Occur
in immediate
succession, belong to a unity
which has to Ipe deciphered; just as an a and a
b, when written in succession, must be pro^
nounced as one syllable, a6. It is just the same
with the interrelations of dreams; The dream
of the stairs has been taken from a series of
dreams with whose other members I am fa
miliar, having interpreted them. A dream in
cluded in this series must belong to the same
context. Now, the other dreams of the series
are based on the memory of a nurse to whom
I was entrusted for a season, from the time
when I was still at the breast to the age of two
and a half, and of whoma hazy recollectionhas
remained in my consciousness. According to in
formation which I recently obtained from my
mother, she was old and ugly, but very intelH
gent and thorough; according to the inferences
which I
am
justified in drawing from my
dreams, she did not always treat me quite
kindly, but spoke harshly to me when I showed
insufficient understanding of the necessity for
cleanliness. Inasmuch as the maid endeavoured
to continue my education in this respect, she is
entitled to be treated, in my dream, as an in
carnation of the prehistoric old woman. It is to
;be assumed, of course, that the child was fond
of his teacher iri spite of her harsh behaviour^1
1 A supplementary interpretation of this dream: To
spit (spuckeii) on the stairs, since spuken (to haunt)
is the occupation of spirits (cf. English, "spook"), led
me by a free translation to espirit d'escalier. "Stairwit" means unreadiness at repartee, (Scklagfertigkeit
:== literally: "readiness to hit out") with which I re-
.ally have to reproach myself. But was the nurse de
ficient in Scklagfertigkeit?

[244b]
(b) Dreams of the Death of Beloved •
Persons
<••::
, : •v
Another series of dreams which may be called
typical are those whose content is that a be
loved relative, a parent, brother, sister, child,
or the like, has died. We must at once distin
guish two classes of such dreams: those in
which the dreamer remains unmoved, and those
in which he feels profoundly grieved by the
death of the beloved person, even expressing
this grief by shedding tears in his sleep.
We may
ignore the
dreams
of the first
group; they have no claim to be reckoned as
typical. If they are analysed, it is found that
they signify something that is not contained in
them, that they are intended to mask another
wish of some kind. This is
the case in the
dream of the aunt who sees the only son of
her sister lying on a bier (p. 201). The dream
does not mean that she desires the death of
her little nephew; as we have learned, it merely
conceals the wish to see a certain beloved per
son again after a long separation—the same
person whom she had seen after as long an
interval at the
funeral of
another nephew.
This wish, which is the real content of the
dream, gives no cause for sorrow, and for that
reason no sorrow is felt in the dream. We see
here that the feeling contained in the dream
does not belong to the manifest, but to the lat
ent dream-content, and that the affective con
tent has remained
free from the; distortion
which has befallen the conceptual content.
It is otherwise with those dreams in which
the death of a beloved relative is imagined, and
in which a painful affect is felt. These signify,
as their content tells us, the wish that the per
son in question mightdie; and since I may here
expect that the feelings of all my readers and
of all who have had such dreams will lead them
to reject my explanation, I must endeavour to
rest my proof on the broadest possible basis. ;
; We have already cited a dream from whiph
we could see that the wishes represented 'as
fulfilled in
dreams
are not always current
wishes. They may also be bygone, discarded,
buried and repressed wishes, which we must
nevertheless credit with a sort of continued ex
istence, merely on account of their reappear
ance in a dream. They are not dead, like per
sons who have died, in the sense that we know
death, but are rather likje the shades in the
Odyssey which awaken to, a certain degree of
life so soon as they have1 drunk blood. The
dream of the dead child in the box (p. 202)
contained a wish that had been present fifteen

[245a]
The Intierpretation of Dreams
241
years earlier, and which had at that time been
frankly admitted as real. Fufther^-and this;
perhaps; is not unimportant from the stand
point of the theory of dreams^—a recollection
frdm the dreamer's earliest childhood was at
the{ root of this wish also: When the dreamer
was a little child—but exactly when cannot be
definitely
determined—she
heard
that
her
mother, during the pregnancy of which she was
the outcome^ had fallen into a profound emo
tional depression, and had passionately Wished
for the death of the child in her womb. Having
herself grown up and become pregnant, she was
only following the example of her mother.
If anyone dreams that his father or mother,
his brother or sister, has died, and his dream
expresses grief, I should never adduce this as
proof that he wishes any of them dead now.
The theory of dreams does not go as far as to
require-this; it is satisfied with concluding that
the dreamer has wished them dead at some
time or other during his childhood!:I fear, how
ever, that this limitation will not go far to ap
pease my critics; probably they will just as
energetically deny the possibility that they ever
had such thoughts, as they protest that they do
not harbour them now. I must, therefore, re<-
construct a portion of the submerged infantile
psychology on the basis of the evidence of the
present1
Let us first of all consider the relation of
children to their brothers and sisters. I do not
know why we presuppose that it must be a lov
ing one, since examples of enmity among adult
brothers and sisters are frequent in everyone's
experience, and since we are so often able to
verify the fact that this estrangement originat
ed during childhood, or has always existed.
Moreover, many adults who today are devoted
to their brothers and sisters, and support them
in adversity, lived with them in almost continu
ous enmity during their childhood. The eldet
child ill-treated the younger, slandered himy
and robbed him of his toys; the younger was
consumed with helpless fury against the elder,
envied and feared him, or his earliest impulse
toward liberty and his first revolt against1inr
justice were directed against his oppressor; The
parents say that the children do not agree, and
cannot find the reason for it. It is-not difficult
to see that the character even of a well-be
haved child is not the character we should wish
to find in an adult. A child is absolutely egois1Cf. also "Analysis of a Phobia in a Five-year-old
Boy,"
Collected
Papers,
ill;
and
"On
the
Sexual
Theories of Children/" /to., n.

[245b]
tical; heteels his Wants acutely, and strives re
morselessly to satisfy them, especially against
his competitors^ other children, and first of all
against his brothers and sisters. And yet we do
not on that accountcall a child wicked—v?e call
him- naughty7; he is not responsiblefor his mis4
deeds, either in our owh judgment 6r in the
eyes of the law. Andthis is as it should be; for
we may expect that within the very period of
life which we reckon as childhood, altruistic
impulses and morality will awake in: the little
egoist, and that, in the words •of Meynert, a
secondary ego Will overiay and inhibit the pri
mary ego. Morality, of course, does not develop
simultaneously in all its departments, and fur
thermore, the duration of the amoral period of
childhood differs in different individuals. Where
this morality fails to develop we are prone to
Speakof degeneration; but here the case is ob
viously one of arrested development. Where
the primary character is already overlaid by
the later development it may be at least par
tially uncovered again by an attack of hys
teria.
The
correspondence between
the
socalled hysterical character and that of a haugfc
ty Child is positively striking. The obsessional
neurosis, on the other hand, corresponds to a
super-morality, Which develops as a strong re
inforcement against the primary character that
is threateningto revive.
Many persons, then, who now love their
brothers and sisters, and who would feel be
reaved by their death, harbour in their uncon^
scious hostile wishes, survivals from an earlier
period, wishes which are able to realize them
selvesin dreams. It is;however, quite especially
interesting to observe the behaviour of little
children up to their third and fourth year for
wards their younger brothers or sisters. So far
the child has been the only one; now he is in
formed that the stork has brought a new baby.
The child inspects the new arrival, and ex
presses his opinion with decision: "The stork
had better take it back again!,,a
I seriously declare it as my opinion that a
child is able to estimate the disadvantages
which he has to expect on account of a new
comer. A connection of mine, who now gets on
?Hans, whose phdbia was the subject of the analysis
in the above-mentioned publication, dried out at the
age of three and a half, while feverish, shortly after
the birth of a sister: "But I don't want to have a little
sister."
In his
neurosis, eighteen
months later, he
frankly confessed the wish that his mother should drop
the child into the bath while hathing it, in order that
it might die. With altthis, Hans was1 a good-natured^
affectionate child, who soon, became fond of his sis-;
ter, and took her under his special protection.

[246a]
242
SlGMUlfD
very well with a. sister, who is four years her
junior, responded to the news of this sisters
arrival with the reservation: "But I shan't give
her my red cap, anyhow." If the child should
come to realize only at a later stage that its hap
piness may be.prejudiced by a younger bro
ther or sister, its enmity will be aroused at this
period. I know of a case where a girl, not three
years of age, tried to strangle an infant in its
cradle, because she suspectedthat its continued
presence boded her no good. Children at this
time of life are capable of a jealousy that is
perfectly evident and extremelyintense. Again,
perhaps the little brother or sister really soon
disappears, and the child once more draws to
himself the whole affection of the household;
then a new child is sent by the stork; is it not
natural that the favourite should conceive the
wish that the new rival may meet the same
fate as the earlier one, in order that he may be
as happy as he was before the birth of the first
child, and during the interval after his death?1
Of course, this attitude of the child towards
the younger brother or sister is, under normal
circumstances, a mere function of the differ
ence of age. After a certain interval the mater
nal instincts of the older girl will be awakened
towards the helpless new-born infant.
Feelings of hostility towards brothers and
sisters must occur far more frequently in chil
dren than is observed by their obtuse elders.2
In the case of my own children, who fol
lowed one another rapidly, I missed the oppor
tunity of making such observations, I am now
retrieving it, thanks to my little nephew, whose
undisputed domination was disturbed after fif
teen; months by the arrival of a feminine rival.
I hear, it-is true, that the young man behaves
very chivalrously toward his Httle sister, that
he kisses her hand and strokes her; but in spite
1 Such cases of death in the experience of children
may soon be forgotten in the family,^biit psycho-an
alytical investigation shows that they are very signifi
cant for a later neurosis.
2 Since the above was written, a great many observa
tions
relating, to
the
originally hostile attitude of
children
toward
their brothers and sisters, and
to
ward one of their parents, have been recorded in the
literature of
psycho-analysis.
One
writer,
Spitteler,
gives the following peculiarly sincereand ingeniousde
scription of this typical childish attitude as he experi
enced it in his earliest childhood:
"Moreover, there
was now a second Adolf. A little creature whom they
declared was my brother, but I could riot understand
wliat he could be for, or why they should pretend he
was a being like myself. I was sufficient unto my
self: what did I want with a brother? And he
was
not only useless, he was also even troublesome. When
I plagued my grandmother, he too wanted to plague
her; when I was wheeled about in the baby-carriage
be sat opposite me, and took up half the room, so
that we could not help kicking pne another."

[246b]
Freud
of this I have convinced myself that even be*
fore the completion of his second year he ^is
using his new command of language to criti
cize this person, who, to him, after all, seems
superfluous. Whenever the conversation turns
upon her he chimes in, and cries angrily: "Too
(l)ittle, too
(l)ittle!" During the last few
months, since the child has outgrown this idisparagement, owing to her splendid develop
ment, he has found another reason for his insist
ence that she does not deserve so much atten
tion. He reminds us, on every suitable pretext:
"She hasn't any teeth."8 We all of us recollect
the case of the eldest daughter of another sis
ter of mine. The child, who was then six years
of age, spent a full half-hour in going from one
aunt to another with the question: "Lucie can't
understand that yet, can she?" Lucie was her
rival—two and a half years younger.
I have never failed to come across this dream
of the death of brothers or sisters, denoting an
intense hostility, e.g., I have met it in all my
female patients. I have met with only one ex
ception, which could easily be interpreted into
a confirmation pf the rule. Once, in the course
of a sitting, when I was explaining this state of
affairs to a female patient, since it seemed to
have some bearing on the symptoms under con
sideration that day, she answered, to my as
tonishment,
that
she
had
never
had
such
dreams. But another dream occurred to her,
which presumably had nothing to do with the
case—a dream which she had first dreamed at
the age of four, when she was the youngest
child, and had since then dreamed repeatedly.
"A number of children, all her brothers and
sisters with her boy and girl cousins, were
romping about in a meadow. Suddenly they all
grew wings, flew up, and were gone." She had
no idea of the significance of this dream; but
we can hardly fail to recognize it as a dream of
thfc death of all the brothers and sisters, in its
original form, and but little influenced by the
censorship. I will venture to add the following
analysis of it: on the death of one out of this
large number of children—in this case the chil
dren of two brothers were brought up together
as: brothers and sisters—would not our dream
er, at that time not yet four years of age, have
asked some wise, grown-up person: "What be
comes of children when they are dead?" The
answer would probably have been: "They grow
8 The three-and-a-half-year-old Hans embodied his
devastating criticism of his little sister in these identi
cal words (loc<cit.). He assumed that she was unable
to speak on account of her lack of teeth.

[247a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
wings and become angels." After this explana
tion, all the brothers and sisters and cousins in
the dream now have wings, like angels and—
this is the important point—they fly away. Our
little angel-maker is left alone: just think, the
only one out of such a crowd! That the chil
dren romp about a meadow, from which they
fly away, points almost certainly to butterflies
—it is as though the child had been influenced
by the same association of ideas which led the
ancients to imagine Psyche, the soul, with the
wings of a butterfly.
Perhaps some readers will now object that
the inimical impulses of children toward their
brothers and sisters may perhaps be admitted/
but how does the childish character arrive at
such heights of wickedness as to desire the
death of a rival or a stronger playmate, as
though all misdeeds could be atoned for only
by death? Those who speak in this fashion for
get that the child's idea of being dead has little
but the word in common with our own. The
child knows nothing of the horrors of decay, of
shivering in the cold grave, of the terror of the
infinite Nothing, the thought of which the
adult, as all the myths of the hereafter testify,
finds so intolerable. The fear of. death is alien
to the child; and so he plays with the horrid
word, and threatens another child: "If you do
that again,you willdie,-just like Francis died";
at which the poor mother shudders, unable per
haps to forget that the greater proportion of
mortals do not survive beyond the years of
childhood. Even at the age of eight, a child re
turning from a visit to a natural history muse
um may say to her mother: "Mamma, I do
love you so; if you ever die, I am going to
have you stuffed and set you up here in the
room, so that I can always, always see you!"
So different from our own is the childish con
ception of being dead.1
Being dead means, for the child, who has
been spared the sight of the suffering that pre
cedes death, much the same as being gone, and
ceasing to annoy the survivors. The child does
not distinguish the means by which this ab
senceis brought about, whether by distance, or
estrangement, or death.2 If, during the child's
1To my astonishment, I was told that a highly intel
ligent boy of ten, after the sudden death of his father,
said: "I understand that father is dead, but I can't
see why he does not come home to supper." Further
material relating to this subject will be found in the
section "Kinderseele," edited by Frau Dr. von HugHellmuth, in Imago Vol. i-v, 1912-18.
2The observation of a father trained in psycho-anal
ysis was able to detect the very moment when his very
intelligent little daughter, age four, realized the dif
ference between being away and beingdead. The child

[247b]
243
prehistoric years, a nurse has been dismissed,
and if his mother dies a little while later, the
two experiences, as we discover by analysisj
form links of a chain in his memory. The fact
that the child does hot very intensely miss those
who are absent has been realized, to her sor
row, by many a mother; when she has returned
home from an absence of several weeks, and
has been told, upon inquiry: "The children
have not asked for their mother once;" But if
she really departs to-"that undiscovered coun
try from whose bourne no traveller returns,"
the children seemat first to have forgotten her,
and only subsequently do they beginto remem
ber their dead mother.
While, therefore, the child has its motives
for desiring the absence of another child, it is
lacking in all
those restraints which would
prevent it from clothing this wish in the form
of a death-wish; and the psychic reaction to
dreams of a death-wish proves that, in spite of
all the differences of content, the wish in the
case of the child is after all identical with the
corresponding wish in an adult.
If, then, the death-wish of a child in respect
of his brothers and sisters is explained, by his
childish egoism, which makes him regard his
brothers and sisters as rivals, how are we to
account for the same wish in respect of his
parents, who bestow their love on him, and sat
isfy his needs, and whose preservation he
ought to desire for thesevery egoisticalreasons-?
Towards a solution of this difficulty we may
be guided by our knowledge that the very great
majority of dreams pf the death of a parent
refer to the parent of the same sex as the
dreamer, so that a man:generally dreams of the
death of his father, and a woman of the death
ofher mother. I do not claim that thishappens
constantly; but that it happens in a great ma
jority of casesis so evident that it requires ex
planation by some factor of general signif
icance.3 Broadlyspeaking, it is as thougha sex
ual preference made itself felt at an early age,
was being troublesome at table, and noted that one of
the waitresses in the.pension was looking at her with
an expression of annoyance. "Josephine ought to be
dead," she thereupon remarked to her father. "But
why dead?" asked the father, soothingly. "Wouldn't it
be enough if she went away?" "No," replied the child,
"then she would come back again." To the uncurbed
self-love (narcissism) of the child, every inconvenience
constitutes the crime of Use majesti, and, as in the
Draconian code, the child's feelings prescribe for all
such crimes the one invariable punishment.
3The situation is frequently disguised by the inter
vention of a tendency to punishment, which, in the
form of a moral reaction, threatens the loss of the
beloved parent.

[248a]
244
SiGMUND Freud
as though the boy regarded his father, and the
girl hermother, asarival inlove—by whose re
moval, he or she could but profit.
Before rejecting this idea as monstrous, let
the reader again consider the actual relations
between parents and children. We must distin
guish between the traditional standard of con
duct, the filial piety expected in this relation,
and what daily observation shows us to be the
fact. More than one occasion for enmity lies
hidden amidst the relations of parents and chil
dren; conditions are present in the greatest
abundance under which wishes which cannot
pass the censorship are bound to arise. Let us
first consider the relation between father and
son. In my opinion the sanctity with whichwe
have endorsed the injunctions of the Deca
logue dulls our perception of the reality. Per
haps we hardly dare permit ourselves to per
ceivethat the greater part of humanity neglects
to obey the fifth commandment. In the lowest
as weiras in the highest strata of human so
ciety, filial piety towards parents is wont to
recede before other interests. The obscure leg
ends which have been handed down to us from
the primeval ages of human society in myth
ology andfolklore givea deplorable idea of the
despotic power of the father, and the ruthlessness with which it was exercised. Eronos de
vours his children,as the wild boar devours the
fitter of the sow; Zeus emasculates his father1
and takes his place as ruler. The more tyranni
cally the father ruled in the ancient family, the
more surely must the son, as his appointed suc
cessor, have assumed the position of an enemy,
and the greater must have been his impatience
to attain to supremacy through the death of his
father. Even in our own middle-class families
the father commonly fosters the growth Of the
germ of hatred which is naturally inherent in
the paternal relation, by refusing to allow the
son to be a free agent or by denying him the
means of becoming so. A physician often has
occasion to remarkthat a son's grief at the loss
of his father cannot quench his gratification
that he has at last obtained his freedom. Fathv
ers, as a rule, cling desperately to as much of
the sadly antiquated potestas patris farnilias2
as still survives in our modern society, and the
1 At least in some of the mythological accounts. Ac
cording to others, emasculation was inflicted only by
Kronos on his father Uranos.
With regard to the mythological significance of this
motive, cf. Otto Rank's Der Mythus von der Gebtirt
des Helden, In No. v of Schriften zur angew. Seelenkunde (1909), and Das Inzestmotiv in Dichtung und
Sage (.1912),.chap, ix, 2.
3 Authority of the father.—Ed.

[248b]
poetwho,like Ibsen,putsthe immemorial strife
between father and son in the foreground of
his drama is sure of his effect. The causes of
conflict between mother and
daughter arise
when the daughter grows up and finds herself
watched by her mother when she longs for real
sexual freedom, while the mother is reminded
by the budding beauty of her daughter that for
her the
time has come to
renounce sexual
claims.
All these circumstances are obvious to every
one, but they do not help us to explain dreams
of the death of their parents in persons for
whom filial piety has long since come to be un
questionable. We are, however, prepared by
the foregoing discussion to look for the origin
of a death-wish in the earliest years of child
hood.
In the case of psychoneurotics, analysis con
firms this
conjecture beyond all doubt. For
analysis tells us that the sexual wishes of the
child—in so far as they deserve this designation
in their nascent state—awaken at a very early
age, and that the earliest affection of the girlchild is lavished on the father, while the earli
est infantile desires of the boy are directed up
on the mother. For the boy the father, and for
the girl the mother, becomes an obnoxious rival,
and we have already shown, in the case of bro
thers and sisters, how readily in children this
feeling leads to the death-wish. As a -general
rule, sexual selection soon makes its appear
ance in the parents; it is a natural tendency for
the father to spoil his little daughters, and for
the mother to take the part of the sons, while
both, so long as the glamour of sex does not
prejudice their judgment, are strict in training
the children. The child is perfectly conscious
of this partiality, and offers resistance to the
parent who opposes it. To find love in an adult
is for the child not merely the satisfaction of a
special need; it meians also that the child's will
is indulged in all other respects. Thus the ctjild
is obeying its own sexual instinct, and at the
same time reinforcing the stimulus proceeding
from the parents, when its choice between the
parents corresponds with their own.
The signs of these infantile tendencies are
for the most part over-looked; and yet some
of them may be observed even after the early
years of childhood. An eight-year-old girl of my
acquaintance, whenever her mother is called
away from the table, takes advantage of her
absence
to
proclaim
herself
her
successor.
"Now I shall be Mamma; Karl, do you want
some more vegetables? Have some more, do,"

[249a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
2*5
etc. A particularly clever and lively little girl,-
not yet four years of age, in whom this trait
of child psychology is unusually transparent^
says frankly: "Now mummy can go away;
then daddy must marry me, and I will be his
wife." Nor does this wish by any means ex
clude the possibility that the child may most
tenderly love its mother. If the little boy is
allowed to sleep at his mother's side whenever
his father goes on a journey, and if after his
father's return he has to go back to the nursery,
to a person whom he likes far less, the wish
may readily arise that his father might always
be absent, so that he might keep his place be
side
his
dear,
beautiful
mamma;
and
the
father's death is obviously a means for the at
tainment of this wish; for the child's experience
has taught him that dead folks, like grandpapa,
for example, are always absent; they never
come back.
While such observations of young children
readily accommodate themselves to the inters
pretation suggested, they do not, it is true,
carry the complete conviction which is forced
upon a physician by the psycho-analysis of
adult neurotics. The dreams of neurotic patients
are communicated with preliminaries of such a
nature that their interpretation as wish-dreams
becomes inevitable. One day I find a lady de
pressed and weeping. She says: "I do not want
to see my relatives any more; they must shud
der at me." Thereupon, almost without any
transition, she tells me that she has remem
bered a dream, whose significance, of course, she
does not understand. She dreamed it when she
was four years old, and it was this: A fox or a
lynx is walking about the roof; thensomething,
falls down, or she falls down, and after that,
her mother is carried out of the house—dead;
whereat the dreamer weeps bitterly. I have
no sooner informed her that this, vdream must
signify a childish wish to see her mother dead^
and that it is because • of this dream that she
thinks that her relatives must shudder at her,
than she furnishes material in explanation of
the dream. "Lynx-eye" is an opprobrious epi
thet which a street boy once bestowed on her
when she was a very small child; and when
she was three years old a brick or tile lell on
her mother's head* so that she bled profusely.
I once had occasion to make a thorough study
of a young girl who was passing through various
psychic states. In the state of frenzied con
fusion with which her illness begany the patient
manifested a quite peculiar aversion for her,
mother; she struck her and abused her when*;

[249b]
ever she approached the bed, while at thesame •
period she was affectionate and submissive to
a much older sister. Then there followed a lucid •
but rather apathetic condition*with badly disrv
turbed sleep. It was* in thisiphase that :I began
to treat her and to analyse her dreams.; An;
enormous number of these dealt* in a .more or
less veiled fashion, with the death of the girl's
mother; now she was present at the funeral of
an old woman, now she saw herself and;her.
sister sitting at a table, dressed in mourning;,;
the meaning of the dreams could not be doubt
ed. During her progressive improvement hys
terical phobias
made
their appearance* the
most distressing of which was
the fear that
something had happened to her mother. Wher
ever she might be at the time, she had then to
hurry home in order to convince herself that
her mother was still alive. Now this ease, con
sidered in conjunction with the rest of my.ex
perience, was very instructive; it showed, in
polyglot translations, as it were, the different
ways in which the psychic apparatus reacts to.
the same exciting.Jdea. In the state of con
fusion,
which I regard as an overthrowM©f
the second psychic instance by the first in
stance, at other times suppressed, the uncon
scious enmity towards the mother gained the
upper hand, and found physical expression;
then, when the patient became calmer, the in
surrection was suppressed, and the.domination
of the censorship restored, and this enmity had
access only to the realms of dreams, in which
it realized the wish that the mother might die;
and, after the normal condition had been still
further strengthened, it created the excessive
concern for the mother as a hysterical counterreaction and defensive phenomenon. In the
lightoof' these considerations, it is no. longer,
inexplicable why hysterical girls are so often
extravagantly attached to their mothers. - r
On another occasion I. had an opportunityof obtaining a profound insight into the-unr
conscious psychic life of a young 'noanr for
whom an obsessional neurosis made life almost
unendurable, so that he could not go,into the
streets, because he was tormented by the fear
that he would kill everyone he met; He spent:
his days in contriving evidence of an alibi in
case he should be accused of any murder that
might have been committed in the city* It
goes without saying that this man was as moral
as he was highly cultured, The analysist^whichj,
by the way, led to a cure^revealepV., as rthe
basis of this distressing obsessiQn,rmurderpu§T
impulses; in; respect of his
rathejir pversfcriGfr

[250a]
246
SlGMUND
fathers-impulses which, to his astonishment,
had consciously expressed themselves when he
was seven years old, but which, of course, had
originated in a much earlier period of his child
hood. After the painful illness and death of
his father, when the young man was in his
thirty-first year, the obsessive reproach made
its appearance, which transferred itself to
strangers in the form of this phobia. Anyone
capable of wishing to pushhis own father from
a mountain-top into an abyss cannot be trusted
to spare the lives of persons lessclosely related
to him; he therefore does well to lock himself
into his room.
According to my already extensive experi
ence, parents playaleading partin the infantile
psychology of all persons who subsequently be
come psychoneurotics. Falling in lovewith one
parent and hating the other forms part of the
permanent stock of the psychic impulses
which arisein early childhood, and are.of such
importance as the material of the subsequent
neurosis; But I do not believe that psychoneu
rotics are to be sharply distinguished in this
respect from other persons who remain normal
—that is, I do not believethat they are capable
of creating something absolutely new and pe
culiar to themselves. It is far more probable-—
and this is confirmed by incidental observations
of normal children—that in their amorous or
hostile attitude toward their parents, psycho
neurotics do no more than reveal to us, by mag
nification, something that occurs less markedly
and intensively in the minds of the majority of
children.Antiquity has furnishedus with legend
ary matter which corroborates this belief, and
the profound and universal validity of the old
legends is explicable only by an equally uni
versal validity of the above-mentioned hypothe
sis of infantile psychology.
I am referring to the legend of King Oedipus
and the Oedipus Rex of Sophocles. Oedipus,
the son of Laius, king of Thebes, and Jocasta,
is exposed as a suckling, because an oracle had
informed jthe father that his son, who was still
unborn, would be his murderer. He is rescued,
and growsupas a king's son at a foreign court,
until, being uncertain of his origin, he, tooycon
sults the oracle, and is warned to avoid his
native place, for he is destined to become the
murderer of his father and the husband of his
mother. On the road leading away from his
supposed home he meets King Laius, and in a
sudden quarrel strikes him dead. He comes to
Thebes, where he solves the riddle of the
Sphinx, who is barring the way to the city,

[250b]
Freud
whereupon he is elected king by the grateful
Thebans^ and is rewarded with the hand of
Jocasta. He reigns for many years in peace and
honour, and begets two sons and two daughters
upon his unknown mother, until at last a plague
breaks out—which causes the Thebians to con
sult the oracle anew. Here
Sophocles' trag
edy begins. The messengers bring the reply
that the plague will stop as soon as the mur
derer of Laius is driven from the country. But
where is he?
Where shall be found9
Faint, and hard to be known, the trace of the
ancient guilt?
The action of the play consists simply in,the
disclosure, approached step by step and ar
tistically delayed (and comparable to the work
of a psycho-analysis) that Oedipus himself is
the murderer of Laius, and that he is the son of
the murdered man and Jocasta. Shocked by the
abominable crime which he has unwittingly
committed, Oedipus blinds himself, and departs
from his native city. The prophecy of the oracle
has been fulfilled.
The Oedipus Rex is a tragedy of fate; its
tragic effect depends on the conflict between
the all-powerful will of the gods and the vain
efforts of human beings threatened with dis
aster; resignation to the divine will, and the
perception of one's own impotence is the lesson
which the deeply moved spectator is supposed
to learn
from the tragedy. Modern authors
have therefore sought to
achieve a similar
tragic effect by expressing the same conflict
in
stories of their own invention.
But the
playgoers have looked on unmoved at the un
availing efforts of guiltless men to avert the
fulfilment of curse or oracle; the modern trag
edies of destiny have failed of their effect.
If the Oedipus Rex is capable of moving a
modern reader or playgoer no less powerfully
than it moved the contemporary Greeks, the
only possible explanation is that the effect jof
the Greek tragedy does not depend upon the
conflict between fate and human will, but up
on the peculiar nature of the material by which
this conflict is revealed. There must be a voice
within us which is prepared to acknowledge the
compelling power of fate in the Oedipus, while
we are able to condemn the situations occurring
in Die Ahnfrau or other tragedies of fate as
arbitrary inventions. And there actually is a
motive in the story of King Oedipus which ex
plains the verdict of this inner voice. His fate
moves us only because it might have been our

[251a]
own, because the oracle laid upon us before
our birth the very curse which rested upon him.
It may be that we were all destined to direct
our first sexual impulses toward our mothers,
and our first impulses of hatred and violence
toward our fathers; our dreams convince us
that we were. King Oedipus, who slew his father
Laius and wedded his mother Jocasta, is nothing
more or less than a wish-fulfilment-—the ful
filment-of the -wish of our childhood. But we,
more fortunate than he, in so far as we have
not become psychoneurotics, have since our
childhood succeeded in withdrawing our sexual
impulses from our mothers, and in forgetting
our jealousy of our fathers. We recoil from the
person for whom this primitive wish of our
cfaOhoo^^Site^^^^
the force
of the repression which these wishes have un
dergone in our minds since childhood. As the
poet brings the guilt of OediptK^<to^light by.his
investigation, he forces us to become aware of
our own inner selves, in which the same im
pulses are still extant, even though they are
suppressed.The antithesis with which the chor
us departs:
. . , Behold, this is Oedipus,
Who unravelled the great riddle, and was first
in power,
Whose fortune all the townsmen praised and
envied;
See in whatdread'tidftefsity he sank!
—this admonition touches us and our own pride,
we who, since the years of our childhood,
have grown so wise and so powerful in our own
estimation. Like Oedipus, we live in ignorance
of the desires that offend morality, \he desires
that nature has forced upon us and after their
unveiling we may well prefer to avert our gaze
from the scenes of our childhood.1
In the very text of Sophocles' tragedy there
is an unmistakable reference to the fact that
the Oedipus legend had its source in dreammaterial of immemorial antiquity, the content
xNone of the discoveries of psycho-analytical research
has evoked such embittered contradiction, such furious
opposition, and
also such entertaining acrobatics of
criticism, as this indication of the incestuous impulses
of childhood
which survive in
the
unconscious. An
attempt has even been made recently, in defiance of
all experience, to assign only a symbolic significance to
kicest. Fefemczi fcaSigiveir airingenious reinterpretation
of the Oedipus myth, based on a passage in one of
Schopenhauer's
letters,
in
Imago,
i,
(1912).
The
Oedipus-complex, which was first alluded to here in
The IwterfretaMm*4kr-&n&i^,*h^ thr/y^gh.cfurt-^t
study of the subject, acquired an unexpected "signifi
cance for the understanding of human history and the
evolution of
religion and morality. See
Totem and
Taboo.

[251b]
The Interpretation of Dreams
247
of which was the painful disturbance of the
child's relations to its parents caused by the
first impulses of sexuality. Jocasta comforts
Oedipus—who is not yet enlightened, but is
troubled by the recollection of the oraek—by
an allusion to a dream which is often dreamed,
though it cannot, in her opinion, mean any
thing:
For many a man hath seen himself in dreams
His mother's-mate^but he who-.gives.noJieed.
To suchlike matters bears the easier life.
The dream of having sexual intercourse with
one's mother was as common then as it is to
day with many people, who tell it with indig
nation and astonishment. As may well be im
agined, it is the key to the tragedy and the
*com$>$8mi§nt^^
father. The Oedipus fable is the reaction of
phantasy to these two typical dreams, and just
as such# dream,*when occurring?toan.adult, is
experienced with feelings of aversion, so the
content of the fable must include terror and
self-chastisement.
The
form
which it
sub
sequently assumed was the result of an un
comprehending secondary elaboration of the
material, which sought to make it serve a theo
logical intention.2 The attempt to reconcile di
vine omnipotence with human responsibility
must, of course, fail with this material as with
any other.
Anotherof the great poetic tragedies, Shake
speare's Hamlet, is rooted in the same soil as
Oedipus Rex. But the whole difference in the
psychic life of the two widely separated pe
riods of civilization, and the progress, during
the course of time, of repression in- the emo
tional life of humanity, is manifested in the
differing treatment of the same material. In
Oedipus Rex the basic wish-phantasy of the
child is brought to light and realized as it is in
dreams; in Hamlet it remains repressed, and we
learn of its existence—as we discover the rele
vant facts in a neurosis—only through the in
hibitory effects which proceed from it. In the
more modern drama, the curious fact that it is
possible to remain in complete uncertainty as
to the character of the hero has proved to be
quite consistent with the over-powering effect
of the tragedy. The play is based upon Hamlet's
hesitatioii4n-.accomplishing the task of revenge
assigned to him; the text does not give the
cause or the motive of this hesitation, nor have
the manifold attempts"at interpretation ^uc-*
ceeded in doing so. According to the still pre2 Cf. the dream-material of exhibitionism, pp. 238-9.

[252a]
248
Sl0MTJN5>.I,REUD i
vailing conception, a conception for whichGoe*
the was first responsible, Hamlet represents the
typeof man whose ^active energy is paralyzed
by excessive intellectual activity: ^Sicklied-b?er
with the pale>cast^of thought.'':Acciordihg to
another; conception, the poet has endeavoured
to portray a inorbid, irresolute character, on
the verge of neurasthenia. The plot of the^dra'4
ma, however, shows us that Hamlet is by no
means intended to appear as a character wholly
incapable of action. On two separate occasions
we see him assert himseif: once in a sudden
outburst of rage, when he stabs the"eavesdrop
per behind the arras, and on the other occasion
when lie deliberately, and even Craftily; With
the complete unsciftpiiloushess of a prince!of
the Renaissance, sends the; two courtiets to the
death 'Which was intended for himself:' What is
i£ then, that inhibits him in accomplishing the
task which his father's ghost has laid iipon
him? Here the; explanation offers itself that it
is the peculiar nature of this task. Hamlet is
able to 0*0 anything but taiceveh^etece^ufjbh
the man who did away with his1 father and'has
taken his father's place With his ;mother-^-ffie
man who shows him in realization the repressed
desires of his ownchildhood.The loathing
which should have driven him to revenge is
thus replaced by. self-reproach, by'1 conscien
tious scruples, which teH himthat he himself
is nor better than the murderer whom he is re
quited to punish. I have here' translated into
consciousness^what; had to remain unconscious
in the mind Of the hero; ifanyone wishes to
call Hamlet; anhysterical subject I cannot"Btit
admit that this is the deduction to be drawn
from my interpretation!! The sexualaversion
Which Hamlet expresses in conversation with
Ophelia is perfectly/consistent with this deduc
tion—-the same sexual aversion which during
the nexi few years Was increasingly to take
possession of the poet's soiil, lintil it found its
supreme (uttefahce in Tijnon of'Athens. It can,
of course, be' only the poet's own psychology
Withwhich We are cbnftrbnted' in Hamlet; and
in a work bn Shakespeare by Georg'Brahdes
(1896) t find the statement that the"df^ihia
Was composed immediately after the death of
Shkkespeare'^ father (1661)—that is to say,
when hewas/stili/mourning his loss, and dur
ing a reyiyal, as We may fairly assume, of his
own/childish feelings hi respect of his father.
It is khoWh, too, that SMkespeare's son, who
died jm/.c&I^6Iod'/.bore^ei name .of:^amhet
(idientical With &mlet). Just as1Hamlet treats'
of-the relation of the son to his- parents^ so

[252b]
Macbeth, which was Written about the! same
period,,is based upon the theme of childless-!
ness; Just as all neurotic symptoms, like dreams
themselves, are;capable of hyper-interpretation,
and even require such hyper-interpretation beforethey become perfectly-intelligible, so every
genuine poetical creation must have proceeded
from more than ;one-motive,1 more than one
impulse in the mind of the poet; and must ad
mit of more than one interpretation. I have
here attempted to interpret only the deepest
stratum of impulses in;the mind of the crea
tive poet*
<<;•-••
With regard to typical dreams of the death
of relatives, I must add a few words upon their
significance from the point of view of the
theory of?dreams in general. These dreams show
us the occurrence of ai very unusual state of
things"; they show us that the dream-thought
created by the repressed wish completely es
capes the censorship, and is transferred to. the
dream without' alteration. -Special conditions
must:obtain in order to make this possible.The
following two factors favour the production:of
these dreams: first, this is the last-wish that
we could credit ourselves with harbouring; we
believe such a wish "would never occur to. us
even in a dream"; the dream-censorship is
therefore unprepared for this monstrosity, just
as the laws of Solon did not foresee the neces
sity of establishing .a. .penalty.....for, patr^cide^
Secondly, the repressed ancl unsuspected wish
is,' inthis special case, frequently met half-way
by a residuefrom the day's experience, in the
fbfm of some concern for the life of the be
loved person. This anxiety cannot enter hito the
drearii otherwise than by taking advantage of
the corresponding wish; but the wish is able to
maskitself behind the concern which has1been
aroused, during the clay. If one is mcluied,to
think that all thisis reallya very muchsinipler
process, and to imagine that one merely con
tinues during the night,, and in one's dream,
What was begun during the day, one removejs
the,, dreams of the death of those dear to us
1 These indications in the direction of an analytical
understanding of Hamlet were subsequently- developed
by' Dr. Ernest Jones, who defehiied the above con
ception against others which have been put forward
in theliterature
of
theLsubject (The
Problem
of
Hamlet and tkeOedipus'Complex', [i$iij). The tela?
tion 6V the
material of Hamlet to tiie myth* of the
birth of the hero has been demonstrated'by 0. Rank:
Further attempts at an analysis of Macbeth, will be
ftiund
in my essay oh "Some Character Types Met
within P^cH6-Analytic Work," CollectedPapers, IV.,
ia Ii.:Jekels*s' "Shakespeare's Macbeth" in•Imago,
Vi
fi918) .and in "The Oedipus Complex as an Explai
nation
of Hamlet's'Mystery'/• d'Siudy in •Motive','
(American Journal of Psychology [1910], vol; xxi):.

[253a]
but of all connection with the general expla
nation of dreams, and a problem that may very
Well be solved remains a problem needlessly.
It is instructive to trace the relation of these
dreams to anxiety-dreams. In dreams of the
death of those dear to us the repressed wish
has found a way of avoiding the censorship1—
and the distortion for which the censorship is
responsible. An invariable concomitant phe
nomenon, then, is that painful emotions are felt
in the dream. Similarly, an anxiety-dream oc
curs pnly When the censorship is entirely or
partially overpowered, and on the other hand,
the overpowering of the censorship is facilitat
ed"when the adual sensation of anxiety is al
ready present from1somatic sources. It thus becomes obvious for What purpose the cerisbrship
performs its'office arid (practises dream-distortibh; it does soinvorderHo prevent the develops
mejit of %txieiy df other forms of painful
affect.
•'"-''
J '
l
'"'
I have spokenjn the foregoing sections^of
the .egoism, pf the.-, child's"psyche, andI now
empfiasizq this pecuiiarity in order to suggest
a cpimection, for dreams too have retained
tHs^characteris
All dreams are'.,absolutely
egoistical; in everydream the, beloved ego ap
pears, deven though.in, a dis^isecTform. The
wishes that are realized, in dreams are invari
ably^ the wishes ofrthis ego; it is.only, a t"decep
tive appearancei if .interest.in another person is
believed to have evoked.a dream. I wilt now
analyse a few .examples.which appearr to con
tradict this assertion;
A boy not^yet four years of age relates the
following dream: He saw a large garnished, dish,
on which was a large joint of roast meat; and
the joint was suddenly—not carved-—but eaten
up. He did not see the person who ate it.x
Who can he be, this strange person, of whose
luxurious repast the little fellow dreams? The
experience of the day must supply the answer.
For some days pastthe boy,in accordancewith
the doctor's orders, had been living on a milk
diet; but on the evening of the dream-day he
had been naughty, andj as a punishment, had
1Eveii the large, over-abundant,immoderate and exajggerated things occurring in dreams may be a child
ish characteristic. A child wants nothing more intense
ly than to grow big, ahd to eat as much of everything
ks grQLwn-ups do;'/a child is hard to satisfy; he knows
no such #brd as enough and insatiably demands the
repetition of whatever has pleased him or tasted good
to.him. He learns to practise moderation, to be modest
and resigned, oiily through training. As we know, the
neurotic also is inclined to1 immoderation and excess.

[253b]
The Interpretation of Dreams
249
been deprived of his supper. He had already
undergone one such hunger-cure,-and had borne
his deprivation bravely. He knew that he would
get nothing, but he did not even allude to the
fact that he was hungry. Training was begin
ning to produce its effect; this is demonstrated
even by the dream, Which reveals the begin
nings of dream-distortion. There is no doubt
that he himself is the person whose, desires are
directed toward this abundant meal, and a meal
of roast meat* at that. But since he knows that
this is forbidden himj he does not dare* as huh*
gry children do in dreams (cf. my little Anna's
dream about strawberries, p. 192); to sit down
to the meal himselfi The ^person rernaihsvanon?
ymOUSi
' —-;.,_•;• -; j: jrrr
One night I dream that 1 see on a booksell
er's counterainew yplumepf one of those cbllectors* series, which I am 'in the habit of buyr
ing (monp^aphs on artistic subjects;, history.,
famous artistic centres, eic$. Tfie ntiiy, collec
tion is entitled "Famous Orators'' tpr Ora
tions), and the'first number':bears the name of
I)r. Lecher. . :\; ' •' . .'.. \\'".":'•
;T'.
On analysis it ^eemsto .me improbable that
theiarne ofDr.Lecher, thelong-winded speak
erof.,the German Opppsitipri., should occupy
my thoiights rwhil^I am"dreaniifig.The jfactis
that a few dayi ago I .u^ertooj^^
logical treatment,^of spme: new'pajients, -ancl
amrnow forced to talk for/ten to,tweWe h9W
aday. Thus I myself am aiong-winded speaEer.
'•--•
r"'
HI.-,
:=
-~
:
--•
•J\
On another occasion I dream that a univer
sity lecturer of my acquaintance says to me:
"My son, the myopic?'Then folkws adialogue
of brief observations ahd replies. A third por
tion of the dream follows, in which I and my
sons appear, and so far as the latent dreamcontent is concerned, the father, the son, and
Professor M, are merely lay figures, represent
ing myself and my eldest son. Later on I shall
examine this dream again, on account of ah-
'other pecuHarity.
IV
-
-
.;•:•;
The following dream gives an example of
really base, egoistical feelings, -which conceal
themselves behind an affectionate1 concern: •-
'•<; My friend Otto looks ill; his face1 is broffli
and his eyes protrude:
.
.'
^
i(
- Otto is my familyphysician, to whom I dWe
a debt greater than I can ever hope;to repay,
since he has watched'for years overthe^health

[254a]
2 SO
Sigmund Freud
of my children, has treated them successfully
When they have been ill, and, moreover, has
given them presents whenever he could find
any excuse for doing so. He paid us a visit on
the day of the dream, and my wife noticed
that he looked tired and exhausted. At night I
dream of him, and my dream attributes to him
certain of the symptoms of Basedow's disease.
If you were to disregard my rules for dreaminterpretation you wouldcunderstand this dream
to mean that I am concerned about the health
of my friend, and that this concern is realized
in the dream. It would thus constitute a con
tradiction not only of the assertion that a dream
is a wishrfulfilment, but also of the assertion
that it.isv.acce.ssible,only to.<egoisticaLimpiulses.
But will those who thus interpret my dream
explain why I should fear that Otto has Base
dow's, disease, for which diagnosis his appear
ance does not afford the slightest justification?
My analysis, on the other hand, furnishes the
following material, deriving from an incident
which had occurred six years earlier. We were
driving—a. small party of us, including Pro
fessor R—in the dark through the forest of K,
which lies at a distance of some hours from
where weWere staying in the country. The driv
er, who was not quite sober, overthrew us arid
the carriage down a bank,... and it was only by
good fortune that we all escaped unhurt. But
we were forced to spend the night at the near
est inn, where the news of Our mishap aroused
great sympathy. A certain gentleman, who
showed unmistakable symptoms
of
morbus
Basedowii—the brownish colour of the skin of
the face and the protruding eyes, but no goitre
—placed himself entirely at our disposal, and
asked what he could do for us. Professor R
answered in his decisive way, "Nothing, except
lend me a nightshirt." Whereupon our generous
friend replied: "I am sorry, but I cannot do
that," and left us.
In continuing the analysis,it occurs to me that
Basedow is the name not only of a physician
but also of a famous pedagogue. (Now that
I am wide awake, I do not feel quite sure of this
fact.) My friend Otto is the person whom I
have asked to take charge of the physical edu
cation of my children—especially during the age
of puberty (hence the nightshirt) in case any
thing should happen to me. By seeing Otto in
my dream with the morbid symptoms of our
above-mentioned generous helper, I
clearly
mean to say: "If anything happens to me, he
will dp just as littje for my children as Baron
I* did for us, in spite of his amiable offers."

[254b]
The egoistical flavour of this dream should now
be obvious enough.1
But where is the wish-fulfilment to be found
in this? Not in the vengeance wreaked on my
friend Otto (who seems to be fated to be badly
treated in my dreams), but in the following
circumstance: Inasmuch as in my dream I repr
resented Otto as Baron L, I likewise identified
myself with another person, namely, with Pro
fessor R; for I have asked something of Otto,
just as R asked something of Baron L at the
time of the incident I have described. And this
is the point. For Professor R has gone his way
independently, outside academic circles, just as
I myself have done, and has only in his later
years received the title which he.had earned
long before. Once more, then, I want to be a
professor! The very phrase in his later years is
a wish-fulfilment, for it means that I shall live
long enough to steer my boys through the age
of puberty myself.
Of other typical dreams, in Which one flies
with a feeling of ease or falls in terror, I know
nothing from my own experience, and whatever
I have to say about them I owe to my psycho
analyses. From the information thus obtained
One must conclude that these dreams also re
produce impressions made in childhood—that
is, that they refer to the games involving rapid
motion which have such an extraordinary at
traction for children. Where is the uncle who
has never made a child fly by running with it
across the room with outstretched arms, or has
never played at falling with it by rocking it on
his knee and then suddenly straightening his
leg, or by lifting it above his head and suddenly
pretending to withdraw his supporting hand?
At such moments children shout with joy, and
insatiably demand a repetition of the perform
ance, especially if a little fright and dizziness
1 While Dr. Ernest Jones was delivering a lecture be
fore an
American scientific society, and was speak
ing of egoism in dreams, a learned lady took excep
tion to this unscientific generalization. She thought the
lecturer was entitled to pronounce such a verdict only
on the dreams of Austrians, but had no right to in
clude the dreams of
Americans. As for
herself, she
was sure that all her dreams were strictly altruistic.
In justice to this lady with her national pride it
may, however, be
remarked that the
dogma:
"the
dream is wholly egoistic" must not be misunderstood.
For inasmuch as everything that pccurs in preconscious
thinking may appear in
dreams
(in the content as
well as the latent dream-thoughts) the altruistic feel
ings may
possibly
occur.
Similarly,
affectionate or
amorous feelings for another person, if they exist in
the unconscious, may occur iii dreams. The truth of
the assertion is therefore restricted to the
fact that
among the Unconscious stimuli of dreams one very
often finds egoistical tendencies which seem to have
been overcome in the waking state*

[255a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
251
are involved in the game; in after years they
repeat their sensationsin dreams,but in dreams
they omit the hands that held..them,...so. that
now they are free to float or fall. We know that
all small children have a fondness for such
games as rocking and see-sawing; and if they
see gymnastic performances at the circus their
recollection of such games is refreshed.1 In
some boys a hysterical attack will consist sim
ply in the reproduction of such performances,
which they accomplish with great dexterity.
Not infrequently sexual sensations are excited
by these games of movement, which are quite
neutral in themselves.2 To express the matter
in a few words: the exciting games of child
hood are repeated in dreams of flying, falling,
reeling and the like, but the voluptuous feel
ings are now transformed into anxiety. But, as
every mother knows, the excited play of chil
dren often enough culminates in quarrelling
and tears.
I have therefore good reason for rejecting
the explanation that it is the state of our der
mal sensations during sleep, the sensation of the
movements of
the
lungs,
etc., that evokes
dreams of flying and falling. I see that these
very sensations have been reproduced from
the memory to which the dream refers—and
that they are, therefore, dream-content and not
dream-sources.
I do not for a moment deny, however, that
I am unable to furnish a full explanation of this
series of typical dreams. Precisely here my ma
terial leaves me in the lurch. I must adhere to
the general opinion that all the dermal and ki
netic sensations of these typical dreams are
awakened as soon as any psychic motive of
whatever kind has need of them, and that they
are neglected when there is no such need of
them. The
relation
to
infantile experiences
seems to be confirmed by the indications which
1Psycho-analytic investigation has enabled us to con
clude that in the predilection shown by children for
gymnastic performances, and in the repetition of these
in hysterical attacks, there
is,
besides the
pleasure
felt in the organ, yet another factor at work (often
unconscious): namely, a memory-picture of sexual in
tercourse observed in
human beings or
animals.
2 A young colleague, who is entirely free from ner
vousness, tells me, in this connection: "I know from
my own experience that while swinging, and at the
moment at which the downward movement was at its
maximum, I used to have a curious
feeling
in my
genitals, which,
although it was not really pleasing
to me, I must describe as a voluptuous feeling." I have
often heard from patients that the first erections with
voluptuous sensations which they can remember
to
have had in boyhood occurred while they were climb
ing. It is established with complete certainty by psy
cho-analysis that the first sexual sensations often have
their origin in the scufflings and wrestlings of child
hood.

[255b]
I have obtained from the analyses of psycho
neurotics. But I am unable to say what other
meanings•might,-in the course,of the.dreamer's
life, have become attached to the memory of
these sensations—different, perhaps, in each in
dividual, despite the typical appearance of these
dreams—and I should very much like to be in
a position to fill this gap with careful analyses
of good examples. To those who wonder why
I complain of a lack of material, despite the
frequency of these dreams of flying, falling,
tooth-drawing, etc., I must explain that I my
self have never experienced any such dreams
since I have turned my attention to the sub
ject of dream-interpretation. The dreams of
neurotics which are at.my .disposal, however,
are not all capable of interpretation, and very
often it is impossible to penetrate to the far
thest point of their hidden intention; a certain
psychic force which participated in the build
ing up of the neurosis, and which again be
comes active during its dissolution, opposes
interpretation of the final problem.
(c) The Examination-Dream
Everyone who has received his certificate of
matriculation after passing his final examina
tion at school complains of the persistence with
which he is plagued by anxiety-dreams in which
he has failed, or must go through his course
again, etc. For the holder of a university de
gree this typical dream is replaced by another,
which represents that he has not taken his doc
tor's degree, to which he vainly objects, while
still asleep, that he has already been practising
for years, or is already a university lecturer or
the senior partner of a firm of lawyers, and so
on. These are the ineradicable memories of the
punishments we suffered as children for mis
deeds
which
we
had
committed—memories
which were revived in us on the dies irae, dies
ilia*of the gruellingexaminationat the two crit
ical junctures in our careers as students. The
examination-anxiety of neurotics is likewise in
tensified by this childish fear. When.our stu
dent days are over, it is no longer our parents
or teachers who see to our punishment; the in
exorable chain of cause and effect of later life
has taken over our further education. Now we
dream of our matriculation, or the examina
tion for the doctor's degree—and who has not
been faint-hearted on such occasions?-—when
ever we fear that we may be punished by some
unpleasant result because we have done some
thing carelessly or wrongly, because we have
8 Day of wrath.—Ed.

[256a]
252
Sigmund Freud
not been as thorough as we might have been—r
ini short, whenever we feel the burden of re^
sponsibihty;
- For a further explanation of examinationdreams I have to thank a remark made by a
colleague who had studied this subject, who
once stated, in the course of a scientific discus
sion, that in his experience the examinationdream occurred only to persons who had passed
the
examination,
never to
those
who
had
flunked. We have had increasing confirmation of
the fact that the anxiety-dream of examination
occurs when the dreamer is anticipating a re
sponsible task on the following day, with the
possibility of disgrace; recourse will then be
had to an occasion in the past on which a great
anxiety proved to have been without real justi
fication, having, indeed, been refuted by the
outcome. Such a dream.would be a very strik
ing example of the way in which the dreamcontent is misunderstood by the waking in
stance. The-exclamation which is regarded as a
protest against the dream: "But I am already
a doctor," etc, would in reality be the consola
tion offered by the dream, and should, there
fore, be worded as follows: "Do not be afraid
of the morrow; think pf the anxiety which you
felt before your matriculation; yet nothing
happened to justify it, for now you are:a doc
tor," etc. But the anxiety which we attribute
to the dream really has its origin in the residues
of the dream-day.
The tests of this interpretation which I have
been able to make in my own case, and in that
of others, although by no means exhaustive,
were entirely in its favour.1 For example, I
failed in my examination for the doctor's de
gree in medical jurisprudence; never once has
the matter worried me in my dreams, while I
have often enough been examined in botany,
zoology, and chemistry, and I sat for the ex
aminations in these subjects with well-justified
anxiety, but escaped disaster, through the clem
ency of fate, or of the examiner. In my dreams
of school examinations, I am always examined
in history, a subject in which I passed brilliant
ly at the time, but only, I must admit, because
my good-natured professor—my one-eyed bene
factor in another dream—did not overlook the
fact that on the examination-paper which I
returned to him I had crossed out with my
fingernail the second of three questions, as a
hint that he. should not insist on it. One of my
patients, who withdrew before the matricula
tion examination, only to pass it later, but
1See also pp. 261-2.

[256b]
failed in the officer's examination, so that he
did not become an officer, tells me that he often
dreams of the former examination, but never
of the latter.
W. Stekel, who was the first to interpret the
matriculation dream, maintains thatthis dream
invariably refers to sexual experiences and sex
ual maturity. This has frequently; been con*
firmed in my experience.
VI. The Dream-Work
All other previous attempts to solve the pror>
lems of dreams have concerned themselves di
rectly with the manifest dream-content as it is
retained in the memory. They have sought to
obtain an interpretation Of the dream from this
content, or, if theydispensed with aninterpre
tation, to base their conclusions concerning the
dream on the evidence provided by this con
tent. We, however, are confronted by a differ
ent set of data; for us a new psychic material
interposes itself
between the dream-content
and the results of our investigations: the latent
dream-content, or dream-thoughts, which are
obtained only by our method. We develop the
solution of the dream from this latent content,
and hot from the manifest dream-content. We
are thus confronted with a new problem, an
entirely novel task—that of examining and
tracing the relations between the latent dreamthoughts and the manifest dream-content, and
the processes by which the latter has grown out
of the former.
The dream-thoughts and the dream-content
present themselves as two descriptions of the
same content in two different languages; or, to
put it more clearly, the dream-content appears
to us as a translation of the dream-thoughts
into another mode of expression, whose symbols
and laws of composition we must learn by com*-
paring the
origin with the
translation. The
dream-thoughts
we
can
understand
without
further trouble the moment we have ascertained
them. The dream-content is, as it were, prej
sented in. hieroglyphics, whose symbols must be
translated, one by one, into the language of the
dream-thoughts. It would of course, be incor
rect to attempt to read these symbols in accord
ance with their values as pictures, instead of in
accordance with their meaning as symbols. For
instance, I have
before me a picture-puzzle
(rebus)—a house, upon whose roof there is a
boat; then a single letter; then a running figure,
whose head has been omitted, and so on. As a
critic I might be tempted to judge this composi
tion and its elements to be nonsensical. A boat

[257a]
The iNTiBBMTAHOMrQg Dreams
253
isr out of place pnifche,rooi> of a house^andca
h^dJe^s^angannot rw
er(^anfthe, house, and>if the whpjtert)iing;i5
meant to represent a landscape the single lettefs
of the alphabet have no right in it, since they
do not occur in nature; A correct judgment of
^e picture-puzzle-is possible only-if J-rmake
no sych objections, tovthe. whole ancVits-partSj
andvif, pn^the.contrary, 2 take^e;trpu^le,^p
replace each image by a syl}ableor.wprd^hich
it may represent, by virtue of.,some, allusion or
relation. The words thus put together are-no.
longer meaningless, hut -might -.constitute, the
most beautiful and pregnant aphorism; Now 3
dream is such a: picture-puzzle, and-our predr
ecessprs in thet art pf ,dreain^interpretatipn
have made the mistake of judging ther<?2>^ as
an, artistic compositipn. As sucj^.of course, it
appears nonsensical and worthless;: • ;
t
>".v\.'
A. Condensation
;! .
The
first thing that becomes
clear to the
investigator when he compares>the dream^on*
tent with the dream-thoughts is that a tremen
dous work of condensation has-been; accom^
plished.Thed^eamis meagre, paltry and laconic
in comparison:with the ranged and copiousness
of the dream-thoughts^ The dream, when writ*
teh down, fills half a page; the analysis^ which
contains the dream-thoughts; requires six, eightj
twelve times as much space. The1 ratio varies
with different dreams; but in my experience it
is always of the same order. As a rule, the ex
tent of the compression which has been accom
plished' isf under-estimated, owing to the fact
that
the
dream-thoughts
which
have
been
brought to light are believed to be the whole of
the material,
whereas a continuation of the
work of interpretationwould reveal still:further
thoughts hidden in the dream. We have already
found it necessary to remark that one can never
be really sure that one has interpreted a dream
completely; even if the solution seems satisfy
ing and flawless, it is always possible that yet
another meaning has been manifested: by the
same dream. Thus the degree of condensation's
—^strictly speaMng^T-indeterminable, Exception
may be taken—arid at first sight the objection
seems perfectly plausible—to the assertion that
the disproportion between dream-content and
dream-thoughts justifies the conclusion that a
considerable condensation of psychic material
occurs in the formation of dreams. For we often
have the feeling that we have been dreaming a
great deal all night, and have then forgotten
most of what we have dreamed; The dream

[257b]
which weljrjememherjori3waMng:^w6uld(tliui^a^
psarbq&e merely-a^emnant of;the totdcdream'iworki/fwhichi would -surely^ equal the* cdream*
thoughts hv:tangp. if only we could;remember
itcicompletely*.:Tora certain extentrthis^iis .uri*
dpubteidlyfitj:ue^ltbereisjnoj getting:away from
the-^faefc'rthat: aidreariiTis-.mpsfcaicduratelyrrrer
prpducedaftfwe try to remember it/hinmediater
lyr&iteKty&bhig, and-that;the: relcblieetiontof it
beconlesi more;andimoredeiectivei asthereby
gpes-pn,; On: .thejiOther bandyatjhas^ torbe jeer
pgnizedf;i(hat:;thei im^es5ionf^that:::we^have
dreamed a goo^dealnrnofe] than! We^aiieable to
reproduce is yer# often based on anfillusion,the
origin of which we^shall explain-later]on?More*
qyer, the assumption of .a; condensationiin the
dream-work is not affected by the;possibility of
forgettinga part -ofdreams, for itimayhevdpmonstrated by;the n^ultitude pf ideas fipertainT
ing tp those individual parts of.the dream;.wlikh
do remain,in the.memory^-If a large par&pf the
d?eain has.really rescaped:the:memory, we ;ar§
probably jdeprived of ^access; to a pew series of
dr;earn.-thpughtSvrWe haye, no justification,, for
expecting,?that those portions; of the 4ream
which haye been lost rshould; likewise;haye jre-t
ferredvonly to those thoughts; which r^e;Joapw
from |the analysis: of the portions wj^icivhave
beeri preserved1
: >a
orr? -
;r!t
In view ,ot the very greatJnumber, pf ideas
wjiich analysis elicits.forseac^. individual >elet
ment of the dream-content, the principal doubt
inqthe minds of many:readers will be whether
it is permissible tp count everything that suh*
sequeptly occurs to the mind during analysis
as,forming part pf the; drean;-tnQughtSri^in
other words,tto assume that,^11> these thought
haye, been active inrthe sleeping state,,, and haye
taken part inthe*foOTatipn pf =the]drjea^m, Is,
it not more probabWtbat new.combinatipns of
thoughts are developed in the course of ana%
ysis, which didTnot participate in the; formation
of the dream? To this objection I can give only
a conditional reply. It is true, of, course,, that
separate fcomb^atiqns of rthoughts make their
first; appearance during,,the analysis;, but one
can .convince oneself every, time this happens
that such new; combinations have been estath
lished only between thoughts which have al
ready;, been connected in. other ways in the
dream-thoughts; the new combinations, are, sp
to speak,,corollaries, shprt^circuits, which are
1 References tb th6 condensation in dreams1 are: to be"
found; in-;the works of many writersr on the.-subjecU
Pu Prel states in. his Pkilosophie der Mystik that he
is- absolutely certain tftat-acondensatioh-proce^ of the
succession of ideas had occurred.
:i
•••)"

[258a]
*54
Sigmund Freud
made possible by the existence of other, more
fundamental modes of connection. In respect of
the great majority of the groups of thoughts re
vealed by analysis, we are obliged to admit that
they have already been active in the formation
of the dream, for if we work through a succes
sion of such thoughts, which at first sight seem
to have played no part in the formation of the
dream, we suddenly come upon a thought which
occurs in the dream-content, and is indispen
sable to its interpretation, but which is never-
-tBftess inaccessiMcr exceprthrough* this "(ihaih
of thoughts. The reader may here turn to the
dream of the botanical monograph, Which is
obviously..the^EesulLofiaatastojaishing degree,oi
condensation; even though I^haw^iofcgivemthe^
complete analysis.
But how, then, are we to imagine the psy
chic condition of the sleeper which precedes
dreaming? Do all the dream-thoughts exist side
by side, or do they pursue one another, or are
there several simultaneous trains of thought,
proceeding from different centres, which sub
sequently meet? I do riot think it is necessary
at this point to forin a plastic conception Of
the psychic condition at the time of dreamformation. But let us hot forget that we are
concerned with unconscious thinking, and that
the
process
may
easily
be
different
from
that which we observe'in^0urselves*'in'de
liberate contemplation accompanied by con
sciousness.
The fact, however, is irrefutable that dreamformation is based on a process of condensa
tion. How, then, is this condensation effected?
Now, if we
consider that of
the dreamthoughts ascertained only the rnost restricted
number are represented in the dream by means
of one of their conceptual elements, we might
conclude that the condensation is accomplished
by means of omission, inasmuch as the dream
is not a faithful translation or projection, point
by.point, of the dream-thoughts, but a very
incomplete and defectivereproduction of thern.
This view, as we shall soon perceive, is a very
inadequate one. But for the present let us take
it as a point of departure, arid ask ourselves: If
only a
few of the elements of
the dreamthoughts make their way into the dream-con
tent, what are the conditions that determine
their^seleetion?
In order to solve this problem, let us turn our
attention to those elements of the dream-con
tent which must have fulfilled the conditions
for which we are looking. The most suitable
material for this investigation will be a dream

[258b]
to whose formation a particularly intense con
densation has contributed. I select the dream,
cited on page 207, of the botanical mono
graph.
Dream-content: I have written a monograph
upon a certain (indeterminate) species of plant.
The book lies before me.I am just turning over
a folded coloured plate. A dried specimen of
the plant is bound up in this copy, as in a
herbarium.
The most prominent element of this dream
is the botanical monograph. This is derived
fxomu the .irnp^Eessions.of the. dream-day; I had
aetually-vseen a .monograph:on, thexgenus Cy
clamen in a bookseller's window.
The men
tion of this genus is lacking in the dream-con
tent; only the monograph and its relation to
botany have remained. The botanical mono
graph immediately reveals its relation to the
work on cocaine which I once wrote; from co?
came the train of thought proceeds on the one
hand to a Festschrift, and on the other to my
friend, the oculist, Dr. Koenigstein; who was
partly responsible for the introduction of co
caine as a local anaesthetic. Moreover, Dr*
Koenigstein is connected with the recollection
of an interrupted conversation I had had with
him on the previous evening," and with all sorts
of ideas relating to the remuneration of medi^
cal and surgical services among colleagues. This
conversation, then, is the actual dream-stimu
lus ; the monograph on cyclamen is also a real
incident, but one of an indifferent nature; as
I now see, the botanical monograph of the
dream proves to be a common mean between
the two experiences of the day, taken over
unchanged from an indifferent impression, and
bound up with the psychically significant ex
perience by means of the most copious asso
ciations.
Not only the combined idea of the botanical
monograph;howeverf but also each of its sep-l
arate elements, botanical and monograph,pene
trates
farther
and
farther,
by
manifold
associations, into the- confused tangle of the
dream-thoughts. To botanical belong the recol
lections of the person of Professor Gartner
(German: Gartner=gardener), of his blooming
wrfe^tjfTny-patientTwhos^Tiame is Flora,andof
a lady concerning whom I told the story of the
forgotten flowers.Gartner,again, leads me to the
laboratory and the conversation with Koenig
stein; and the allusion to the two female pa
tients belongs to the same conversation. From

[259a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
255
the lady with the flowers a train of thoughts
branches off to the favourite flowers of mywife,
whose other branch leads to the title of the has
tily seen monograph. Further, botanicalrecalls
an episode at the Gymnasium, and a university
examination; and a fresh subject—that of my
hobbies—which was
broached in the abovementioned conversation, is linked up, by means
of what is humorously called my favourite
flower, the artichoke,with the train of thoughts
proceeding from the forgotten flowers; behind
artichoke there lies, on the one hand, a recoil
lection of Italy, and on the other a reminis
cence of a scene of my childhood, in which I
first formed an acquaintance—which has since
then grownso intimate—with books. Botanical,
then^is^veritable nucleus, arid;.lor"the dream,
the meeting-point of many trains of thought;
which, I can testify, had all really been brought
into connection by the conversation referred
to. Here we find ourselves in a thought-factory,
in which, as in The Weaver's Masterpiece:
The little shuttles to and fro
Fly, and the threads unnoted flow;
One throw links up a thousand threads.
Monograph in the dream, again, touches two
themes: the one-sided nature of my studies,
and the costliness of my hobbies.
The impression derived from this first in
vestigation is that the elements botanical and
monograph were taken up into the dream-con
tent because they were able to offer the most
numerous points of contact with the greatest
number of dream-thoughts, and thus repre
sented nodal points at which a great number
of the^dxeam-thoughts -met .together,-and .be*
cause they were of manifold significance in re
spect of the meaning of the dream. The fact
upon which this explanation is based may be
expressed in another form: Every element of
the dream-content proves to be over-deter
mined—-that is, it appears several times over
in the dream-thoughts.
We shall learn more if we examine .the other
components of the dream in respect of their
cmmrieme-mrtheto^eam^%m^h^/>Wm^^m(mEl:
plate refers (cf. the analysis on p. 208) to a
new subject, the
criticism passed upon my
work by colleagues, and also fo a subject al
ready represented in the dream—my hobbies—
and, further, to a memory of my childhood, in
which I pull to pieces a book with coloured
plates; the dried specimen of the plant relates
to my experience with the herbarium at the
Gymnasium, and gives this memory particular

[259b]
emphasis. Thus I perceive the nature of the
relation between the dream-content and dreamthoughts: Not only are the elements of the
dream determined several times over by the
dream-thoughts,
but
the
individual
dreamthoughts are represented in the dream by sev
eral elements. Starting from an element of the
dream, the path of the association leads to a
number of dream-thoughts; and from a single
dream-thought
to
several
elements
of
the
dream.
In
the process of dream-formation,
therefore, it is not the case that a single dreamthought, or a group of dream-thoughts, supplies
the dream-content with an abbreviation of itself
as its representative, and that the next dreamthought,suppliesanother,abbreviation as its rep
resentative(muchas.representatives are elected
from among the population); but rather that
the whole mass of the dream-thoughts is sub*-
jected to a certain elaboration, in the course
of which those elements that receive the strong
est and completest support stand out in relief;
so that the process might perhaps be likened
to election by the scrutin du liste. Whatever
dream I may subject to such a dissection, I al
ways find the same fundamental principle conr
firmed—that
the
drearn-elements have been
formed out of the whole mass of the dreamthoughts, and that every one of them appears,
in relation to* the^ dfeam^t!Kragtits,%> have *ar
multiple determination.
It is certainly not superfluous to demonstrate
this relation of the dream-content to the dreamthoughts by means*of-a further example, which
is distinguished by a particularly artful inter
twining of reciprocal relations. The dream is
that of a patient -whom I
am treating
for
claustrophobia (fear of enclosed spaces).It will
soon become evident why I feel myself called
upon to entitle this exceptionally clever piece of
dream-activity:
II. "A Beautiful Dream"
The dreamer is driving with a great number
0} comPmipns^in XrStveety whermther&:4si a
modest hostelry (which is not the case). A
tite®tmmlnp&fmmm(&dske^
of
the room's of the inn. He is first spectator, then
actor. Finally the company is told to change
their clothes, in order to return to the city.
Some of the company are shown into rooms
on the ground floor, others to rooms on the
first floor. Then a dispute arises. The people up
stairs are annoyed because those downstairs
have not yet finished changing, so that they
cannot come down. His brother is upstairs; he

[260a]
2§G
SmMTJN0:RRE^B
a#downstairs^ and heis dngrfy with his brother
betdike1 ;:'they' dr&w hUrried. -(This part ?©bscure^ 'Besides, itrlwas already iecided,-upon
their arrival, who was to go upstairs-and- who
dowfti Thefihe goes alone up the. hill1 towards
the city, and he1walks so heavily; and with such
difficulty, that he cantiotmove from-the spot.
An elderly gentleman joins him and talks angri
ly &f the King of Italy. Finally> towards the
top of the hill, he is able to walk much more
easily. ;
^
•-••
•%
-^
The* difficulty experienced in climbing ithe
hill was so distinct that for some time after
wakinghe was in doubt whether the experience
was a;'dream or,the reality;
• Judged by the manifest content,' this- dream
can hardly be eulogized. Contrary to the rules,
I shall begin the interpretation with that por
tion to which the dreamer referred as being
the most distinct* k
-i; ;
. 1
--The difficulty dreamed.ofv -and:probably ex^
perienced duririg the?dream--^diniculty in climb
ing;-• acconipanied .by: dyspnoeartrwas pne, of
the. symptoms which. the, patient had actually
exhibited; some;years hefore, arid which, in con
junction with other symptoms,jwas! at the time
attributed^ to tuberculosis
(probably hysterr
ieajly simulated)i:; From our study:of ;exhibit
tipn-dreams we, are already .acquainted with
this sensation' <of- heing; inhibited in motion,
peculiar to dreams, and here again we -fodnit
utilized. as;:material always available for. the
purposes of any other kind of representation,
The part of?the dream-cpntent which, represents
climbing- as cUfficult-at first, and, easier at the
topof.-the luli, made me. think, while it was
being -related,-.of the wellrknpwnv-masterly fin?
traduction tp Daudet's, Sappho, Here a-young
man carries the woman he loves upstairs;:she
iss at..6r^i^!.Ught-^'a;ieattier,: but the higher
he climbs the more she weighs;, and this scene
is symbolic of the progress of their relation,
in describing which Daudet seeks to admonish
young, men not to lavish an earnest affection
upon 'girls of bumbleorigin and dubious antes
cedents.1 Although I knew that my patient had
recently had a love-affair with ah actress, and
hadbrotenIt off, I hardly expected to find that
the interpretation ,)vhicn had occurred to fjcie
tvas correct; The situation in Sappbpis.actual
ly' the reverse of that in .the dream;, for in the
dream ciimbmg^
firs^and
easylatier bri; in thenovel the s^boliisriiis
aIn estimating tbe significance 'of tliis frassage' we
may recall the meaning of dreams of climbing stairs;
a,s explainedin the,chapter on Symbolism.
c, ....
,

[260b]
pertinent only if whafrwas at first easily cair-
-Tiedfinally proves to he a heavy 'burden;.'To
mtf astonistimenty the'patient remarked'that
the interpretation irttedCin very well with the
plot of a play which he had seen the5 previous
evening. The <play.-was called Rund nm \Wien
i^Round about IVienna), and treated ofi?the
career of ai girl, who was at first respectable,
but who subsequently.!lapsed into ]the r'demi
mondei and formed relations with highly-placed
lovers^ thereby climbing, but finally she went
downhill fasten and faster. This* play reminded
him of* another; entitled.Yon Stufei zuStufe
(From Step4o Stepi)y theoposter advertising
which had depicted aiflight of stairs.
•
To continue the Interpretation: The actress
with whom he:had had his most recent and
coinplicated affair; had lived in X^street. There
is no inn in.this street.iHoweyer, while he was
spending part of the summer In Vienna for
the'sake of this: lady, he had-lodged (Geriman;:
abgestiegen—stopped,
literally stepped: off)
at a small hotel in the neighbourhood. When he
was leaving the hotel, he said to the cab-driver:
"I am glal atalt^yehts th^t I didn't -get' any
verrhm here]""(Ifrcidehtaily; the dread of ver
minis oneof hisr^obias,) Whereupon the. cab:-
driyer answered;, "How,-could anybody stop
there! That isn't a hotel,at all, it's re
ing but a. pub!"
...'r
htIThe pub immediatelyjremindfidihim^pf a
quotation:
.
^ ,
,
i
Of a wonderful host
..,-,.••
.
-.-:•:
I was lately a guest.
-
;i/
But the host iri the poem by Uhland is] ari
apple-tree: Now a second quotation continues
the tram of thought:
::
.
-r Eausx (dancing withthe: youngwitch),
• .Aloyely dream once came to ine;.
..
::
I then beheld an apple-tree, . \
...
.
^nd there two fairest apples .shone:
. They lured me so, I climbed thereon. ..'."'•
The Fair One
"
Apples have been desired: by you* *
Sincefirst in Paradise they grew;
:
And I>ariLmoved withjoy toiknow
•-<"
:
1 That such within my^garden grow.8
: i
There is. hot'the'sliptest doubt' what is meant
by the_ajple-tree arid the apples; A beautiful
bosom'stoodhigh.among the charms by wfiicti
theacire^,had beWitohed our dreamer;
.':'"'
'Judging from the cbntext'bf the analysis,;^
had every reason to assume that the dreahs

[261a]
referred to an impression of the
dreamer's
childhood. If this is correct, it must have re
ferred to the wet-nurse of the dreamer, who is
now a man of nearly thirty years of age. The
bosom of the nurse is in reality an inn for the
child. The nurse, as well as Daudet's Sappho,
appears as an allusionto his recently abandoned
mistress.
The (elder) brother of the patient also ap
pears in the dream-content; he is upstairs,
while the dreamer himself is downstairs. This
again is an inversion, for the brother, as I
happen to know, has lost his social position,
while my patient has retained his. In relating
the dream-content, the dreamer avoided say
ing that his brother was upstairs and that he
himself was downstairs. This would have been
to obvious an expression, for in Austria we
say that a man is on the ground floor when he
has lost his fortune and social position, just
as we say that he has comedown.Now the fact
that at this point in the dream something is
represented as inverted must have a meaning;
and the inversion must apply to some other
relation between the dream-thoughts and the
dream-content. There is an indication which
suggests howthis inversion is to be understood.
It obviously applies to the end of the dream,
where the circumstances of climbing are the
reverse of those described in Sappho. Now it
is evident what inversion is meant: In Sappho
the man carries the woman who stands in a
sexual relation to him; in the dream-thoughts,
conversely, there is a reference to a woman car
rying a man; and, as this could occur only in
childhood, the reference is once more to the
nursewhocarriesthe heavy child.Thus the final
portion of the dream succeeds in representing
Sapphoand the nurse in the same allusion.
Just as the name Sappho has not been select
ed by the poet without reference to a Lesbian
practise, so the portions of the dream in which
people are busy upstairs and downstairs, above
and beneath, point to fancies of a sexual con
tent with which the dreamer is occupied, and
which, as suppressed cravings, are not uncon
nected with his neurosis. Dream-interpretation
itself does not show that these are fancies and
not memories of actual happenings; it only
furnishes us with a set of thoughts and leaves
it to us to determine their actual value. In
this case real and imagined happenings appear
at first as of equal value—and not only here,
but also in the creation of more important psy
chic structures than dreams. A large company,
as we already know, signifies a secret. The

[261b]
The Interpretation of Dreams
257
brother is none other than a representative;
drawn into the scenes of childhood by fancying
backwards, of all of the subsequent xivals for
women's favours. Through the medium of an
experience indifferent in itself^ the episode of
the gentleman who talks angrily of the King of
Italy refers to the intrusion of people of low
rank into aristocratic society. It is as though
the warning which Daudet gives to young men
were to be supplemented by a similar warning;
applicable to a suckling child.1 ,
In the two dreams here cited I have shown
by italics where one of the elements of the;
dream recurs in the dream-thoughts,, in order
to make the multiple relations of the former
more obvious. Since, however, the analysis of
these dreams has not been carried to comple
tion, it will probably be worth while to con
sider a dream with a full analysis, in order to
demonstrate the manifold determination of the
dream-content. For this purpose I shall select
the dream of Irma's injection (see p. 183). From
this example we shall readily see that the con
densation-work
in
the
dream-formation
has
made use of more means than one.
The chief person in the dream-content is my
patient Irma,who is seenwith the features which
belong to her waking life, and who therefore, in
the first instance, represents herself. But her
attitude, as I examine her at the window, is
taken from a recollection of another person, of
the lady for whom I should like to exchange
my patient, as is shown by the dream-thoughts.
Inasmuch as Irma has a diphtheritic mem
brane, which recalls
my
anxiety about my
eldest daughter, she comes to represent this
child of mine, behind whom, connected with,
her by the identity of their names, is concealed
the person of the patient who died from the
effects of poison. In the further course of the
dream the significance of
Irma's personality
changes (without the alteration of her image
as it is seen in the dream): she becomes one
of the children whom we examine in the pub
lic dispensaries for children's diseases, where
my friends display the differences in their men
tal capacities. The transition was obviously
effected by the idea of my little daughter. Ow
ing to her unwillingness to open her mouth, the
same Irma constitutes an allusion to another
1The fantastic nature of the situation relating to the
dreamer's
wet-nurse
is
shown by the circumstance,
objectively ascertained, that the
nurse in
this
case
was his mother. Further, I may call attention to the
regret of the young man in the anecdote related on
p. 222 above (that he had not taken better advantage
of his opportunities with his wet-nurse) as the probable
source of his dream.
: :

[262a]
258
lady who was examined by me, and,
the same connection, to my wife. Further, in
the morbid changes which I discover in her
throat I have summarized allusions to quite a
number of other persons.
All these people whom I encounter as I fol
low up the associations suggested by Irma do
not appear personally in the dream; they are
concealed behind the dream-person Irma, who
is
thus
developed into
a
collective
image,
which, as might be expected, has contradictory
features. Irma comes to represent these other
persons, who are discarded in the work of con
densation, inasmuch as I
allow anything to
happen to her which reminds me of these per
sons, trait by trait.
For the purposes of dream-condensation I
may construct a composite person in yet an
other fashion, by combining the actual features
of two or more persons in a single dream-im
age. It is in this fashion that the Dr. M of my
dream was constructed; he bears the name of
Dr. M, and he speaks and acts as Dr. M does,
but his bodily characteristics and his malady
belong to another person, my eldest brother;
a single feature, paleness, is
doubly deter
mined, owing to the fact that it is common to
both persons. Dr. R, in my dream about my
uncle, is a similar composite person. But here
the dream-image is constructed in yet another
fashion. I have not united features peculiar to
the one person with the features of the other,
thereby abridging by certain features the mem
ory-picture of each; but I have adopted the
method employed by Galton in producing fam
ily portraits; namely, I have superimposed the
two images, so* that the common features stand
out in stronger relief, while those which do not
coincide neutralize
one another and become
indistinct. In the dream of my uncle the fair
beard stands out in relief, as an emphasized fea
ture, from a physiognomy which belongs to two
persons, and which is consequently blurred;
further, in its reference to growing grey the
beard contains an allusion to my father and to
myself.
The construction of collective and composite
persons is one of the principal methods of
dream-condensation. We shall presently have oc
casion to deal with this in another connection.
The notion of dysentery in the dream of Ir
ma's injection has likewise a multiple determi
nation; on the one hand, because of its paraphasic assonance with diphtheria, and on the
other because of its reference to the patient
whom I sent to the East, and whose hysteria

[262b]
Sigmund Freud
also in
had been wrongly diagnosed.
The mention of propyls in the dream proves
again to be an interesting case of condensation.
Not propyls hut amyls were included in the
dream-thoughts. One might think that here a
simple displacement had occured in the course
of dream-formation. This is in fact the case,
but the displacement serves the purposes of the
condensation, as is shown from the following
supplementary-analysis: If I dwell for a mo
ment upon the word propylen (German) its as
sonance with the word propylaeum suggests it
self to me. But a propylaeum is to be found
not only in Athens, but also in Munich. In the
latter city, a year before my dream, I had vis
ited a friend who was seriously ill, and the ref
erence to him in trimethylamin, which follows
closely upon propyls, is unmistakable.
I pass over the striking circumstance that
here, as elsewhere in the analysis of dreams, as*
sociations of the most widely differing values
are employed for. making thought-connections
as though they were equivalent, and I yield to
the temptation
to regard the
procedure by
which amyls in the dream-thoughts are re
placed in the dream-content by propyls as a
sort of plastic process.
On the one hand, here is the group of ideas
relating to my friend Otto, who does not un
derstand me, thinks I am in the wrong, and
gives me the liqueur that smells of amyls; on
the other hand, there is the group of ideasconnected with the first by contrast—relating to
my Berlin friend who does understand me, who
would always think that I was right, and to
whom I am indebted for so much valuable in
formation concerning the chemistry of sexual
processes.
What elements in the Otto group are to at
tract my particular attention are determined
by the recent circumstances which are respon
sible for the dream; amyls belong to the ele
ment so distinguished, which are predestined
to find their way into the dream-content. The
large group of ideas centering upon William is
actually stimulated by the contrast between
William and Otto, and those elements in it are
emphasized which are in tune with those al
ready stirred up in the Otto group. In the whole
of this dream I am continually recoiling from
somebody who excites my displeasure towards
another person with whom I can at will con
front the first; trait by trait I appeal to the
friend as against the enemy. Thus amyls in the
Otto group awakes recollections in the other
group, also belonging to the region of chemis-

[263a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
259
try;
trimethylamin, which
receives
support
from several quarters, finds its way into the
dream-content. Amyls, too, might have got into
the dream-content Unchanged, but it yields to
the influence of the William group, inasmuch
as out of the whole range of recollections cov
ered by this name an element is sought out
which is able to furnish a double determination
for amyls. Propyls is closely associated with
amyls; from the William group.comes MJunich
with its propylaeum. Both groups are united in
propyls—propylaeum. As though by a compro
mise, this intermediate element then makes its
way into the dream-content. Here a common
mean which permits of a multiple determination
has been
created. It thus becomes palpable
that a multiple determination must facilitate
penetration into the dream-content. For the
purpose of this mean-formation a displacement
of the attention has been unhesitatingly effected
from what is really intended to something ad
jacent to it in the associations.
The study of the dream of Irma's injection
has now enabled us to obtain some insight into
the process of condensation which occurs in the
formation of dreams. We perceive, as peculiari
ties of the condensing process, a selection of
those elements which occur several times over
in the dream-content, the formation of new
unities (composite persons, mixed images), and
the production of common means. The pur
pose which is served by condensation, and the
means by which it is brought about, will be in
vestigated when we come to study in all their
bearings the psychic processes at work in the
formation of dreams. Let us for the present be
content with establishing the fact of dreamcondensation as a relation between the dreamthoughts and the dream-content which deserves
attention.
The condensation-work of dreams becomes
most palpable when it takes words and means
as its objects. Generally speaking, words are
often treated in dreams as things, and there
fore undergo the same combinations as the
ideas of. things. The results of such dreams are
comical and bizarre word-formations.
i. A colleague sent an essay of his, in which
he had, in my opinion, overestimated the value
of a recent physiological discovery, and had ex
pressed himself, moreover, in extravagant terms.
On the following night I dreamed a sentence
which obviously referred to this essay: "That
is a truly norekdal style." The solution of this
word-formation at first gave me some difficul
ty; it was unquestionably formed as a parody

[263b]
of the superlatives colossal, pyramidal; but it
was not easy to say where it came "from. At
last the monster fell apart into the two names
Nora and Ekdal, from two well-knownplays by
Ibsen. I had previously read a newspaper arti
cle on Ibsen by the writer whose latest work I
was now criticizing in my dream.
2. One of my female patients dreams that a
man with a fair beard and a peculiar glittering
eye is pointing to a signboard, attached.to~a
tree which reads: uclamparia—wet.x
Analysis.—The man was- rather authorita
tive-looking, and his peculiar glittering eye at
once recalled the church of San Paolo, near
Rome, where she had seen the mosaic portraits
of the Popes. One of the early Popes had a
golden eye (this is really an optical illusion, to
which the guides usually call attention). Fur
ther associations showed that the general phy
siognomy of the man corresponded with her
own clergyman (pope), and the shape of the
fair beard recalled her doctor (myself), while
the stature of the man in the dream recalled
her father. All these persons stand in the same
relation to her; they are all guiding and direct
ing the course of her life. On further question
ing, the golden eye recalled gold^-money—the
rather
expensive
psycho-analytic
treatment,
which gives her a great deal of concern. Gold,
moreover, recalls the gold cure for alcoholism
-—Herr D, whom she would have married, if it
had not been for his clinging to the disgusting
alcohol habit-—she does not object to anyone's
taking an occasional drink; she herself sometimes_ drinks beer and liqueurs. This again
brings her back to her visit to San Paolo (fuori
la mura) and its surroundings. She remembers
that in the neighbouring monastery of the Tre
Fontane she drank a liqueur made of eucalyp
tus by the Trappist monks of the monastery.
She then relates how the monks transformed
this malarial and swampy region into a dry and
wholesome neighbourhood by planting numbers
of eucalyptus trees. The word uclamparia then
resolves itself into eucalyptus and malaria, and
the word wet refers to the former swampy na
ture of the locality. Wet also suggests dry. Dry
is actually the name of the man whom she
would have married but for his over-indul
gence in alcohol. The peculiar name of Dry is
of Germanic origin (drei—three) and hence,
alludes to the monastery of the Three (drei)
Fountains. In talking of Mr. Dry's habit she
used the strong expression: "He could drink a
1 Given by translator, as the author's example could
not be translated.

[264a]
260
Sigmund Freud
fountain." Mr. Dry jocosely refers to his habit
by saying: "You know I must drink because I
am always dry'' (referring to his name). The
eucalyptus refers also to her neurosis, which
was at first diagnosed as malaria. She went to
Italy because her attacks of anxiety, which
were accompanied by marked rigors and shiver
ing, were thought to be of malarial origin. She
bought some eucalyptus oil from the monks,
and she maintains that it has done her much
good.
The condensation uclamparia—-wet is, there
fore, the point of junction for the dream as
well as for the neurosis.
3. In a rather long and confused dream of
my own, the apparent nucleus of which is a sear
voyage, it occurs to me that the next port is
Hearsing, and next after that Fliess. The latter
is the name of my friend in B, to which city I
have often journeyed. But Hearsing is put to
gether from the names of the places in the
neighbourhood of Vienna, which so frequently
end in "ing": Hietzing, Liesing, Moedling (the
old Medelitz, meae deliciae,my joy; that is, my
own name, the German for joy being Freude),
and the English hearsay, which points to calumr
ny, and establishes the relation to the indifferent
dream-stimulus of the day—a poem in Flie^
gende Blatter about a slanderous dwarf, Sagter
Hatergesagt (Saidhe Hashesaid). By the com^
bination of the final syllable ing with the name
Fliess, Viissingen is obtained, which is a real
port through which my brother passes when he
comes to visit us from England. But the Erig>
lish for Viissingen-is Flushing, whichsignifies
blushing, and
recalls patients suffering from
erythmphobid
(fear of
blushing), whom I
sometimes treat, and also a recent publication
of Bechterew's, ^relating' to this neurosis, the
reading of which angered me;1;
*>
•;•*»
1 The same analysis and synthesis of syllables—a
veritable chemistry of syllables:—serves us for many
a" jest- in waking life. "What is the cheapest method
of obtaining sHver? You go to a field •where silverberries are. growing: and, pick them; then the berries
a,re eliminated and the silver remains in a free state."
[Translator's example]'. The first person who read and
criticized this book made the objection—with which
other readers will probably agree—that "the dreamer
often appears too witty." That is true, so long as it
applies to the dreamer; it involves a condemnation
only when its application is extended to the inter
preter of the dream. In waking reality I can "make
very little claims to the predicate witty; if my dreams
appear witty, this is not the. fault of my. individuality,
but of
the
peculiar psychological conditions under
which the dream is fabricated, and is intimately con
nected with the theory of wit and the comical. The
dream becomes "witty because the shortest and most
direct way to the expression of its thoughts is barred
for it; the dream is under constraint. My readers may
convince: themselves •that the dreams of my patients
give the impression of being quite as witty (at least,

[264b]
4. Upon another occasion I had a dream
which consisted of two separate parts. The first
was the vividly remembered word Autodidasker: the second was a faithful reproduction in
the dream-content of
a
short and harmless
fancy which had been developed a few days
earlier, and which was to the effect that. I must
tell Professor N, when I next saw him: "The
patient about whose condition I last consulted
you is really suffering from "a neurosis, just as
you suspected." So not only must the newlycoined Autodidasker satisfy the requirement
that it should contain or represent a com
pressed meaning, but this meaning must have a
valid connection with my resolve—repeated
from waking fife—to give Professor N due
credit for his diagnosis.
Now Autodidasker is easily separated into
author (German, Autor), autodidact, and Lasker,with whom is associated the name Lasalle.
The first of these words leads to the occasion
of the dream—which this time is significant. I
had brought home to my wife several volumes
by a weHrknown author who is a friend of my
brother's, and who, as I have learned, comes
from the sameneighbourhood as myself (J. J.
David). One evening;she told me how pro
foundly impressed she had been by the pa
thetic sadness of a story in one of David's
hovels (a story of wasted talents), and our
conversation turned upon the signs of talent
which we perceive in our own children; Under
the influence of what she had just read, my
wifeexpressed someconcern about ourchildren,
and I comforted her with the remark that pre
cisely such dangers as she feared can be averted
by training. During thenight my thoughts prel*
ceeded farther, took up iny wife's concern fo*
the children, and interwove with*it all sorts -of
other things. Something which the novelist had
said to my brother on the subject of marriage
showed my thoughts a by-path which might
lead to representation in the dream. This path
led to Breslau; a lady who was a very good
friend of ours had married and gone to live
there. I.found in Breslau Lasker and. Lasall&,
two examples to justify the fear lest our hoys
should be ruined by women, examples which
enabled me to represent simultaneously two
ways of^influencing a man to his undoing.2 The
in intention), as my own, and even more so. Never
theless, this reproach impelled me to compare the tech
nique of. wit with the dream-work..
<
-
2 Lasker died of progressive paralysis; that is, of the
consequences of an
infection caught from a woman
(syphilis); Lasalle, also a syphilitic, was killed in a
duel which he fought on account of the lady whom
he had been courting.

[265a]
The Interpretation'of Dreams
afo
Cherchez la femme, by which these thoughts
may be summarized,; leads me, if taken in an
other sense, to; my brother> who is still unmar
ried and whose name is Alexander. Now,I see
that Alex, as we abbreviate the name, sounds
almost like an inversion of Lasker,arid: that
this fact must have contributed to send my
thoughts on a detour by way of Breslau.
But the playing with names and syllables in
which I am here engaged has yet another mean
ing. It represents the wish that my brother
may. enjoy a happy family life, and this in the
following manner: In the novel of artistic life,
L'GLuvre, which, by virtue of its content, must
have
been
in
association with
my
dreamthoughts, the author, as is well-known, has
incidentally given a description of his own
person and his own domestic happiness, ahd
appears under the name of Sandoz. Inthe meta
morphosis of his name he probably went to
work as follows: Zola, when inverted (as chil
dren are fond of inverting names) gives Aloz.
But this was still too undisguised; he therefore
replaced the syllable AI, which stands at the
beginning of the name Alexander, by the third
syllable of the same name, sand, and thus ar
rived at Sandoz. My autodidaskeroriginated in
a similar fashion. *
My phantasy—that I am telling Professor N
that the patient whom we have both seen is suf
fering from a neurosis—found its Way into the
dream in the following manner: Shortly before
the close of my working year, I had a patient
in whose case my powers of diagnosis failed
me. A serious organic trouble-^-possibly some
alterative <degeneration of •the spinal cordwas to be assumed, but could not be conclu
sively demonstrated. It would have been tempt
ing to diagnose the trouble as a neurosis, and
this would have put an end to all my difficulties,
but for the fact that the sexual anamnesis, fail
ing which I am unwilling to admit a neurosis,
was so energetically denied by the patient. In
ray embarrassment I called to my assistance
the physician Whom I respect most of all men
(as others do also), and to whose authority I
surrender most completely. He listened to my
doubts, told me he thought them justified, and
then said: "Keep on observing the man, it is
probably a neurosis." Since I know that he does
not share my opinions concerning the aetiology
of the neuroses, I refrained from contradicting
him, but I did not conceal my scepticism. A
few days latefI informed the patient that'.I did
hot know what to do with him; and advised
him to go to someone else. Thereupon, to my

[265b]
great astonishment, he began to- beg my pairdon for having lied to me; he- had felt so
ashamed; and now he revealed to me just that
piece of sexual aetiology whichI had expected,
and which I-found 'necessary for^sumihg! the
existence of a neurosis; This was &"relief-to me,
but at the same time a humiliation; «for: I had
to admit that my consultant, whb was not dis
concerted by the absence of anamnesis,-had
judged the case more correctly. I made up my
-mind to:tell him, when next I saw him, that he
had been right and I had been wrong.
f T
'•'- This is just what I do in' the dream. But
what sort of a wish is fulfilled if I acknowl
edge that I am mistaken? This is precisely niy
wish; T wish to be mistaken as regards my
fears—that is to say, I wish that my wife,
whose fears I have appropriated in my dreafnthoughts; may prove to be mistakeri. The sub
ject to which the fact of being right or Wrdng
is related in the dream is not far removed from
that which is; really of interest to the dreamthoughts. We have the same pair of alterna
tives, of either organic or functional impair
ment caused by a woman, or actually by the
sexual life—either tabetic paralysis or a neu
rosis—with which latter the nature of Lasalles
undoing is indirectly connected.
In this well-constructed (and on careful airat
ysis quite transparent) dream, Professor N ap
pears not merely on account of this analogy,
and my wish to be proved mistaken, or the
associated
references to Breslau and to the
family of our married friend who lives there;
but also on account of the following little dia
logue Which followed bur consultation: After he
had acquitted himself of his professional duties
by
making the
above-mentioned suggestion^
Dr. N proceeded to discuss personal matters.
"How many children have you now?"—"Six."
—A thoughtful and respectful gesture.—"Girls,
boys?"—"Three of each. They are my pride
and my riches."—"Well, you must be careful;
there is no difficulty about the girls, but the
boys are a difficulty later on as regards their
upbringing." I replied that until now they had
been very tractable; obviously this prognosis
of my boys' future pleased me as little as his
diagnosis of my patient, whom he believed to
be suffering only from a neurosis. These two
impressions, then, are connected by their boh-*
tiguity; by their being successively received;
and when I incorporate the story of the neuro
sis into the dream,. I substitutenittfor the con
versation: on the subject of upbringing- which
is even more closely connected with the dream*

[266a]
262
SiGMUND Freud
thoughts; since it touches so closely upon theanxiety subsequently expressed by my wife.
Thus, even my fear that N may prove to be
tight in his remarks on the difficulties to bemtet
with in bringing up boys is admitted into the
dream-content, inasmuch as it is concealed be
hind the representation of my wish that I may
be wrong to harbour -sttch^appr^hensions..The.
same phantasy serves without alteration to rep
resent both the conflicting alternatives.
Examination-dreams present the same diffi
culties to interpretation that I have already
described as
characteristic of most typical
dreams. The associative material which
the
dreamer supplies only rarely suffices for inter
pretation.
A
deeper
understanding of
such
dreams has to be accumulated from a consid
erable number of examples. Not long ago I ar
rived at a
conviction that reassurances like
"But you already are a doctor," and so on, not
only convey a consolation but imply a re
proach as well. This wouldhave run: "You are
already so old, so-far advanced jn. life, and yet
you still commit such follies, are guilty of such
chirdish^f^
-
cism and consolation would correspond with
the examination-dreams. After this it is no
longer surprising that the reproaches in the
last analysed examples concerning follies and
childish behaviour should relate to repetitions
of reprehensible sexual acts.
The verbal transformations in dreams are
very similar to those which are known to occur
in paranoia, and which are observed also in
hysteria and obsessions. The linguistic tricks
of children, who at a certain age actually treat
words as objects, and even invent new lan
guages and artificial syntaxes, are a common
source, of such pccurrencjs^bpthjn.dreams and
in the psychoneuroses.
The analysis of nonsensical word-formations
in dreams is particularly well suited to demon
strate the degree of condensation effected in
the dream-work. From the small number of the
selecte^examples^fererconsidere#*it*must not
be concluded
that
such
material
is
seldom
observed or is at all exceptional. It is, on the
contrary, very frequent,
but, owing to the
dependence of dream interpretation on psycho
analytic treatment, very few examples are noted
down and reported, and most of the analyses
which are reported are comprehensible only to
the specialist in neuropathology.
When a spoken utterance, expressly distin
guished as such from a thought, occurs in a

[266b]
dreamy itis~ an invariable rule that the dreamspeech has
originated
from
a remembered
speech in the dream-material. The wording of
the speech has either been^prjese^gd in its en
tirety or has been slightly altered in expres
sion; frequently the dream-speech is pieced to
gether from different recollections of spoken
remarks;,the wording has^remaineilthe same,
but the sense has perhaps become ambiguous,
or differs from the wording. Not infrequently
the dream-speech serves merely as an allusion
to an incident in connection with which the
remembered speech was made.1
B. The Work of Displacement
Another and probably no less significant rela
tion must have already forced itself upon our
attention while we were collecting examples of
dream-condensation. We may have noticed that
these elements which obtrude themselves in
the dream-content as its essential components
do not by any means play this same part in the
dream-thoughts. As
a corollary to this,„Jhe
converse of this statement is also true. That
which is obviousfy^^the^essential content of the
dream-thoughts need not be represented at all
in the dream. The dream is, as it were, centred
elsewhere; its content is arranged about ele
ments which do not constitute the central point
of the dream-thoughts. Thus, for example, in
the dream of the botanical monograph the cen
tral point of the dream-content is evidently the
element botanical; in the dream-thoughts, we
are concerned with the complications and con
flicts resulting from services rendered between
colleagues which place them under mutual ob
ligations ; later on with the reproach that I am
in the habit of sacrificing too much time to my
hobbies; and the element botanical finds no
placein this nucleus of the dream-thoughts,un
less it is loosely connected with it by antithesis,
for botany was never among my favourite sub
jects. In the Sappho-dream of my patient, as
cending and descending, being upstairs and
dowf*, is made- the central-point; the dream,
however, is concerned with the danger of sex
ual relations with persons of low degree; so
that only one of the elements of the dream1 In the case of a young man who was suffering from
obsessions, but whose intellectual functions were in
tact and highly developed, I recently found the only
exception
to
this rule. The speeches which occurred
in his dreams did not originate in speeches which he
had heard or had made himself, but corresponded to
the
undistorted
verbal
expression
of
his
obsessive
thoughts, which came to his waking consciousness on
ly in an altered form.

[267a]
thoughts seems to have found its way into the
dream-content, and this is unduly expanded.
Again, in the dream of my uncle, the fair
beardvwhich-seems to be its centraLpoint,, ap
pears to have no rational connection with the
desire for greatness which we have recognized
as the nucleus of the dream-thoughts. Such
dreams very naturally give us an impression of
a displacement. In complete contrast to these
examples, the dream of Irma's injection shows
that individual elements
may claim the same
place in dreamr-formation as that' which they
occupy in the dream-thoughts. The recogni
tion of this new and utterly inconstant relation
between the dream-thoughts and the dreamcontent will probably astonish us at first. If we
find, in a psychic process of normal life, that
one idea has been selected from among a number of offiersraiilhas ar^quired^apaMcular em
phasis in our consciousness, we are wont to re
gard this as proof that a peculiar psychic value
(a certain degree of interest) attaches to the
victorious idea. We now discover that this value
of the indk*dual element in the dream-thoughts
is not retained in dream-formation, or is not
taken into account.
For there is no doubt
which of the elements of the dream-thoughts
are of the highest value; our judgment informs
us immediately. In dream-formation the essen
tial elements, those that are emphasized by in
tensive interest, may be treated as though they
were subordinate, while they are replaced in
the dream by other elements, which were cer
tainly subordinate in the dream-thoughts. It
seems at first as though the psychic intensity*
of individual ideas were of no account in their
selection for dream-formation, but only their
greater or lesser multiplicity of determination.
One mrghHbe inclined to think that what gets
into the dream is not what is important in the
dream-thoughts, but what is contained in them
several times over; but our understanding of
dream-formation is not much advanced by this
assumption; to begin with, we cannot believe
that the two motives of multiple determination
and intrinsic value can influence the selection
of the dream otherwise than in the same direc
tion. Those ideas in the dream-thoughts which
are most important are probably also those
which recur most frequently, since the indi
vidual dream-thoughts radiate from them as
centres. And yet the dream may reject these in
tensely emphasized and extensively reinforced
^Thepsyehic intensity or valu^of-an-idea—the em
phasis due to interest—is of course to be distinguished
from perceptual
or conceptual intensity.

[267b]
The Interpretation of Dreams
263
elements, and may take up into its content other
elements which are only extensively reinforced.
This difficulty may be solved if we follow up
yet another impression received during the in
vestigation of the over-determination of the
dream-content. Many readers of this investiga
tion may already have decided, in their own
minds, that the discovery of the multiple5 de
termination of the dream-elements is of no
great importance, because it is inevitable. Since
in analysis we proceed from the dream-ele
ments, and register all the ideas which associ
ate themselves with these elements,;•
is it any
wonder that these elements should recur with
peculiar frequency in the thought-material ob
tained in this manner? While I cannot admit
the validity of this objection, I am now going
to say something that sounds rather like it:
Among the thoughts which analysis brings to
light are many which are far removedfrom the
nucleus of the dream, arid which stand out like
artificial interpolations made for a definite pur
pose. Their purpose may readily be detected;
they establish a connection, often a forced and
far-fetched connection, between the dream-con
tent and the dream-thouglits, and in many
cases, if theseelements wereweeded out ofthe
analysis, the components of the dream-content
would riot only not be over-determined, but
they would not be sufficiently determined- We
are thus led to the conclusion that multiple de
termination, decisive as regards the selection
made by the dream, is perhaps not always a
primaryfactor in dream-formation, but is often
a secondary product of a psychic force which
is as yet unknown to us. Nevertheless, it must
be of importance for the entrance of the indi
vidual elements into the dream, for we may
observe that, in cases where multiple determi
nation does not proceed easily from the dreammaterial, it is brought about with a certain
effort.
It now becomes very probable that a psychic
force expresses itself in.the dream-work which,
on the one hand, strips the elements of the
high psychic value of their intensity and, on
the other hand, by means of over-determina
tion, creates new significant values from ele
ments of slight value, which new values then
make their way into the dream-content.Now if
this is the method of procedure, there has oc
curred in the process of dream-formation a
transference and displacement of the psychic
intensities of
the individual elements, from
which results the textual difference between the

[268a]
%H
•SiGicu^rD Freud
dream-content xand.;the thought-content. .Jhe
process which we,here assume to be, operative
is,actually the most essential part of the dreamwork; it may fitly, be called dream-displace
ment. Dream-displacement and dream-conden
sation are the, two craftsmen to whpmwe m^y
chiefly, ascribe the structure of ther dream.
- I think it will be easy to recognizethe psychic
force which expresses itself in dream-displace
ment. The result of this displacement is that
the dream-content no longer has any likeness
to the nucleus of the dream-thoughts, and the
dream reproduces only a distorted-,form of the
dream-wish in the unconscious. But we are al
ready acquainted .with dream-distortion;
we
have traced'it back to the censorship which one
psychic instance in.the psychic life exercises
oyer another, pream^splacement isone,of the
chief means of;? achieving this distortion. Is
fecit,cuipro.fuit} Wemustassume that ctreamdisplacement is brought about by the influence
of this censorship, the .endopsychic defence.2.
The nianner in which the factors pi displace
ment, .epndensation and -pver-determinatioain-
'*aThe doer• gained."' '
:"-!-•"•
v -* Since- J Regardc\hb attribution of dream-distortion
to the censorshipas the central point of my conception
of the dream, I Will here quote the closing'passage of
. a story, Trdum&n^wie Wacheny.ivom Phantasieneines,
Reqlisten*^ by *, Lynkeus (Viennar \-second
e,djtion
[xooq])»Vitf'which' I find, this'Jchief feature oi my
doctrine'reproduced:
711
:
"*•! .
i i"-?
•'-'/ X'
. "GonCefning -a ;man ;who possesses the ..remarkable
faculty of never dreaming nonsense. ..."
" Your marvellous faculty of
dreaming as if you
were awake* is based,upon; your virtues, upon your
goodness, your justice, and your Love.of truth; it is
the moral clarity of your nature which makes every
thing about you. intelligible to: me."
"But if I really, give thought to the matter," was
the reply, "I almost believe that all inen are made
as
I
am, arid that no one ever dreams nonsense!
A
dream which one remembers so distinctly that one^can
relate it afterwards, and which, therefore, is no dream
of delirium, always has a meaning; why, it cannot be
otherwise! For that which isi in contradiction, tQ.itself
can never be combined, into a. whole. The ffact that
time and space are often thoroughly shaken'up, de
tracts not at all from the real content of the dream,
because both are without any significance, whatever for
its essential content. We often. do' the same thing in
waking life; thmk of fairy-tales, of so manyi boldand
pregnant creations: oirfantasy, of which only a foolish
person would say: 'That is'nonsenseI For it isn't pbs^-
sible?""
•••'
•-•
-.v.:.
;*+.•••
- ^f.only it were always^possible to interpret dreams
correctly, as you have just done with, mine!" said, the
friebd.
""
*<That is certainly not an ;easy task, but with a
little attention.it must always
be. possible
to
the
dreamer. You ask why it is generally impossible? In
your case there seems to be something veiled in your
dreams,;something unchaste in. a special and exalted
fashion, a certain secrecy in your nature, which it is
•"difficult to fathom; and that is >why your dreams so
often seem to. be without, meaning, Or even nonsen- ,
sical. But in the profoundest sense, this is by no means'
the case* indeed' it- cannot be, for a hiari is always
the same person, whether he wakes or dreams."

[268b]
. teract' with one; anQther^mr;to
which is the ruling factor andwhich the^subordinate onerr-ail this will be reserved as a sub
ject for later investigation. In the meantime,
we rjiay state, as a second conditionwhich, the
elements -that find their, way into the dream
must satisfy, that they must be withdrawn
from; the resistance 0} the censorship. But
henceforth, in the interpretation of dreams, we
shall reckon with dream-displacement as an
unquestionable fact.
C. The Means of Representation
in Dreams
Besides the two factors of condensation and dis
placement in dreams,, which we have found to
beatwork in fjoae^transfprmatipn of the latent
dream--material into the,,.manifest dream-con
tent,, we sb^A*^
course of this inyestiga^
tion,. come upon two further conditions whieb
exercise an unquestionable influence, over; the
selection of the material that eventually ap[
pears in. the dream. But first, even at the .risk
of.seeming to. interrupt our progress, I shall
take a preliminary:=glance rat the processes b#
which the interpretation of dreams isjaccpmr
plished, I do not deny thai the-best wayof ex?
plaining them,: and of convincing,the critic pf
their reliability, would, be to take a. single
dream as an example, tordetaii its interpretar
tion, as J did (in Chapter ri) in the case of the
dream, of Irma's injection^,but then to assemf
blethe dream-thoughts whichI had discovered*
and from them to reconstruct the formation of
the dream—-thatis to say, to supplement drearn7
analysis by.dream-synthesis.. I have done this
with several specimens for myown instruction;
but I cannpt undertake to do it, here, as ,1 am
prevented by a number of considerations (re*
latjng to the psychic material necessary for
such a demonstration) such as any right-thinks
ing person,would approve. In the analysis of
dreams these considerations present-less diffiT
culty, for an analysis may be incomplete anbj
still .retain its value,-even,if it leads only a
little-way jnto the ;structure^ of- the dream. I
do, not see how a synthesis,,*tp be convincing,
could be anything short of complete. I could
give a complete synthesis only of the dreams
of such persons as are unknown to the reading
public. Since,; however, neurotic patients are
the only, persons who furnish me with; the
means of making;such a synthesis, this part of
•the ?description of dreams must be.postponed
until I-can" rarry the psyctologiea'l explanation"
of the neuroses far enough to demonstrate their

[269a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
2%
relation to our subject.1This will be done else
where.
From my attempts to construct dreams syn
thetically from their dream-thoughts, I know
that the material which is yielded by interpre
tation varies in value. Part of it consists of the:
essential dream-thoughts, which would com-i
pletely replace the dream and would in them
selves
be a sufficient substitute for it, were
there no dream-censorship. To the other part,
one is wont to ascribe slight importance, nor
does one set any value on the assertion that
all these thoughts have participated hi the for^
mation of the dream; oh the contrary, they
may include notions Which are associated with
experiences that have Occurred subsequently to
the €ream, between the dream and the intetpretation. This*part comprises not onl^all the
cdhriectihg-paths whichhaveledfrom the mani
fest to the1latent •dream-Gontent, but also the
intermediate and approximating associations by
means of which one has arrived at Taknowledge
of[these cdnhectmg-paths during the work of
interpretation;
"
At this point we are^ interested exclusively
iir the essential dream-thoughtS; These eornmorily reveal themselves as a complex of
thoughts and memories of ;the most•intricate'
poissible construcliohV withall the characteris
tics of the?thbujght-pfocesseis1 known to Itis inl
waking life. NbtihfreqUehil^they aretrams" of
thought which proceed from more than one*
centre, but which are not without points of
contact; and almost invariably We^find, along
with a train of thought, its contradictory coun^'
terpart, connected with it by the assdciationdf contrast.
?
The individual parts of this complicated
structure naturally stand in the most manifold
logical relations to one another. They consti
tute foreground and background, digressions,
illustrationsj conditions, lines of argument and
objections. When the whole mass of these
dream-thoughts is -subjected' to the pressure of
the dream-Work, during which the fragments
are turned about/ broken up and compacted,
somewhat like drifting ice, the question arises:
What becomes of the logical ties which had
hitherto provided the framework of the struc
ture?"What representation do if, because, as
'"?'! have since given the complete analysis and syn
thesis of two dreams in' the Brtichstuck Mner• Hysterieamlyse, iigps) (Ges. Schriften, Vol.;.VHl).,-|"Frag
ment of an Analysis of a pase of Hysteria," translated
by rStrachey,
Collected Tapers, Vol. m,
(Hogarth
Press, London).- OviRank's analysis, Em Traum. der
sich.,selhst4eutetf;deserves mention as.tbe most comr
plete interpretation bf a comparatively'long dream.
•

[269b]
though, although, either—or and all the other
conjunctions,' without which we cannot: under
stand a phrase or a sentence, receive in cut
dreams?
.-.
:-'..-
To begin with, we must answer that the
dream has at its. disposal no means of repre
senting these logical relations between the
dream-thoughts. In most cases it disregards all
these Conjunctions,:and undertakes the elabo
ration only of the material content of the
dream-thoughts. It is left to the interpretation
of the dream to restore the coherence which
the. dream-worthas destroyed.
If dreams lack the ability. •to express, these
relations, the psychic material-of which they;
are5wrought must be responsible for thisidefecti
As a matter of fact, the representative ^arts—^
paintingand sculptures—are similarly restricted*-
as compared witb poetry^ which is able to em-,
ploylspeech; and herragain thereasoii for thislimitation lies in the material by the elaboration
of which the two plastic arts endeavour to Ex
press- something. Beforecthe. art of .painting
arrived at an^understandingsof the laWsof ex
pression by which it is boundjit attempted stoi
mafe up lor this deficiency: In• oldrpaintingsi
little labels hung out of*the mouths ofcthelper-i
sons represented, giving in- writing- the jspeech
which; the artist despaired of expressing in the!
picturei -;i --^- ': i^^--.7- ...i-
-• ^Here,T perhirjs an objection will-be;raised,!
challenging the11 assertion >thai our dreams
diSfjense* ^th the tepresentation, of' logical
relatidnsv There are dreams-iri?whieh-the!7most
complicated! intellectual operationsitake placed
afgUrhehts for and against are adduced] jokes?
arid comparisons ;are made, •Justus in >bur
wakmg thoughts. But here again appearances
are deceptive; ifthe interpretation of such
dreams is continued it will be foundthatall
these things are dream-material, not the'repre
sentation of intellectual activity in the dream:
TM-content of the; dream-thoughts' is"repro
duced by the apparent thinking in our dreams,
but hot the relations of the dream-thoughts to
one another, inthe determination1 of"which re
lations thinking consists. I shall give some"ex
amples of this. But the fact which is most
easily established is that all speeches which
occur in dreams, and which are expressly desig
nated as such, are unchanged or drily- slightly
modified replicas
of -speeches which
occur
likewise among the memories in the xlreahi^
material. Often the ^eech" is only* an allusion
to ah event contained in1 the dream-thotights£
the meaning df the dream is quite differentiP-4

[270a]
266
SlGMUND FREUD
However, I shall not dispute the fact that
even critical thought-activity, which does not
simply
repeat
material
from
the
dreamthoughts, plays a part in dream-formation. I
shall have to explain the influence of this factor
at the close of this discussion. It will then be
come clear that this thought activity is evoked
not by the dream-thoughts, but by the dream
itself, after it is, in, a certain sense, already
completed.
Provisionally, then, it is agreed that the logi
cal relations between the dream-thoughts do
not obtain any particular representation in the
dream. For instance, where there is a contradic
tion in the dream, this is either a contradiction
directed against the dream itself or a contradic
tion contained in one of the dream-thoughts;
a contradiction in the dream corresponds with
a
contradiction between the dream-thoughts
only in the most indirect and intermediate
fashion.
But just as the art of painting finally suc
ceeded in depicting, in the persons represented,
at least the intentions behind their wordstenderness, menace, admonition, and the like—
by other means than by floating labels, so also
the dream has found it possible to render an
account of certain of the logical relations be
tween its dream-thoughts by an
appropriate
modification of the peculiar method of dreamrrepresentation. It will be found by experience
that different dreams go to different lengths in
this respect; while one dream will entirelydis
regard the logical structure of its material, an
other attempts to indicate it as completely as,
possible. In so doing, the dream departs more:
or less widely from the text which it has to
elaborate; and its attitude is equally variable in
respect to the temporal articulation of
the
dream-thoughts, if such has been established in
the unconscious (as, for example, in the dream
of Irma's injection).
But what are the means by which the dreamwork is enabled to indicate those relations in
the dream-material which are difficult to rep
resent? I shall attempt to enumerate these, one
by one.
.
:. ;
T.;•
In the first place, the dream renders an ac
count of the connection which;is,undeniably
present between all the portions of the dreamr
thoughts by combining this material into a
unity as. a situation or: a proceeding. It repro
duceslogical connections in theiorm of simul-,
taneity; in this? case,it behaves rather like the
painter who groups together all the philoso
phers or poets in a picture of the School of

[270b]
Athens, or Parnassus. They never were assem
bled in any hall or on any mountain-top, al
though to. the reflective mind they do consti
tute a community.
The dream carries out in detail this mode of
representation. Whenever it
shows two
ele
ments close together, it vouches for a particu
larly intimate connection between their corre
sponding representatives in the dream-thoughts.
It is as in our method of writing: to signifies
that the two letters are to be pronounced as one
syllable; while t with o following a blank space
indicates that t is the last letter of one woroV
and 0 the first letter of another. Consequently,
dream-combinations are not made up. of arbi
trary, completely incongruous elements of the
dream-material, but of elements that are pretty
intimately related in the dream-thoughts also.
For representing causal relations our dreams
employ two methods, which are essentially re
ducible to one. The .method of representation
more frequently employed-rin cases, for ex
ample, where the dream-thoughts are to the
effect: "Because this was thus and thus, this
and that must happen"—consists in making the
subordinate clause a prefatory dream and join
ing the principal clause on to it in the form of
the main dream.If my interpretation is correct,
the sequence may likewise be reversed. The
principal clause*always corresponds; to that part
of the dream which is elaborated in the great
est detail.
An? excellent example of such a representa
tion of causality was once provided by a fe
male patient, whosedream I shall subsequently
give in full. The dream consisted of a short pro-^
logue, and of a very circumstantial and very;
definitely centred dream-composition. I might
entitle it "Flowery language." The preliminary
dream is as follows: She goes to the two maids
in the kitchen and scolds them for taking so»;
long to prepare" a little bite of food." She also\
seesa very large numberof heavy kitchenutenA
sils in the kitchen turned upside down in order\
to drain, even heaped up in stacks. The two\
maids go to fetch water, and have, as it were,:
to climb into a river, which reaches up to the,
house or into the courtyard.
Then follows the main dream, which begins;
as follows: She is climbing down from a height
over a curiously shaped trellis, and she is glad
that her dress doesn't get caught anywhere, etc.
Now the preliminary dream refers tp the house
of the lady's parents. The words which are
spoken in the kitchen are words which she has
probably often heard spoken by heir mother.

[271a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
267
The piles of clumsy pots and pans are taken
from an unpretentious hardware shop located
in the same house. The second part of this
dream contains an allusion to the dreamers
father, who was always pestering the maids,
and who during a flood—for the house stood
close to the bank of the river—contracted a
fatal illness. The thought which is concealed
behind the preliminary dreamis something like
this: "Because I was born in this house, in
such sordid and unpleasant surroundings . . ."
The main dream takes up the same thought,
and presents it in a form that has been al
tered by a wish-fulfilment: "I am of exalted
origin." Properly then: "Because I am of such
humble origin, the course of my life has been
so and so."
As far as. I can see,.the division of a dream
into two unequal portions does not alwayssig
nify a causal relation between the thoughts of
the two portions. It often seems as though in
the two dreams the same material were present
ed from different points of view; this is cer
tainly the case when a series of dreams,
dreamed the same night, end in a seminal
emission, the somatic need enforcing a more
and more definite expression. Or the
two
dreams have proceeded from two separate cen
tres in the dream-material, and they overlap
one another in the content, so that the subject
which in one dream constitutes the centre co
operates in the other as an allusion, and vice
versa. But in a certain number of dreams the
division into short preliminary dreams and long
subsequent dreams actually signifies a causal
relation between the two portions. The other
method of representing the causal relation is
employed with less comprehensive material,
and consists in the transformation of an image
in the dream into another image, whether it be
of a person or a thing. Only where this trans
formation is actually seen occurring in the
dream shall we seriously insist on tbe causal
relation; not where we simply note that one
thing has taken the place of another. I said
that both methods of representing the causal
relation
are
really
reducible
to
the
same
method; in both cases causation is represented
by succession, sometimes by the succession of
dreams, sometimes by the immediate transfor
mation of one image into another. In the
great majority of cases, of course, the causal
relation is not represented at all, but is effaced
amidst the succession of elements that is un
avoidable even in the dream-process.
Dreams are quite incapable of expressing the

[271b]
alternative either—or; it is their custom to
take both members of this alternative into the
same context, as though they had an equal right
to be: there. A classic example of this is con
tained in the dream of Irma's injection. Its
latent thoughts obviously mean: I am not re
sponsible for the persistence of Irma's pains;
the responsibility rests either with her resist
ance to accepting the solution or with the fact
that she is living under unfavourable sexual
conditions, which I am unable to change, or
her pains are not hysterical at all, but organic.
The dream, however, carries out all these pos
sibilities, which are almost mutually exclusive,
and is quite ready to add a fourth solution
derived from the dream-wish. After interpreting
the dream, I then inserted the either—or in its
context in the dream-thoughts.
. But when in narrating a dream the narrator
is inclined to employ the alternative either—or:
"It was either a garden or a living-room," etc.,
there is not really an alternative in the dreamthoughts, but an and—a simple addition. When
we use either—or we are as a rule describing
a quality of vagueness in some element of the
dream, but a vagueness which may still be
cleared up. The rule to be applied in this case
is as follows: The individual members of the
alternative are to be treated as equal and con
nected by an and. For instance, after waiting
long and vainly for the address of a friend who
is travelling in Italy, I dream that I receive a
telegram which gives me the address. On the
telegraph form I see printed in blue letters: the
first word is blurred—perhaps via
or villa; the second is distinctly Sezerno,
or even (Casa).
The second word, which reminds me of Italian
names, and of our discussions on etymology,
also expresses my annoyance in respect of the
fact that my friend has kept his address a
secret from me; but each of the possible first
three words may be recognized on analysis as
an independent and equally justifiable start
ing-point in the concatenation of ideas.
During the night before the funeral of my
father I dreamed of a printed placard, a card
or poster rather like the notices in the waitingrooms of railway stations which announce that
smoking is prohibited. The sign reads either:
You are requested to shut the eyes
or
You are requested to shut one eye
an alternative which I am in the habit of rep
resenting in the following form:

[272a]
26*
Sigmund Freud
the
You are requested to shut
eye(s).
one
Each of the two versions has its special
meaning, and leads along particular paths in the
dream-interpretation. I had made the simplest
possible funeral arrangements, for I knew what
the deceased thought about such matters. Other
members of the family, however, did not ap
prove
of
such
puritanical
simplicity;
they;
thought we should feel ashamed in the presence
of the other mourners/Hence one of the word
ings of the dream asks for the shutting of one
eye, that is to say, it asks that people should
show
consideration.
The significance of the
vagueness, which is here represented by an'
either—or, is plainly to be seen. The dreamwork has not succeeded in concocting a coherent
and yet ambiguous wording for the dreamthoughts. Thus the two
principal trains of
thought are separated from each other, even
in the dream-content.
In some few cases the division of a dream
into two equal parts expresses the alternative
which the dream finds it so difficult to present.
The attitude1 of dreams to the category of
antithesis and contradiction is very striking.
This category is simply ignored; the word No
does not seem to exist for a dream. Dreams
are particularly fond of reducing antitheses to
uniformity, or representing them as one and
the same thing. Dreams likewise take the lib
erty of representing any element whatever by
its desired opposite, so that it is at first im
possible to tell, in respectof any element which
is capable of having an opposite, whether it is
contained in the dream-thoughts in the nega
tive of the positive sense,1 In one of the recent
ly cited dreams, whose introductory portion we
have already interpreted ("because my origin
is so and so"), the dreamer climbs down over
a trellis, and holds a blossoming bough in her
hands. Since this picture suggests to her the
angel in paintings of the Annunciation (her
own name is Mary) bearing a lily-stem in his
1 From a work of K. Abel's, Der Gegensinn der Urworte, (1884), (see my review of it in the BleulerFreud Jahrbuch, ii
(191-0) (Ges. Schriften, Vol. x).
I leatned the surprising fact, which is confirmed by
other philologists, that the oldest languages behaved
just as dreams do in this regard. They had originally
only one word for both extremes in a series of quali
ties
or activities
(strong—weak, old—young,
far—
near, bind—separate), and formed
separate designa
tions for the two opposites only secondarily, by slight
modifications of
the
common primitive
word.
Abel
demonstrates a very large number of those relationships
in ancient Egyptian, and points to distinct remnants
of the same development in
the Semitic and IndoGermanic languages.

[272b]
hand, and the whiterrobed girls walking in prd^-
cession on
Corpus
Ghristi
Day, when =the
streets are decorated with green boughs, the
blossoming bough in the dream is quite clearly
an allusion to sexual innocence. But the bough
is thickly studded with red blossoms, each of
which resembles a camellia. At the end of her
walk (so the dream continues) the blossoms
are: already beginning to fall; then follow un
mistakable allusions to menstruation. But this
very bough, which is carried like a lily-stem
and as though by an innocent girl, is also ah
allusion to Camille, who, as we know, usually
wore a white camellia, but a red one during
menstruation.
The
same
blossoming
bough
("the flower of maidenhood" in Goethe's songs
of the miller's daughter) represents at once
sexual innocence and its opposite. Moreover,
the same dream, which expresses the dreamer's
joy at having succeededin passing through life
unsullied, hints in several places (as in the
falling of the blossdm) at the opposite train of
thought, namely, that she had been guilty of
various sins against sexual purity (that isj iri
her childhood). In the analysis of the dream
we may clearly distinguish the two trains of
thought, of which the comforting one seems
to be superficial, and the reproachful one more
profound. The two are diametrically opposed
to each other, and their similar yet contrasting
elements have been represented by identical
dream-elements.
1
The mechanism of dream-formation is fa
vourable in the highest degree to only one of
the logical relations. This relation is that of
similarity, agreement, contiguity, just as; a
relation which may be represented in our
dreams, as no other can be, by the most varied
expedients. The screening which occurs in the
dream-material, or the cases of just as are the
chief points of support for dream-formation,
and a not inconsiderable part of the dreamwork consists in creating new screenings ofj
this kind in caseswhere those that already exist
are prevented by the resistance of the censor
ship from making their Way into the dream.
The effort towards condensation evinced by
the dream-work facilitates the representation
of a relation of similarity.
Similarity, agreement, community, are quite
generally expressed in dreams by contraction
into a unity, which is either already found in
the dream-material or is newly created. The
first case may be referred to as identification,
the second as composition. Identification is used
where the dream is concerned with persons,

[273a]
The iNTEEPRfirA^mMroi Dreams
compositionswheref" things;^constituteithe >msfe
fcerialnto^be unified;>but' compositions are* also
made^of persons.-Localities' are-often; treated
as persons,vnd .^-h-nij": ^:v. ' :
•..v±j\.
i ^dentifi^tibi¥^onsistS-;mrgiving3ifepres
tioh in th^dreamkroritent to;only one of two or
morepersons'^who^are related^sonie•common
featurev.while the-second person or mother Jjer-*
sons^appear >to:be suppressed as" far as the
dream is="eoMernedl-In the- dreamiihisone
^scfeesni&gV perionienters!into all the*relation^
and /sitoatiohs^^hich derive from; the persons
whom he screens; In cases"of cdmpositioriphbwever^ when
persons" are combined, there are
already present' in the dream-image^ features
which are -characteristici of,' but-not common
to, the persons in questions rso that a new unity}
a composite ;person,-i appears as the resulFof
the union of these features; The combination- iU
self may be effected in various'ways. Either
the dream-person bears the: name of one of
the persons to whom he refers^-and in this
case we simply know, in a manner thatis iquife'
analogous to= knowledge in waking life, that
this or that person is intended--while the visual
features
belong to another person;
or; the
dream-image itself is compounded of visual
features whichfcreality are derived from the
two. Also, in place'of the visual features, the
part played by the second person may be rep-;
resented by the attitudes and gestures which
are usually ascribed to him by the words he
speaks, or by the situations in which he is
placed.In this latter method of characterization
the sharp distinction between the identification
and the combination of persons begins to dis
appear But it may also: happen that the. for-<
mation of such a composite person Is 'unsuccess
ful. The situations or actions of the dream are
then attributed to one person, and the other-^
as a rule the more important—is introduced
as an; 'inactive spectator. Perhaps the dream
er will 'say:: "My mother was there too".
(Stekel). Such an element of the dream^content is then comparable to a determinative inhieroglyphic script which is not meant to be
expressed, but is intended only to explain an
other sign.
The
common
feature
which
justifies the
union of:two persons—that is to say, which
enables it to be made—may either be repre-i
sented in the dream or it may be absent. As a
rule; identification or compositiori <of persons
actually serves to avoid the necessity of repre
sentingthis common feature. Instead of repeatirigs HA :isrUndisposed towards hie) arid'so is

[273b]
B,VlAmake^in my* dream; a cdmpdsite persdn
of'AiandoB;ror I>conceiveuAjas doing som^
thing'which' is alierl to his>character]^ but which
is^characteristio: ofIB. The dream-fcei&Gff ob
tained1in this-jway vappears in the. 'dream <hi
some'new connection, arid the fact that*he sig
nifies, both A and B justifies my'inserting thkt
which is:common to both- persons-^-their!bos^
tility?towards me^afc the ^proper'pl£oe inithe"'
dream-interpre'tation.'iln this 'manner I-often
achieve a >quite extraordinary degreel'b& cori^
dehsation ofthe ;drearri^conte^;-I=jM abletb '
dispense with the; direct ^epresentatidri'wof the
very complicated relations belonging"to- one "
person, if I :can find a^second person who has
an equal claim1 tb some of these relations./II
will-be> readily; understood how far this repre-i
sentation by means of identification may cic-i
cumvent the censoring resistance -#hich «ets
up: such harsh conditions for the drearn-wbrki
The thing that offends the censorship:may reside in those very ideas which are" connected
ihithe dream^material with the one-person; I
now find a second person, who likewise stands
in-some relation to the objectionable material^
but only-td a part of it. Contact at that1one
point which offends the censorship now/-justi
fies my formation of a composite person,; who
is characterized by the indifferent'featur.es'hf
each. This personj the result of combination or
identification; being free of the censorship, is
now suitable for incorporation in the dream-r
content. Thus, by the application of dreamconderisation, I have satisfied the demands of
the dream-censorship:
When a common feature of two persons is
represented in a dream, this is usually a hint
to look fdr another"concealed common feature^
the representation of which is'made impossible
by the censorship. Here a displacement of the
common feature has occurred, which in some
degree facilitates representation. From the cir
cumstance that the composite person is shown
to me in the dreain with an indifferent common
feature, I must infer that another commonfea
ture which is by rid means indifferent exists in
the dream-thoughts.
Accordingly, the identificationor combination
of persons serves various purposes in our
dreams; in the'first place, that of representing
a feature common to two persons; •secondly*
that of representing a displaced common fea
ture;, and, thirdly,, that of expressly. .;ar cpm-
• munity of features which is merely wished for;
As the 'wfsh for a community of features in *
two persons often coincides with 1^integ%

[274a]
8?0
Sigmund Freud
changing of these persons, this relation also is
expressed in dreams by identification. In the
dream of Irma's injection I wish to exchange
one patient for another—that is to say, I wish
this other person to be my patient, as the for
mer person has been; the dream deals with this
wish by showing me a person who is called
Irma, but who is examined in a position such
as I have had occasion to see only the other
person occupy. In the dream about my uncle
this substitution is made the
centre of the
dream; I identify myself with the minister by
judging and treating my colleagues as shabbily
as he does.
It has been my experience—and to this _I
have found no exception—that every dream
treats of oneself. Dreams are absolutely ego
istic.1 In cases where not my ego but only a
strange person occurs in the dream-content, I
may safely assume that by means of identifi
cation my ego is concealed behind that person.
I
am permitted to supplement my ego. On
other occasions, when my ego appears in the
dream, the situation in which it is placed tells
me that another person is concealing himself,
by means of identification, behind the ego. In
this case I must be prepared to find that in the
interpretation
I
should
transfer
something
which is connected with this person—the hid
den common feature—to myself. There are
also dreams in which my ego appears together
with other persons who, when the identification
is resolved, once more show themselves to be
my ego. Through these identifications I shall
then have to connect with my ego certain ideas
to which the censorship has objected. I may
also give my ego multiple representation in.my
dream, either directly or by means of identifi
cation with other people. By means of several
such identifications an extraordinary amount
of thought material may be condensed.2 That
one's ego should appear in the same dream
several times or in different forms is
funda
mentally no more surprising than that it should
appear, in conscious thinking, many times and
in different places or in different relations: as,
for example, in the sentence: "When / think
what a healthy child / was."
Still easier than in the case of persons is the
resolution of identifications in the case of local
ities designated by their own names, as here
4Cf. here the observations made on pp. 249-50.
2If I do not know behind which of the persons ap
pearing in the dream I am to look for my ego, I ob
serve the following rule: That person in the dream who
is "subject to an. emotion which I am aware of while
asleep is the one that conceals my ego.

[274b]
the disturbing influence of the all-powerful ego
is lacking. In one of my dreams of Rome (p.
218) the name of the placein which I find my
self is Rome; I am surprised, however, by a
large number of German placards at a street
corner. This last is a wish-fulfilment, which
immediately suggests Prague; the wish itself
probably originated at a period of my youth
when I was imbued with a German nationalistic
spirit which today is quite subdued. At the
time of my dream I was looking forward to
meeting a friend in Prague; the identification
of Rome with Prague is therefore explained by
a desired common feature; I would rather meet
my friend-in Rome than*in.Prague; for the
purpose of this meeting I should like to ex
change Prague for Rome.
The possibility of creating composite forma
tions is one of the chief causes of the fantastic
character so common in dreams, in that it hv
troduces into the dream-content elements which
could never have been objects of perception,
The psychic process which occurs in the crea
tion of composite formations is obviously the
same as that which we employ in conceiving
or figuring a dragon or a centaur in our wak
ing senses. The only difference is that, in the
fantastic creations of waking life, the impress
sion intended is itself the decisive factor, while
the composite formation in the dream is deter-f
mined by a factor—the common feature in the
dream-thoughts—which is independent of its
form. Composite formations in dreams may be
achievedin a great many different ways. In the
most artless of these methods, only the proper-j
ties of the one thing are represented, and this
representationJscaccompanied-by a knowledge
that they refer to another object also; A more
careful technique combines features of the one
object with those of the other in a new image;
whileit makes skillful use of any reallyexisting
resemblances between the two objects. The new
creation mayprove tobewholly absurd, oreveni
successful as a phantasy, according as the mate
rialand thewit employed in constructing it may
permit. If the objects to be condensed into a uni
ty are too incongruous, the dream-work is con
tent with creating a composite formation with a
comparatively distinct nucleus, to which are
attached more indefinite modifications. The unifia^tiondnto*one m
extent unsuccessful; the two representations
overlap oneanother, and give riseto something
like a contestbetweenthe visualimages. Similar
representations might be obtained in a drawing
if one were to attempt to give form to a uni-

[275a]
fied abstraction of disparate perceptual images.
Dreams naturally abound in such composite
formations; I have given several examples of
these in the dreams already analysed, and will
now cite more such examples. In the dream on
p. 268, which describes the careerof my patient
in flowery language, the dream-ego carries a
sprayof blossoms in herhand which, aswehave
seen, signifies at once sexual innocence and
sexual transgression. Moreover, from the manneriti whichthe MossonTs-aTe^sefe-on-jthey-r^eall
cherry-blossom; the blossoms themselves, con
sidered singly, are camellias, and finally the
whole spray gives the dreamer the impression
of an exotic plant. The common feature in the
elements
of
this
composite
formation
is
revealed by the dream-thoughts. The blossom
ing spray is made up of allusions to presents
by which she was^irtduced or wasto-have heeri
induced to behave in a manner agreeable to
the giver. So it was with cherries in her child
hood, and with a camellia-tree in her later
years; the exotic character is an allusion to a
much-travelled naturalist, who sought to win
her favour by means of a drawing of a flower.
Another female patient contrives a composite
mean out of bathing machines at a seaside re
sort, country privies, and the attics of our city
dwelling-houses. A reference to human naked
ness and exposure is common to the first two
elements; and we may infer from their con
nection^tfryithe thifd-^eTOerit'"thatr-(in he*~
childhood), the garret was.likewise the scene
of bodily exposure. A dreamer of the male sex
makes a composite locality out of two places
in which "treatment" is given—my office and
the assembly rooms in which he first became
acquainted with his wife. Another, a female
patient, .after.her elder brother has promised
to regale her with caviar, dreams that his legs
are covered all over with black beads of caviar.
The two elements, taint in a moral sense and
the
recollection of a cutaneous eruption in
childhood which made her legs look as though
studded over with red instead of black spots,
have here combined with the beads of caviar to
form a new idea—the idea of what she gets
from her bmtfm'&^
human body are treated as objects, as is usually
the case in dreams. In one of the dreams re
corded by Ferenczi there occurs a composite
formation made up of the person of a physician
and a horse, and this composite being wears a
night-shirt. The common feature in these three
componentswas revealed in the analysis, after
the nightshirt had been recognized as an allu

[275b]
The Interpretation of Dreams
27*
sion to the father of the dreamer in a scene of
childhood. In each of the three cases there was
some object of her sexual curiosity. As a
child she had often been taken by her nurse to
the army stud, where she had the amplest op
portunity to satisfy her curiosity, at that time
still uninhibited.
I have already stated that the dream has no
means of expressing the relation Of contradic
tion, contrast, negation. I shall now contradict
this-assertion for the first time. A certain num
ber of cases of what may be summed up under
the word contrast obtain representation, as we
have seen, simply by means of identification—
that is, when an exchange, a substitution, can
be bound up with the contrast. Of this we have
cited repeated examples. Certain other of the
contrasts in the dream-thoughts* which per
haps come under the category of inverted,
turned into the opposite, axe represented in
dreams in the following remarkable manner,
which may almost be described as witty. The
inversion does not itself make its way into the
dream-content, but manifests its presence in
the material by the fact that a part of the al
ready formed dream-content whichis, for other
reasons, closely connected in context is—as it
were subsequently—inverted. It is easier to
illustrate this process than to describeit. In the
beautiful "Up and Down" dream (pp. 255-6)
the dream-representation of ascending is an
inversion
of
its
prototype
in
the
dreamthoughts: that is, of the introductory scene of
Daudet's Sappho; in the dream, climbing is
difficult at first and easy later on, whereas, in
the novel, it is easy at first, and later becomes
more and
more difficult. Again, above and
below, with reference to the dreamer's brother,
are reversed in the dream. This points to a re
lation of inversion or contrast between two
parts of the material in the dream-thoughts,
which indeed we found in them, for in the
childish phantasy of the dreamer he is carried
by his nurse, while in the novel, on the con
trary, the hero carries his beloved. My dream
of Goethe's attack on Herr M (to be cited
later) likewise contains an inversion of this
sort, which must be set right before the dream
can be interpreted. In this dream, Goethe at
tacks a young man, Herr M; the ^reality, as
contained in the dream-thoughts, is that an
eminent man, a friend of mine, has been at
tacked by an unknown young author. In the
dream I reckon time from the date of Goethe's
death; in reality the reckoningwas made from
the year in which the paralyticwas born. The

[276a]
2#3
SiGi^uifD#i^MP-
?. thought which influences the -dream-material
reveals*itself as my [opposition to the treatment
> of Goethe a:s though he were ia lunatic. "Itis
the other way about," says the dream; '-if you
don't linderstand the book it is: you who are
feeble-minded, inot, the:
'• author." ;All a these
dreams of inversion, moreover^ seem]to me{to
irafe an raUusjpn to ithe,contemptuous -phrase,
"to tiJirn.one's backvupon a person": (German:
einem Se Kehrsefte zeiggn, lit, to, show a per
son ^neV baekside): cf. the inversion in reaspect of the dreanxer's brother in.the Sappho
dream. It .is further worth- noting how fre--
quentlyinversion is employedin precisely those
dreams: which are inspired by repressed homor
•sexuaL impulses...
~
-
;
=•;
; ;
;
-
:MoreQyer, inversion, or transformation into
the opposite, is one ;pf the; most favoured and
most versatile, methods pf representation winch
the dream-work; has at its disposal. It serves,
in the first pjace^tp enable the wish-fulfilment
to prevail against a definite element of :the
dream-rthoughts. "If;only it were the other way
•about!" is- often the ;best expression for the
reaction of •the ego against a disagreeable rec
ollection. But inversion becomes extraordinar
ily useful:in the service: of the censorship, for
it effects, in the materiai to be represented, a
degree of distortion which at first simply para
lyses _our understanding of the g>eamv;;It is
therefore ^always permissible, if a dream-stub
bornly refuses to surrender its meaning, to
venture on the experimental inversion$k.^defi
nite, portions ;iQ.f its .manifest. content.^Shen,
not infrequently, everything becomes;clears
.Besides the inversion of;content, the temporal
.inversion must not be overlooked, A-frequent
deyice of dream-distortion. consists-in, present
ing the final issue of the event or the concliir
sion of the train of thought at the beginning
,pf the dream, and appending at thefend of the
dream the premises; of the conclusion; pr, the
causes of -the event:: Anyone who. forgets this
technical
device of
dreamfdistortion
stands
helpless before-the problem of dreamrinterprer
:tation/
v
.'....•-
^
^The hysterical attack often employs the same-de
vice, of temporal inversion in order to conceal its mean
ing from Uie~ otserver. The attack of a hysterical girl,
•fb*
example, consists* in ehactirig a little1 romance,
:which ]she: has! imagined in the unconscious; in •con
nection with an encounter in a tram., A man, attracted
hy the beauty of her foot, addresses her while she is
•reading, whereupon she. *goes with him: and
a 'pas
sionate loyerscene. ensues. Her attack begins with the
representatibri' of this scene by writhing movements of
the 'ibody (accompanied by movements of>'4he lips, and
folding .of the arms to, signify, kisses and embraces).,
whereupon she Hurries into the next room,'sits down
on a cbaii* lifts her iskirt-in order to show ^her foot,

[276b]
. Insnaiiycases,indeed*we. discover:thecmearj(t
ingpf-thie dreanj only when^eThave.subjected
the d^eam-content to a multiple myer.sionnin
accordance with,> the different relations.s For
e.xample; in the (dream-of afyoung .patient who
is suffering from obsessional neurosis, the mem
ory of the^childish^•death-wish:directed against
a,dreaded iather^:cpncealed itself .feehmd the
following words \ His father scolds him because
he comes home sajate, but -the context pf the
psycho-analytic treatment and the impressions
of the dreamer showthat the sentence must
behead.as follows: ge isangry with his fathef{,
and,further,"that:his father alwaysmine home
too early (i.e., too soon). LHe.would have pre^
ferred, that his father should/not come home
at all, which is.identical with the, wish.(see p.
,245) that his father woulddi§. As a little boy,
during the prolonged absence of his father, the
dreamer was guilty of a sexual .aggression
against another,child, and was punished by the
threat,:/'Just you wait untilyourfather comes
horned
;:.
If we should seek to trace the rejatipns bey
tween the
dream-content: and
the
dreamthoughts a .little farther, we,shall dp this best
by makingthe dreamitself our point of.depar
ture, and, asking ourselves: WhatTdp:,certain
iormal characteristics of the dr^arntpresentar
.tion signify: in relation to the. drea^-thoyghts-?
First and foremost among the formal characr
teristics which are bound; tpiimpress us in
dreams are, the differences in the sensory injtensity pf t}ie single dream-imagps, and;in th£
jdistinctness;of various parts of tne dream- pr
ofwhole dreams as compared with one another,.
The differences in, the intensity of indiyiduajl
dream-images cover the. whole gamut, from a
Sharpness of;definition whichone is inclinedr4although without warrant-—tp rate moreVhighly
than that of,reality,\tp avproyoking; indistinctr
ness which we declare to be characteristic of
dreams,.because it really is not wholly. compar
rable to any of .the degrees of indistinctness
which we occasionally perceive in real objects.
Moreover, we usually ^describe, the impression
which we receive of an indistinct object-.in a
dream as fleetingjf while we think of the more
distinct dream-images as haying beep percep
tiblealsp fora longer period of time, %e must
now ask ourselves by what conditions in the
acts as though she were about ta. re;ad a book, and
speaks to me (answers rrid). Cf. the observation':of
Artemrdorus: "In interpreting dream-stories,'. ;6ne must
consider, them the first. :time? from.the beginning .to the
end, and the second time from the'end to the begin
ning."
•-•••
v..\-
'••:
;-.;•.•.
';•
yj ;

[277a]
dream-material these differences in the distinct
ness of the individual portions of the dreamcontent are brought about.
Before proceeding farther, it is necessary to
deal with icertain expectations which seem to
be almost inevitable. Since actual sensations
experienced during sleep may constitute part
of the dream-material, it will probably be asr
sumed that these sensations, or the dreamelements resulting from them, are emphasized
by a special intensity, or conversely, that any
thing which is particularly vivid in the dream
can probably be traced to such real sensations
during sleep. My experience, however, has
never confirmed this. It is not true that those
elements of a dream which are derivatives of
real impressions perceived in sleep (nerve
stimuli) are distinguished by their special viv
idness from others which are based on mem
ories. The factor of reality is inoperative in
determining the intensity of dream-images.
Further, it might be expected that the sen
sory intensity (vividness) of single dreamimagesis in proportion to the psychicintensity
of the elements corresponding to them in the
dream-thoughts. In
the latter,
intensity is
identical with psychic value; the.most intense
elements are in fact the most significant, and
these constitute the central point of the dreamthoughts. We know, however, that it is pre
cisely these elements which are usually not
admitted to the dream-content, owing to the
vigilance of the censorship. Still, it might be
possible for their most immediate derivatives,
which represent them in the dream, to reach
a higher degree of intensity without, however,
for that reason constituting the central point
of the dream-representation. This assumption
also vanishes as soon as we compare the dream
and the dream-material. The intensity of the
elements in the one has nothing to do with the
intensity of the elements in the other; as a
matter of fact, a complete transvaluation of all
psychic values takes place between the dreammaterial and the dream. The very element of
the dream which is transient and hazy, and
screened by more vigorous images, is often
discovered to be the one and only direct deriv
ative of the topic that completely dominates
the dream-thoughts.
The intensity of the dream-elements proves
to be determined in a different manner: that
is, by two factors whichare mutually independ
ent. It will readily be understood that those
elements by means of which the wish-fulfil
ment expresses itself are those which are

[277b]
The Interpretation of:Dreams
*73
intensely represented. But analysis tells us
that from
the most vivid elements
of
the
dream the greatest number of trains of thought
proceed, and that those which are most vivid
are at the same time those which are best de
termined. No change of meaning is involved
if we express this latter empirical proposition
inthe followingformula: The greatest intensity
is shown by those elements of the dream for
whose formation the most extensive condensa
tion-work was required. We may, therefore, ex
pect that it will be possible to expressthis con
dition, as well as the other condition of the
wish-fulfilment, in a single formula.
I must utter a warning that the problem
which I have just been considering—the causes
of the greater orlesser intensity or distinctness
of single elements in dreams—is not to be con
founded with the other problem—that of varia
tions in the distinctness of whole dreams or
sections of dreams. In the former case the op
posite of distinctness is haziness; in the latter,
confusion. It is, of course, undeniable that in
both scales the two kinds of intensities rise and
fall in unison. A portion of the dream which
seems clear to us usually contains vivid ele
ments; an obscure dream, on the contrary, is
composed of less vivid elements. But the prob
lem offered by the scale of definition, which
ranges from the apparently clear to the indis
tinct or confused, is far more complicated than
the problem of fluctuations in vividness of the
dream-elements. For reasons which will be given
later, the former cannot at this stage be further
discussed. In isolated cases one observes, not
without surprise, that the impression of dis
tinctness or indistinctness produced by a dream
has nothing to do with the dream-structure, but
proceeds from the dream-material, as one of its
ingredients. Thus, for example, I remember a
dream which on waking seemed so particularly
well-constructed, flawless and clear that I made
up my mind, while I was still in a somnolent
state, to admit a new category of dreams—
those which had not been subject to the mech
anism
of
condensation
and
distortion,
and
which might thus be described as phantasies
during sleep. A closer examination, however,
proved that this unusual dream suffered from
the same structural flaws and breaches as exist
in all other dreams; so I abandoned the idea of
a category of dream-phantasies.1 The content
of the dream, reduced to its lowest terms, was
that I was expounding to a friend a difficult
XI do not know today whether I was Justified in
doing so.

[278a]
274
Sigmund Freud
and long-sought theory of bisexuality, and the
wish-fulfilling power of the dream was respon
sible for the fact that this theory (which, by
the way, was not communicated in the dream)
appeared to be so lucid and flawless. Thus, what
I believed to be a judgment as regards the fin
ished dream was a part, and indeed the most
essential part, of the dream-content. Here the
dream-work reached out, as it were, into my
first waking thoughts, and presented to me, in
the form of a judgment of the dream, that part
of the dream-material which it had failed to
represent with precision in the dream. I was
once confronted with the exact counterpart of
this case by a female patient who at first ab
solutely declined to relate a dream which was
necessary for the analysis "because it was so
hazy and confused," and Who finally declared,
after repeatedly protesting the inaccuracy of
her description, that it seemed to her that sev
eral persons—herself,
her husband, and her
father—had occurred in the dream, and that
she had not known whether her husband was
her father, or who really was her father, or
something of that sort. Comparison of this
dream with the ideas which occurred to the
dreamer in the course of the sitting showed
beyond a doubt that it dealt with the rather
commonplace story of a maidservant who has
to confess that she is expecting a child, and
hears doubts expressed as to "who the father
really is."1 The obscurity manifested by this
dream, therefore, was once more a portion of
the dream-exciting material. A fragment of this
material was represented in the form of the
dream. The form of the dream or of dreaming
is employed with astonishing frequency to rep
resent the concealed content.
Glosses on the dream, and seemingly harmless
comments on it, often serve in the most subtle
manner to conceal—although, of course, they
really betray—-a part of what is dreamed. As,
for example, when the dreamer says: Here the
dream was wiped out, and the analysis gives an
infantile reminiscence of listening to someone
cleaning himself after defecation. Or another
example, which deserves to be recorded in de
tail: A young man has a very distinct dream,
reminding him of phantasies of his boyhood
which have remained conscious. He found him
self in a hotel at a seasonal resort; it was night;
he mistook the number of his room, and entered
a room in which an elderly lady and her two
1 Accompanying hysterical symptoms; amenorrhoea
and profund depression were the chief troubles of this
patient.

[278b]
daughters were undressing to go to bed. He con
tinues:
uThen there are some gaps in the
dream; something is missing; and at the end
there was a man in the room, who wanted to
throw me out, and with whom I had to strug
gle." He tries in vain to recall the content and
intention of the boyish phantasy to which the
dream obviously alluded. Butwe finally become
aware that the required content had already
been given in his remarks concerning the in
distinct part of the dream. The gaps are the
genital apertures of the women who are going
to bed: Here something is missing describes the
principal characteristic of the female genitals.
In his young days he burned with curiosity to
see the female genitals, and was still inclined to
adhere to the infantile sexual theory which at
tributes a male organ to women.
A very similar form was assumed in an anal
ogous reminiscence of
another dreamer. He
dreamed: / go with Fraulein K into the restaur
rant of the Volksgarten . . . then comes a dark
place, an interruption . . . then I find myself in
the salon of a brothel, where I see two or three
women, one in a chemise and drawers.
Analysis. Fraulein K is the daughter of his
former employer; as he himselfadmits, she was
a sister-substitute. He rarely had the opportu
nity of talking to her, but they once had a con
versation in which "one recognized one's sex
uality, so to speak, as though one were to say:
I am a man and you are a woman." He had been
only once to the above-mentioned restaurant
when he was accompanied by the sister of his
brother-in-law, a girl to whomhe was quite in
different. On another occasion he accompanied
three ladies to the door of the restaurant. The
ladies were his sister, his sister-in-law, and the
girl already mentioned. He was perfectly indif^
ferent to all three of them, but they all be
longed to the sister category. He had visited a
brothel but rarely, perhaps two or three times
in his life.
j
The interpretation is based on the dark placet
the interruption in the dream, and informs us
that on occasion, but in fact only rarely, ob
sessed by his boyish curiosity, he had inspected
the genitals of his sister, a few years his junior.
A few days later the misdemeanor indicated in
the dream recurred to his conscious memory.
All dreams of the same night belong, in re
spect of their content, to the same whole; their
division into several parts, their grouping and
number, are all full of meaning and may be re
garded as pieces of information about the latent
dream-thoughts. In the interpretation of dreams

[279a]
consisting of several mainsections, or of dreams
belonging to the same night, we must not over
look the possibility that these different and
successive dreams mean the same thing, ex
pressing thesame impulses in different material.
That one of these homologous dreams which
comesfirst in time is usually the most distorted
and most bashful, while the next dream is bold
er and more distinct.
Even Pharaoh's dream of the ears and the
kine, which Joseph interpreted, was of this
kind. It is given by Josephus in greater detail
than in the Bible. After relating the first dream,
the King said: "After I had seen this vision 1
awaked out of my sleep, and, being in disorder,
and considering with myself what this appear
ance should be, I fell asleep again, and saw an
other dream much more wonderful than the
foregoing, which still did more affright and
disturb me." After listening to the relation of
the dream, Joseph said: "This dream, O King,
although seen under two forms, signifies one
and the same event of things."1
Jung> in his Beitrag zur Psychologie des Geruchtes, relates how a veiled erotic dream of a
schoolgirl was understood by her friends with
out interpretation, and. continued by them with
variations, and he remarks, with reference to
one of these narrated dreams, that "the con
cluding idea of a long series of dream-images
had preciselythe same content as the first im
age of the series had endeavouredto represent.
The censorship thrust the complexout of the
way as long as possible by a constant renewal
of symbolic screenings, displacements, trans
formations into something harmless,etc." Scherner was well acquainted with this peculiarity
of dream-representation, and describes it in his
Lebendes Traumes (p. 16.6) in terms of a spe
cial law in the Appendix to his doctrine of or
ganic stimulation: "But finally, in all symbolic
dream-formations
emanating
from
definite
nerve stimuli, the phantasy observes the gen
eral law that at the beginning of the dream it
depicts the stimulating object only by the re
motest and freest allusions, but towards the
end, when the graphic impulse becomes ex
hausted, the stimulus itself is nakedly repre
sented by its appropriate organ or its function;
whereupon the dream, itself describing its or
ganic motive, achieves its end...."
A pretty confirmation of this law of Scherner's has been furnished by Otto Rank in his
essay: Ein Traum, der sich selbst deutet. This
1Josephus; Antiquities of the Jews, book n, chap,v,
trans, by Wm. Whiston (David McKay, Philadelphia).

[279b]
The Interpretation of Dreams
?7S
dream, related to him by a girl, consisted of
two dreams of the same night, separated by an
interval of time, the second of which ended
with an orgasm. It was possible to interpret
this orgastic dream in detail in spite of the few
ideas contributed by the dreamer, and
the
wealth of relations between the two dreamcontents made it possible to recognize that the
first dream expressed in modest language the
same thing as the second, so that the latter—
the orgastic dream—facilitated a full explana*
tion of the former. From this example, Rank
very justifiably argues the significance of or
gastic dreams for the theory of dreams in gen
eral.
But, in my experience,it is only in rare cases
that one is in a position to translate the lucid
ity or confusion of a dream, respectively, into
a certainty or doubt in the dream-material.
Later on I shall have to disclose a hitherto unmentioned
factor
in
dream-formation, upon
whoseoperation this qualitative scalein dreams
is essentially dependent.
In many dreams in which a certain situation
and environment are preserved for some time,
there occur interruptions which may be de
scribed in the following words: "But then it
seemed as though it were, at the same time,
another place, and there such and such a thing
happened," In these cases, what interrupts the
main action of the dream, which after a while
may be continued again, reveals itself in the
dream-material as a subordinate clause, an in
terpolatedthought.Conditionally in the dreamthoughts is represented by simultaneity in the
dream-content (wenn or wann=if or when,
while).
We may now ask: What is the meaning of
the sensation of inhibited movement which so
often occurs in dreams, and is so closely allied
to anxiety? One wants to move, and is unable
to stir from the spot; or wants to accomplish
something, and encounters obstacle after ob
stacle. The train is about to start, and one can
not reach it; one's hand is raised to avenge an
insult, and its strength fails, etc. We have al
ready met with this sensation in exhibitiondreams, but have as yet made no serious
attempt to interpretit. It is convenient, but in
adequate, to answer that there is motor paral
ysis in sleep, which manifests itself by means
of the sensation alluded to. We may ask: Why
is it, then, that we do not dream continually
of such inhibited movements? And we may per
missibly suspect that this sensation, which may
at any time occur during sleep, serves some

[280a]
276
Sigmund Freud
sort of purpose for representation,
and is
evoked only when the need Of-this representa
tion is present in the dream-material.
Inability to do a thing does not always ap
pear in the dream as a sensation; it may appear
simply as part of the dream-content. I think
one case of this kind is especially fitted to en
lighten us as to the meaning of this peculiarity.
I shall give an abridged version of a dream in
which I seem to be accused of dishonesty. The
scene is a mixture made up of a private sana
torium and several other places. A manservant
appears, to summon me to an inquiry. I know
in the dream that something has been missed,
and that the inquiry is taking place because I
am suspected of having appropriated the lost
article. Analysis shows that inquiry is to be
taken in two senses; it includes the meaning
of medical examination. Being conscious of my
innocence, and my position as consultant in this
sanatorium, I calmly-follow the manservant.
We are-received at the door by another man
servant, who says, pointing at me, "Have you
brought him? Why, he is:a respectable man."
Thereupon, and unattended, I enter a great
hall where there d?e many machines, which re
minds me of an inferno with its hellish instru
ments -ofpunishment. I see a colleaguestrapped
to an appliance; he has every reason to be in
terested in my appearance, but he takes no no
tice of me. I understand that I may now go.
Then I cannot find my hat, and cannot go
after-all?
; 1
rr
The Wish that the dream fulfils is obviously
the wish that1 my honesty shall be acknowl
edged, and that I may be permitted to go; there
must therefore be all sorts of material in the
dream-thoughts which comprise a contradic
tion of this wish. The fact that I may go is the
sigh of my ahsolutioh-; if, then, the dream pro
vides at its close an event which prevents me
from going, we may readily conclude that-the
suppressed material of the contradiction is as
serting itself in this feature. The fact that I
cannot find my hat therefore means: "You are
not after all an honest man." The inability to
do something in the dream is the expression of
a contradiction, a No; so that our earlier asser
tion\ to the effect that the dream is not ca
pable of expressing a negation, must be revised
accordingly.1
:;1 Areference to an experience of childhood emerges,
in the complete analysis, through the following con
necting-links: "The Moor has done hisduty, the Moor
can go." And then follows the waggish.question: "How
old is the Moor when he has done his duty?":—"A
year, then he can go (walk)." (It is said that I came

[280b]
In other dreams in which the inability-to dp
something occurs; not merely as a situation,
but also as a sensation, the same contradiction
is more emphaticallyexpressed by the sensation
of inhibited movement, or a will to which a
counter-will is opposed. Thus the sensation of
inhibited movement represents a conflict of
will. We shall see later on that this very-motor
paralysis during sleep is one of the fundamen
tal conditions of the psychic process which
functions during dreaming. Now an impulse
whichis conveyed to the motor system is none
other than the will, and the fact that we are
certain that the impulse will be inhibited in
sleep makes the whole process extraordinarily
well-adapted to the representation of a will to
wards something and of a No which opposes
itselfthereto. From my explanation of anxiety,
it is easy to understand why the sensation of
the inhibited will is so closely allied to anxiety,
and why it is so often connected with it in
dreams. Anxiety is a libidinal impulse, which
emanates from the unconscious and is inhibited
by the preconscious.2 Therefore, whena sensa
tion of inhibition in the dream is accompanied
by anxiety, the dream must be concerned with
a volition which was at one time capable of
arousing libido; there must be a sexual impulse:
As for the judgmentwhich is often expressed
during a dream: "Of course, it is onlya dreamt
and the psychic force to which it may be as*
cribed, I shall discuss these questions later on;
For the present I will merelysay that they axe1
intended to depreciate the importance of what
is being dreamed. The interesting problem al*
lied to this, as to what is meant if a certain
content in the dreamt is characterized in the
dream,itself as having beendreamed—the rid*
die of
a dream within a dream—has
been
solved ih a similar sense by W. Stekel, bythe
analysis of some convincing examples. Here
again the part of the dream dreamed is to be
depreciated in value and robbed of its reality?
that which the dreamer continues to dream
after waking from the dream within a dream
is what the dream-wish desires to put hi place
into, the world with so much black curly hair that,my
young mother declared that I was a little Moor.) The
fact that I cannot find my hat is an experience of the
day which has been exploited in various senses. Our
servant, who is a genius at stowing things away, had
hidden the hat. A rejection of melancholy thoughts of
death is concealed behind the conclusion of the dream:
"I have not nearly done; my duty yet; I cannot.go
yet." Birth and death together—as* in the dream of
Goethe and the paralytic, which was a little earlier
in date.
2 This theory is not in accordance with more recent
views;J
•

[281a]
THE lNTERPRETAT?I0H;Of Dreams
277
of the obliterated reality. It may therefore be
assumed thatr the part dreamed contains the
representation of the reality, the •real memory^
While, on the other hand, the continued dream
contains the representation of what the dreamr
er merely wishes. AThe inclusion of •a. certain
content in a dream within a dream is, there
fore, equivalent to the"wish that what has been
characterized as a dream had never occurred.
In other words: when a particular incident is
represented by the dream-work in a dreamy it
signifies the strongest confirmation of the real-r
ity of this incident, the mostemphatic affirma
tion of it. The dream-work utilizes the dream
itself as a form of repudiation; and thereby
confirms the theory that a dream is a wishfulfilment.
D. Regard for Representability
We have hitherto been concerned with inves
tigating the manner in which our dreams repre
sent the relations "between the dream-thoughts;
but we have often extended our inquiry to the
further question as to what alterations the
dream-material itself undergoes for the pur
poses of dream-formation. We now know that
the dream-material, after being stripped of a
great many of its relations, is subjected to com
pression, while at the same time displacements
of the intensity of its elements-enforce apsy^
chic transvaluation of this material. The dis
placements which we have considered were
shown to be substitutions of one particular idea
for another, in some way related to the orig
inal by its associations, and the displacements
were made to facilitate thihcondensation, inas
much as in this manner, instead of two ele-*
ments, a common mean between them found
its way into the dream. So fair, no mention has
been made of any other kind of displacement.
But we learn from the analyses that displace
ment of another kind does occur, and that it
manifests itself in an exchange of the verbal
expression for the thought in question. In both
cases we are dealing with a displacement along
a chain of associations, but the same process
takes place in different psychic spheres, and
the result of this displacement in the one case
is that one element is replaced by another, while
in the other; case an element exchanges its ver
bal-shape for another '.
;
J
This second kindof displacement occurring ih
dream-formation is not only of great theoretical
interest, but also peculiarly well-fitted to explain
the appearance of phantastici absurdity in whichf
dreams disguise themselves. Displacement usu

[281b]
ally occurs in such a way. that a colourless and
abstract expression of the dream-thought is ex
changed for one1 that is pictorial'"and concrete;
The advantage, and along with it ther purpose,
of tins substitution is obvious: Whatever: is
pictorial is.capable of representationAh drearris
and can be, fitted into aysituation in which ab
stract expression«would confront the dreani*
representation with difficulties not unlike those
which would arise if a political leading article
had to be represented in an illustrated jpurnah
Not only the possibility of representation,: but
also the interests of condensation and of the
censorship, may be furthered by this exchange.
Once the abstractly expressed and unservice
able dream-thought is translated into pictorial
language, those, contacts and identities between
this new expression and the rest of the dreammaterial which are required by the dream-work;
and which it contrives whenever they are not
available, are more readily provided, since in
every language concrete terms, owing to their
evolution, are richer in associations than are
abstract terms. It may be imagined that a good
part of the intermediate work in dream-forma
tion, which seeks to reduce the separate dreamthoughts to the tersest and most Unified expres
sion in the dream, is effected in this manner,
by fitting paraphrases of the* various thoughts;
Theone thought whose mode of expression has
perhaps been determined by other factors "will
therewith exert a distributive and selective in
fluence oh the expressions available for the
others, and it may even do this from the
very start, just as it would in the creative
activity of a poet. When a poem is to be writ
ten in rhymed couplets, the second rhyming
line is bound by two conditions: it must ex
press"the meaning allotted to it, and its expres'r
sion must permit of a rhyme with the first:
line. The best poems are, of course, those in
which one does not detect the effort to find a
rhyme, and in which both thoughts have as
a matter of course, by mutual induction, se
lected the verbal expression which, with a lit
tle subsequent adjustment, will permit of the
rhyme.
In some cases the change of expression serves
the purposes of dream-condensation more di
rectly, in that it provides an arrangement of
words which, being ambiguous, permits of the
expression of more than one of the dream-'
thoughts. The whole range of verbal wit is thus
made to serve the purpose of the drfeam-work.
The part played by words in dream-formation
ought not to surprise us. A word, as thepointv

[282a]
278
SlGMUNDi J?REUD
of junction of a number of ideas, possesses, as
it were, a predestined ambiguity, and the neu
roses (obsessions, phobias) take advantage of
the opportunities for condensation and disguise
afforded by words
quite as eagerly
as do
dreams.1 That dream-distortion also profits by
this displacement of expression may be readily
demonstrated. It is indeed confusing if one am
biguous word is substituted for two with single
meanings, and the replacement of sober, every
day language by a plastic mode of expression
baffles
our understanding,
especially since a
dream
never tells us whether the
elements
presented by it are to be interpreted literally or
metaphorically,
whether they
refer
to
the
dream-material directly, or only by means of
interpolated expressions. Generally speaking,
in the interpretation of any element of a dream
it is doubtful whether it
(a) is to be accepted in the negative or the
positive sense (contrast relation);
(b) is to be interpreted historically (as a
memory);
(c) is symbolic; or whether
(d) its valuation is to be based upon its
wording.
In spite of this versatility, we may say that the
representation
effected by the
dream-work,
which was never even intended to be under
stood, does not impose upon the translator any
greater difficulties than those that the ancient
writers of hieroglyphics imposed upon their
readers.
I have already given several examples of
dream-representations which are. held together
only by ambiguity of expression (her mouth
opens without difficulty, in the dream of Irma's
injection; / cannot go yet after all, in the last
dream related, etc.). I shall now cite a dream
in the analysis of which plastic representation
of the abstract thoughts plays a greater part.
The difference between such dream-interpreta
tion and the interpretation by means of symbols
may nevertheless be clearly defined; in the
symbolic interpretation of dreams, the key to
the symbolism is selected arbitrarily by the
interpreter, while in our own cases of verbal dis
guise these keys are universally known and are
taken from established modes of speech. Pro
vided one hits on the right idea on the right
occasion, one may solve dreams of this kind,
either completely or in part, independently of
1 Compare
conscious.
Wit
and
its
Relation
to
the
Un-

[282b]
any statements made by the dreamer.
A lady, a friend of mine, dreams: She is ai
the opera. It is a Wagnerian -performance^
which has lasted until 7.45 in the morning. In
the stalls and pit there are tables, at which
people are eating and drinking. Her cousinand
his young wif&pwho~hme just'-Mtumed-from
their honeymoon, are sitting at one of these
tables; beside them is a member of the aristoc
racy. The young wife is said to have brought
him back with her from the honeymoon quite
openly, just as she might have brought back a
hat. In the middle of the stalls there is a high
tower, on the top of which there is a platform
surroundedby an iron railing. There, highover
head, standsthe conductor, with the features of
HansRichter, continually running roundbehind
the railing, perspiring terribly; and from this
position he is conducting the orchestra, which
is arranged round the base of the tower. She
herself is sitting in a boxwith a friend of hen
own sex ,(knownJ;o.me). BTenjyounger,,sister
tries to hand her up, from the stalls, a large\
lump of coal, alleging that she had not known
that it would be so long, and that shemust by
this time be miserably cold. (As though the
boxes ought to have been heated during the
long performance.)
Although in other respects the dream gives;
a good picture of the situation, it is, of course,
nonsensical enough: the tower in the middle
of the stalls, from which the conductor leads!
the orchestra, and above all the coal which her
sister hands up to her. I purposely asked for
no analysis of this dream. With some knowl
edge of the personal relations of the dreamer,
I was ableto interpretparts of it independent
ly of her. I knew that shehad felt intense sym
pathy for a musician whose career had been
prematurely brought to an end by insanity. I
therefore decided to take the tower in the stalls
verbally. It then emerged that the man whom!
she- wished ta-see.ia.the .placejoivHanst Riehter
towered above all the other members of the
orchestra. This tower must be described as a
composite formation by means of apposition;
by its substructure it represents the greatness
of the man, but by the railing at the top, be
hind which he runs round like a prisoner or an
animal in a cage (an allusion to the name of
the unfortunate man),2 it represents his later
fate. Lunatic-tower is perhaps the expression
in which the two thoughts might have met.
Now that we have discovered the dream's
method of representation, we may try, with
2 Hugo Wolf.

[283a]
The Interpretation of. Dreams
the same key* to unlock the meaning of the
second apparent absurdity, that of the coal
whkhher4sisterhandsvJap;-to the jhreameir. Gojflrf
should mean secret love.
No fire, no coal so hotly glows
As the secret love of which no one knows.
She and her friend* remain se^d-wfa&er her
younger sister, who still has a prospect of mar
rying, hands her up the coal because she did
not know that it would be so long. What would
be so long is not told in the dream. If it were
an anecdote, we should say the performance;
but in the dream we may consider the sentence
as it is, declare it to be ambiguous, and add
before she married. The interpretation secret
love is then confirmed by the mention of the
cousin who is sitting with his wife in the stalls,
and by the open love-affair attributed to the
latter. The contrasts between secret and open
love, between the dreamer's fireand the coldness
of the young wife, dominate the dream. More-
-over, here once, again there is a person, in^a
high position as a middle term between the
aristocrat and the musician who is justified in
raising high hopes.
In the above analysis we have at last brought
to light a third factor, whose part in the trans
formation
of
the
dream-thoughts
into the
dream-content is by no means trivial: namely,
consideration of the suitability of the dreamthoughts for representation in the particular
psychic material of which the dream makes
use—that is, for the most part in visual images.
Among the various subordinate ideas associ
ated with the essential dream-thoughts, those
will be preferred which permit of visual rep
resentation, and the dream-work does not hesi
tate to recast the intractable thoughts into an
other verbal'form, even though this is a-more
unusual form, provided it makes representa
tion possible, and thus puts an end to the psy
chological distress
caused
by
strangulated
thmldgg^^s^ji^^
into another mould may at the same time serve
the work of condensation, and may establish
relations with another thought which otherwise
would not have been established. It is even
possible that this second thought may itself
have previously changed its original expression
for the purpose of meeting the first one half
way.
Herbert Silberer2 has describeda good meth1The German sitzen geblieben is often applied to
women who have not succeeded in getting married.—
Tr.
2 Bleuler-Freud Jahrbuch, i (1909).

[283b]
279
od of directly observing the transformation of
thoughts into images which occurs in dreamformatipji, and to tkns .made it. possible to
study in isolation this one factor of the dreamwOrk. If, while in a state of fatigue and somno
lence, heimposed upon himselfa mental effort,
it .frequently ..happened,jthat the thought es
caped him, and in its place there appeared a
picture in which he could recognize the sub
stitute for the thought. Not quite appropriate
ly, Silberer described this substitution as autosymbolic. I shallcite herea few examples from
Silberer's work, and on account of certain pe
culiarities of the phenomena observed I shall
refer to the subject later on.
"Example 1.1 remember that I have to cor
rect a halting passage in an essay.
"Symbol. I see myself planing a piece of
wood.
"Example 5.1 endeavour to call to mind the
aim of certain metaphysical studies which I
am proposing to undertake.
1 "This aim, I reflect, consists in workingone's
way through, while seeking for the basis•of"ex- ^
istence, to ever higher forms of consciousness
or levels of being.
"Symbol. I run a long knife under a cake
as though to take a slice out of it.
"Interpretation.
My movement with
the
knife signifies working one's way through. . . .
The explanation of the basis of the symbolism
is as follows: At table it devolves upon me now
and again to cut and distribute a cake, a busi
ness which I perform with a long, flexible knife,
and which necessitates a certain amount of care.
In particular, the neat extraction of the cut
slices of cake presents a certain amount of
difficulty; the knife must be carefully pushed
.under.the slices ,in*question (the-slow working
one's way through in order to get to the bot
tom). But there is yet more symbolism in the
picture. The cake of the symbol was really a
dobosrcake—that is, a cake in which the knife
consciousness and thought).
"Example 9. I lost the thread in a train of
thought. I make an effort to find it again, but
I have to recognize that the point of departure
has completely escaped me.
"Symbol. Part of a form of type, the last
lines of which have fallen out."
In view of the part played by witticisms, puns,
quotations, songs, and proverbs in the intel*
leetual life of educated persons, it would be
entirely in accordance with our expectations to

[284a]
$85
Sigmtjnd Freudr
find^disguises of this sort used with extreme
frequency in*the representatiori of the-dreamsthoughts. Only in the/sase of a few types of
material has a generally valid dream-symbols
ism established^itself on the basis of generally
known allusionsand verbal equivalents. A good
part of this symbolism, however, is common to
the psychoneuroses, legends, and popular us
ages as Well.as to dreams.
In fact,- if we look more closely into, the
matter, we: must recognize that in employing'
this kind of. substitution the dream-work is do
ing nothing at all original. For the achievement
of its purpose, which in this case Is representar
tion without interference from the censorship,
it simply follows the paths which it finds al
ready marked out in unconscious thinking, and
gives the preference to those transformations
of the repressed material which are permitted
to become conscious also in the form of witti
cisms and allusions, and with which all the
phantasies of neurotics aire replete. Here we
suddenlybeginto understand the dream-inter
pretations of Seherner) whose essential correct
ness I have vindicated elsewhere. The preoccu
pation of the imagination with One's own body
is by no means peculiar to or characteristic of
the dream alone.. My analyses have shown me
that it is constantly found in the unconscious
thinking of neurotics* and may be traced back
to sexual curiosity, whose object, in the adoles
cent youth or maiden,;is ,the genitals ;of the
opposite sex, or even of the. same sex. But, as
Schemer and Volkelt very truly insist, the house
does, not constitute the only group of. ideas
which is employed for the symbolization of the
body, either in dreams or in the unconscious
phantasies of neurosis. To be sure, I know pa^
tients who have steadily adhered to an archi
tectural symbolism for the body and the geni
tals
(sexual interest, of course, extends far
beyond the region of the external genital or
gans)—patients for whom posts and pillars
signify legs (as in the Song of Songs), to whom
every door suggests a bodily aperture (hole),
and every water-pipe the urinary system, and
so on. But the groups of ideas appertaining to
plant-life, or to the kitchen, are just, as often
chosen to conceal sexual images;1 in respect of
the former everyday language, the sediment of
imaginative comparisons dating from the re
motest times, has abundantly paved the way
(the vineyard of the Lord, the seed of Abra*
. f A;mass of corroborative material;may be.foundin
the three supplementary volumes..of JSdward Fuchs's
Jllustrierte Sittengeschichte; privately printed hy A.
Lange; Munich.;:.« /'
/
,
"'

[284b]
ham]^the1garden of the^maiden intheSong of
Songs). The ugliest as"well as the mosV^intimate details of sexualflife may be thought or
dreamed of in apparently innocent allusions to
culinary operations, and the symptoms, of hys
teria will become absolutely unintelligible if
we fprget that sexual symbolism may conceal
itself behind the most commonplace and incon
spicuous matters as its safest hiding-place.That
some neurotic children cannot look at blood
and raw meat, that they vomit at the, sight of
eggs and macaroni, and that the
dread of
snakes, which is natural to mankind, is mon
strously exaggerated in neurotics—-all this has
a definite sexual meaning! Wherever the neuro
sis employs a disguise of this sort, it treads'tlie
paths once trodden by the whole of humanity
in the early stages of civilization—paths to
whose thinly veiled existence our idiomatic ex
pressions, proverbs, superstitions, and*customs
testify to this day.
I here insert the promised flower-dream of a
female patient,, in which-1 shall print in Roman
type everything which is to be sexually inter
preted. This beautiful dream lost all its charm
for the dreamer once it had been interpreted.
(a). Preliminary dream: She goes to the two
maids in the kitchen and scolds them for taking
so long to prepare a little bite of food. She alsp
sees a very large number of heavy kitchen
utensils in the kitchen, heaped into piles and
turned upside down in order to drain. Late?
addition: The two maids go to fetch water, and
have, as it were, to climb into a river whiclji
reaches up to the house or into the courtyard?
(b) Main dream:8 She is descending from a
height41 over curiously constructed railings, or
a fence which is composed of large square trel
lis-work hurdles with small square apertures?
It is really not adapted for climbing; she is
constantly afraid that she cannot find a place
for her foot, and she is glad that her dress
doesn't get caught anywhere, and that she is
able to climb il so respectably? As she climbs
2 For the interpretation of this preliminary dream,
which is to be regarded as causal, see p. 266.
3 Her career.
* Exalted origin, the wish-contrast to the preliminary
dream.
.
6. A composite formation; which unites .two.localities,1
the so-called garret (German:
Boden="floor," "gar
ret") of her father's house, in which she used to play
with her .brother,: the object of her* later phantasies,
and the farm of a malicious uncle, who used to tease
.,..-.,.
..;
(
..•;,
crWishrContrast to an actual memory of her uncle's
farm,
to the effect that she used to
expose herself
while she was asleep.. -

[285a]
The Interpbetation of Dreams
281
she is carrying a big branch in her hand,1 really
like a tree, which is thickly studded with red
flowers; a spreading branch, with many twigs?
With this is connected the idea of cherry-blos
soms (Bluten=flowers), but they look like fully
opened camellias, which of course do not grow
on trees. As she is descending, she first has one,
then suddenly two, and then again only one?
When she has reached the ground the lower
flowers have already begun to fall. Now that
she has reached the bottom she sees' an "odd
man" who is combing-^as she would like to put
it—just such a tree, that is, with a piece of
wood he is scraping thick bunches of hair from
it, which hang from it like moss. Other men
have chopped off such branches in a garden, and
have flung them into the road, where they are
lying about, so that a number of people take
some of them. But she asks whether this is right,
whether she may take one, too? In the garden
there stands a young man (he is a foreigner,
and known to her) toward whom she goes in
order to ask him how it is possible to trans
plant such branches in her own garden.6 He em
braces her, whereupon she struggles and asks
him what he is thinking of, whether it is per
missible to embrace her in such a manner. He
says there is nothing wrong in it, that it is per
mitted? He then declares himself willing to go
with her into the other garden, in order to show
her how to put them in, and he says something
to her which she does not quite understand:
"Besides this I need three metres (later she
says: square metres) or -three fathoms Jof
ground?' It seems as though'he were asking
her for something in return for his willingness,
as though he had the intention of indemnifying
(reimbursing) himselfin her garden; <w though
he wanted to evade some law of other, to de*
rive some advantage from it without causing
her an injury. She does not know whether of
not he really shows1 her anything.
:
':'1"-
The above dream, which has been given
prominence
on account of its symbolic elements, may be described
as a biographical
1 Just as the angel bears a lily-stem in the Annunci
ation.
2 For the explanation 5of-.thiscomposite formation,
see
p.
268;
innocence, menstruation, La
Dame aux
Cam&lias.
3 Referring to the plurality of the persons who serve
her phantasies.
. *.Whether it is permissible to masturbate. iSich einen
herunterreissen means "to pull off' and colloquially
"to masturbate."—TR.]
5The branch {Ast) has long been used to represent
the male organ, and, moreover, contains a very distinct
allusion to the family name of the dreamer.,
6 Refers to matrimonial precautions, as does that
which immediately follows.

[285b]
dream. Such dreams occur frequently in psycho
analysis, but perhaps only rarely outside it.T
I have, of course, an abundance of such ma-r
terial, but.to reproduce it here would lead us
too far into the consideration of neurotic con
ditions. Everything points to ^^t^^^ same conclu
sion, namely, that we need not assume that any
special symbolizing activity of the psyche is
operative in dream-formation; that, on the con
trary, the dream makes use of such symbolizations as are to be found ready-made in uncon
scious thinking, since these, by reason of their
ease of representation, and for the most part
by reason of their being exempt from the cen
sorship, satisfy more effectively the require
ments of drean>formation.
E. Representation in Dreams by Symbols:
Some Further Typical Dreams
The analysis of the last] biographical; dream
shows that I recognized the symbolism in
dreams, from the very outset. But it was only
little by little that I arrived at a full apprecia
tion of its extent and significance, as the result
of increasing experience, and under the.influf
ence of the works of W. Stekel, concerning
which I may here fittingly say something;- - :
This author, who has perhaps injured psycho?
analysis as: much as he has benefited it,oprpt
duced a large number of novel symbolic trans
lations, to which no credence Wasgiven'at first,
but most-of; which were: laterriconfirmed and
had to be accepted. Stokers services are in no
way belittled by therremarkrthati the sceptical
reserve;with which these;symbolswere received
was notunjustified. For thejexamples uponwhich
he based his interpretations were often uneonT
vineing, and, moreover^he]employed a method
which must he rejected as scientifically-unre
liable. Stekel found his symbolic meanings-by
wayi of intuition,, by virtue; of his individual
faculty of immediately understanding the sym?
bols. But such an art cannot be.generally as?
sumed; its efficiency is immune,from criticism^
and its results have therefore no claim to eredir
bility. It is as though onerwere to base one's
diagnosis of infectiousodiseases on the olfactory
impressions receiyed; beside the sickrbed, al
though:of course there have been clinicians, to
whom the sense of smell—atrophied in most
r^orjIe-~has been .of greater service;,than^tto
others,?and who really have been abletodiag^
nose a case of abdoihihal typhus by their5 sensje
of smell.
.7 An analogous biographical dream is recorded oil •,-
p. 287, among the examples of. dream symbolism.
. ''

[286a]
282
Sigmund Freud
The progressive experience of psycho-analyr
sis has enabled us to discover patients who have
displayed in a surprising degree this immediate
understanding of dream-symbolism. Marty of
these patients suffered from dementia praecox,
so that for a time there was an inclination to
suspect that all dreamers with such an under
standing of symbols were suffering: from that
disorder. But this did not prove to be the case;
it is simply a question of a personal gift or
idiosyncrasy without perceptible pathological
significance.
When one has familiarized oneself with the
extensive employment of symbolism for the
representationof sexualmaterial in dreams,one
naturally asks oneself whether many of these
symbols have not a permanently established
meaning, like the signs in shorthand; and one
even thinks of attempting to compile a new
dream-book on the lines of the cipher method.
In this connection it should be noted that sym
bolism does not appertain especially to dreams,
but rather to the unconscious imagination, and
particularly to that of the people, and it is to
be found in a more developed condition in
folklore, myths,
legends, idiomatic phrases,
proverbs, and the current witticisms of a peo
ple than in dreams, We shouldhave, therefore,
to go far beyond the province of dream-inter
pretation in order fully to investigate the
meaning of symbolism, and to discuss the nu
merous problems—for the most part still un
solved—which are associated with the concept
of the symbol.1 We shall here confine ourselves
to saying that representation by a symbol comes
under the heading of the indirect representationsj but that we are warned by all sorts of
signs against indiscriminately classing symbolic
representation with the other modes of indirect
representation before we have
clearly con
ceived its distinguishing characteristics. In a
number of cases, the common quality shared
by the symbol and the thing which it represents
is obvious; in others, it is concealed; in these
latter cases the choice of the symbol appears to
be enigmatic. And these are the very cases that
must be able to elucidate the ultimate meaning
of the symbolic relation; they point to the fact
that it is of a genetic nature. What is today
1 Cf. the works of Bleuler and his Zurich disciples,
Maeder, Abraham, and others, and of the non-medi
cal authors (Kleinpaul and others) to whom they re
fer. But the most pertinent things that haye been.said
on the subject will be found in the work of O. Rank
and H. Sachs, Die Bedeutung der Psychoanalyse fiir
die Geisteswissenschaft, (1913), chap, i; also E. Jones,
Die Theorie der Symbolik Intern. Zeitschr. fiir Psy
choanalyse, v. (1-919).' -

[286b]
symbolically connected was probably united*
in primitive times, by conceptual and linguistic
identity.2 The symbolic relationship seems to
be a residue and reminder of a former identity.
It may also be noted that in many cases the
symbolic identity extends beyond the linguistic
identity,
as
had
already been
asserted by
Schubert (1814).3
Dreams employ this symbolism to give a dis
guised representation to their latent thoughts.
Among the symbols thus employed there are, of
course, many which constantly, or all but con
stantly, mean the same thing. But we must
bear in mind the curious plasticity of psychic
material. Often enough a symbol in the dreamcontent may have to be interpreted not sym
bolically but in
accordance with its proper
meaning; at other times the dreamer, having
to deal with special memory-material, may take
the law into his own hands and employ any
thing whatever as a sexual symbol, though it is
not generally so employed. Wherever he has
the choice of several symbols for the repre
sentation of a dream-content, he will decide in
favour of that symbol which is in addition ob
jectively related to his other thought-material;
that is to say, he will employ an individual mo
tivation besides the typically valid one.
Although since Schemer's time the more re
cent investigations of dream-problems have defi
nitely established the existence of dream-sym
bolism—even Havelock Ellis acknowledges that
our dreams are indubitably full of symbols—it
must yet be admitted that the existence of
symbols in
dreams has
not only facilitated
dream-interpretation, but
has
also
made it
more difficult. The technique of interpretation
in accordance with the dreamer's free associa
tions more often than otherwise leaves us in
the lurch as far as the symbolic elements of the
dream-content are concerned. A return to the
arbitrariness of dream-interpretation as it wajs
2 This conception would seem to find an extraordi
nary confirmation in a theory advanced by Hans Speijber ("Uber den Einfluss sexueller momente auf Entstehung und Entwicklung der Sprache," in Imago, i.
[1912]). Sperber believes that
primitive -words
de
noted sexual things exclusively, and subsequently lost
their
sexual
significance and were applied to
other
things and activities, which were compared with the
sexual.
3 For example, a ship sailing on the sea may appear
in the urinary dreams of Hungarian dreamers, despite
the fact that the term of
to ship, for
to urinate, is
foreign to this language (Ferenczi). In the dreams of
the
French
and
the
other
romance
peoples room
serves as
a
symbolic representation
for
woman, al
though these peoples have nothing analogous to the
German Frauenzimmer. Many symbols are as old as
language
itself, while
others
are
continually being
coined (e.g., the aeroplane, the Zeppelin).

[287a]
practisedin antiquity, and is seemingly revived
by Stekers-wild,interpretations, is contrary to
scientific method. Consequently, those elements
in the dream-content which are to be symboli
cally regarded compel us to employ a combined
technique, which on the one hand is based on
the dreamer's associations, while on the other
hand the missing portions have to be supplied
by the interpreter's understanding of the sym
bols. Critical circumspection in the solution of
the symbols must coincide with careful study
of the symbols in especially transparent ex
amples of dreams in order to silence the re
proach of arbitrariness in dream-interpretation.
The uncertainties which still adhere
to
our
function as dream-interpreters are due partly
to our imperfect knowledge (which, however,
can be progressively increased) and partly to
certain
peculiarities
of
the
dream-symbols
themselves. These often possess many and var
ied meanings, so that, as in Chinese script,
only the context can furnish the correct mean
ing. This multiple significance of the symbol
is allied to the dream's faculty of admitting
over-interpretations,
of
representing,
in
the
same
content,
various
wish-impulses
and
thought-formations, often of a widely diver
gent character.
After these limitations and reservations, I
will proceed. The Emperor and the Empress
(King and Queen)1 in most cases really repre
sent the dreamer's parents; the dreamer himself
or herself is the prince or princess. But the
high authority conceded to the Emperor is also
conceded to great men, so that in some dreams,
for example, Goethe appears as a father symbol
(Hitschmann).—All elongated objects, sticks,
tree-trunks,
umbrellas
(on
account
of
the
opening, which might be likened to an erec
tion), all sharp and elongated weapons, knives,
daggers, and pikes, represent the male member.
A frequent, but not very intelligible symbol
for the same is a nail-file (a reference to rub
bing and scraping?).—Small boxes, chests, cup
boards, and ovens correspond to the female
organ; also cavities, ships, and all kinds of
vessels.-—A room in a dream generally repre
sents a woman; the description of its various
entrances and exits is scarcely calculated to
make us doubt this interpretation.2 The interest
1 In the U.S.A. the father is represented in dreams
as the President, and even more often as the Governor
—a title which is frequently applied to the parent in
everyday life.—TR.
2 "A patient living in a boarding-house dreams that
he meets one of the servants, and asks her what her
number is; to his surprise she answers: 14. He has, in

[287b]
The Interpretation of Dreams
283
as to whether tne room is open or locked will
he readily understood in this connection. (Cf.
Dora's dream in Fragment of an Analysis of
Hysteria.) There is no need to be explicit as to
the sort of key that will unlock the room; the
symbolism of lock and key has been gracefully
if broadly employed by Uhland in his song of
the Graf Eberstein.—The dream of walking
through a suite.of rooms .signifies a brothel or
a harem. But, as H. Sachs has shown by an
admirable example, it is also employed to rep
resent
marriage
(contrast). An interesting
relation to the sexual investigations of child
hood emerges when the dreamer dreams of two
rooms which were previously one, or finds that
a familiar room in a house of which he dreams
has been divided into two, or the reverse. In
childhood the female genitals and anus (the
"behind")8 are conceived of as a single opening
according to the infantile cloaca theory, and
only later is it discovered that this region of
the body contains two separate cavities and
openings. Steep inclines, ladders and stairs, and
going up or down them, are symbolic represen
tations of the sexual act.4 Smooth walls over
which one climbs, fagades of houses^ across
which one lets oneself down—often with a sense
of great anxiety—correspond to erect human
bodies, and probably repeat in our
dreams
childish memories of climbing up parents or
nurses. Smooth
walls
are men;
in
anxiety
dreams one often holds firmly to projections
on houses. Tables, whether bare or covered,
and boards, are women, perhaps by virtue of
contrast, since they have no protruding con
tours.
Wood
generally
speaking,
seems,
in
accordance with its linguistic relations, to rep
resent feminine matter (Materie). The name
of the island Madeira means wood in Portu
guese. Since bed and board (mensa et thorus)
constitute marriage, in
dreams the latter is
often substituted for the former, and as far as
practicable the sexual representation-complex
is transposed to the eating-complex.—Of arfact, entered into relations with the girl in question,
and has often had her in his bedroom. She feared, as
may be
imagined, that the landlady suspected
her,
and had proposed, on the day before the dream, that
they should meet in one of the unoccupied rooms. In
reality this room had the number
14, whiie in the
dream the woman bore this number. A clearer proof of
the identification of woman and room, could hardly be
imagined," (Ernest Jones, Intern. Zeitschr. /.. Psycho
analyse, ii, [ 1914 ] ). ( Cf. Artemidorus, The Symbolism
of Dreams [German version by F. S. Krauss, Vienna,
1881, p. no]: "Thus, for example, the bedroom sig
nifies the wife, supposing one to be in the house.")
8 Cf. "the cloaca theory" in Three Contributions to
the Theory of Sex.
* See p. 123-124 above.

[288a]
284
SlGMUND
tidesof dress,a woman'shat may very often be
interpreted with certainty as the male genitals.
In the dreamsof men, one often finds the neck
tie as a symbol for the penis; this is not only
because neckties hang down in front of the
body, and are characteristic of men, but also
because one
can select them at pleasure, a
freedom which nature prohibits as regards the
Original of the symbol. Persons who make use
of this symbol in dreams are very extravagant
in the matter of ties, and possess whole collec
tions of them.1 All complicated machines and
appliances are very probably the genitals—as
a rule the male genitals—in the description of
which the symbolism of dreams is as indefati
gable as human wit. It is quite unmistakable
that all weapons and tools are used as symbols
for the male organ: e.g., ploughshare, hammer,
grnij revolver, dagger, sword, etc. Again, many
of the landscapes seen in dreams, especially
thosethat containbridges or wooded mountains,
may be readily recognized as descriptions of
the genitals. Marcinowski collected a series of
examples in which the dreamer explained his
dream by means of drawings, in order to repre
sent the landscapes and places appearing in it.
These drawings clearly showed the distinction
between the manifest and the latent meaning
of the dream. Whereas, naively regarded, they
seemed to represent plans, maps, and so forth,
closer investigation snowed that they were rep
resentations of the human body, of the geni
tals, etc., and only after conceiving them thus
could the dream be understood.2 Finally, where
one finds incomprehensible neologisms one may
suspect
combinations of components
having
a
sexual
significance.—Children, too,
often
signify the genitals, since men and women are
in the habit of fondly referring to their genital
organs as little man, little woman, little thing.
The little brother was correctly recognized by
Stekel as the penis. To play with or to beat a
little child is often the dream's representation
of masturbation. The dream-work represents
castration by baldness, hair-cutting, the loss of
teeth, and beheading. As an insurance against
castration, the dream uses one of the common
* Cf. in the Zentralblatt fur Psychoanalyse, ii, 6 js,
the drawing of
a nineteen-year-old manic patient: a
man with a snake as a neck-tie, which is turning to
wards a girl. Also the story Der Schamhaftige (Anthropophyteia, vi,
334):
A woman entered a bathroom,
and there came face
to
face with a man who hardly
had time to put on his shirt. He
was greatly em
barrassed, but at
once covered his
throat with the
front of his shirt, and said: "Please excuse me, I have
no necktie.*'
2 Cf. Pfister's works on cryptography and picturepuzzles.

[288b]
Freud
symbols of the penis in double or multiple
form; and the appearance in a dream of.a liz
ard—an animal whose tail, if pulled off, is
regenerated by a new growth—has the same
meaning. Most of
those animals which are
utilized as genital symbols in mythology and
folklore play this part also in dreams: the fish,
the snail, the cat, the mouse (on account of
the hairiness of the genitals), but above all the
snake, which is the most important symbol of
the male member. Small animals and vermin
are substitutes fori little children, e.g., undesired
sisters or brothers. To befinfected with vermin
is often, the equivalent for pregnancy.—As a
very recent symbol of the male organ I may
mention the airship, whose employment is justi
fied by its relation to flying, and also, occasion
ally, by its form.—Stekel has given a number
of other symbols, not yet sufficiently verified,
which he
has
-. illustrated by examples. The
works of this author, and especially his book:
Die Sprache des Traumes, contain the richest
collection of interpretations of symbols, some
of which were ingeniously guessed ahd were
proved to be correct upon
investigation, as,
for example, in the section on the symbolism
of death. The author's lack of critical reflection,
and his tendency to
generalize at all costs,
m'ake his interpretations doubtful or inappli
cable, so that in making use of his works
caution
is
urgently
advised.
I
shall there
fore restrict myself to mentioning a few ex
amples.
Right and left, according to Stekel, are to
be understood in dreams in an ethical sense.
"The right-hand path always signifies the way
to righteousness, the left-hand path the path
to crime. Thus the left may signify homosex
uality, incest, and perversion, while the right
signifies marriage, relations with a prostitute,
etc. The meaning is always determined by the
individual moral standpoint of the dreamer!"
(loc. cit., p. 466). Relatives in dreams general
ly stand for the genitals (p. 473). Here I can
confirm this meaning only for the son, the
daughter,
and
the
younger
sister—-that
is,
wherever little thing could be employed. On the
other hand, verified examples allow us to rec
ognize sisters as symbols of the breasts, and
brothers as symbols of the larger hemispheres.
To be unable to overtake a carriage is interpret
ed by Stekel as regret at being unable to catch
up with a differencehi age (p. 479). The luggage
of a traveller is the burden of sin by which
one is oppressed (ibid.) But a traveller's lug--
gage often proves to be an unmistakable symbol

[289a]
The Interpretation aftDreams
$$S
of one& own/genitals; To numbers,:which;fre
quently occur in .dreams, Stekel-has assigned
a-fixed ^symbolic meahing^ but these interpret
tations»":feeemoneither: /sufficiently, verified; nor
of-Joniversal •validity* although .mr;individual
Cases they :can-usually be recognized as; plaiisible.-We have,mtlallr events; abundant confir
mation that the figure three is a.symbolof ithe
male- genitals; One;iof Stekel's generalizations
refers- to the double meaning ofithe genital
sjftnbols; "Where is there a symbol,'' he asks,
•^rhieh. (if in1 any way permitted by the imagi^
nation) may not be used simultaneously in the
masculine; and" the feminine'sense?" To-be
sure, the clause in parenthesis retracts much of
theJ absolute character of this assertion, -for
this double meaning is not always permitted
by the imaginations StillyI think it is not superfltious to. state that; insmy iexperlence this gen
eral statement of Stdkel's requires.elaborations
Besides those* symbols which are; just as fre-?
quently employed .for the <male ,as fort -the
female genitals, there are-:others which prepon
derantly, or almost exclusively, designate one
of the sexes, and there are\yet othersiwhichj
so far as we know, have only the male or only
the female:signification; To*use long, stiff;ob
jects and weapons as symbols- ,of: the, -femate
genitals, Or hollow objects (chests, boxes,.etc.)
as symbols of the male genitals, iscertainly not
permitted by the imagination.;; -[ l^ ;r
It is true that the tendency of dreamsj-and;of
the unconscious phantasy, to employ thesexual
symbols bisexually^ .reveals art archaicr trait,
for in childhood the difference in the genitals,
is unknown, and jthe same genitals,are .attribute
ed to both sexes. One may also be'misled, as
regards; the1significance of; a bisexual; symbol
if one forgets- th'e> fackthat: in,some dreams a
general reversal'; bfc sexes>: takes place; so that
the,male organ isrepresentedby the.femalej and
vice versa., Such -dreams express,- for [example^
the wishiof a woman to-be a ;man.
-jr •
,
The genitals \may even be' represented jin
dreams by other parts of: the body: the .male
member by the hand or the ioot, the female
genital orifice: by the mouth; the .ear, or even
the eye. The secretions of the human body—
mucus, tears,r,urine,semenj etc.—may= be used
in dreams interchangeably. This; statement of
Stekel's, correct in the main, has suffered a justir
fiable critical restriction; as the result of certain
^comments of R. iReitler's {Jnternat,:Zeitschr.
fur Psych., i, 1913)., The gist.of the matter
is-the replacement of an important secretion,
sucbas tie;semen, by an:indifferentroiie.

[289b]
,-These very incomplete indicationssnay suffice
tbistimulate others to make aimorejfpainstaking
collection^fl have attempted a:n^cbjnoxe cje?»
tailed [account ofj .dream-syiiibplisEn,-infimy;
Gmeral Introduction to Psycfao-Analysis?. n
^
-ol, shall now append a;: few instances- qf }^e
use-of such symbol whichwUl sho^howJni^
possible it is to arriverat the;4nterpre;tationfpfa
dream jif one excludes dreamjTsymbplism,;V!but
also how in many cases it is imperatively.forced
upon oneviAt thevsa^eitimej I must expressly
warn/the investigator against overestimating
theimportance ofrsymbols in the interpretation
of dreamsy. restricting the work of dream-transi
lation •tobthe translation of symbols, 'and neg-f
lecting the: technique of1utilizing the assocmtions of the dreamer;.?The{two;tedmiqueg pf
dream-interpretation, must•supplement jqne an?
other^^radaeally^however, as well as.vtheor^ti?
cally^ precedence is., retained fby; the latter
process, which assigns theyfin&l significance^
thedutterances of the:d*eamer, while the ;sym>
bol-translation which;c^ye undertake, play an
auxiliary partv ^ iri;; >
c;::
j •
r;
.iicTherha.tas ^eisymbol; of ;a»iman (of .fee
maler|genitals>^ (A; fragment fromTthe^dream
of a:young wonian who suffered:from agora
phobia as the result of her fear;of temptai
,
I am:walking in the street in.summer; I am
wearing a -straw hat of peculi<Wys)iap.ei the wad
dle piece of which is bent upwards, while thesi^ye
piecesyf^ngydowimazds (here, the description
hesitates)^, and.in smh.a fashion thafconejiangs
lowerthan the. other.-lp>m cheerfid and in\q
confident mood;<-andjQs'l pass>a\0ttmhef:qf
young:officers;I thmk\to \myself: You can't do
anything toyme^: =,."•>. y.VM \:
'$\-.i
;v As sKe could prpdqce ao associations to ^he
hat, rI said to herv;\ "The hat is really- ainaale
genital organ, with its raised •.middle--piece, and
the two downwardrhanging' side pieces.'' It is
perhaps peculiar that her.-hat should be\ supr
poisedta.be,a;man, but after all one says.:Unter
die Haube kpmmm (to get unc-er•the cap.)
when we, mean: tp get married. I intentionally
refrained -from interpreting the^ details coitcerning; the unequal dependence of
tne two
sjde pieces,: although the determination of just
such details .must.point;;the way to the,-inter1 In spite of all .the differences between Schemer's
conception of dream-symbolisnx and; the; one developed
here, I must still insist that Scheriier should be recbgnizedl as the true discoverer of symbolism in dreams,
and that ttie, experience of psycho-analysis has,brought
his book (published in 1&61) into posthumous repute^
,y^ From "Nachtrage zur Traumdeutung" in Zentral
blatt fiir Psychoanalyse,!, Nos. 5 and 6, (1911).

[290a]
286
SlGMUND EREUD
pretation. I went on to say that if, therefore,
she had a husband with such splendid genitals
she would not have to fear the officers; that
is, she would have nothing to wish from them,
for it was essentially her temptation-phantasies
Which prevented her from going about unpro
tected and unaccompanied. This last expla
nation of her anxiety I had already been able
to give her repeatedly on the basis of other
material
It is quite remarkable how the dreamer be
haved after this interpretation. She withdrew
her description of the hat and wouldnot admit
that she had said that the two side pieces were
hanging down. I was, however, too sure of what
I Iiad heard to allow mysetf'to^ be misled, and*
so-Tinsisted.that she did say it. She was quiet
for a while, and then found the courage to ask
why it was that one of her husband's testicles
was lower than the other, and whether it was
the same with all men. With this the peculiar
detail of the hat was explained, and the whole
interpretation was accepted by her.
The hat symbol was familiar to me long be
fore the patientrelated this dream. From other
but less transparent cases I believed that I
might assume the hat could also stand for the
female genitals.1
2. The little one as the genital organ. Being
(Another dream of the same agoraphobic
patient.)
Her mother sends away her little daughter
so that she has to go alone. She then drives
with her mother to the railway station, and
sees her little one walking right along the track)
so that she is bound to be run over. She hears
thmb^nes^craeki (At this sheexperiences,a feel
ingof discomfort but no real horror.) She then
looks out through the carriage window, to see
whether the parts cannot be seen behind. Then
shereproaches hermother for allowing thelittle
one to go out alone.
Analysis.—It is not an ea$y matter to. give
here a complete interpretation of the dream.
It forms part of a cycle of dreams, and can be
fully understood only in connection with the
rest. For it is not easy to obtain the material
necessary to demonstrate the symbolism in a
sufficiently isolated condition. The patient at
first finds that the railway journey is to be
interpreted historically as an allusion to a dexCf. Kirchgraber for a similar example {Zentral
blatt fur Psychoanalyse, iii, [1912], p. 95). Stekel reported a dream in which the hat with an obliquelystanding feather in the middle symbolized the (impo
tent) man.

[290b]
parture from a sanatoriumfor nervous diseases*
with whose director she was, of
course, in
love. Her mother fetched her away, and before
her departure the physician came to the rail
way station and gave her a bunch of flowers;
she
felt
uncomfortable because
her mother
witnessed
this
attention.
Here the
mother,
therefore, appearsas the disturber of her tender
feelings, a role actually played by this strict
woman during .her daughter's girlhood.—The
next association referred to the sentence: She
then looks to see whether the parts cannot be
seen behind. In the dream-facade one would
naturally be compelled to think of the pieces
of the little daughter who had been run over
and crushed. The- association, however, turns
in quite a different direction. She recalls that
she once« saw-her father in ...the. bath-room,
naked, from behind; she then begins to talk
about sex differences, and remarks that in the
man the genitals can be seen from behind, but
in the woman they cannot. In this connection
she now herself offers the interpretation that
the little one is the genital organ, and her little
one (she has a four-year-old daughter) heir
own organ. She reproaches her mother for
wanting her to live as though she had no
genitals, and recognizes this reproach in the
introductory sentence of the dream: the mother
sendsL her little one away, so that she has tb
go alone. In her phantasy, gdngaione^Ton^ithe streets means having no man, no sexual
relations (coire—to go together), and this she
does not like. According to all her statements,
she really sufferedas a girlthrough her mother's
jealousy, because her father showed a prefer
ence for her.
The deeper interpretation of this dream de
pends upon another dream of-the sameTiight;
in which the dreamer identifies herself with
her brother. She was a tomboy, and was always
being told that she should have been born a
boy. This identification with the brother shows
with especial clearness that the little one sig
nifies the genital organ. The mother threatened
him (her) with castration, which could only be
understood as a punishment for playing with
the~fenrtafr-paTts^an^^^^y^niM^Aw^0iem^i
fore, shows that she herself had masturbated
as a child, though she had retained only a
memory of her brother's having done so. Ah
early knowledge of the male genitals, which
she lost later, must, according to the assertions
of this second dream, have been acquired at
this time. Moreover, the second dream points
to the infantile sexual theory that girls origin

[291a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
riate from boys as a result of castration. After
I had told her of this childish belief, she at
once confirmed it by an anecdote in which the
boy asks the girl: "Was it cut off?" to which
the girl replies: "No, it's always been like
that."
Consequently the sending away of the little
one, of the genital organ, in the first dream
refers also to the threatened castration. Finally,
she blames her mother for not having borne
her as a boy.
That being run over symbolizes sexual inter
course would not be evident from this dream
if we had not learned it from many other
3. Representation of the genitals by build
ings, stairs, and shafts.
(Dream of a young man inhibited by a father
complex.)
He is taking a walk with his father in a place
which is certainly the Prater, for one can see
the Rotunda, in front of which there is a small
vestibule to which there is attached a captive
balloon; the balloon, however, seems rather
limp. His father asks him what this is all for;
he is surprised at it, but he explains it to his
father. They come into a courtyard in which
lies a large sheet of tin. His father wants to
pull off a big piece of this, but_first looks
round to see if anyone is watching. He tells his
father that all he needs to do is to speak to the
overseer, and then he can take as much as he
wants to without any more ado. From this
courtyard a flight of stairs leads down into a
shaft, the walls of which are softly upholstered,
rather like a leather arm-chair. At the end of
this shaft there is a long platform, and then a
new shaft begins...
Analysis. This dreamer belonged to a type
of patient which is not at all promising from a
therapeutic point of view; up to a certain
point in the analysis such patients offer no reSKtanee^wbatever, bxrt: from' that point4 onwards
they
prove to
be
almost inaccessible. This
dreain
he
analysed
almost
independently.
"The Rotunda," he said, "is my genitals, the
captive balloon in front is my penis, about
whose flaccidity I have been worried." We
must, however, interpret it in greater detail:
the Rotunda is the buttocks, constantly associ-
-ated%y^h^ehtfdfwith the*genitals; the smaller
structure in front is the scrotum. In the dream
his father asks him what this is all for-—that
is, he asks him about the purpose and arrange
ment of the genitals. It is quite evident that
this state of affairs should be reversed, and that

[291b]
he ought to be the questioner. As such ques
tioning on the part of the father never occurred
in reality,we must conceive the dream-thought
as a wish, or perhaps take it conditionally, as
follows. "If I had asked my father for sexual
enlightenment ..." The continuation of this
thought we shall presently find in another
place.
The courtyard in which the sheet of tin is
spread out is not to be conceived symbolically
in the first .instance, but originates from his
father's place of business. For reasonsof discre
tion I have inserted the tin for another material
in which the father deals without, however,
-changing,,.anything, in the..JverJbaL.expression
of the dream. The dreamer had entered his
father's
business, and had taken a terrible
dislike to the somewhat questionable practices
upon which its profit mainly depended. Hence
the continuation of the above dream-thought
("if I had asked him") would be: "He would
have deceived me just as he does his custom
ers." for the pulling off, which serves to repre
sent commercial dishonesty, the dreamer him
self gives a second explanation, namely, mas
turbation. This is not only quite familiar to
us (see above, p. 281), but agrees very well
with the fact that the secrecy of masturbation
is expressed by its opposite (one can do it quite
openly). Thus, itragrees"entirely with our ex
pectations that the autoerotic activity should
be attributed to the father, just as was the
questioning in the first scene of the dream. The
shaft he at once interprets as the vagina, by re
ferring to the soft upholstering of the walls.
That the action of coition in the vagina is
described as a going down instead of in the
usual way as a going up agrees with what I
have found in other instances.1
The details—that at the end of the first
shaft there is a long platform, and then a new
shaft—he himself explains biographically. He
Bad forsome time had sexual intercourse with
women, but had given it up on account of in
hibitions, and now hopes to be able to begin it
again with the aid of treatment. The dream,
however, becomes indistinct towards the end,
and to the experienced interpreter it becomes
evident that in the second scene of the dream
the influence of anothersubject has alreadybe
gun" to assert itself;" which is IhtKcated'-by'his
father's business,his dishonest practices,andthe
vagina represented by the first shaft, so that
one may assume a reference to his mother.
1CfVcomment in the Zentralblatt fur Psychoanal
yse, i; and see above, p. 281, note 4/

[292a]
$88
i/A'* r(TSMWQW>¥imJMr
^•4,0 The- maleiougan .symbolized by^pessons:
an&the; female by a landscape^ sti" m : • r-ob
;.?:([Dream -of? aiwomani; of -the lowei?.-class;
whoseitosbandis?a pblicemanp^eported/by: B;
Batten), -^n.^: v-t h;,;
•.> 'V.J I -T
.^.vui'/l
. dU Then someone Woke into the.Imuselpnd
sM:amiouslyy,calledjfor a, policeman. Jkxtihfo
went peacefully with two tramps into achurch^
to which agneatfdanyMepsvkd^ip^
churchMere was a mountain*-on topj>f which
there was a den&joresi.*{ The^oliceman'was,
provid^d-mth.a helmet, agorgety. and a cloak?
The: two \vctgrant$f: who wentalong\nsMh the,
policeman quite-peaceably,-had sack-like apr.om
tiedV round their. Joins:9 A road led fromMechUrchtonthe. fountain. This road•was ^overr
grown-oneacMside with grassand brushwood,
whichibecamethicker'an& thicker as itreaphed
the top of ^
Mountain, where it Xpreadrput;
into quite a forest.
^
: 5. Castration dreams of children.
>(a)iA' boy: ageduthree years\jmd five,
months, for whom.hisfather's return frpin mil
itary serviceis clearly inconvenient, wakes one
morning in. a, disturbed and excited state, and
constantly'repeats thei question:Mhy did Daddpcarry his Mad onaplate? Last night Daddy
carried his hea& on a plate, yy •
-r;
•_. (b)
A student who is now suffering from
a severeLobsessional neurosis -• remembers that
in hissixthyear he repeatedly had theyfollow
ing dream: He goes to the barber to, have his
hair cut. Then a large womanwith severe fea
tures comes up to himand cutsoff hishead. He
recognizes the woman as his mother.
•;
6.
A modified staircase dream.,
.
To one of my patients, a sexual abstainer,
who was ivery ill, whose phantasy was fixated
upon his mother, and who repeatedly dreamed
of cHmbing; stairs while accompanied by his
mother* I once remarked that moderate mas
turbation; would probably have been less harm?
ful to him than his. enforced abstinence. The
influence ofrthis remark, provoked the follow
ing dream: «•:••'
; :
, ,
His1 piano teacher reproaches him for neg
lecting Ms piano-playing,, andJ or>not practic
ing theEtudesofMoschelesi and Clementi-s
Gradus ad Parnassum. With; reference to this
he remarked that the Gradus, tooyjis a stair-?
1 Or Chapel=vagina.
2 Symbol of coitus.
8 Mohs Veneris.
;'
'.
;
-;
4 Crines pubis.'
,
.
v
5 Demons in cloaks and hoods are, according to the
explanation^ of:.a specialist, of ,.a phallic character. :
6 The two halves ofthe scrotum, y
.--

[292b]
way/andilihatptbeipiano.4tseli-is:-a stairw,ay>)a^
ifohas;;a scale; fUM/uYh :U\t
<- -vY boj r-: I
rlt.n^
which- cannot;fbeenlfeteci'in theifeprese,nfeatioflt
of-sexuatifacts and-wishes/
7. The sensation of reality and the repre-t
sentation of repetitipn;r
:
,
,r-o -«i')
^ A many, now- thirty^fiye, relates? a clearly rer
memberedcdream wMeh^(he^ckimstp^baje had
whenihelwas four years; ofr age: [ The-notary
with whom his father's will was depostiedr-r.
boyb&d lost his father at-ther age,;p£, three—
broufhttwo. large-EmperorApears, of whfchyhe
wasugiven one to- eat., The other laydonythe:
window-sill of the living-room. He woke with
the^f.conyictipni-of; the reality;:©f what; -he had
dreamt, and obstinately asked his mother to
give him the ^dond pe.ar ^ it.was, he,-said* still
lying on the window-sill. His mother laughecl
at-thiSi .-.-.
• -, yy
• Analysis.* The notary was a jovial old gen
tleman who, as he-seems to.remembervteally
sometimes\brought pears with; him. ,The^window-siilvwas;vas he^sawit in tfee.dream. Nothing
else occurs to him in this connection, except*
perhaps, that his mother hasrecently told him
a dreamv She has two birds, sitting on her head;
she wonders when they will fly away, but they
dp not flyvaway, and one of them flies to her
mouth and sucks at it.\
J-
, The dreamer's inability to furnish associa
tions. justifies the attempt, to interpret it by
the substitution of symbols. The two pears^-
pommes ou/wires—arethe breasts of the moth
er who nursed him; the window-sill is the prpr
jection of the bosom, analogous to the balcp-^
nies in the dream of houses. His sensation pf
reality after waking is justified, for.his.mother
had actually suckled him for much longer than
the customary term, and her breast was -still
available*
The
dream
is
to
be
translated:
"Mother, give (show) me the,breast again at
which I once used to drink" The once is rep
resented by the eating of the one pear, tjjie
againby-the,desire for the other^Thetemporal
repetition pi an act is habitually represented
in dreams; by the numerical,multiplication Jof
an object, .
;
•;
- f- --
i
It is naturally; a .very striking phenomenon
th^at symbolism should already play a part in
the dream of a child of fpur;: but this is; the
rule rather than the exception. One ma^y say
that the dreamer has command of symbolism
from the very first.
•
The early age,at wbich people make use: of
symbolic tfepresentatipn, even; apart from the

[293a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
289
dream-life, may be shown by the following
uninfluenced memory of a lady who is now
twenty-seven:.. She is in her fourth year. The
nursemaid is driving her, with her brother,
eleven months younger, and a cousin, who is
betweenthe twoin age, to the lavatory, so that
they can do their little business there before
going for their walk. As the oldest, she sits on
the seat and the other two on chambers. She
asks her (female) cousin: Have you a purse,
too? Walter has a little sausage, I have a purse.
The cousin answers: Yes, I have a purse, too.
The nursemaid listens, laughing, and relates the
conversation to the mother, whose reaction is
a sharp reprimand.
Here a dream may be inserted whose ex
cellent symbolism permitted of interpretation
with little assistance from the dreamer:
8.
The question of symbolism in the dreams
of normal persons.1
^
An objection frequently raised by the op
ponents of psycho-analysis—and recently also
by Havelock Ellis2—is that, although dreamsymbolism may perhaps be a product of the
neurotic psyche, it has no validity whatever m
••-• *
1
u
^
„
,u
£
. 1
r»" *
t«i
texpensive flowers; one has to pay for them;
the case of normal persons. But while psycho-
±K~^ -r. wiA. ^-A-.
-\ 7.7. y /, ;7
„
'
rpman^c nn Pcc^nf^i H^wL™
then she adds that they were hkes-of-the-vaHey,
analysis
recognizes
no
essential distinctions,
but only quantitative differences, between the
psychic life of the normal person and that of
the neurotic, the analysis of those dreams in
which, in sound and sick persons alike, the rer
pressed complexes display the same activity;
reveals the absolute identity of the mechan
isms as well as of the symbolism. Indeed, the
natural dreams of healthy persons often con
tain a much simpler, more transparent, and
more characteristic symbolism than those of
neurotics, which, owing to the greater, strict
ness of the censorship and the more extensive
dream-distortion resulting therefrom, are fre-r
quently troubled and obscured, and are there
fore more difficult to
translate. The follow
ing dream serves to illustrate this fact. This
dream comes from a non-neurotic girl of a
rather prudish and reserved type. In the course
of conversation I found that she was engaged
to be married, but that there were hinderances
in the way of the marriage which threatened
to postpone it. She related spontaneously the
following dream:
/ arrange the centre of a table with flowers
for a birthday. On being questioned she states
that in the dream she seemed to be at home
1 Alfred Robitsek in the Zentralblatt, fur Psycho
analyse; ii (1911), p. 340.
2 The World of Dreams, London (1911), p. 168.

[293b]
(shehasno home at the time).and experienced
a feeling of happiness.
The popidar symbolism enables me to trans
late:the dreamior myself. It is the expression
of her wish to be married: the table, with the
flowers in the centre^ is symbolic of herself
and her genitals. She represents her future
wishes as fulfilled, inasmuch as she is already
occupied with the thoughts of the birth of
a child; so the wedding has taken place long
ago.
I call her attention to the fact that the
centre of a tableis an unusual expression,^which
she admits; but here, of course, I cannot ques
tion her more directly. I carefully refrain from
suggesting to her the meaning of the symbols,1
and ask her only for the thoughts which occur
to her mind in connection with the individual
parts of the dream. In the course of the anafc
ysis her reserve gave way to a distinct interest
in the interpretation, and a frankness which
was made possible by the serious tone of the
conversation. To my question as to what kind
pf flowers they had been, her first answer is:
violets, and pinks or carnations. I tbbk the
word lily in this dream In its popular sense;
as a symbol of chastity; she confirmed this,' as
purity occurred to her in association with lily.
Valley is a common feminine dream-symboli
Thechance juxtaposition of the two symbols in
the name of the flower is made into a piece of
dream-symbolism, and serves to emphasize the
preciousness of her v\r%\n\ty—expensive flow
ers; one has to pay for them—and expresses
the expectation that her husband will know
howto appreciate its value. The comment, ex
pensive flowers, etc. has, as will be shown, a
different meaning in every One of the three
different flower-symbols.
I thought of what seemed to me a venture
some explanation of the hidden meaning of the
apparently quite asexual word violets by an un
conscious relation to the French viol. But to
my surprise the dreamer's association was the
English word violate. The accidental phonetic
similarity of the two words violet and violate
is utilized by the dream to express in the lan
guage of flowers the idea of the violence of
defloration (another word which makes use of
flower-symbolism), and perhaps also to give,
expression to a masochistic tendency on the
part pf the girl. An excellent example of the
word bridges across whichrun thepaths to the

[294a]
290
Sigmund Freud
unconscious. One has to pay for them here
means life, with which she has to pay for be
coming a wife and a mother.
In association with pinks, which she then
calls carnations, I think of carnal. But her as
sociation is colour, to which she adds that car
nations are the flowers which her fiance gives
her frequently and in large quantities. At the
end of the conversation she suddenly admits,
spontaneously, that she has not told me the
truth; the word that occurred to her was not
colour, but incarnation, the very word I ex
pected. Moreover, even the word colour is not
a remote association; it was determined by the
meaning of carnation (i.e., flesh-colour)—that
is, by the complex. This lack of honesty shows
that the resistance here is at its greatest be
cause the symbolism is here most transpar
ent, and the struggle between libido and re
pression is most intense in connection withthis
phallic theme. The remark that these flowers
were often given her by her fiance is, together
with the double meaning of carnation, a still
further indication of their phallic significance
in the dream. The occasion of the present of
flowers during the day is employed to express
the thought of a sexual present and a return
present. She gives her virginity and expects in
return for it a rich love-life. But the words:
expensive flowers; one has to pay for themmay
have a real, financial meaning. The flower-sym
bolism in the dream thus comprises the virginal
female, the male symbol, and the reference to
violent defloration. It is to be noted that sexu
al flower-symbolism, which, of course, is very
widespread, symbolizes the human sexual or
gans by flowers, the sexual organs of plants;
indeed,. presents. of flowers between lovers
may have this unconscious significance.
The birthday for which she is making prepa
rations in the dream probably signifies the birth
of a child, She identifies herself with the bride
groom, and represents him preparing her for a
birth (having coitus with her). It is as though
the latent thought were to say: "If I were he,
I would not wait, but I would deflower the
bride without asking her; I would use vio
lence." Indeed, the word violate points to this.
Thus even the sadistic libidinal components
find expression.
In a deeper stratum of the dream the sen
tence / arrange, etc., probably has an auto
erotic, that is, an infantile significance.
She also has a knowledge—possibly only in
the dream—of her physical need; she sees her
self flat like a table, so that she emphasizes

[294b]
all the more her virginity, the costliness of the
centre (another time she calls it a centre-piece
of flowers). Even the horizontal element of
the table may contribute something-torthe-sym
bol. The concentration of the dream is worthy
of remark; nothing is superfluous, every word
is a symbol.
Later on she brings me a supplement to this
dream:
/
decorate
the
flowers
with
green
crinkled paper, She adds that it was fancy paper
of the sort which is used to disguise ordinary
flower-pots. She says also: "To hide untidy
things, whatever was to be seen which was
not pretty to the eye; there is a gap, a little
space in the flowers. The paper looks hke
velvet or moss." With decorate she associates
decorum, as I expected. The green colour is
very prominent, and with this she associates
hope, yet another reference to pregnancy. In
this part of the dream the identification with
the man is not the dominant feature, but
thoughts of shame and frankness express them
selves. She makes herself beautiful for him; she
admits
physical defects, of
which she is
ashamed and which she wishes to correct. The
associations velvet and moss distinctly point to
crines pubis.
The dream is an expression of thoughts hard
ly known to the waking state of the girl;
thoughts which deal with the love of the senses
and its organs; she is prepared for a birth-day,
i.e., she has coitus; the fear of defloration and
perhaps the pleasurably toned pain find expres
sion; she admits her physical defects and overcompensates them by means of an over-esti
mation of the value of her virginity. Her shame
excuses the emerging sensuality by the fact that
the aim of it all is the child. Even material
considerations, which are foreign to the lover,
find expression here. The affect of the simple
dream—the feeling of bliss—shows that here
strong emotional complexes have found satis
faction.
!
I close with the
j
9.
Dream of a chemist.
!
(A young man who has been trying to give
up his habit of masturbation by substituting
intercourse with a woman.)
Preliminary statement: On the day before
the dream he had been instructing a student
as "to Grignard}s reaction, in which magnesi
um is dissolved in absolutely pure ether under
the catalytic influence of iodine. Two days
earlier there had
been an explosion in the
course of the same reaction, in which someone
had burned his hand.

[295a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
Dream I. He is-going to make phenylmagnesiumbromide; he sees the apparatus with par
ticular distinctness,
but
he has substituted
himself for the magnesium. He is now in a cu
rious, wavering attitude. He keeps on repeating
to himself: "This is the right thing, it is work
ing, my feet are beginning to dissolve, and my
knees are getting soft." Then he reaches down
and feels for his feet, and meanwhile (he does
not know how) he takes his legs out of the
carboy, and then again he says
to himself:
"That can't be . . . Yes, it has been done cor
rectly.n Then he partially wakes, and repeats
the dream to himself, because he wants to tell
it to me. He is positively afraid of the analysis
of the dream. He is much excited during this
state of semi-sleep, and repeats continually:
"Phenyl, phenyl."
IL He is in •.. .with his whole family. He is
supposed to be at the Schottentor at half-past
eleven in order to keep an appointment with
the,lady in question] but he does not wake
until
half-past eleven. He says to
himself:
"It is too late now; when you get there it will
be half-past twelve." The next moment he sees
the whole family gathered about the table—
his mother and the parlourmaid with the souptureen with peculiar distinctness. Then he says
to himself: "Well, if we are sitting down to eat
already, I certainly can't get away*-
Analysis. He
feels, 'sure that- even^the*first
dream contains a reference to the lady whom
he is to meet at the place of rendezvous (the
dream Was dreamed during the night before
the expected meeting). The student whom he
was
instructing is a particularly unpleasant
fellow; the chemist had said to him: "That
isn't right, because the magnesium was still
unaffected," and the student had answered, as
though he were quite unconcerned: "Nor it is."
He himself must be this student; he is as in
different to his analysis as the student is to
his synthesis; the he in the dream, however,
who performs the operation, is myself. How
unpleasant he must seem to me with his in
difference to the result!
-
{
Again, he is the material with which the an
alysis (synthesis) is-madei For the question is
the success Of the treatment. The legs in the
dream recall an impression of the previous
evening. He met a lady at a dancihgclass of
whomhewishedto make a conquest;he pressed
her to him so closely-that she once'Cried out.
As he ceased to press her legs1 he felt her firm^
responding pressure' against his lower thighs
as far'as just above the knees; the spot meri-

[295b]
291
tioned in the dream. In this situation,, then, the
woman is the magnesium in the retort, which
is at last working. He is feminine towards me,
as he is virile towards the woman. If he suc
ceeds with the-woman, the treatment will also
succeed. Feeling himself and becoming; aware
of his knees refers to masturbation, and corre
sponds to his fatigue of the previous day . ; .
The rendezvous had actually been made'for
half-past eleven. His wish to oversleep him
self and to keep to his sexual object at home
(that is,masturbation) corresponds to his resist
ance.
:
He says, in respect to the repetition of the
name phenyl, that all these1radicals ending in
yl have always been pleasing to him; they are
very convenient to use v. benzyl, acetyl, etc.
That, however, explained nothing. Butwhen I
proposed the foot Schlemihl he laughed heart
ily, and told me that during^the summer he had
read a> book by ;Prevost^which contained a
chapters "Les exclus de>Vamour"' and-in this
there was some mention olSchlemUiis; and
in reading- of these outcasts he said to him
self: "That is my case;'' He would have placed
the Schlemihl il he had missed 7the appoint
iiO
• It seems that the sexual symbdlism of dreams
has already been directly-confirmed by experi
ment. In 1912 Dr. K. Schrotter; at the instance
of& Swoliodafproduced dr^anasJikde^ply hyp^
notized1 persons by suggestions which deter
mined a large part of the dfeam-content. If the
suggestion proposed that the subject should
dream of normal or abnormal sexual relations^
the dream carried but these1 orders by replac
ing sexual material by'the symbols with which
psycho-analytic dream-interpretation has made
us familiar. Thus, following the suggestion that
the dreamer should dream of homosexual re
lations with a lady friend, this friend appeared
in the dream carrying a shabby travelling-bag,
upon which there was a label with the printed
words: "For ladies1 only." The dreamer was
believed never to ha ve he a r d of d re arhsymbolization or of dream-i n t er p r et atf6n.
Unfortunately,- the value of this important
investigation Was diminished by the fact that
Dfv Schrotter shortly afterwards committed
suicide. Of his dream-experiments he gave us
only a preliminary report in the Zentralblatt
fur Psychoanalyse.' j
:-
-
•
•'•••"••
Similar results wefe reported in 1923 by G.
Roffenstein: Especially interesting were the ex
periments, perfprmed by, Betlheim and Hartmann,. because they eliminated hypnosis* These

[296a]
2Q2
SlGMUND
authors told stories of a crude sexual content
to confused patients suffering from Korsakoff's
psychosis, and observed the distortions which
appeared,when the material related was repro
duced.1 It was shown that, the reproduced ma
terial contained symbols made familiar by the
interpretation* of dreams (climbing stairs, stab
bing and shootingas symbols: of coitus, knives
and cigarettes as symbols of the penis). Special
value was attached to the appearance of the
^symbol of climbing stairs, for, as the authors
justly observed, "a symbolization of this sort
could not be effected by a conscious wish to
distort."
- ;..;.;
-,,.•
-
I
cy Qnly•when we:haye formeo^ a due, estimate
efrthe importance of symbolismin dreamsjcan
we continue the^istudy ofothe; typicalsdreams
whichwas interruptedM an earjierchapter-(p.
-243). I feel lustifed in,dividing these dreams
roughly intOitwoiclasses;> firsts thosewhich, al?
ways rcaljy h$#e: the same meaning, andLseec|n;d, t^pse-whichvdespite the same,jpr ajsimilar
:content::mu§fe\neverthi|less.be -givencthe most
varied interpretations.; Of the typical; dreams
belongingto the;first classI haye already dealt
fajrjy^fullyjwfththe ^xamination^dream*
On account of their similar affective characr
t§rj the breams ofTmisstag a.train deserve to be
ranked with4be, ejcamination-dreams-; more^
over,their interpretation justifies: this apRrpximation. They are cqnsplation-dreamsr, vdfrected
against another.anxiety, perceived in^reams-r-r
the fear of death. Ta depart is one of the most
frequent:and one of-the 'most readily; estab
lished of the death^symbpls. The dream there
fore says consolingly: "Reassure yourself, yon
are not going to die (to depart)," just as the
examination-dream calms us by saying: "Don^t
bet afraid; this time, too, nothing will:happen
to you." The difficulty is understanding both
kinds of dreams is due. to the fact that the
anxiety is attached precisely to the expression
of consolation.
;
,
-
The meaning of the >. dreams due to dental
stimulus, which I have often- enough had to
analyse in-my patients escaped me for a long
time because, much to my astonishment, they
habitually offered too great a resistance to in
terpretation. But finally an overwhelming mass
of evidence convinced me that in: the case, of
men nothing other than the masturbatory de^
sires of puberty furnish the motive power ,pf
these; dreams. I shall analyse, two such dreams,
one pf which is; also a flying dream. The two
r]± ie#befFetilreaktionen bei der KorsakoffschefrPsychose/* Arch*f. Psychiatrie, VoL LXXH-G1924)*(""-•
-f rr

[296b]
Freud
dreams were dreamed by the same person—-a
young man of pronounced homosexualitywhich,
however, has been inhibited in life.
He is witnessing a performance of Fidelio
from the stalls of the operdhouse; he is sitting
next to L, whose personality is congenial to
him, and whose friendship he would like to
have. Suddenly he flies diagonally right across
the stalls; he then puts his hand in his mouth
and draws out two of his teeth.
He himself describes the
flight by. saying
that it was as though he were thrown into the
air. As the opera?performed was Fidelio, be
Recalls the words:.
-A
^
• He who a charming wife acquires . . .v
But the acquisition of even the most charming
wife is hotvamong:the wishes of the dreamer.
Two other lines would-be more appropriate:: L
r He "mho succeeds in the lucky (big) throw
The friend of a friend to be. ....
i
The dream thus contains the lucky (big) throw
which is not, however, a wish-fulfilment only,
For it conceals also the painful reflection that
in his. striving after friendship he has often
had:the misfortune to be thrown out, and the
fear lest this fate may be repeated in the casfe
of the young man by whose side he has en
joyed therperformance of;Ff^//a..This is now
followed ,by a confession, shameful to ajman pf
his refinement,-!to .the effect that once, aftefr
such:a rejection on the part of a friend, his
profound sexual longing caused him. to mastur
bate twice in succession.
The other dream is as follows: Two uni
versity professors of hisacquaintanceiare treat
ing him in my place. One of them does, some
thing to his penis; he is afraid of an operatioit.
The other thrusts\an iron bar against his mouth,
so that he loses one ortwo teeth. He is bounfi
with four silk fyandfeerchiefs. -
j
rThe sexualjfsignifieance of this dream: can
hardly be doubted. The silk handkerchiefs al
lude to an identification with a homosexual of
his acquaintance. The dreamer, who has never
achieved coition
(nor has he ever actually
sought sexual intercourse) with:men,,conceives
the sexual ;act on the lines of masturbation
with which he was familiar during puberty.
: I.believe that the frequent modifications,of
the typicalidream due-to[dental stimulus—th^t,
for example^inwhich another perjspn.draws the
tooth from the dreamer?smouth--rwill be made

[297a]
The Interpretationnoi Dreams
intelligible/by thersame explanation.1 It may,
hoWever^ibe difficult to 'Understand how dental
stimulus can have come to have this signifi
cance. But here -I maydraw attention tb the
frequent displacement from, below to -above
which is at the service of sexual repression,,and
by meansiof which all kinds of sensations-rand
intentions occurring in hysteria, which ought
to be localized in the genitals, mayat;all events
be realized in other,r unobjectionable parts of
the body; We have.;a?case of such displacement
When the genitals are; replaced by the jfapein
the symbolism of unconscious;thought. £hjs is
corroborated by the fact that verbal usage re
lates the buttocks.to the cheeks, and the labia
minora to the lips which enclose the orifice.of
the mouth. The nose is compared to the; penis
in numerous allusions, and,in each; case tfie
presence of thair completes the resemblance;
Oniyone feature—the teeth^-is beyond all ppsr
sibility of being compared in.this way; but.it
istjust this coincidence pf ag^eementf.ani ijisr
agreement. which matesi~the: teeth suitable for
purposes .of representation under the pressure
of sexual repression,..
',
T will not, assert that the interpretation of
dreams due to Rental stimulus as clreams. of
masturbation fthe^cprrectness of which I can
not'doubt) has been freed of all obscurity.2 I
carry the explanation as far as I am able, and
must leave the reit unsolved. But I must refer
to yetanother relation indicated bya colloquial
expression. In Austria there is in use ah indeli
cate designation for the act of masturbation,
namely: "To pull One out," of "to pull one
off.'"8 I am unable to say whence these collo
quialisms originate, or on what symbolismsthey
are based; but the teeth wouldJ very well fit
in With the first of the two.
7
' Dreams of pulling teeth, arid of teeth falling
out, are interpreted iri popular belief toLmean
the death of a connection. Psycho-analysis can
admit of such a meariing only at the most as a
joking allusion to the sense already Indicated.
To the second group of typicaldreams belong
"••
-1 The extraction of a tooth by another is usually to
be interpreted as castration (cf. hair-cutting; Stekel).
One must distinguish between dreams
due to dental
stimulus and dreams referring to the-dentist, such as
have been recorded, for example,' by Coriat (gentralbtatt fur Psychoanalyse, iii, ,440).
2 According to C. G. Jung, dreams due to
dental
stimulus in the case of women have the significance of
parturition: dreams. E.Joneg has given valuable, con
firmation of this. The common element of this interpre
tation with that represented above may, be ifound in
tjie,fact that in both cases ^castration-bijctb), there is
a questionof removing a part from the wholebody.
3 Cf. the biographical dreamon< pp.- 2S0-1;

[297b]
293
those inwhich one is flying or hovering, falling,
swimming, etc. What do these dreams signify?
Here wecannot generalize: They mean,; as we
shall learn^something different in each case;
only,;the: sensory material which they contain
always comes from theisame source;:=
•
:•We must conclude from the information ob*
tained in psycho-analysis that these dreams also
repeat impressions of our childhood—that: is,
that they *efer to the1 games invdving move
mentwhich have such an.extraordinaryriattrac
tion >for children. Where is the uncle who has
never madea child fly-by'running with1it across
the roomywith outstretched-arms, or has never
played at 7fallingowith it by rocking it!.:on Ms
knee and then suddenly straightening his-leg^
, orbyiiftingit abovehishead andsuddenlypre
tending to withdraw his.supporting-hand? -At
such moments children shoutwithrjoy and;in?-
satiably;demand a repetition .of the perform
ance^ especially if,a.little.fright{rand; dizziness
are involved in iloIn .after" yearsthey repeat
their sensations in dreams, brit inidreams rthey
omitf;the hands that held them, so that now
tley are free to float or faU::We knowthatnall
small children havea fondness,for such.games
as rocking and see-sawing,; and when they see
gymnastic performances at
the
circus their
recollection of suek^games is;refceshedvln some
boys'r the hysterical attack consists: simply In
the reproduction of such performances,:which
they accomplish with great>dexterity.rJNpt••
M<?
frequently ,sexual •sensations ;are: -excited ?:by
these games ofmovement,innocent though they
are in themselves. To express the matter in a
few words: it is these romping games of child?
hood which are being repeated in dreams: of
flying, falling, vertigo, and the like, but.'the
pleasurable sensations::are now -transformed
into anxiety. But, as every mother knows, the
romping, of: children often enough ends; in
quarrelling and tears,r r
.; •
•••. I :ha!ve therefore good'reason for rejecting
the explanation that it is the condition of our
cutaneous sensations during sleep, the sensa
tion of the movements,of the lungs, etc., that
evoke dreams of flying and falling. As I see it,
these sensations have themselves been repro
duced from the memory'to which the dream re
fers—-that they are therefore dream-content,
and not dream-sources.4
•; This material, consisting of sensations of
motion, similar in character, and originating
from the same sources, is now used for the
* This passage, dealing with dreams- Of motion, lis
repeated* onaccount ofthe context. Cf, p^2$o& -

[298a]
294
SlGMUND
representattotf of the most manifold dreamthoughts. Dreams of flying or hovering, forthe
most part pleasurably toned, will call for the
most widely differing interpretations—inter
pretations of a quite special nature in the case
of somedreamers, andinterpretations of a typi
cal nature in that of others. One of my patients
was in the habit of dreaming very frequently
that she was hovering a little way above the
street without touching the ground. She was
very*short*.of•* stature, and she shunned every
sort of contamination involved by intercourse
with human beings. Her dream of suspension
*—which raised her feet above the ground and
allowedher head to tower into the air—fulfilled
both of her wishes. In the case of other dream
ers of the same sex, the dream of flying had
thesignificance of the longing: "If onlyI were
a little bird!" Similarly, others become angels
at night, because no one has ever called them
angels by day; The intimate connection be
tween flyingand the idea of a bird makes it
comprehensible that the dream of flying, in the
case of male dreamers, should usually have a
coarsely sensual significance;1 and we should
not be surprised to hear that this or that
dreamer is always very proud of his ability
to fly.
Dr. Paul Federn (Vienna) has propounded
the fascinating theory that a great many flying
dreams are erection dreams, since the remark
able phenomenon of erection, which constantly
occupies the human phantasy, cannot fail to
be impressive asanapparent suspension of the
laws of gravity (cf. the winged phalli of the
ancients).
It .is a noteworthy fact that a prudent ex
perimenter like Mourly Void, who is really
averse to any kind of interpretation, neverthe
less defends the erotic interpretation of the
dreams of flying and hovering.2 He describes
the erotic element as "the most important mo
tive factor of the hovering dream," and refers
to the strong sense of bodily vibration which
accompanies this type of dream, and the fre
quent connection of such dreams with erec
tions and emissions.
Dreams of falling are more frequently char
acterized by anxiety. Their interpretation, when
they occur in women, offers no difficulty, be
cause they nearly always accept the symbolic
meamng-of *failing, which is a circumlocution
for giving way to an erotic temptation. We have
1A reference to the German slang word vogeln (to
copulate) from Vogel (a bird).—Tr.
3 "Uber den Troum," Ges. Schriften, Vol. HI.

[298b]
Freud
not yet exhausted the infantile sources of the
dream of falling; nearly all children have fallen
occasionally, and then been picked up and
fondled; if they fell out of bed at night, they
were picked up by the nurse and taken into heir
bed.
People who dream often, and with great en
joyment, of swimming, cleaving the waves, etc.,
have usually been bed-wetters, and they now
repeat in the dream a pleasure which they have
long since Jearned to forego. We shall soon
learn, from one example or another, to what
representations dreams of swimming easily lend
themselves.
The interpretation of dreams of fire justifies
a prohibition of the nursery, which forbids chil
dren to play with fire so that they may not
wet the bed at night. These dreams also are
based on reminiscences of the enuresis nocturna of childhood. In my "Fragment of ah
Analysis of Hysteria"3 I have given the com
plete analysis and synthesis of such a dream
of fire in connection with the infantile -history
of the dreamer, and have shown for the repre
sentation of what maturer impulses this in
fantile material has been utilized.
It would be possible to cite quite a number
of other typical dreams, if by such one under
stands dreams in which there is a frequent re
currence, in the dreams of different persons, of
the same manifest dream-content. For exam
ple: dreams of passing through narrow alleys,
or a whole suite of rooms; dreams of burglars,
in respect of whom nervous people take meas
ures of precaution before going to bed; dreams
of being chased by wild animals (bulls, horses);
or of being threatened with knives, daggers,
and lances. The last two themes are character
istic of the manifest dream-content of persons
suffering from anxiety, etc. A special investiga
tion of this class of material would be well
worth while. In lieu of this I shall offer two ob
servations, which do not, however, apply ex
clusively to typical dreams.
The more one is occupied with the solution
of dreams, the readier one becomes to acknowl
edge that the majority of the dreams of adults
deal with sexual material and give expression
to erotic wishes. Only those who really analyse
dreams, that is, those who penetrate from their
manifest content to the latent dream-thoughts,
can form an opinion on this subject; Jtmt never
those who are satisfied with registering merely
the manifest content (as, for example, Nacke
8 Collected Papers, in.

[299a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
m
'in;*»hfeiwritings*:on* sexual dreams). Let us rec
ognize at once that there is nothing astonishing
in this fact, which is entirely consistent with
the principles of dream-interpretation. No other
instinct has had to undergo so much suppres
sion, from the time of childhood onwards, as
the
sexual instinct in all its numerous com
ponents:1 from no other instincts are so many
and such intense unconscious wishes left over,
which now, in
the
sleeping
state, generate
dreams. In dream-interpretation this impor
tance of the sexual complexes must never be
forgotten, though one must not, of course,
exaggerate it to the exclusion of all other
factors.
Of many dreams it may be ascertained, by
careful interpretation, that they may even be
understood bisexually, inasmuch as they yield
an indisputable over-interpretation, in which
they realize homosexual impulses—that is, im
pulses which are contrary to the normal sexual
activity of the dreamer. But that all dreams
are to be interpreted bisexually, as Stekel2 main
tains, and Adler,3 seems to me to be a generali
zation as~insusceptible of proof as it is improb
able, and one which, therefore, I should be loth
to defend; for I should, above all, be at a loss
to know how to dispose of the obvious fact
that there are many dreams which satisfy other
than erotic needs (taking the word in the wid
est sense), as, for example, dreams of hunger,
thirst, comfort, etc. And other similar asser
tions, to the effect that "behind every dream
one finds a reference to death" (Stekel), or
that every dream shows "an advance from the
feminine to the masculine line" (Adler), seem
to me to go far beyond the admissible in the
interpretation of dreams. The assertion that all
dreams call for:a,sexual interpretation, against
which there is such ah untiring polemic in the
literature of the subject, is quite foreign to my
Interpretation of Dreams. It will not be found
in any of the eight editions of this book, and
is in palpable contradiction to the rest of its
contents.
We have stated elsewhere that dreams which
are conspicuously innocent commonly embody
crude erotic wishes, and this we might confirm
by numerous
further
examples.
But
many
dreams which appear indifferent, in which we
should never suspect a tendency in any par1 Cf. Three Contributions to the Theory of Sex.
2W. Stekel, Die Sprache des Traumes (1911).
8 Alf. Adler, "Der Psychische Hermaphroditismus im
Leben und in der Neurose*' in Fortschritte der Medi
zin (1910), No. 16, and later papers in the Zentral
blatt fiir Psychoanalyse, i (1910-11).

[299b]
ticular'direction,' may be 'traced-, according to
the analysis, to unmistakably sexual wish-im
pulses, often of an unsuspected nature. For
example, who, before it had been interpreted,
wou4dv:hayesuspected,:a. sexual wish in the fol
lowing dream? The dreamer relates: Between
two stately palaces there stands, a little way
back, a small house, whose doors are closed.
My wife leads me along^the little bit of road
leading to the house and pushes the door open,
and then I slip quickly and easily into the in
terior of a courtyard that slopes steeply up
wards.
Anyone who has had experience in the trans
lating of dreams will, of course, at once be re
minded that penetration into narrow spaces
and the opening of locked doors are among the
commonest of sexual symbols, and will readily
see in this dream a representation of attempt
ed coition from behind (between the two stately
buttocks of the female body). The narrow,
steep passage is, of course, the vagina; the as
sistance attributed to the wife of the dreamer
requires the interpretation that in reality it is
only consideration for* the wifewhich is re
sponsible for abstention from such an attempt.
Moreover, inquiry shows that on the previous
day a young girl had entered the household of
the dreamer;
she had pleased him, and had
given him the impression that she would not be
altogether averse to an approach of this sort.
The little house between the two palaces is
taken from a reminiscence of the Hradschin In
Prague, and once more points to the girl, who is
a native of that city.
If, in conversation with my patients, I em
phasize the frequency of the Oedipus dream—
the dream of having sexual intercourse with
one's mother—I elicit the answer: "I cannot
remember such a dream." Immediately after
wards, however, there arises the recollection of
another, an unrecognizable, indifferent dream,
which the patient has dreamed repeatedly, and
which on analysis proves to be a dream with
this very content—that is, yet another Oedipus
dream. I can assure the reader that disguised
dreams of sexual intercourse with the dreamer's
mother are far more frequent than undisguised
dreams to the same effect.*
* I have published a typical example of such a dis
guised Oedipus dream in No. 1 of the Zentralblatt fur
Psychoanalyse (see below); another, with a detailed
analysis, was published in No. 4 of the same journal
by Otto Rank. For other disguised Oedipus dreams in
which the eye appears as a symbol, see Rank {Int.
Zeitschr. fiir Ps. A., i, [ 1913] ). Papers upon eye dreams
and eye symbolism by Eder, Ferenczi, and Reitler will
be found in the same issue. The blinding in the Oedipus

[300a]
••; Theto are dreams of landscapes and locali
ties -in which emphasis is always laid upon the
assurance: "I have been here before." But this
Dejdi yu has a special significance in dreams.
In this case the locality is always the genitals
of the mother; of no other place can it be as
serted with such certainty that one has been
hereh before. I was once puzzled by the account
of a dream given by a patient afflicted with
obsessional neurosis. He dreamed that he called
at a house where he had been twice before. But
this very-.patient; had long ago told me of an
episode of his sixth year. At that time he shared
his mother's bed, and had abused the occasion
by inserting his finger into his mother's genitals
while she was asleep.
> A large number of dreams, which are fre
quently full of anxiety, and often have for
content the traversing. of narrow spaces, or
legend and elsewhere is a substitute for castration.
The ancients, by the way, were not unfamiliar with
the symbolic interpretation of the undisguised Oedipus
dream (see.0. Rank, Jahrb. ii, p. 534: "Thus, a dream
of Julius Caesar's of sexual relations with his mother
has been handed down to us, which the oneiroscopists
interpreted as a favourable omen signifying his takr
ing possession of the earth (Mother Earth). Equally
well known is the oracle delivered to the Tarquinii, to
the effect that that one of
them would become the
ruler, of Rome who should be the
first to. kiss his
mother (oscidurn matri
tulerit), which Brutus con
ceived as; referring to Mother Earth .{terram osculo
cqntigit, scilicet quod ea communis mater omnium marr
ialium esset,Liyyt I, lvi). Cf. here the dream of Hippias in Herodotus vi; 107. These myths and interpre
tations point to a correct psychological insight. I haye
found that those persons who consider themselves pre
ferred or favoured by their mothers manifest in life
that confidence in. themselves, and that unshakable^op
timism, which often seem heroic, and not- infrequently
compel actual success.
Typical example of a disguised Oedipus dream:
A man dreams: He has a secret affair with a woman
whom another man wishes to marry. He is concerned
lest the other should discover this relation and aban
don the marriage; he therefore behaves very affection-?
ately to the man; he nestles up to him and kisses him.
The facts of the dreamer's life touch the dream-con
tent, only >t one point. He has a secret affair with a
married woman, and an equivocal expression of her
husband, with whom he is on friendly terms, aroused
in him the suspicion that he might have noticed some
thing of thisr relationship. There is, however, in reality,
yet another factor, the mention of which was avoided
in the dream,: and which alone gives the key to it. The
life of the husband.is, threatened by an organic malady,
fiis wife is prepared for the possibility of his sudden
death, and our dreamer consciously harbours the in
tention of marrying the young widow after her hus
band's decease. It is through this objective situation
that the dreamer
finds
himself transferred into the
constellation of the Oedipus dream; his wish is to be
enabled to kill the
man, so: that he may win the
woman for his wife;, his dream gives expression to the
wish in a hypocritical distortion. Instead of represent
ing'Tier as already married to the other man, it repre-r
sents the other man only as wishing to marry her;
which indeed corresponds with his own. secret inten
tion, and the-hostile wishes directed against the man
are concealed und0r demonstrations of affection, which
are reminiscences of his childish relations to his father.

[300b]
iG SiGiremFiraup
_<•
staying long in the water, are-based upon phan
tasies:.concerning; the: intrauterine life," the
sojourn in the mother's wombj and the act of
birth. I here insert the dream of a young man
who, in his phantasy, has even profited by'the
intra-uterine opportunity of spying upon an
act of coition between his parents.
He is in a deep shaft, in which there is a
window, as in the Semmering tunnel. Through
this he sees at first an empty landscape, and
then he composes a picture in it, which is there
all at once and fills up the empty space. The
picture represents a field which is being deeply
tilled by ah implement^ and the wholesome air,
the associated idea of hard work, and the
bluisfcblack clods of earth make a pleasant im
pression on him; He then goes on and sees a
work on education lying open . *. and is sur
prised that so much attention is devoted in it
to the sexual feelings (of children), which
makes him think of me. .
Here is a. pretty water-dream of a female
patient, which was turned to special account
in the course of treatment/
At her usual holiday resort on the . . . Lake,
she flings herself into the dark water at a place
where the pale moon is reflected in the water.
Dreams of this sort are parturition dreams;
their interpretation is effected by reversing the
fact recorded in the manifest dream-content;
thusy instead of flinging oneself into the water,
read coming out of the water—that is, being
born.1 The place from which one is born may
be recognized if one thinks of the humorous
sense of the French la lune: The pale moon
thus becomes the white bottom,which the child
soon guesses to be the place from .which it
came. Now what can be the meaning of the
patient's wishing to be born at a holiday retsort? I asked the dreamer this, and she replied
without
hesitation:
"Hasn't
the
treatment
made me as though I were born again?" Thus
the dream becomes an invitation to continue
the treatment at this summer resort—that is, to
visit her there; perhaps it also contains a very
bashful allusion to the wish to become a mother
herself.2
•* For the mythological meaning of water-birth, see
Rank: Der Mythus von der Geburt des Helden (1909);
2 It was not for a long time that I learned to appre
ciate the^ significance of the phantasies and unconscious
thoughts relating to life in the womb. They contain the
explanation of the curious dread, felt by so many peo
ple, of being buried alive, as well, as the profoundest
unconscious reason for the belief in a life after death,
which represents only the projection irito the futtfre of
this mysterious life before birth. The act of'birth*
Moreover, is the first experience attended by atixiety,
and is thiis, the source and'model of the affect of
anxiety.
-

[301a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
297
'Another dream of parturition,: with its interpfetation, I take from a paper by E. Jones.
<fShe stood at the seashore watching a small
boy, who seemed to be hers, wading into the
water. This he did, till;the water covered him
andshe could only see his head bobbingup and
down near the surface^ The scene then changed
to the crowded hall of an hotel. Her husband
left her, and she 'entered into conversation
with' a stranger. :
"The second half of the dream was dis
covered in the analysis to represent flight from
her husband, and the entering into intimate
relations with a third person, behind whom was
plainly indicated Mr. X's brother, mentioned
in a former dreami. The first part of the dream
was a fairly evident birth-phantasy. In dreams,
as in mythologyi the delivery of a child from
the: uterine waters is commonly; represented,
by way of distortion, asdrhe entry of the child
into water; among many other instances^the
births of Adonis, Osiris•
Moses, arid Bacchus
are well-known illustrations of this. The bob
bing up and down of the headin. the water at
once recalled.to the: patient the; sensation of
quickening which she had experienced:in her
only pregnancy. Thinking of the boy going, in--
to-.the water, induced a reverie "in which she
saw herself faking-him out of the water, carry
ing him into the nursery, washing-and-dressing
him, and installing him in.her household.
"The second half of the dreamy therefore,
represents thoughts concerning; the elopement,
which belonged to the first half of the Under
lying latent content; thefirst half of the dream
corresponded with the second half of the: la*
tent content, the birth phantasy. Besides! this
inversion in the order^ further inversions took
place in each half of the dream. In the first
half the child entered the water, and then his
head bobbed; in the underlying dream-thoughts
the quickening: occurred first, arid then :the
child left the water (a: double inversion)/rln
the second half?her- husband left her; in/ the
dream-thoughts she left her husband."
Another parturition
dream is related by
Abraham—-the dream of a young woman ex
pecting her first confinement: From one,point
of the floor of the room a subterranean chan
nel leads directly into the water? (path of partur
rition—amniotic fluid). She:lifts up a trap in
the floor, and there immediately appears a crea
ture dressed in brownish fur; which almost
resembles a seal. This creature; changes into
the dreamer's younger brother, to whom herrer
Mion has always been maternal in character.

[301b]
Rank has shown from [a number of dreams
that parturition-dreams employ the same sym
bols as micturitipn-dreamsi The erotic stimulus
expresses itself in these dreams.-as anL:urethra)
stimulus. The,stratification: of meaning in these
dreams corresponds with a-change, in the sig
nificance of the synibpl since cinldhood;
We may here turn back to the interrupted
theme (see p. 190) of the part .playedby or^
game, sleep-disturbing stimuli in dream-for?
matipn. Dreams which have come into existence
under .these influences not only reveal quite
frankly the wishfulfilling tendency, and the
character
of
convenience-dreams, but
they
very often,display a quite transparent.symbol
ism as well, since waking not
infrequently
follows a stimulus whose satisfaction in symr
bolic disguisehas already been Vainly attempted
in the dream, This is true of^ emissiondreams
as well as those evoked by:the need to ririnate
or defecate. The peculiar character of emission
dreams permits us directly to unmask certain
sexual symbols already recognized as typical,
but nevertheless yiqiehtly disputed, and it also
convinces us that many an apparently innocent
drjam-situatipn is riiefely the syrribolic; prelude
to' a^crndely sexualscene.^This, however^ fin|^
direct representation, as a rule, only iri tfie
coniparativoly inMquent
emission
drearns,
"while ft often enough turns into an arixiietly--
dream, winch likewise leads toykiMg. ^';c'
The symbolism' of ^eams due to urethral
stimulus is -especially obvious, and has arrays
been divined. ffippocrates1jhad already advan
ced the theory, that a disturbance of the blad
der was indicated if one dreamt of fountains
and,springs (Havelock Ellis). Scherner,j^hp
has studied the manifold syriibolisni of "fife
urethral stimulus, agrees that "the powerful
urethral stimulus- always turns into the- stimu
lation pf the" sexual;sphere and its symbolic
imagery!. ;iThe drearndue to urethral stimulus
is pften at the same time the representative Of
the sexual dream;.,": :.
' .
"
;. •
CI (Rank, whose conclusions.(in his paper on
Die SyritbolscJnchtung tin WecktmUm)<jt have
here followed, argues,v'ery plausiblythat a large
number of "dreams due to urethral stimulus*'
are really caused by sexual stimuli, wln^Vsft
first- seek to gratify themselves by way of re
gression to the infantile form of urethral
erotism. Those cases are 2especially, instructive
in which the urethral stimulus thus produced
leads to waking and the, emptying of the blad
der, .-. whereupon, in spite of this relief, the
drearii is continued, arid expresses its need in

[302a]
298
undisguisedly erotic images;1
In a quite analogous manner dreams due to
intestinal stimulus disclose the pertinent sym
bolism, and thus confirm the relation, Which is
also amply verified by ethno-psycholbgy, of
gold and feces.2 "Thus, for example, a woman,
at a time when she is under the care of a phy
sician on account of an intestinal disorder,
dreams of a digger for hidden treasure who is
burying a treasure in the vicinity of a little
wooden shed which looks like a rural privy.
A second part of the dream has as its content
how she wipes the posterior of her child, a
little girl, who has soiled herself."
Dreams of rescue are connected with partu
rition dreams. To rescue, especially to rescue
from the water, is, when dreamed by a woman,
equivalent to giving birth; this sense is, how
ever, modified when the dreamer is a man.8
Robbers, burglars, and ghosts, of which we
are afraid before going to bed, and which some
times even disturb our sleep, originate in one
and the same childish reminiscence. They are
the nightly visitors who have waked the. child
in order to set it on the chamber, so that it
may not wet the bed, or have lifted the cover
let in order to see clearly how the child is hold
ing its hands while sleeping. I haye been able
to induce an exact recollection of the nocturnal
visitor in the analysis of some of these anxiety
dreams. The robbers were always the father;
the ghosts more probably correspond to fe
male persons in white night-gowns.
P. Examples'—Arithmetic and Speechin
Dreams
Before I proceed to assign to its proper place
the fourth of the factors which control the
1 "The same symbolic representations which in the
infantile sense constitute the basis of the vesical dream
appear in the recent sense in purely sexual significance:
water==urine=semen=amniotic
fluid; ship=to pump
ship (urinate)=seedrcapsule; getting wet=enuresis=
coitus=pregnancy; swimmingsfull bladder=dwellingplace of the unborn; rain=urination=symbol of fertili
zation; traveling (journeying—alighting)=getting out
of bed=having sexual intercourse (honeymoon jour
ney); urinating=sexual ejaculation" (Rank,- i, c).
2 Freud, "Character and Anal Erotism," Collected
Papers, n; Rank, Die Symbolschictung, etc.; Dattner,
Intern. Zeitschr. f.
Psych, i (1913);
Reik, Intern.
Zeitschr., iii (1915).
3 For such a dream see Poster, "Ein Fall von psychoanalytischer
Seelensorge
und
Seelenheilung,"
in
Evangelische Freiheit (1909). Concerning the symbol
of "rescuing," see my paper, "The Future Prospects of
Psycho-Analytic Therapy" (p. 123 above). Also "Con
tribution to the Theory of Love, 1: A Special Type of
Object Choice in Men," in Collected Papers, rv. Also
.Rank, "Beilege zur Rettungs-phantasie," in the Zentral
blatt fiir Psychoanalyse, i (1910), p. 331; Reik; "Zur
Rettungssymbolic" ibid., p. 299.

[302b]
Sigmbnd Freud
formation of dreams, I shall cite a few examples
from my collection of dreams, partly for the
purpose of illustrating the co-operation of the
three factors with which we are already ac
quainted, and partly for the purpose of adduce
ing evidence for certain unsupported assertions
which have been made, or of bringing out what
necessarily
follows
from
them. It has,
of
course, been difficult in the foregoing account
of the dream-work to demonstrate my conclu
sions by
means
of
examples.
Examples
in
support of isolated statements are convincing
only when considered in the context of an inf
terpretation of a dream as a whole; when they
are wrested from their context, they lose their
value; on the other hand, a dream-interpreta
tion, even when it is by no means profound,
soon becomes so extensive that it obscures the
thread of the discussion which it is intended
to illustrate. This technical consideration must
be my excuse if I now proceed to mix together
all sorts of things which have nothing in com
mon except their reference to the text of the
foregoing chapter.
We shall first consider a few examples of
very peculiar or unusual methods of represen
tation in dreams. A lady dreamed as follows:
A servant-girl is standing on a ladder as though
to clean the windows, and has with her a chim
panzee and a gorilla cat (later corrected, an\
gora cat). She throws the animals on to the
dreamer; the chimpanzee nestles up to her,
and this is very disgusting. This dream has ac
complished its purpose by a very simple means,
namely, by taking a mere figure ol.speech lit
erally, and representing it in accordance with
the literal meaning of its words. Monkey, like
the names of ainmals in general, is an opprobri
ous epithet, and the situation of the dream
means merely to hurl invectives. This same
collection will soon furnish us with further ex
amples of the employment of this simple artir
fice in the dream-work.
j
Another dream proceeds in a very similar
manner: A woman with a child which has a
conspicuously deformed cranium; the dreamer
has heard that the child acquired this deformi
ty owing to its position in its mother's womb.
The doctor says that the cranium might be
given a better shape by means of compression,
but that this would injure the brain. She thinks
that because it is a boy it won't suffer so much
from deformity. This dream contains a plastic
representation of the abstract concept: Child
ish impressions, with which the dreamer has
become familiar in the course of the treatment

[303a]
In the following example the dream-work
follows rather a different course. The dream
contains a recollection of an excursion to the
Hilmteich, near Graz: There is a terrible storm
outside; a miserable hotel—the water is drip
ping from the walls, and the beds are damp.
(The latter part of the contentwasless directly
expressed than I give it.) The dream signifies
superfluous. The abstract idea occurring in the
dream-thoughts is~ first- made--.equivocal- by a
certain abuse of language; it has perhaps been
replaced by overflowing, or by fluid and superfluid (-fluous), and has then been brought to
representation by an accumulation of like im
pressions. Water within, water without, water
in the beds in the form of dampness—every
thing fluid and super fluid. That for the pur
poses of dream-representation the spelling is
much less considered than the sound of words
oughtnot to surprise us when weremember that
rhyme exercises a similar privilege.
The fact that,languagevhas at its disposal a
great number of words which were originally
used in a pictorial and concrete sense, but are
at present used in a colourless and abstract
fashion, has, in certainother cases, madeit very
easy for the dream to represent its thoughts.
The dream has only to restore to these words
their full significance, or to follow their change
of meaning a little way back. For example, a
man dreams that his friend; who is struggling
to get out of a very tight place, calls upon him
for help. The analysis shows that the tight place
is a hole, and that the dreamer symbolically
uses these very words to his friend: "Be care
ful, or you'll get yourself into a hole."1 Another
dreamer climbs a mountain from which he ob
tains an extraordinarily extensive view.
He
identifies himself with his brother, who is edit
ing a reviewdealing with the Far East.
In a dream in Der Grime Heinrich, a spirited
horse is plunging about in a field of the finest
oats, every grain of which is really "a sweet
almond, a raisin and a new penny" wrapped in
red silk and tied with a bit of pig's bristle."
The poet (or the dreamer) immediately fur
nishes the meaning of this dream, for the horse
felt himself pleasantly tickled, so that he ex
claimed: "The oats are pricking me" .("I feel
my oats").
In the old Norse sagas (according to Henzen)
prolificuse is made in dreams of colloquialisms
and witty expressions; one scarcely finds a
dream without a double meaning or a play upon
words.
1 English example.—TR.

[303b]
The Interpretation of Dreams
299
It would be a special undertaking to collect
such methods of representation and to arrange
them in accordance with the principles upon
which they are based. Some of the representa
tions are almost witty. They give one the im
pression that one would have never guessed
their meaning if the dreamer himself had not
succeeded in explaining it.
1. A man dreams that he is asked for a
name^^whiehy however,- he cannot recall.
He
himself explains that this means: "I shouldn't
dream of it."
2. A female patient relates a dream in which
all
the
persons concerned were
singularly
large. "That means," she adds, "that it must
deal with an episode of my early childhood, for
at that time all grown-up people naturally
seemed to me immensely large." She herself
did not appear in the dream.
The transposition into childhood is expressed
differently in other dreams—by the translation
ofJimeJntQ.space. One sees persons and scenes
as though at a great distance, at the end of a
long road, or as though one were looking at
them through the wrong end of a pair of operaglasses.
3. A man who in waking life shows an in
clination to employ abstract and indefinite ex
pressions, but whootherwise has his wits about
him, dreams, in a certain connection, that he
reaches a railway station just as a train is
coming in. But then the platform moves to
wards the train, which stands still; an absurd
inversion of the real state of affairs. This de
tail, again, is nothing more than an indication
to the effect that something else in the dream
must be inverted. The analysis of the- same
dream leads to recollections of picture-books
in which men were represented standing on
their heads and walking on their hands.
4. The same dreamer, on another occasion,
relates a short dream which almost recalls the
technique of a rebus. His uncle gives hima kiss
in an automobile. He immediately adds the in
terpretation, which would never have occurred
to me: it means, auto-erotism. In the waking
state this might have been said in jest.
5. At a New Year's Eve dinner the host,
the patriarch of the family, usheredin the New
Year with a speech. One of his sons-in-law, a
lawyer, was not inclined to take the old man
seriously, especially when in the course of his
speech he expressed himselfas follows: "When
I open the ledger for the Old Year and glance
at its.pages I see everything on the asset side
and nothing, thank the Lord, on the side of Ha-.

[304a]
300
SlGMUND BESEUD
bility; all you children have been a great asset,
none of you a liability." On hearing this the
young lawyer thought of X, his wife's brother,
who was a cheat and a liar, and whom hd had
recently extricated from the entanglements of
the law. That night, in a dream, he saw the New
Year's celebration once more, and heard the
speech, or rather saw it. Instead of speaking,
the old man actually opened the ledger, and on
the side marked assets he saw his name amongst
others, but on the other side, marked liability,
there was the name of his brother-in-law, X.
However, the word liability was changed into
Lie-Ability, which he regarded as X's main
characteristic.1
6. A dreamer treats another person for a
broken bone. The analysis shows that the frac
ture represents a broken marriage vow, etc.
7. In the dream-content the time of day
often represents a certain period of the dream
er's childhood. Thus, for example, 5:15 a.m.
means to one dreamer the age of five years and
three months; when he was that age, a younger
brother was born.
8. Another
representation
of
age
in
a
dream: A woman is walking with two little
girls; there is a difference of fifteen months in
their ages. The dreamer cannot think of any
family of her acquaintance in which this is the
case. She herself interprets it to mean that the
two children represent her own person, and that
the dream reminds her that the two traumatic
events of her childhood were separated by this
period of time (3^ and 4H years).
9. It is not astonishing that persons who are
undergoing psycho-analytic treatment frequent
ly dream of it, and are compelled to give
expression in their dreams to all the thoughts
and expectations aroused by it. The image
chosen for the treatment is as a rule that of a
journey, usually in a motor-car, this being a
modern and complicated vehicle; in the refer
ence to the speed of the car the patient's iron
ical humour is given free play. If the uncon
scious, as an element of waking thought, is to
be represented in the dream, it is replaced, ap
propriately enough, by subterranean localities,
which at other times, when there is no refer
ence to: analytic treatment, have, represented
the female body Or the womb. Below in the
dream very often refers to the genitals, and
its opposite, above, to the face, mouth or breast.
By wild beasts the dream-work usually sym
bolizes passionateimpulses; those of the dream1 Reportedby Brill in his Fundamental Conceptions
of Psychoanalysis.

[304b]
er, and also those of other persons of whom the
dreamer is afraid; or thus, by means of a very
slight displacement, the persons who experi
ence these passions. From this it is not very;far
to the totemistic representation of the dreaded
father by means of vicious animals, dogs, wild
horses,etc. One might say that wild beasts serve
to represent the libido, feared by the ego, and
combated by repression. Even the neurosis
itself, the sick person, is often separated from
the dreamer and exhibited in the dream as an
independent person.
r
One may go so far as to say that the dreamt
work makes use of all the means accessible
to it for the visual representation of the dreamthoughts, whether these appear admissible or
inadmissible to waking criticism, and thus exr
poses itself to the doubt as well as the derision
of all those who have only hearsay knowledge
of dream-interpretation, but have never themt
selves practised it. Stekel's book, Die Sprache
desTraumes, isespecially richin suchexamples,
but I avoid citing illustrations from this worl^
as the author's lack of critical judgment and
his arbitrary technique would make even the
unprejudiced observer feel doubtful.
•io;
From an essay by V. Tausk {<(Kleider
undFarbenim Dienste der Traumdarsteilung,"
in Interna. Zeitschr. fur Ps.A.,ii [1914]):
|
(a) A dreams that he sees his former govr
erness wearing a dress of black lustre, which
fits closely over her buttocks. That means he
declares this woman to be lustful.
(b)
C in a dream sees a girl on the road to
X, bathedin a white light and wearing a white
blouse.
The dreamer began an affair with a Miss
White on this road.
11. In an analysis which I carried out in the
French language I had to interpret a dream in
which I appeared as an elephant. I naturally
had to ask why I was thus represented: "Vous
me trompez," answered the dreamer (Trompe
= trunk).
J
The dream-work often succeeds in represent
ing very refractory material, such as proper
names, by means of the forced exploitation of
very remote relations. In one of my dreams
old Brucke hasset me a task. I make a prepa
ration,and pick somethingout of it which looks
like crumpled tinfoil. (I shall return to this
dream later.) The corresponding association,
which is not easy to find, is stanniol, and now
I know that I have in mind the name of the
author Stannius, which appeared on the titlepage of a treatise on the nervous system of

[305a]
THE iNTERERETAlSONUTQg DREAMS
m*
fishes, whichin myjyoutb-J regarded withreverence.->£Thetost,scientific problem; which;my
teaGher"^t"jne.sdid;aefcuaUy;jjetete:tO:the.;neryous
system iOf•> a fish—ithe- AmmQGoef&s. lObviouslyj
this namercouldtoot be, utilised in rthe>picture-r
puzzle:
=k
.;;;•/
1 Here I must not fail to include a dream with
a curious content, which is worth notingiralso
as the dream of ;a child,: and which & readily
explained hy analysis,; A lady tells- mef: "I can
remember that when=I was a child;:!./repeat
edly dreamed that:,God wore a-cqnkal paper
hat on His head. They\ often -used to-make me
wear such a hat at table* so that .1 shouldn't be
able to look at the plates of the other children
and see how. much they (had received: of any
particular dish; Since I had heard-that-Godwas
omniscient^ :the::dream signified: that I knew
everything in spite ofthe hatwhich-I was,made
toweaf."
'•;••"'
•-.
.•/
What the dream-workconsists in, and its un
ceremonious
handling
of. its
material, j.the
dream-thoughtSj may,be shown in an instruct
tive manner by the numbers /and,calculations
which occur in dreams.: Superstition, by the
way, /regards;numbersras•liaving a special sig
nificance: in dreams;, I shall therefore: give>a
few examples of this-kind from mycollection.
?
i. From the dream of a lady, shortly before
the end of her treatment:
'
:. i
•
'. Sheiwants to pay for something orother; her
daughter stakes 3 florins 65 kreuzet -from her
purse;,buPjtlie>mother-\says: "fflhat^are you
doing?.ItJcosUxmly 2^1 kireuzer??Thisfragment
of the dream was intelligible without further
explanation owing to my knowledge Of the
dreamer's circumstances; The lady was a for
eigner, who had placed hit daughter at school
in Vienna, and was able to continue my treat
ment as long as her daughter rerhained in the
city. In-..;three weeks=the daughter's •scholastic
yearrwouldiend^ and the treatment would then
stop. On the day before the dream the principal
of the^ school ^had £siecllier wh&her,s^cbuld
not decide to leave the child at school for
another year. She had then obvioiisly reflected,
that in this,case she would be ableto continue
the treatment for another year. Now, this is
whatthe d^atn refersto, for a year'is equal to
365 days; the three;weeks remaining before the
end ofthescholastic year, andofthetreatment^
are equivalent to. 21 days'," (tftqugfr- not•'.to\ so
manyhoursof treatment).The nmn^tjals,wMch
in the dre^m-thdughlis refer to periods of time^
are given money values in the dream, and simultaheoiisly adeeper meaning jfih^s bxpressionr^

[305b]
forl time is. money. 365 kreuzerj: pf conrsej are
3 florins 6$ykfeuzer:The Mmatoess ofiftefums
which- appear in-the dream Is >a, selfreyidfi.nt
wish-Mfilrnent:; the. wish has reduc.eci^pth rthe
cost, of tthe?treatment and ;tfee, year's; school
fees.: :yy•;
..";•
:>• -
--7 '-^\ ->nn; ,vl
•r;} &• In another; dreamithenumerals iare ^|n7
volved in even inore;complex relatiqns, A young
lady*who •has: been imarried: for :some ^years^
learns -that an acquaintance; of hers* of-rabput
the salne.age^ Elise.l/y has just becpni%epgaged.
Thereupon/she 'dreamsv^ShA^^ittingymth^
theatre with her hwband,and oneysideyof the
stallsds:quike empty; Her husband tellsjierythak
BliseL and- her fiance* had-also wished to coffte
ta. the: theatre, but, that thesy only could \have
obtained poor seats; three for i florin$o kreuzet•;> andho)* course they could nottake -ikose^he
thinks they didn't lose mm
^r.oj^~
What is-tb&origmof the^iifiomi $p krm%e>X&
AxealJyiindifferentuncide^niof the pj-eyious day.
Ther ;dreamer!s sister-in-lawihad received 15a
florins as a present. fromiJher:!husband,. and
hastened, to get rid of -them hy buyingvsome
jewellery. >Let us note that i$o florins: ijs jog
times i*florin 50 kreuzer. But whence thei 3yin
connection with theseatsvin the theatre?, Ther^
is only one association* for tMs, namely, thati&e
fianceois three monthsv younger than; herself.
When we have ascertained the significance,of
the fact that one side ofrthe-stalls is empty we
have the solution of tthe dreanX.Ihis feature ;is
an undisguisedallusionto a Httle(incident: which
had?given her- husband;a-good ejscuse; for teaming
her. She had1decided to/go tp the theatre, that
week; she had. been careful to:obtain tickets ,a
few days beforehand, and had had to pay the
advance booking-fee; When they got to thethe^
atre they found that one side of the.house was.
almost empty;, so that jshe certainly meed not
have been in such a hurry.
-. I
shall now; substitute the .dream-thoughts
for the dream*: "It surely was nonsense to;mar
ry,so early; thereyt&sMOrneed for niy being in
such aVhurry. From Elise IL's ExampleI see that
I: should*have got a:husband just the samerH
and- one a.hundred times better—If.I had;only
waited (antithesis.to the haste of^ther sisterrinbw)v-.I/could have bought three such men for
the: money /(the dowry) P^Our attention 71s:
drawn to the fact that the numerals .in ,$us
dream have, changed their-meanings,and them
relations, to a much greater extent than inthe
one. previously considered. The transforming
and distorting activity of. the dream hasiin this
case been greater-r^a fact which we intetpret

[306a]
302
Sigmund Freud
as meaning that these dream-thoughts had to
overcome an unusual degree of endo-psychic
resistance before they attained to representa
tion. And we must not overlook the fact that
the dream contains an absurd element, name
ly, that two persons are expected to take three
seats. It will throw some light on the question
of the interpretation of absurdity in dreams if
I remark that this absurd detail of the dreamcontent is intended to represent the most strong
ly emphasized of the dream-thoughts: "It was
nonsense to marry so early." The figure 3,
which occurs in a quite subordinate relation be
tween the two persons compared (three months'
difference in their ages), has thus been adroit
ly utilized.tp. produce the idea of nonsense re
quired by the dream. The reduction of the
actual 150 florins to 1 florin 50 kreuzer cor
respondsto the dreamer'sdisparagement of her
husband in her suppressed thoughts.
3. Another example displays the arithmet
ical powers of dreams, which have brought
them into such disrepute. A man dreams: He
is sitting in the B's house (the B's are a fami
ly with Which he was formerly acquainted),
and he says: "It was nonsense that you didn't
give me Amy for my wife" Thereupon, he
asks the girl: "How old are you?" Answer:
"I was bom in 1882" "Ah, then you are 28
years'M?**
Since the dream was dreamed in the year
1898, this is obviously bad arithmetic, and the
inability of the dreamer to calculate may, if
it-cannot be^otherwise explained, be likened to
that of a general paralytic. My patient was one
of those men who cannot help thinking about
every woman they; see. The-patient who <for
some months came next after him in my con
sulting-room was a young lady; he met this
lady after he had constantly asked about her,
and he was very anxious to make a good im
pression on her. This was the lady whose age
he estimated at 28. So much for explaining the
result of his apparent calculation. But 1882
was the year in which he had married. He had
been unable^ta refrain from entering into-conve$satidn?wit$^^
women -whom*he
met at my house—the two by no means youth
ful maids who alternately opened the door to
him—and as he did not find them very respon
sive, he had told himself that they probably
regarded him as elderly and serious.
Bearing in mind these examples, and others
of a similar nature (to follow), we may say:
The
dream-work does not calculate at all,
whether correctly or incorrectly; it only strings

[306b]
together, in the form of a sum, numerals which
occur in the dream-thoughts, and which may
serve as allusions to material which is insus
ceptible of representation. It thus deals with
figures, as material for expressing its intentions,
just as it deals with all other concepts, and
with names and speeches which are only verbal
images.1
For the dream-work cannot compose a new
speech. No matter how many speeches and an
swers, which may in themselves be sensible or
absurd, may occur in dreams, analysis shows
us that the dream has merely taken from the
dream-thoughts fragments of speeches which
have really been delivered or heard, and has
dealt with them in the most arbitrary fashion.
It has not only 'torn them ^romtheir xontext
and mutilated them, accepting one fragment
and rejecting another, but it has often fitted
them together in a novel manner, so that the
speech which seems coherent in a dream is dis
solved by analysis into three or four compos
nents. In this new application of the words the
dream has often ignored the meaning which
they had in the dream-thoughts, and has drawn
an entirely new meaning from them.1 Upon
closer inspection, the more distinct and com
pact ingredients of the dream-speech may be
distinguished from others, whidL^era^a&xonneetTvesfand'Tiave probably been supplied, just
as we supply omitted letters and syllables in
reading. The dream-speech thus has the struc
ture of breccia, in which the larger pieces of
various vmaterial^ai'o held together by a soli
dified cohesive medium.
i
Strictly speaking, of course, this description
is correct only for those«.drean>speeches*whiob
have something of the sensory character of a
speech, and are described as speeches.
The
others, which have not, as it were, been per
ceived as heard or spoken (which have no ac
companying acoustic or motor emphasis in the
1 Analyses of
other numerical dreams have been
given by Jung, Marcinowski and others. Such dreams
often
involve
very complicated arithmetical opera
tions, which are^mme thejess-salwckby^e^dreamer
with astonishing confidence. Cf. also Ernest Jones,,
"OberrWM&ewusste ^ZaMen^ekefidimtg"' Zeritrdlb? fUr
Psychoanalyse, 4, ii, [1912], p. 241).
1
Neurosis behaves in the same fashion.
I know a
patient
who—involuntarily
and
unwillingly—hears
(hallucinates) songs or fragments of songs without be
ing able to understand their significance for her psychic
life. She is certainly not a paranoiac. Analysis shows
that by exercising a certain license she gave the text
of these songs a false application. "Oh, thou blissful
one!
Oh, thou happy one!" This is the first line of
Christmas carol, but by not continuing it to the Word,
Christmastide, she turns it into a bridal song, etc. The
same mechanism of distortion may operate, without
hallucination, merely in association.

[307a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
dream) are simply thoughts, such as occur in
our waking life, and find their way unchanged
into many of our dreams. Our reading, too,
seems to provide an abundant and not easily
traceable source for the indifferent speech-ma
terial of dreams. But anything that is at all con
spicuous as a speech in a dream can be referred
to actual speeches which have been made or
heard by the dreamer.
We have already found examples of the deri
vation of such dream-speeches in the analyses
of dreams Whi<ih have been cited for other pur
poses. Thus, in the innocent market-dream (p.
213) where the speech: That is no longer to be
had .serves to.Jdentify me with.the butcher,
while a, fragment of the, other, speech^ I don't
know that, I don't take that, precisely fulfils
the task of rendering the dream innocent. On
the previous day, the dreamer, replying to some
unreasonable demand on the part of her cook,
had waved her aside with the words: /
don't
know that, behave yourself properly, and she
afterwards took into the dream the first, indif
ferent-sounding part of the speech in order to
allude to the latter part, which fitted well in
to the phantasy underlying the dream, but
which might also have betrayed it.
Here is one of many examples which all lead
to the same conclusion:
A largecotirtyard irrwhtehrdead bodies are
being burned. The dreamm-says, "I'm gomg,I
can't stand the sight of it." (Not a distinct
speech.) Then he meets two butcher boys and
asks, "Well, did it taste good?" And one of
them answers, "No, it wasn't good" As though
it had been human flesh.
The innocent occasion of this dream is as
follows: After taking supper with his wife, the
dreamer pays a visit to his worthy but by no
means appetizing neighbour. The hospitable old
lady is just sitting down to her own supper, and
presses him (among men a composite, sexually
significant word is used jocosely in the place
of this word) to taste it. He declines, saying
that he has no< appetite. She replies: "Go on
with you,
you can manage it all right," or
something of the kind. The dreamer is thus
forced to taste and praise what is offered him.
"But that's good!" When he is alone again
with his wife, he complains of his neighbour's
importunity, and of the-craality of"the food
which he has tasted. "I can't stand the sight
of it," a phrase that in the dream, too, does
not emerge as an actual speech, is a thought
relating to the physical charms ofthe lady who
invites him, which may be translated by the

[307b]
303
statement that he has no desire to look at her.
The analysis of another dream^-which I will
cite at this stage for the sake of a very dis
tinct speech, which constitutes its nucleus, but
which will be explained only when we come to
evaluate the affects in dreams^-is more instruc
tive. I dream very vividly:
I have gone to
Brucke's laboratory at night, and on hearing a
gentle knocking at the door, I open it to (the
deceased) Professor Fleischl,who enters in the
company of several strangers, and after saying
a few words sits down at his table. Then follows
a second dream: My friend Fl has come to Vi*
enna, unobtrusively, in July; I meet him in the
street,,Jn^(Mn®ezs8tiott^w^
friend P, awLI go, with,them somewhere, and
they sit down facing each other as though at a
small table, while I sit facing them at the nar*
row end of the table. Fl speaks of his sister,
and says: "In three-quarters of an hour she
was dead," and then something like "That is the
threshold." As P does not understand him, Fl
turns to me, and asks me how much I have fold
P of his affairs. At this, overcome by strange
emotions, I try to tell Fl that P (cannot pos
sibly know anything, of course, because he) is
not alive. But noticing the mistake myself, I
say: "Non vixit." Then I look searchingly atP,
and under my gaze he becomes pale and blurred,
and his eyerturnra sickly blue—and atlasVhe
dissolves._/,te:JQJce^eatly at this; I now un^
derstand that Ernst Fleischl, too, is only an ap
parition, a revenant, and I find that it is quite
possible that such a person should exist only
so long as one wishes him to, and that he can
be made to disappear by the wish of another
person.
This very pretty dream unites so many of
the enigmatical characteristics of the dreamcontent—the criticism made in the dream itself,
inasmuch as I myself notice my mistake in
saying Non vixit instead of Non vivit, the un
constrained intercourse with deceased persons*
whom the dream itself declares to be dead, the
absurdity of my: conclusion, and the intense
satisfaction which it gives me—that "I would
give my life" to expound the complete solution
pf the problem. But in reality I am incapable of
doing what I do in the dream, i.e*, of sacrific
ing such intimate friends tQjny-ambdtion^And
if T attempted to disguise the facts, the true
meaning of the dream, with which I am per
fectly familiar, would be spoiled. I must there
fore be content to select a few of the elements
of the dream for interpretation, some here, and
some at a later stage.

[308a]
i?Th& scerieoini which .1 annihilate) Pi:wifchr-&
glance'forinsthe cehtrexrfthe dreamcuHis e^es
become strange and weirdly blue, arid)then he
dissolves. This" scene Is an unmistakable. imitaM
tion of a scene!that was actually-exi5erieticed4
I was a demonstrator at the PhysiologicalIn^
stitute; I was'on: dutyrin the mOrning, and
Brikke learnedthafoomseveral •occasions Lhacl
been unpunctuaPinmy attendancef afcfhe stu?.
dents' laboratory.£|hemdfning, therefore, he aririved at the*hour of opening, and waited for me.
What he -said to me wa&brief and to the point ;>
but it was not what he skid: that mattered;
What overwhelmed tne was the terrible gaze
of his blue>eyes, before which I melted away-^.
as P.does in- the dream,.\for P has exchanged
roles withinej much to my relief.i^Anyone who
remembers the%esvof?$h&. great master, which
were wohderfully beautiful even in his old age;
and hasvever seen him: angered, will readily
imagine the emotions of the young transgressor*
on that occasion.
;
H
But for a long while I was unable to account
for the Nonvixit with which; I pass sentence in.
the dteam.rFinalry, I remembered that the rea
son Why these twovwords were so distinct in
the dream was not because they were heard
or spoken^ but because": they were seen.Then I
knew at once where they came from/ On the
pedestal of the statue of the Emperor Joseph
in the Vienna Hofburg: are inscribed the iofa.
lowing beautiful words:
^
Saluti patriae vixit
non diu sed totus.1
A "
From this inscription I had taken what fitted
one inimical train of thought in my dreamthoughts, and which was" intended to mean:
"That fellow has nothing to say in the matter,
he is not really alive?' And I now recalled that
the dream was dreamed a few days after the
unveiling of the memorial tb Fleischl, in the1
cloisters of! the University, upon which occa
sion I
had once more seen the memorial to
Briicke, and must have thought with regret (in
the unconscious) how my gifted friend P, with
all* his devotion to science, had by his prema
ture death forfeited his just claimtio a memorial in these halls; So I set up thisMemorial to
x.TheAinscription iw fact reads: :
r
\
r.
Saluti publicae vixit^
..'.-'".
pondmsedtotus.
,
" [He lived1 .for the safety'of the public, riot for a
long time,* huttalwa£$«]
"••'••
'"
'
The- motive of-the mistake; patriae [fatherland] for,
pubiicae, has
probably t)een correctly divined by
Wittels.
-
r-'
"

[308b]
Mm; m theidream; ^dse^fe^m^^Men* -P's bapi^
tistrial^ame;?^ iiWt hn'i Iw .;.};; ^;•:•-.•.,
.;
-According"to^the ^nles^*of •di?eam-interfretatibny I shouldstill hot be justified in replacing
nonmvitywhich I need; by<rioni)ixit, "tfhich is
placed at my disposal- by the:recollectforiro'f "the
Kaiser Josef memorial; Sbrrie-othe*- element*^of
the dream-ithoughtsrmusthave contributed to
make this possible. Somethingnow*calls iriy ate
tendon^to-the"Sact that in ^e droanrscehe two
trains of thought relating to My friend P meet*
one hostile, the other affectioriate^the formed
on'thesurface," the latter covered*upland both
are given represehta,tibn• in >the same^wordst
iwritiixk. As my friend P has-deservedwell of
science, I erect a memorial to hirn^as he!has
been -guilty of a malicious wish (expressed >at
the end of the drearn),-! annihilate him. Thave
here^constructed a sentence with a special ca
dence, and in doing so I must havd-been in^-
fluenced by some existing model.- But where1
can I find a similar antithesis, a similar paral
lel between two opposite reactiohs to the sanie
persohyboth of which canrclaim to be wholly
justified, and which nevertheless do
• not afc
tempt to affect one another? Only iri one >pas4sage which, however, makes a profound impress
sion tipori the reader—-Bputus's speech of-jus
tification in Shakespeare's Julius Caesar:f-As1
Caesar loved me, I weep for him; as he was
fortunate, I rejoice at it; as he was valiant; I
honour him; but as he waV ambitious, I slew
him." Have we not here the same verbal struc
ture, and the same antithesis of thought, as in
the dream-thoughts? So I am playing Brutus
in my dream. If only I could iind in my dreamthoughts another collateral connection to•con
firm this! I think it;might be the following!:
My friend: Fl comes id Viennain July* This de
tail is hot the case in reality. To my knowledge,
my friend has never been^in Vienna in July^
But the month of July is named after Julms
Caesar, and might' therefore very well furnish
the
required
allusion
to
the
intermediate
thought—^thatI am playing the part of-Brutus.3
Strangely enough, I once "did actually play
the part of Brutus. When I^was a boy of four
teen^ I presented the scene between Brutus and
Caesar in Schiller's poem to an audience of
children: with the assistance of my nephew,
who was a yearolder than Iy and who had come
to us from Englartd-^arid was thus a revenani-^
2As an example of ovef-tleterniinatidri: My excuse
for coming late was that a-fter working late into the
night, in.the mprnrng-Jhad to .make the; long journey
from Kaiser-Jbsef-Strass^ to Wahririgef'Strasse.
- *'And alsbyCdesar^Kais&i11 i: •>•'''*

[309a]
THE iNTERPiRETATION OF DREAMS
305
for In him I recognized the playmate of my
early childhood. Until the end of my third year
we had been inseparable; we had loved each
other and fought each other and, as I have al
ready hinted, this childish relation has deter
mined all my later feelings in my intercourse
with persons of my own age. My nephew John
has since then had many incarnations, which
have revivified first one and then another aspect
of a character that is ineradicably fixed in my
unconscious memory. At times he must have
treated me very badly, and I must have op
posed my tyrant courageously, for in later
years I was often told of a short speech in
which I defended myself when my father—his
grandfather—called me to account: "Why did
you hit John?" "/ hit him because he hit me."
It must be this childish scene which causes mom
vivit to become non vixit, for in the language
of later childhood striking is known as wichsen
(German: wichsen—to polish, to wax; i.e., to
thrash); and the dream-work does not disdain
to take advantage of such associations.
My
hostility towards my friend P, which has so lit
tle foundation in reality—he was greatly my
superior, and might therefore have been a new
edition of my old playmate—may certainly be
traced to my complicated relations with John
during our childhood. I shall, as I have said,
return to this dream later on.
G. Absurd Dreams—Intellectual
Performances in Dreams
I
Hitherto, in our interpretation of dreams, we
have come upon the element of absurdity in the
dream-content so frequently that we must no
longer postpone the investigation of its cause
and its meaning. We remember, of course, that
the absurdity of dreams has furnished the Op
ponents of dream-interpretation with their chief
argument for regarding the dream as merely
the meaningless product of an attenuated and
fragmentary activity of the psyche.
I will begin with a few examples in which
the absurdity of the dream-content is apparent
only, disappearing when the dream is more
thoroughly examined. These are certain dreams
which—accidently, one begins by thinking—
are concerned with the dreamer's dead father.
1. Here is the dream of a patient who had
lost his father six years before the date of the
dream:
His father had been involved in a terrible ac
cident. He was travelling by the night express
when the train was derailed, the seats were tele

[309b]
scoped, and his head was crushed from side to
side. The dreamer sees him lying on his bed;
from his left eyebrow a wound runs vertically
upwards. The dreamer is surprised that his fa
ther should have metwith anaccident (since he
is dead already,as the dreamer adds.in relating
his dream). His father's eyes are so clear:
According' to the prevailing standards of
dream-criticism, this dream-content would be
explained as follows: At first, while the dreamer
is picturing his father's accident, he has for
gotten that his father has already been-many
years in his grave; in the course of the dfearn
this memory awakens, so that he is surprised
at his own dream even while he is dreaming it.
Analysis, however, tells us that it is quite su
perfluous to seek for such explanations. The
dreamer had commissioned a sculptor to make
a bust of his father, and he had inspected the
bust two days before the dream. It is this which
seems to him to have come to grief (the Ger
man word means gone wrong or met with an
accident). The sculptor has never seen his fath
er, and has had to work from photographs. On
the very day before the dream the son had sent
an old family servant to the studio in order
to'see whether he, too, would pass the same
judgment upon the marble bust—namely, that
it was too narrow between the temples. And
how follows the memory-material which has
contributed to the formation of the dream i
The ;dreamer's father had a habit, whenever
he was harassed by business cares or domestic
difficulties, of pressing his temples between his
hands, as though his head was growing too large
and he was trying to compress it. When the
dreamer was four years old, he was present
when a pistol was accidentally discharged, and
his father's eyes were blackened (his eyes are
so clear). When his father was thoughtful or
depressed, he had a deep furrow in his fore
head just where the dream shows his wound.
The fact that in the dream this wrinkle is re
placed by a wound points to the second occa
sion for the dream. The dreamer had taken a
photograph of his Httle daughter; the plate
had fallen from his hand, and when he picked
it upit revealed a crack which ran like a verti
cal furrow across the child's forehead, extend
ing as far as the eyebrow. He could not help
feeling a superstitious foreboding, for on the
day before his mother's death the negative of
her portrait had been cracked.
Thus, the absurdity of this dream is simply
the result of a carelessness of verbal expression,
which does not distinguish between the bust or

[310a]
306
Sigmund Freud
the photograph and the original. We are all ac
customed to makingremarks like: "Don't you
think it's exactly your father?" The appear
ance of absurdity in this dream might, of course,
have been easily avoided. If it were permissible
to form an opinion on the strength of a single
case, one might be tempted to say that this
semblanceof absurdity is admitted or even de
sired.
II
Here is another example of the same kind from
my own dreams (I lost my father in the year
1896):
After his death, my father has played a part
in the political life of the Magyars, and has
united them into a political whole; and here I
see, indistinctly, a httle picture: a number of
men, as though in the Reichstag; a man is
standing on one or two chairs; there are others
round about him. I remember that on his death
bed he looked so like Garibaldi, and I am glad
that this promise has really come true.
Certainly this is absurd enough.
It was
dreamed at the time when the Hungarians were
in a state of anarchy, owing to Parliamentary
obstruction, and were passing through the crisis
from, which Koloman Szell subsequently de
livered them. The trivial circumstance that the
scenes beheld in dreams consist of such little
pictures is not without significance for the
elucidation of
this element. The customary
visual dream-representations of our thoughts
present images that impress us as being lifesize; my dream-picture, however, is the repro
duction of a wood-cut inserted in the text of
an illustrated history.of Austria, representing
Maria Theresa in the Reichstag of Pressburg
«—the famous
scene of Moriamur pro rege
nostro.1 Like Maria Theresa, my father, in my
dream, is surrounded by the multitude; but he
is standing on one or two chairs (Stiihlen), and
is thus, like a Stuhlrichter (presiding judge).
(He has united them; here the intermediary is
the phrase: "We shall need no judge.") Those
of us who stood about my father's death-bed did
actually notice that he looked very like Garibal
di. He had a post-mortem rise of temperature;
his cheeks shone redder and redder
involun
tarily we continue: "And behind him, in unsub1 [We die for our king.] I have forgotten in what
author I found a reference to a dream which was over
run with unusually small figures, the source of which
proved to be one of the engravings of Jacques Callot,
which
the
dreamer
had examined
during
the
day.
These
engravings contain an
enormous
number
of
very small figures; a whole series of them deals with
the horrors of the Thirty Years War.

[310b]
stantial (radiance), lay that which subdues us
all—the common fate."
This uplifting of our thoughts' prepares*.us
for the fact that we shall have to deal with this
common fate. The post-mortem rise in temper
ature corresponds to the words after his death
in the dream-content. The most agonizing of
his afflictions had been a complete paralysis
of the intestines (obstruction) during the last
few weeks of his life. All sorts of disrespectful
thoughts associate themselves with this. One
of my contemporaries, who lost his father while
still at the Gymnasium—upon which occasion I
was profoundly moved, and tendered him my
friendship—once told me, derisively, of the-distress of a relative whose father had died in
the street, and had been brought home, when
it appeared, upon undressing the corpse, that
at the moment of death, or post-mortem, an
evacuation of the bowels (Stuhlentleerung) had
taken place. The daughter was deeply distressed
by this circumstance, because this ugly detail
would inevitably spoil her memory of her fa
ther. We have now penetrated to the wish that
is embodied in this dream. To stand after one's
death.before one's children great and. unde
nted: who would not wish that? What now has
become of the absurdity of this dream? The
appearance of absurdity was due only to the
fact that
a perfectly permissible figure of
speech, in which we are accustomed to ignore
any absurdity that may exist as between its
components, has been faithfully represented in
the dream. Here again we can hardly deny that
the appearance of absurdity is desired and has
been purposely produced.
The frequency with which dead persons ap^-
pearin our dreamsas.livingand<aefee-anda&-
sociating with us has evoked undue astonish
ment, and some curious explanations, which
afford conspicuous proof of our misunderstand
ing of dreams. And yet the explanation of these
dreams is close at hand. How often it happens
that we say to ourselves: "If my father were
still alive, what would he say to this?"
The
dream can express this if in no other way than
by his presence in a definite situation. Thus,
lor instance, a young man whose grandfather
has left him a great inheritance dreams that
the old man is alive, and calls his grandson to
account, reproaching him for his lavish expen
diture. What we regard as an objection to the
dream on account of our better knowledge that
the man is already dead, is in reality the con
soling thought that the dead man does not need
to learn the truth, or satisfaction over, the fact

[311a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
that he can no longer have a say in the matter.
Another form of absurdity found in dreams
of deceased relatives does not express scorn and
derision; it serves to express the extremest re
pudiation,; the representation of a suppressed
thought which one would like to believe the
very last thing one would think of. Dreams
of this kind appear to be capable of solution
only if we remember that a dream makes ho
distinction between desire and reality. For ex
ample, a man Who nursed his father during
his last illness, and who felt his death very
keenly, dreamed some time afterwards the fol
lowing senseless dream: His father was again
living, and conversing with him' as usud,t)ut
(and this was -the.remarkable.". thing) he had
nevertheless diedy though he did riot know it:
This dream is intelligible if, after he had nev
ertheless died, we insert in consequence of the
dreamer's wish, and if after but he did not know
it, we add that the dreamer had entertained
this wish. While nursing him, the son had often
wished that his father was dead; that is, he had
had the really compassionate thought that it
would be a good thing if death would at last
put an end to his sufferings.
While he was
mourning his father's death, even this com
passionate wish
became an unconscious re
proach, as though it had really contributed to
shorten the sick man's life: By the awakening
of the earliest infantile feelings against his
father, it became possible to express this re
proach as a dream; and it was'precisely be
cause Of the extreme antithesis between the
dream-instigator
and the day-thoughts that
this dream had to assume so absurd a form.1
As a general thing, the dreams of a deceased
person of whom the dreamer has been fond
confront the interpreter with difficult problems,
the solution of which is not always satisfying.
The reason for this may be sought in the es
pecially
pronounced
ambivalence
of
feeling
which controls the relation of the dreamer to
the dead person. In such dreams it is quite
usual for the deceased person to be treated at
first as living; then it suddenly appears that
he is dead; and in the continuation of the dream
he is once more living. This has a confusing ef
fect. I at last divined that this alternation of
death and life is intended to represent the in
difference of the dreamer ("It is all One to me
whetherhe is alive or dead"). This indifference^
of course, is not real, but wished; its purpose
is to help the dreamer to deny his very intense
1 Cf. "Formulations regarding the Two Principles in
Mental Functioning," Collected Papers, iv.

[311b]
307
and often contradictory emotional- attitudes,
and so it becomes the dream-representation of
his ambivalence. For other dreams in which
one meets with deceased persons the following
rule will often be a guide: If in the dream the
dreamer is not reminded that the dead person
is dead, he sets himself on a par with theJdead;
he dreams of hi&own death. The sudden reali
zation or astonishment in the dream ("but he
has long been dead!") is a protest against this
identification, and rejects the meaning that the
dreamer is dead. But I will admit that I feel
that dream-interpretation is far from having
elicited all :the secrets of dreams having this
content.
.
: -
>
?
HI!
• .'-
. :—-,- vrr:
In the example which I shall now cite, ?I can
detect the dreams-work in the.act of purposely
manufacturing an: absurdity for which there is
no occasion whatever in the dream-material. It
is taken from the dream which I had as a re
sult of meeting Count Thun just before going
away on a holiday../ am driving in a cab, and
I tellythe driver to drive to a railway station.
"Of course, T can't drive with you on the rail*
way track itself," I say, after the driver had re
proached me, as though I had worn him out; at
the same time, it seems as though I had al
ready madewith hima journey that oneusually
makes by train. Of this confused and senseless
story analysis gives the following explanation:;
During the day I had hired a cab to take me
to a demote street in Dornbach. The driver,
however, did not know the way, and simply
kept on driving, in the manner of such worthy
people, until I became aware of the fact and
showed him the way, indulging in a few deri
sive remarks.
From this driver a train of
thought led to the aristocratic personage whom
I was to meet later on. For the present, I will
only remark that one thing that strikes us mid
dle-class plebeians about the aristocracy is that
they like to put themselves in the driver's seat.
Does not Count Thun guide the Austrian carof
State? yThe next sentence in the dream, how
ever, refers to my brother, whom I thus also
identify with the cab-driver. I had refused to
go to Italy with him this year (Of course, I
can't drive with you on the railway track itself),
and this refusal was a sort of punishment for
his accustomed complaint that I usually wear
him out on this tour (this finds its way into
the
dream
unchanged)
by rushing him
too
quickly from place to place, and making him
see too many beautiful things in a single day.
That evening my brother had accompanied me

[312a]
308
Sigmund Freud
to the railway station, but shortly before the
carriage had reached the Western station of-the
Metropolitan Railway he had jumped out in
order to take the train to Purkersdorf. I sug
gested to him that he might remain with me a
little longer, as he did not travel to Purkers^
dbrf by the; Metropolitan but by the Western
Railway. This is why, in my dream, I made in
the cab a journey which one usually makes by
train. In reality/ however, it was the other way
about: what I told my brother was: "The dis^-
tance which; you travel on the-Metropolitan
Railway you could; travel in my company on
the Western Railway^" The whole.'confusion;0f
the dream is therefore due to the fact thatin
my dream I replace "Metropolitan Railway" by
cab, iwhich, toibersure, !dbes" good:service dn
bringing the drivef •and imy brotherfinto cbnjunetibn.11!then ielicit from the dream some
nonsense which fs hardly-disentangled by elu
cidation, and which almost constitutes a contra
diction of my earlier speech (Of wurse,! can
not drive with you onthe railway trackitself):
Bubas I have no: excuse whatever vfor confront
ing the Metropolitan Railway' with the :cab, I
must intentionally have given the whole enig
matical story this peculiar form^in my^drearri.
But with what intention? We shall now
learn what the absurdity in the dream signifies^
and the: motives #hich;admitted it ©recreated
iti^In -this "case the> solution of the^mystery
is
as follows: In the dream T 'need an ab
surdity, ••and something incomprehensible, in
connection with driving (Fdhren=*rMing, driv*
ing) because in the dream-thoughts-I have*a
certain opinion that demands representationi
One evening;at the house of the witty and hos
pitable lady who appears, in another scene of
the same dream, as the housekeeper, I heard
two riddles which I could not solve. As they
were known to the other members of the par
ty; I presented a somewhat ludicrous figure in
my unsuccessful" attempts to find the solutions;
They were ttob^ puns turning' On the1 words
Nackkommen (to obey or^ders-^offspring)1 and
Vorfahren (to drive—forefathers, ^ancestry^;
They ran, I believe, as -follows:
-
,
The
coachman d^es it
.
At the mdstefs behests;
, '
Everyone has it;
""
In the.jpave Uresis;
\
?
"
.
-
(Vorfahren)
Aiconfnsing detail was that the first halves of
the two riddles were identical:

[312b]
The coachman does it
At the master's behests;
Not everyone has it,
In the cradle it rests.
(Nachkommen)
When I saw Count Thun drive up (vorfahren)
in state, and fell into the Figaro-like mood, in
which one finds that the sole merit of such
aristocratic gentlemen is that they have taken
the trouble to be born (to- become Nachkom
men)jrthese.;: two riddles became intermediary
thoughts for. the. dream-work,, As aristoeratSs
may readily be replaced bycoacimen, andsinc£
it was, once the custom to call a coachman Herr
Schwager- (brother-in-Ja^)) the work-of con
densation could involve omybrpther?in the same
representation^ But the dreamrthought at work
in the background is as follows: It is nonsense
to be proud of one's ancestors (Vorfahren). I
would rather be an ancestor (yorfahr) myself. On account of ithis opinion, it is nonsense,
we;have the nonsense in the dream. ,And no^
the last riddle in this obscure passage of the
dream, is: splved^^namely that I have; driven
before (vorher gefahren, vorgefahren)
with
this driver.
.... Thusy a dream is made absurd if there oc
curs-in:,the cl^eam-thoughts, as, one of the ele
ments[of the contents, the. opmipn: "That is
nonsense"; and, in general,; if criticismsand
derision are the motives of one of the dread
er's unconscious trains of rthpughtj: Hence*
absurdity iis; one of the means by which tfy§
dreamrwork represents contradiction; another
means is the inversion of material relation be-r
tween the dream-thoughts and the dream-con
tent; another is the employment of the feeling
of motor inhibition. But the absurdity, of »a
dream is not to be translated by a simple no;
it is ^intended to reproduce the tendency of
the dream-thoughts to-express laughter or de
rision simultaneously with the contradiction.
Only witk this intention does the dream-work
produce anything ridiculous; Here again it
transforms a part of the latent content into a
manifest form,1
As a matter of fact j we have already cited
1 Here the dream-work parodies the thought which
it qualifies as ridiculous, in that' it creates something
ridiculous in;relation to it. Heine-doea the same thing
when he wishes id.deride the bad rhymes of the King
of Bavaria. He does it 'by using even worse rhymes:
Herr Ludwig ist' ein grosser Poet
-i •
JJndsingt et, so stiir.zt Apollo ,
Vor ihm auf die Knie una bitiet und fleht,
Halt ein,ich werde sonst toll, ohl

[313a]
The Interpretation oe Dreams
3©9
a convincing example of this significance of an
absurd dream. The dream (interpreted without
analysis). of the Wagnerian performance which
lasted until 7.45 a.m.,and in which the orchestra
is conducted from a tower, etc. (see p. 278),
is obviously saying: It is a crazy world and an
insane society. He who deserves a thing doesn't
get it, and he who doesn't care for it does get
it. In this way the dreamer compares her fate
with that of her cousin. The fact that dreams
of a dead father were the first to furnish us with
examples of absurdity in dreams is by no means
accidental. The conditions for the creation of
absurd dreams are here grouped together in a
typical fashion. The authority proper to the
father has at; an early age evoked the crhicism
of the child, and the strict demands which he
has made have caused the child, in self-defence,
to pay particularly close attention to every
weakness of his father's; but the piety.with
which the father's personality is surrounded in
our thoughts, especially after his death; intent
sifies the censorship which prevents the expres
sion of this criticism from becoming conscious;
Here is another absurd dream of a deceased
father;
y
-./
•
,.
I receive a communication from the town;
council of my native city concerning, the cost
of accommodation in the hospital in 'the year
1851. This was necessitate^ byya seizure' foom
which I was suffering. I make fun of the^mftt^
ter for, in the first place,! was not yet bornin
1851, and in the second place, my father, to
whom the communication might refer, is .al
ready dead.J go to himin the adjoining room,
where he is lying in bed, and tell him about it.
To my surprisehe remembers that in the year
1851. he was once drunk,and had to,be locked
up or confined.,It;was when,he was,working
for the firm of T,^ "Then you/toOy used to
drink?" I ask,>"You married soon after?" I
reckon that I was born in 1856, which seems to
me to be immediately afterwards. 0.
In the light of the foregoing exposition, we
shall translate the insistence with which this
dream exhibits its: absurdities as a sure sign of
a particularly embittered and passionate po^
lemic in the dream-thoughts. AH the greater^
then, is our astonishment when we perceive
thatin this dream the polemic is waged openly,
and that my father is denoted as the person
who is made a iaughmg-stock; Such frankness
seemsito contradict our assumption^of a< censor

[313b]
ship controlling .the ;drear4-workc Tlie explana
tion :is 1that here the father is only an inter
posed: figure, while the quarrel is really with
another person, Who appears in the dream only
in a single allusion. Whereas a drearn usually
treats of revolt against other persons, behind
whom •the father is concealed,; ;here it is-.the
other way about: the father serves as the :man
of straw to represent another, and hence the
dream dares to concern itself openly i..withra
person who is usually-hallowed, because there
is present the certain knowledge that he is not
in reality intended. We learn of this condition
of affairs by considering/the occasion/of the
dream; It was dreamed after.I had heard that
an older .colleague, whose judgment was eon*
sidered :.infallible,; -had expressed >disapproval
and :astonishment on hearing that' one of~my
patients:had already been undergoing psychbf
analytic treatment at my hands for;five years.
The introductory sentencesJof the drea'm allude
hi-atransparently disguised hianner to thefaet
that this colleague badf for a. time taken over
the duties which my father could ^io longer
perform (statement of>expenses, accpmmodaition in the hospital); and?when bur frierldly jrer
lations began to alter for the worse: I was
thrown irito: the same emotional conflict as
that which' arises in the lease? of a misunderstandiiig between father and son-(by reason of
the part played by the ;father/iand:his earlier
functions). The dream-thoughts .riowf bitterly
resent the reproach that I am not making?bet
ter ;progress, which extends itself: from: the
treatment of this patient to: other things:iDoes
my colleague know anyone who can get on any
faster? Does he not know that conditions: of
this sort ate usually incurable and last for life?
What are four or five years: in comparison to
a whole Hfetime, especially, when life has ibeen
made so much easier for the patient:during-the
treatment?
;
-;(-
'-~:
The-impression of absurdity in this dream is
brought about largely by the :faet thati sen
tences from different divisions of ithe dreanithoughts are strung together without any recon
ciling: transition. Thus, the-,sentence, I go to
him in the adjoining'room, etc., leaves the sub
ject from which the preceding sentences are
taken, and; faithfully reproduces the drcuin^
stances? under which J told my father that/1
was engaged to be married; Thus the}dreanr is
trying to remind me of the .noble disinterested
ness1 which the .old man showerd at that 'tiriie,
and to contrast this with the •conduct; of an*

[314a]
310
SlGMUND
other newly-introduced person. I now perceive
that the dream is allowed to make fun of my
father because in the dream-thoughts, in the
full recognition of his merits, he is held up as
an example to others. It is in the nature of
every censorship that one is permitted to tell
untruths about forbidden things rather than
the truth. The next sentence, to the effect that
my father remembers that he was once drunk,
and was locked*up- in"consequence,''-contains
nothing that really relates to my father any
more. The person who is screened by him is
here a no less important personage than the
great Meynert, in whose footsteps I followed
with such veneration, and whose attitude towards^me^.after a^sshort^peri
changed into one of undisguised hostility. The
dream recalls to me his own statement that in
his youth he^iad at one time ^brmed-therhaljit
of intoxicating himself with chloroform, with
the result that he had to enter a sanatorium;
and also my second experience with him, shortly
before his death. I had an embittered literary
controversy with him in reference to masculine
hysteria, the existence of which he denied, and
when I visited him during his last illness, and
asked him how he felt, he described his condi
tion at some length, and concluded with the
words: "You know, I have always been one of
the prettiest cases of masculine hysteria." Thus,
to my satisfaction, and to my astonishment, he
admitted what he so long and so stubbornly
denied. But the fact that in this scene of my
dream I can use my father to screen Meynert is
explained not by any discovered analogy ber
tween the two persons, but by the fact that it
is the brief yet perfectly adequate representa
tion of a conditional sentence in the dreamthoughts which, if fully expanded, would read
as follows: "Of course, if I belonged to the
second generation, if I were the son of a pro
fessor or a privy councillor, I
should have
progressed more rapidly." In my dream I make
my father a professor and a privy councillor.
The most obvious and most annoying absurdity
of the dream lies in the treatment of the date
1851, which seems to me to be indistinguish*
able from 1856, as though a difference of five
years meant nothing whatever. But it is just
this-one'of the -dream-thoughts ~that requires
expression. Four or five years—that is precisely
the length of time during which I enjoyed the
support of the colleague mentipned at th&outr
set; but it is also the duration of time I kept
my fiancee waiting before I married her; and
by a coincidence that is eagerly exploited by

[314b]
Freud
the dream-thoughts, it is also the time I have
kept my oldest patient waiting for a complete
cure. "What are five years?" ask the dreamthoughts. "That is no time at all to me, that
isn't worth consideration. I have time enough
ahead of me, and just as what you wouldn't
believe came true at last, so I shall accomplish
this also." Moreover, the number 51, when con
sidered apart from the number of the century,
is:determinedin* yet another manner andrintan
opposite sense; for which reason it occurs sev
eral times over in the dream. It is the age at
which man seems particularly exposed to dan
ger; the age at which I have seen colleagues
die suddenly, among them one who had been
appointed a few days earlier to a professorship
for wMch he had long been waiting.
Another absurd dream which plays with figures:
An acquaintance of mine, Herr M, has been
attacked in an essay by no less a person than
Goethe and, as we all think, with unjustifiable
vehemence. Herr M is, of course, crushed by
this attack. He complains of it bitterly at a
dinner-party; but his veneration for Goethe
has not suffered as a result of this personal ex
perience. I try to elucidate the temporal rela
tions a little, as they seemJmprobable td me.
Goethe died in 1832; since his attack upon lift
must, of course, have taken place earlier) M
was at the time quite a young man, ft seems
plausible to me that he was 18 yeaWold. But
I do not know exactly what the date of the
present year is, and so the whole calculation
lapses into obscurity. The attack, by the way,
is contained in Goethe's well-known essay on
"Nature."
We shall soon find the means of justifying
the nonsense of this dream. Herr M, with whom
I became acquainted at a dinner-party, had re
cently asked me to examine his brother, who
showed signs of general paralysis. The conjec
ture was right; the painful thing about this visit
was that the patient gave his brother away by
alluding to his youthful pranks, though our
conversation gave him no occasion to do so. I
had asked the patient to tell me the year of his
birth, and had repeatedly got him to make
trifling^calctilatioriS' in*ordertorshowtther-weak-rness of his memory—which tests, by the way*
he passed quite well. Now I can see that I be
have-like, a pa^ytjc Jn-the;drean3u(J do not
know exactly what th&date of the present year
is). Other material of the dream is drawn from
another recent source. The editor of a medical

[315a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
3**
periodical, a friend of mine, had accepted for
his paper a very unfavourable crushing review
of the last book of my Berlin friend, Fl, the
critic being a very youthful reviewer, who was
not very competent to passjudgment. I thought
I had a right to interfere, and called the editor
to account; he greatly regretted his acceptance
of the review, but he would not promise any
redress. I thereupon broke off toy relations
With the periodical, and in my ietter of resig
nation I expressed the hope that our personal
relations would not suffer as a result of the in
cident. The third source of this dream is an ac
count given by a female patient—it was fresh
in my memory at the time—of the psychosis of
her brother who- had fallen4ntoa frenzy cry
ing "Nature, Nature." The physicians in at
tendancethought that the cry was derivedfrom
a reading of Goethe's beautiful essay, and that
it pointed to the patient's overwork in the
study of natural philosophy. I thought, rather,
of the sexual meaning in which even our less
cultured people use the word Nature, and the
fact that the unfortunate man afterwards mu
tilated his genitals seems to show that I was
not far wrong. Eighteen years was the age of
this patient at the time of this access of frenzy.
If I add, further, that the book of my so
severely criticized friend ("One asks oneself
whether the author or oneself is crazy" had
been the opinion of another critic) treats of
the temporal conditions of hie, and refers the
duration of Goethe's life to the multiple of a
number significant from the biological point of
view, it..will,4readiLy be admitted that in my
dream I amputting myselfin my friend's place.
(I try to elucidate thetemporal relations a lit
tle.) But I behave likea paretic,and the dream
revels in absurdity. This means that the dreamthoughts say> ironically: "Naturally, he is the
fool, the lunatic, and you are the clever people
who know better. Perhaps, however, it is.the
other way about?" Now, the other way about
is abundantly represented in my dream, inas
much as Goethe has attacked the young man,
which is absurd, while it is perfectly possible
even today for a young fellow to attack the
immortal Goethe; and inasmuch as I reckon
from the year of Goethe's death, while I made
the paretic reckon from the year of his birth.
But I have further promised to show that no
dream is inspired by other than egoistical mo
tives. Accordingly, I.must accountfor the fact
that in this dream I make my friend's cause
my own, and put myself in hisplace. My criti
cal conviction in waking life would not justify

[315b]
my doing so. Now, the story of the eighteenyear-old patient, and the divergent interpreta
tions of his cry, "Nature," allude to the fact
that I have put myself into opposition to the
majority of physicians by claiming a sexual
aetiology for the psychoneuroses* I may say to
myself: "You will meet with the same kind of
criticism as your friend; indeed you have al
ready done so to some extent"; so that I may
now replace the he in the dream-thoughts by
we. "Yes, you are right; we two are the fools."
That mea res agitur is clearly shown by the
mention of the short, incomparably beautiful
essay of Goethe's, for it was a popular lecture
on this essay which induced me to study the
natural sciences^whm I left'theivGymnasiumi
and was still undecided as to my future.
VI
I have to show that yet another dream in
which my ego does not appear is none the less
egoistic. On p. 249 I referred to a short dream
in which Professor M
says: "My son, the
myopic . . ."/and I stated that this was only a
preliminary dream, preceding another in which
I play a part. Here is the main dream, previ
ously omitted, which challenges us to explain
its absurd and unintelligible word-formation.
On account of something or other that is
happening in Rome, it is necessary forthe tkilr
dren to flee, and this they do. The scene is then
laid before a gatey a double gate in the ancient
style (the Porta Romana in Shna, as I real
ize while I am dreaming). I am sitting on the
edge of a well, and lam greatly depressed; J
am almost weeping. A woman—a nurse, a nun
—brings out the two boys and hands them, over
to their father, who is not myself. The elder is
distinctly my eldest son, but I do not see the
face of the other boy. The woman asks the
eldest boy for a parting kiss. She is remarkable
for a red nose. The boy refuses her the kiss,
but says to her,extending herhishand in part
ing, ^Auf Geseres," and to both of ns (or to
one of us) "Auf Ungeseres." / have the idea
that this indicates a preference.
This dream is built upon a tangle of thoughts
induced by a play I saw at the theatre, called
Das neue Ghetto (The New Ghetto), The Jew
ish question, anxiety as to the future of my
children, who cannot be given a fatherland,
anxiety as to educating them so that they may
enjoy the privileges'^
tures may easily be recognized in the accom
panying dream-thoughts.
"Bythewaters of Babylon we sat down and

[316a]
312
Sigmund Freud
wept." Siena* like Rome, is famous for its beau
tiful fountains. In the dream I have to find
some sort of substitute for Rome (cf. p. 217)
from among localities which are. known to :me.
Near the Porta Romana of Siena we saw a
large, brightly-lit building, which, we learned
was the Manicomio, the insane asylum. Shortly
before the dream I had heard that a co-religion
ist had been forced to resign a position* which
he had secured with great effort, in a State
asylum.
Our interest is aroused by the speech: "Auf
Geseres," where one might expect, from the
situation continued throughout the dream, "Auf
Wiedersehen'" (Au revoir), and by its quite
meaningless antithesis: "Auf Ungeseres." (Un
is a prefix meaning "not."):
According to information received from He
brew scholars, Geseres is a genuine Hebrew
word, derived from the verb goiser;.and may
best be renderedby "ordained sufferings,fated
disaster." From its employment in the Jewish
jargon one would take it to mean "wailing and
lamentation." Ungeseres is a coinage of my
own* and is the first to attract my attention,
but for the present it baffles me; The little
observation at the end of the dream—that
Ungeseres indicates an advantage over Geseres
—Opens the way to the associations, and there
with to understanding. This relation holds good
in the case of caviar; the unsalted kind is more
highly prized than the salted. "Caviar to the
general"—"noble passions." Herein lies con
cealed a jesting allusion to a member of my
household, of Whom I hope—€or she is younger
than I—that she will watch over the future of
my children; this, too, agrees with the fact
that another member of my household, our
worthy nurse, is clearly indicated by the nurse
(or nun) of the dream. But a connecting-link
is Wanting between the pair, salted^-unsaXted
and Geseres—Ungeseres. This is to be found in
gesduert and
ungesauert Ravened, and un
leavened).In their flight or exodusfrom Egypt
the children of Israel had not time to allow
their dough to become leavened, and in com
memoration of this event they eat unleavened
bread at Passover to this day. Here, too, I can
find room for the sudden association which
occurred to me in this part of the analysis. I
remembered how we, my friend from Berlin
and myself, had strolled about the streets Of
Breslau; a city which was strange to us, during
the last days of Easter. A little girl asked me
the way to a certain street; 1 had to tell her
that I did riot knowit; I then remarkedto iny

[316b]
friend, "I hope that later on in life the child
will show more perspicacity in selecting the
persons whom she allows to direct her." Short
ly afterwards a sign caught my eye: "Dr.
Herod, consulting hours.,." I said to myself:
"I hope this colleague; does not happen to be a
children's specialist,'' Meanwhile,my friend had
been developing his views on the biological sig
nificance of bilateral symmetry, and had begun
a sentence with the words: "If we had only one
eye in the middle of the forehead, like Cy
clops . . ."This leads us to the speech of the
professor in the-preliminary dream: "My soti,
the myopic." And now I have been led to the
chiefsource for Geseres. Many years ago,when
this son of Professor M's,. who/ is today an
independent thinker,: was still sitting on his
school-bench, he contracted an-affection of the
eye which, according to: the doctor, gave some
cause- for anxiety. He expressed the opinion
thatiso.long:as it was confined • to. one eye it
was of no great significance, but that if it
shouldjextend to the other eye it would be
serious. The affection subsided in the* one eyfe
without leaving any ill effects; shortly;after
wards, however-the same symptoms did ac
tually appear in the other eye. The boy's
terrified mother immediately summoned the
physician to her distant home in the country.
But the doctor was now of a different opinion
(took the other side). "What sort of 'Geseres*
isthis you are making?'* he asked the mother,
impatiently, "// one side got well> the other
will, too." And so it turned out;
And now as to the connection between this
and myself and my family. The school-bench
upon which Professor M's son learned his first
lessons has become the property of my" eldest
son; it was given to him by the boy'smotherl,
and it is into his mouth that I put the words
of farewell in the dream; One of the: wishes
that may be connected^ with this tranference
may now be readily guessed. This school-berich
is intended by its construction to guard the
child from becoming shortsighted and one'r
sided. Hence myopia (and behind it the Cy
clops), and the discussion about bilat'eralism.
The fear of one-sidedness has a^twofold sig
nificance; it might mean hot only physical
bne-sidedness,
but
intellectual one-sidedness
also. Does it not seem as though the Scene in
the dreamywith all its craziness,were contra
dicting precisely this anxiety? When on the one
hand the boyhas spoken hiswords of farewell,
onthe.dtherhandhe calls outthe veryopposite,
as though to establish"an equilibrium. He-is

[317a]
The Interpretation o#: Dreams
3X3
acting/as itlwefe* in obedience to bilateral sym
metry!
Thus, a dream frequently has the profoundest meaning in the places where it seems most
absurd. In all ages those who have had some
thing tosayand have been unable to sayit with
out danger to themselves jhave gladly donned
the cap and bells. He for whom the forbidden
saving was intended was more likely to tolerate
it if he was able to laugh at jt, and to flatter
himself with the comment that*what he dis
liked was obviously absurd, Dreams behave in;
real Hie as does the prince in the play who is
obliged to pretend to be a madman, and hence
we may say of dreams what Hamlet said of
himself, substituting an unintelligible jest for
the actual truth: "I am but mad north-north-'
west^c when the wind is southerly I know a
hawk from a;handsaw" (Act II, sc, ii)JS
,; TThusrmy;so.lution of the problem of/ absurd
ity in dreams is that the; dream-thpugbts are
never absurd-—atleast, not those of\the dreams
of; sane persons—and:that theidream-work pro
duces,absurd:dreams,;and dreatns>with indiyiduh
allyabsurd elements, when the.dream-thoughts
contain criticism, ridicule, and derision;, which;
have to be given expression; My. next? concern
is to show that the: dream-work is exhausted
by the co-operation of the three factors enu
merated—and of a fourth which has still to be
mentioned—that it does no more than translate
the dream^thoughts, observing:the four condi
tionsprescribed, and thatthe question whether
the mind goes to work in dreams with all its
intellectual faculties, or with only part of them,
is wrongly stated, and does not meet the ac
tual state of affairs. But since there are plenty
of dreams in which judgments are passed, criti
cisms made, and ,facts recognized. in which
astonishment at some individual element of the
dream appears, and explanations are attempted,
and arguments adduced, I must meet the ob~
jections derivingfromtheseoccurrences by the
citation of selected examples;
.
"My answer is as follows: Everything in
dreams which occurs as the apparent function
ing of the critical faculty is to be regarded, not
as the intellectual performance of the dream1 This dream furnishes a good example in support
of the universally valid doctrine that dreams of the
same night, even though they are separated in the
memory, spring from the same thought-material. The
dream-situation in which I am rescuing, my children
from the city of Rome; moreover, Is distorted by a
reference back to an episode of my .childhood; The
meaning is that I envy certain relatives who years
ago had occasion to transplant their children to the
soil of another:country^ ..
-
;

[317b]
work, butas belonging to thesubstance of the
dream-thoughts, andit has found its way from
these, as a completed structure, into the mani
fest dream-content. I may goeven farther than
this! I may even say that the judgments which
arepassed upon the dream as it is remembered
after waking, andthefeelings which arearoused
bythe reproduction of the dream, belong larger
ly to the latent drearn-contenty and must be
fitted into place in the interpretation of the
dream.
1. One striking example of this has:already
been given. A female patient does not wishto
relate her dream because it was too vague. She
saw a person in the dream, and does not .know
whether it was her husband or her father: Then
follows a second dream-fragrnent, in- which
there,occurs a manure-pail, with which the foK
lowing reminiscence is associated. Ajs a young
housewife sheronce declared;iestingiy, in the
presence ipf a young. male1,relative who'\fre
quented the-house,;thatherrnext.business would
be;topi&cure a newmanure^pail. M&tfcmorning
pneiwas/^entto her, but it was filled with lilies
pf thegalley^Thispart of the dream-served to
represent the phrase, "Not grown/on mylownj
manure;":2 If wecomplete the analysis,;wefind
in the dream-thoughts the after-effect of 'ia
story heard in;^puth;; namely,;,that a* girl had
given birth toua/chnd^ and that it was.not clear
who was the father. The dream-representation
here; overlaps into the waking thought} and
allows ^one of cthe elements' of the dreamthoughts to be represented by a judgment*
formed in the^ waking state, of; the: whole
dreangu
•
2. A similar case: One of my patients has a
dream whkh strikes him as being an interest
ing one, for he says to himself, immediately
after ytal^g: "I must tell that to the doctor."
The dream is analysed, and shows'the most
distinct allusion to an affair in which he had
become involved during the treatment, and of;
which he had decided to tell me nothing.9
3. Here is a third example from my own
experience:
1 go to thehospital with P, through a neigh
bourhood in which there are houses and gar
dens. Thereupon I have an idea that I have
2This German expression is equivalent to our say
ing: "lam not•responsible for that," "That's-not myfuneral,'' or."That's not due.to my own efforts,"—TR;.
8The. injunction or resolve already contained,in
the dream:' "/ fitust tell that to the doctor," vrhen1it
occurs in
dreams
during psycho-analytic treatment,
is' constantly- accompanied by a great resistance to
confessing the dream, andis hot infrequently followed^
by the forgetting of the dream.
L'

[318a]
3H
SlGMUND 1ERECJD
already seen this locality several times in my
dreams; I do not know my way very well; P
shows me a way which leads round a corner to
a restaurant (indoor); here I ask for Frau
Doni, and I hear that she is living at the back
of the house, in a small room, with three chil
dren. I go there, and on the way I meet an un
defined person with, my two little girls. After
I have been*with them for awhile,! take them
with me. A sort of reproach against my wife
for having left them there.
On waking I am conscious of a great satis
faction, whose motive seems to be the fact
that I shall now learn from the analysis what
is meant by / have already dreamed of this*
But the analysis of the dream tells menothing
about this; it shows me only that the satis
factionbelongs to the latent dream-content, and
not to a judgment of the dream. It is "satis
faction concerning the fact that I have had
children by my marriage. P's path through life
and my own ran parallel for a time; how he
has outstripped me both socially and finan
cially, but his marriage has remained childless.
Of this the two occasions of the dream give
proofoncomplete analysis. On the previous day
I hadread in thenewspaper the obituary notice
of a certain Frau Dona A—y (which I turn
into Doni), who had died in childbirth; I was
told by my wife that the dead woman had been
nursed by the same midwife whom she herself
hademployed at the birthof our two youngest
boys* Thename Dona had caught my attention,
for I had recently met with it for the first time
in an English novel. The other occasion for the
dream may be found in the date on which it
was dreamed; this was the night before the
birthday of my eldest boy, who, it seems, is
poetically gifted.
4. The same satisfaction remained with me
after waking from the absurd dream that my
father, after his death, had played a political
role-among the Magyars. It ismotivated bythe
persistence of the feeling which accompanied
the last sentence of the dream: / remember
that on his deathbed he looked so like Gari
baldi, and I am glad that it has really come
true,..(Followed by a forgotten continuation.)
I can now supply from the analysis what
should fill this gap. It is the mention of my
second bqy, towhom I have given thebaptismal
name of an eminent historical personage who
attracted me greatly during my boyhood, espe-
*A subject which has been extensively discussed in
recent volumes of the Revue Philosophique (param
nesia in dreams).

[318b]
daily during my stay in England. I had to
wait for a year before I could fulfil my in
tention of using this name if the next child
should be a son, and with great satisfaction I
greeted him by this name as soon as he was
born. It is easy to see how the father's sup
pressed desire for greatness is, in his thoughts,
transferred to his children; one is inclined to
believe that this is one of the ways by which
the suppression of this desire (which becomes
necessary in the course of life) is effected. The
little fellow Won his right to inclusion in the
text of this dream by virtue of the fact that
the same accident—that of soiling his clothes
(quite pardonable ineither a child orina dying
person)—had occurred to him. Compare with
this the allusion Stuhlrichter (presiding judge)
and the wish of the dream: to stand before
one's children great and undefiled.
5.If I should now have to look for examples
of judgments or expressions of opinion which
remain in the dream itself, and are not con
tinued in, or transferred to, our wakirig
thoughts* my task would be greatly facilitated
wereI to take my examples from dreams which
have already been cited for other purposes.
The dream of Goethe's attack On Herr M
appears to contain quite a number of acts of
judgment, / try to elucidate the temporal re
lations a little,as they seem improbable to me.
Does not this look like a critical impulse di
rected against the nonsensical idea that Goethe
should have made a literary attack upon a
young man of my
acquaintance? It seems
plausible to me that he was 18 years old. That
sounds quite like the result of a calculation,
though a silly one; and the / do not know ex
actly what is the date of thepresent year would
be an example of uncertainty or doubt in
dreams.
^ But I know from analysis that these acts of
judgment, which seem to have been performed
in the dream for the first time, admit of a
different construction, inthelight ofwhich they
become
indispensable for interpreting the
dream, while at the same time all absurdity ii
avoided. With the sentence I try to elucidate1
the temporal relations a little, I put myself iri
the place ofmy friend, who is actually trying
to elucidate the temporal relations of life. The
sentence then loses its significance as a judg
ment which-objects to the nonsense of the;
previous sentences. The interposition, Which
seemsimprobable to me,belongs to the follow
ing: It seems plausible^fome.YJtih almost
these identical words' I replied to the lady who

[319a]
told me of her brother's illness: "It seems im
probable to me" that- the-cry of "Mature,
Nature," was in any way connected with
Goethe; it seems much more plausible to me
that it has the sexual significance which is
known to you. In this case, it is true, a judg
ment was expressed, but in reality,^ not in a
dream, and on an occasion which is remem
bered and utilized by the dream-thoughts. The
dream-content appropriates this judgment like
any other fragment of the dream-thoughts.
The number 18 with which the judgment in
the dream is meaninglessly connected still re
tains a trace of the context from which the
real judgment was taken. Lastly, the J do not
know exactly what is the date of the present
year is intended fornoother purpose than that
of my identification with the paralytic, in
examining whom thisparticular fact was estab
lished.
In the solution of these apparent acts of
judgment in dreams, it will be well to keep in
mind the above-mentioned rule of interpreta
tion, which tells us that we must disregard the
coherence which is established in the dream
between its constituent parts as an unessential
phenomenon, and- that every dream-element
must be taken separately and traced back to
its source. The dream is a compound, which
for the purposes of investigation must be
broken upinto its elements. On theother hand,
we become alive to the fact that there is a
psychic force which expresses itself in our
dreams and establishes this apparent coherence;
that is, the material obtained by the dreamwork undergoes a secondary elaboration. Here
we have the manifestations of that psychic
force which we shall presently take into con
sideration as the fourth of the factors which
co-operate in dream-formation.
6. Let us now look for other examples of
acts of judgment in the dreams which have
already been cited. In the absurd dream about
the communication from the town council, I
ask the question, "You married soon after?"
I reckon that I was born in 1856, which seems
to me to be directly afterwards. This certainly
takes the form of an inference. My father mar
ried shortly after his attack, in the year 1851.
I am the eldest son, born in 1856; so this is
correct. We know that this inference has in
fact been falsified by the wish-fulfilment, and
that the sentence which dominates the dreamthoughtsis as follows: Four orfive years—that
is no time at all—that need not be counted.
But every part of this chain of reasoning may

[319b]
The Interpretation of Dreams
3i5
be seen to be otherwise determined from the
dream-thoughts^ as regards--both its -content
and its form. It is the patient of whose patience
my colleague complains who intends to marry
immediately the treatment is ended. The man
ner in which I converse with my father in this
dream reminds me of an examination or crossexamination, and thus of a universityprofessor
who was in the habit of compiling a complete
docket of personal data when entering his
pupils' names: You were born when?—1856.—
Patre?—Then the applicant gave the Latin
form of the baptismal name of the father and
we students assumed that the Hofrat drew in
ferences from the father's name which
the
baptismal name of the candidate wouid not
always have justified. Hence, the drawing of
inferences in the dream would be merely the
repetition of the drawing of inferences which
appears as a scrap of material in the dreamthoughts. From this we learn something new.
If an inference occurs in the dream-content, it
assuredly comesfrom the dream-thoughts; but
it may be contained in these as a fragment of
remembered material, or it may serve as the
logical connective of a series of dream-thoughts.
In any case, an.inferenca.InJ:he dream repre
sents
an inference taken from
the
dreamthoughts.1
It will be well to continue the analysis of
this dream at this point. With the inquisition
of the professor is associated the recollection
of an index (in my time published in Latin)
of the university students; and further, the
recollection of my own course of study. The
five years allowed for the study of medicine
were, as usual, too httle for me. I worked un
concernedly for some years longer; my ac
quaintances regarded me as a loafer, and
doubted whether I should get through. Then,
suddenly,! decided to take my examinations,
and I got through in spite of thepostponement.
A fresh
confirmation of the dream-thoughts
with which I defiantly meet my critics: "Even
though you won't believe it, because I am
taking my time, I shall reach the conclusion
(GermanySchluss=end, conclusion, inference).
It has often happened like that."
In its introductory portion, this dream con
tains several sentences which, we can hardly
deny, are of the nature of an argument. And
this argument is not at all absurd; it might
1 These results correct at several points my earlier
statements concerning the representation of logical
relations (p. 265). These described the general pro
cedure of the dream-work, but overlooked its most
delicate and most careful operations.

[320a]
316
Sigmund Freud
just as Well occur m my waking thoughts. In
my dream I make fun of the communication
from the town council,for in the first place Iwas,
not yet born in 1851, and in the second place
my father, to whom it might refer, is already
dead. Not only is each of these statements per^
fectly correct in itself, but they are the very
arguments that I should employ if I received
such
a
communication. We know from
the
foregoing analysis (p. 309) that this dream has
sprung from the soil of deeply embittered and
scornful dream-thoughts; and if we may also
assume that the motive of the censorship is a
very powerful One, we shall understand that
the dream^thought has every occasion to create
a flawless refutation of an unreasonable de
mand, in accordance with the pattern contained
in the dream-thoughts. But the analysis shows
that in this case the dream-work has not been
required to make a free imitation, but that
material taken from the dream-thoughts had to
be employed for the purpose. It is as though
in an algebraic equation there should occur,
besides the figures, plus and minus signs, and
symbols of powers and of roots, and as though
someone, in copying this equation, without un
derstanding it, should copy both the symbols
and the figures, and. mix them all up together.
The two arguments may be traced to the fol
lowing material: It is painful to me to think
that many of the hypotheses upon which" I
base my psychological solution of the psycho
neuroses will arouse scepticism and ridicule
when they first become known. For instance,
I shall have to assert that impressions of the
second year of life, and even the first, leave an
enduring trace. upon the emotional life of. sub
sequent neuropaths, and that these impressions
—although greatly distorted and exaggerated
by the memory—may furnish the earliest and
profoundest basis of a hysterical symptom.
Patients to whom I explain this at a suitable
moment are wont,to parody my explanation by
offering;to search for reminiscences of the pe
riodwhentheywere not yet born.My disclosure
of the unsuspected part played by the father
in the earliest sexual impulses of female pa
tients may well have a similar reception. (Cf.
the discussion on p. 244). Nevertheless, it is
my well-founded conviction that both doctrines
are true. In confirmation of this I recall cer
tain examples in which the death of the father
occurred when the child was very young, and
subsequent incidents,- otherwise inexplicable,
proved that the child had unconsciously pre
served recollections of the person who:nad so.

[320b]
early gone out of its life.I know that both my
assertions are based upon inferences whose:va
lidity Will be attacked. It is the doing of the
wish-fulfilment that precisely the material ol
thoseinferences, which I fear willbe contested,
should be utilized by the dream-work for estab
lishing incontestable conclusions.
•
-\
7. In one dream, which I have hitherto only
touched upon, astonishment at the subject
emerging;is distinctly expressed at the outset.
The elder Brucke must have set me some
task or other; strangely enough, it relates to
the preparation of the lower part of my own
body} the pelvis and legs, which I see before
me as though in the dissecting-room, but 'with
out feeling the absence of part of my body,
and without a trace of horror. Louise N is
standing beside me, and helps me in the work.
The pelvis is eviscerated; now the upper, now
thelower aspect is visible, and the two aspects
are commingled. Large fleshy red tubercles are
visible (which, even in the dream, make me
think of haemorrhoids). Also something lying
over them had to be carefully picked off; it
looked like crumpled tinfoil.1 Then I was once
more in possession of my legs, and I made a
journey through the city, but I took a cab (as
I was tired). To my astonishment, the cab
drove into the front door of a house, which
opened and allowed it to pass into a corridor,
which was broken off at the end, and eventually
led on into: the open.2 Finally I wandered
through changing landscapes, with an Alpine
guide, who carried my things.-He carried me
for some distance, out of consideration for my
tired legs.. The ground was swampy; we went
along the edge; people were sitting on the
ground, like Red Indians or gypsies; among
them a girl. Until then I had made my way
along on theslippery ground, in constant aston
ishment that I was so well able to do so after
making the preparation. At last we came to a
small wooden house with an open window at
one end. Here the guide set me down, and laid
two planks, which stood in readiness, on the.
window-sill so as to bridge the chasm which
had to be crossed from the window. Now I
grew really alarmed about my legs. Instead of
the expected crossing, I saw two grown-up-men
lying upon wooden benches which were fixed on
the walls of the hut, and something like two
1Stanniol, allusion to Stannius; the nervous system
of fishes; cf. p. 300.
2The place in the corridor of my apartment-house
where the perambulators of the other tenants stand;:
it is also otherwise hyper-determined several times

[321a]
The Interpretation lot: Dreams
317
Sleeping1 children-next to them; as though not
the planks but the children were intended-to
makethe crossing possible..!awokewith terri
fied thoughts. .,•;:!
'!
Anyone who has-been duly impressed by the
extensive nature ofrdreahvoondensation wiU
readily imagine what a numberof pages the
exhaustive analysis of this dream would filL
Fortunately:for the context, I shall make: this
dream onlyithe one example of astonishment
in dreams, whichmakes its appearance in the
parenthetical remark, strangely enough; Let us
consider the occasion of the dream. It is a
visit of this lady, Louise N, who helps me with
my work in the dream. She says: "Lend me
something to read^ I offer her She, by Rider
Haggard; A strange book, but full of hidden
meaning/' I try to explain; "the eternal fem
inine,the immortality of our.emotionsT-^" Here
she<interruptsme: "I know that book already.
Haven't you something of your own?" "No?
my own immortal works are still unwritten;"
"Well, when are you going to publish your socalled 'latest revelations/ which, you promised
us, even we shouldbe able to read?" she asks*
rather sarcastically. I now perceive that she is
a mouthpiecefor someoneelse, and I am silent;
I think of the effort it cost me to make public
even my work on dreams, in which I had to
surrender so much of my own intimate nature.
("The best that you know you can't tell the
boys.") The preparation of my own body
which I am ordered to make in my dream is
thus the self-analysisinvolved in the communi
cation of my dreams. The elder Briicke very
properly finds a place here; in the first years
of my scientific work it so happened that I
neglected the publication of a certain discovery
until his insistence forced me to publish it.
But the further trains of thought, proceeding
from my conversation with Louise N, go too
deep to become conscious;
they are side
tracked by way of the material whichhas been
incidentally awakened in me by the mention
of Rider Haggard's She. The comment
strangely enough applies to this book, and to
another by the same author, The Heart of the
World; and numerous elements of the dream
are taken from these two fantastic romances.
The swampy ground over which the dreamer
is carried, the chasm which has to be crossed
by means of planks, come from She; the Red
Indians, the girl, and the wooden house, from
The Heart of the World. In both novels a
woman is the leader, and both treat of perilous
wanderings; She has to do with an adventurous

[321b]
journey to an undiscovered, country, a place
almost untrodden by the foot of man. Accord
ing to a note which I find in my record of the
dream, the fatigue in my legs was a real sensa
tion from those days^^^^ Probably a weary mood
corresponded with this fatigue, and the/doubt
ing question: "How much farther.wiU-my legs
carry me?" In She, the end of the adventure is
that the heroine meets her death in the inys%
terious central fire, instead of winning immor
tality for herself and for others. Some related
anxiety has iriistakably arisen in the dreamthoughts. The wooden house is assuredly also
a coffin—that is, the grave. But in representing
this
most unwished-for of
all thoughts by
means of a wish-fulfilment, the dream-work
has achieved its masterpiece. I was once in a
grave, but it was an empty Etruscan grave
near
Orvieto—a narrow
chamber with
two
stone benches on the wallsj upon Which were
lying the skeletons of two adults;- The interior
of the wooden house in the dream looks exactly
like this grave, except that stone has been re
placed by wood. The dream seems to say: "If
you must already sojourn in your grave, let it
be this Etruscan grave," and by means of this
interpolation it transforms the most mournful
expectation into one that is really to be de
sired.
Unfortunately, as we shall learn, the
dream is able to change into its opposite only
the idea accompanying an affect, but not al
ways the affect itself. Hence, I awake with
thoughts of terror, even after the idea that
perhaps my children will achieve what has been
denied to their father has forced its way to
representation: a fresh allusion to the strange
romance in which the identity of a character is
preserved through a series of generations cover
ing two thousand years.
8. In the context of another dream there is
a similar expression of astonishment at what is
experienced in the dream. This, however, is
connected with such a striking, far-fetched,
and almost intellectual attempt at explanation
that if only on this account I should have to
subject the whole dream to analysis, even if
it did not possess two other interesting fea
tures. On the night of the eighteenth pf July I
was travelling on the Southern Railway, and in
my sleep I heard someone call out: "Hollthurn,
10 minutes." I immediately think of Holothuria—of a natural history museum—that
here is a place where valiant men have vainly
resisted the domination of their overlord.—
Yes, the counter-reformation in Austria.!—As
though it were a place in Styria or the-Tyrok

[322a]
/
3i8
Now I see indistinctly a small museum, in
which the relics or the acquisitions of these
men are preserved. I should like to leave the
train, but I hesitate to do so. There are women
with fruit on the platform; they squat on the
ground, and in that position invitingly hold up
their baskets.-—I hesitated, in doubt as to
whether we have time, but here we are still
stationary.—/ am suddenly
in another com
partment, in which the leather and the seats
are so narrow that onds^ spine directly touches
the back.* I am surprised at this, but I may
have changed carriages while asleep. Several
people, among them an English brother and
-snterrj-arowMf books plainly onjijshelfxxnthe >
wall.—I see The Wealth of Nations, and Mat
ter and Motion- (by Maxwell), thick books
bound in brown linen. The man asks his sister
about a book of Schiller's, whether she has
forgotten it. These books seem to belongnow
to me, now to them. At this point I wish to
join in the conversation in order to confirm or
support what is beingsaid ... I wake sweating
all over, because all the windows are shut. The
train stops at Marburg.
While writing down the dream, a part of it
occurs to me which my memory wishedto pass
over. / tell the brother andsister (in English),
referring to a certain book: "It is from . . ."
but I correct'myself: "It is by . . ." The man
remarks to his sister: "He said it correctly."
The dream begins with the name of a sta
tion, which seems to have almost waked me.
For this name, which was Marburg, I substi
tute Hollthurn. The fact that I heard Marburg
the first, or perhaps the second time it was
called out, is proved by the mention of Schiller
in the dream; he was born in Marburg, though
not the Styrian Marburg.2 Now on this occa
sion, although I wastravelling first class, I was
doing so under very disagreeable circumstances.
The train was overcrowded; in my compart
ment I had come upon a lady and gentleman
who seemed very fine people, and had not the
good breeding, or did not think it worth while,
to conceal their displeasure at my intrusion.
My polite greeting was not returned, and al1This description is not intelligible even to myself,
hut I follow the principle of reproducing the dream
m those words which occur to me while I am writing
it down. Trierwording itself is a part of the dreamrepresentation.
2Schiller wasnot born in oneof the Marburgs, but
in Marbach, as every German schoolboy knows, and
as I myself knew. This again is one of those errors
(cf. p. 218) which creep in as substitutes for an in
tentional falsification in another place and which I
have endeavoured.to explain in The Psycho-pathology
oj Everyday Life.

[322b]
SlGMUND FREUD
though they were sitting side by side (with
their backs to the engine), the woman before
my eyes hastened to pre-empt the seat oppo
site her, and next to the window, with her
umbrella; the door was immediately closed,
and pointed remarks about the opening of
windows were exchanged. Probably I was
quicklyrecognized as a personhungry for fresh
air. It was a hot night, and the atmosphere of
the compartment, closed on both sides, was
almost suffocating. My experience as a travel
ler leads me to believe that such inconsiderate
and overbearing conduct marks people who
have paid for their tickets onlypartly, or not
aUall^^heri^the^eondiaGtoRcame^rounoVandvI
presented my dearly bought ticket, the lady
exclaimed haughtily and almost threateningly:
"My husband has a pass." She was an impos
ing-looking person, witha discontented expres
sion, in age not far removed from the autumn
of feminine beauty; the man had no chance to
say anything; he sat there motionless. I tried
to sleep. In my dream I takea terrible revenge
on my disagreeable travelling companions; no
one would suspect what insults and humili&i
lions are concealed behind the disjointed frag
ments of the first half of the dream. After this
need has been satisfied, the second wish, to
exchange my compartment for another, makes
itself felt. Thedream changes itsscene sooften^
and without making the slightest objection to
such changes, that it would not have seemed at
all remarkable had I at once, from my memo
ries, replaced my travelling companions by
more agreeable persons. But here was a case
where something or other opposes the change:
of scene, and finds it necessary to explain it.
How did I suddenly get into another compart-j
ment? I could not postively remember having*
changed carriages. So there was only one ex
planation; / must have left the carriage while
asleep—an unusual occurrence, examples of*
which, however, are known to neuropatholo
gists. We know of persons who undertake rail
way journeys in a crepuscular state, without
betraying theirabnormal condition by anysign
whatever, untilat some stage of their journey
they come to themselves, andare surprised by
the gap in their memory. Thus, whileI am still
dreaming, I declare my own case to be such a
case of automatisme ambulatoire.
Analysis permits of another solution. The
attempt at explanation, which so surprises me
if I am to attribute it to the dream-work, is
not original, but is copied from the neurosis
of one of my patients. I have already spoken

[323a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
in another chapter of a highly cultured and
dream really resolves
kindly man who began, shortly after the death
of his parents, to accuse himself of murderous
tendencies, and who was distressed by the pre
cautionary measures which he had to take to
secure himself against these tendencies. His
was a case of severe .obsessional ideas with full
insight. To begin with, it was painful to him to
walk through the streets, as he was obsessed
by the necessity of accounting for all the per
sons he met; he had to know whither they had
disappeared; if one of them suddenly eluded
his pursuing glance, he was left with a feeling
of distress and the idea that he might possibly
have made away with the man. Behind this
obsessive idea was
concealed, among other
things,
a Cain-phantasy,
for "alt men
are
brothers." Owing to the impossibility of ac
complishing this task, he gave up going for
walks, and spent his life imprisoned within his
four walls. But reports of murders which had
been committed in the world outside were con
stantly reaching his room by way of the news
papers, and his conscience tormented him with
the doubt that he might be the murderer for
whom the police were looking. The certainty
that he had npt left the house for weeks pro
tected him for a time against these accusations,
until one day there dawned upon him the pos
sibility that he might have left his house while
in an unconscious state, and might* thus-have
committed murder without knowing anything
about it. From that time onwards he locked
his front door, and gave the key to his old
housekeeper, strictly forbidding her to give it
into his hands, even if he demanded it.
This, then*, is the origin of the.attempted ex
planation that I may have changed carriages
while in an unconscious state;
it has been
taken into the dream ready-made, from the
material of the dream-thoughts, and
is evi
dently intended to identify me with the person
of my patient. My memory of this patient was
awakened by natural association. My last night
journey had been made a few weeks earlier in
his company. He was cured, and we were going
into. the::c0unt?y't0gefcrto. his-relatives^who,
had sent for' me; as we had a compartment to
ourselves, we left all the windows open through
out the night, and for as long as I remained
awake we had a most interesting conversation.
I knew that hostile impulses towards his father
in childhood, in a sexual connection, had been
at the root of his illness. By identifying myself
with him, I wanted to make an analogous con
fession to myself. The second scene of the

[323b]
319
itself into
a
wanton
phantasy to the effect that my two elderly
travelling companions had acted so uncivilly
towards me because my arrival on the scene
had prevented them from exchanging kisses
and embraces during the night, as they had
intended. This phantasy,however, goes back to
an early incident of my childhood when, prob
ably impelled by sexual curiosity, I had in
truded into my parents' bedroom, and was
driven thence by my father's emphatic com*
mand.
I think it would be superfluous to multiply
such examples. They would all confirm what
we have learned from those already cited:,
namely, that an act of judgment in a dream is
merely the repetition of an original act of
judgment in the dream-thoughts. In most cases
it is an unsuitable repetition, fitted into an
inappropriate context; occasionally, however,,
as in our last example, it is so artfully applied
that it may almost give one the impression of
independent intellectual activity in the dream.
At this point we might turn our attention to
that psychic activity which, though it does not
appear to co-operate constantly in the.forma
tion of dreams, yet endeavours to fuse the
dream-elements of different origin into a flaw
less and significant whole. We consider it nee-:
essary, however, first of all to consider the
expressions of affect which appear in dreams,
and to compare these with the affects which
analysis discovers in the dream-thoughts.
IL The Affects in Dreams
A
shrewd remark of Strieker's called our at
tention to the fact that the expressions of af
fects in dreams cannot be disposed of in the
contemptuous fashion in which we are wont to
shake off the
dream-content
after we have
waked. "If I
am
afraid of robbers in my
dreams, the robbers, to be sure, are imaginary,;
but the fear of them is real"; and the samething is true if I rejoice in my dream. Accord
ing to the testimony of our feelings, an affect
experienced in a dream is in no way inferior to
.one^of,Hke;intensity experiencedinwakingdife,-,
and the dream presses its claim to be accepted
as part of our real psychic experiences, by
virtue of its affective rather than its ideational
content. In the waking state, we do not put the
one before the other, since we do not know
how to evaluate an affect psychically except
in connection with an ideational content. If an
affect and an idea are ill-matched as regards
their nature
or their intensity, our waking

[324a]
y
320
judgment becomes confused.
"
'i'Uhe; fact that in dreams the ideational con
tent does not always produce the affective re
sult which in our waking thoughts we should
expect as its necessary consequence has always:
been a cause of astonishment; Strumpell de
clared that; ideas in dreams are stripped- of
their psychic values. But there is no lack of
instances in which the reverse is true; when an
intensive manifestation of affect appears in "a
content which seems-to offer no occasion for it;
In my dream I may be in a horrible, dangerous,
or disgusting situation, and yet I may feel no
fear or aversion; on the other hand, I am
sometimes terrified by harmless things, and
sometimes delighted by childish things* •!
This enigma disappeared more suddenly and
more completely than perhaps any other dreamproblem if we pass from the manifest to the
latent content. We shall then no longer have
to explain it, for it will no longer exist. Analy
sis tells us that the ideational contents have
undergone
displacements
and
substitutions;
while the affects have remained unchanged: No
wonder, then, that the ideational content which
has been altered by dream-distortion no longer
fits the affect which has remained intact; and
no cause for wonder when analysis has put the
correct content into its original place.1
In a-psychic complex which has been sub
jected to the influence of the resisting censor
ship, the affects are the unyieldingconstituent,
which alone can guide us to the correct com-i
pletion. This state of affairs is revealed in the
psychoneuroses even more distinctly than in
dreams. Here the affect is always in the right,
at least as regards its quality; its intensity
may, of course, be increased by displacement
of the neurotic attention. When the hysterical
patient wonders that he should be so afraid of
a trifle, or when the sufferer from obsessions is
astonished that he should reproach himself so
bitterly for a mere nothing, they are both in
1 If I am not greatly mistaken, the first dream which
I was able to elicit
from my grandson (aged
20
months) points to the fact that the dream-work had
succeeded in transforming its •material -into a wishfulfilment, while the affect which belonged to it re-,
mained. unchanged even in
the sleeping state. The.
night before its father was to return to the front the
child criebV out, sobbing violently:
"Papa, Papa—r
Baby.", That may mean: Let Papa and Baby still be,
together;, while the weeping takes cognizance of the
imminent departure. The child was at the tiihe very*
wellable to express the concept of separation. Fort
(=away, replaced, by a peculiarly accented, longdrawn-out doook)
had been his first word, and'for
many, months before this first dream he had played at
away ^with all his toys; which went back to his early
self-conquest in allowing his mother to go away.

[324b]
SlGMUNDtFREUD
error, inasmuch as they regard the conceptual
content—the trifle, the mere nothing—as the
essential thing, 'arid they1defend themselves in
vain, because they^tnake this conceptual cbn-i
tent the starting-point of their thought-work:
Psycho-analysis, however, puts them1 oh the
fight path, inasmuch as it recognizes that, on
the contrary, it is the affect that is justified,
and looks for theconcept which pertains to \i%
and whichhas been repressed by a substitution.
All that we need assume is that the liberation
of affect and the conceptual content do not
constitute the indissbltrble organic'unity as
which we are wont to regard them, but that the
two parts may be welded together, so that
analysis will separate them. Dream-interpre
tation shows that this is actually the; case. -
I will first of all give ah example in which
analysis explains the apparent absence ofaffect
in a conceptual contentwhich dught to compel
a liberation of affect.
The' dreamet: sees three lions in a desert, one
of which is laughing, but she is n^ot dfraid of
them: Then, however, she must have fled from
them, for she is trying to climb a tree But she
finds that her cousin, the French teacher, is
already up in the tree, etc.
.
•
The analysis yields the following material:
The indifferent occasion of the dream was a sen
tence in the dreamer's English exercise: "The
lion's greatest adornment is his mane?' Her
father used to wear a beard which encircled
his face hke a mane. The name of her English
teacher is Miss Lyons. An acquaintance1 of
hers sent her the ballads of Loewe (Loewe=
lion): These, then, are the three lions; why
should she be afraid of them? She has read a
story in which a negro Who has incited his
fellows to revolt is hunted With bloodhounds,
and climbs a tree to save himself. Then follow
fragmentary recollections in the merriest mood <
such as the following directions for catching
lions (from Die Fliegende Blatter): "Take ti
desert and put it through a sieve; the lions
willbe left behind." Also a very amusing, but
not very proper anecdote about an official who
is asked why he does not take greater pains fd
win the favour of his chief\ and who replies
that he has been trying td creep into favour,
but that his immediate superior was already
up there. The whole matter becomes intelligi
bleas soon as one: learns that=onth¥ dream-day
the lady had received a visit from her hus
band'ssuperior. He Was very politeto her, arid

[325a]
kissed:her hand, and she was not at all afraid
of him, although he is a big bug (Grosses Tier
==big animal) and plays the part- of a social
lion in the capital of-her country. This lion is*
therefore, like the lion in A Midsummer Night's
Dream, who is unmasked as Snug the joiner;
and of such stuff ate all the dream-lions of
which one is not afraid.
II
As my second example,I will cite the dream of
the girl who saw her sister?s little son lying as
a corpsein his coffin, but who,it may be added,
was conscious of no pain or sorrow. Why she
was unmoved we know from the analysis. The
dream only disguised her wish to see once more
the man she loved; the affect had to be attuned
to the wish, and not to its disguisement. There
was thus no occasion for sorrow.
In a number of dreams the affect does, at
least remain connected with the conceptual
content which has replaced the content really
belonging to it. In others, the dissolution of the
complex is carried farther. The affect is en
tirely separated from the idea belonging to
it, and finds itself accommodated elsewhere in
the dream, where it fits into the new arrange
ment of the dream-elements. We have seen
that the same thing happens to acts of judge
ment in dreams. If an important inference
occurs in the dream-thoughts, there is one in
the dream also; but the inference in the dream
may be displaced to entirely differentmaterial;
Not infrequently this displacement is effected
in accordance with the principle of antithesis.
I will illustrate the latter possibility by the
following dream, which I have subjected to
the most exhaustive analysis.
Ill
A castle by the sea; afterwards it lies not di
rectly on the coast, but on a narrow canal
leading to the sea. A certain Herr P is the
governor of the castle. I stand with him in a
large salon with three windows, in front of
which rise the projections of a wall, like battle
ments of a fortress. I belong to the garrison,
perhaps as a volunteer naval officer. We fear
the arrival of enemy warships, for we are in
a state of war. Herr P intends to leave the
castle; he gives me instructions as to what must
be done if what we fear shoidd come to pass.
His sick wife and his children are in the threat
ened castle. As soon as the bombardment be
gins,the large hall is to be cleared. He breathes
heavily, and tries to get away; I detain him,

[325b]
The Interpretation of Dreams
321
Und ask him how I am to send him news in
case of need. He says something further, and
immediately afterwards he sinks to the floor
dead. I have probably taxed him unnecessarily
with my questions. After his death, which
makes no further impression upon me, I con^
sider whether the widow is to remain in the
castle, whether I should give notice of the
death to the higher command, whether I should
take over the control of the castle as the next
in command. I now stand at the window, and
scrutinize the ships as they pass by; they are
cargo steamers, arid they rush by over the dark
water; several with more than one funnel*
others with bulging decks (these are very like
the railway stations in the preliminary dream,
which has not been related). Then my brother
is standing beside me, andwe both look out of
the window, on to the canal. At the sight of one
ship we are alarmed, and call out: "Here comes
the warship!" It turns out, however, that they
are only the ships which I have already seen,
returning. Now comes a small ship, comically
truncated, so that it ends amidships; on the
deck one sees curious things like cups or little
boxes. We call out as with one voice: "That
is the breakfast ship"
The rapid motion of the ships, the deep blue
of the water, the brown smoke of the funnels
—all these together produce an intense and
gloomy impression.
The localities in this dream are compiled
from several journeys to the Adriatic (Mira^
mare, Duino, Venice, Aquileia). A short but
enjoyable Easter trip to Aquileia with iny
brother, a few weeks before the dream,fwas
still fresh in my memory; also the naval war
between America and Spain, and, associated
with this my anxiety as to the fate of my
relatives in America, play a part in the dreams
Manifestations of affect appear at two places
in this dream. In one place an affect that would
be expected is lacking: it expressly emphasized
that the death of the governor makes no im
pression upon me; at another point, when I see
the warships, I am frightened, and experience
all the sensations of fright in my sleep. The
distribution of affects in this well-constructed
dream has been effected in such a way that any
obvious, contradiction is avoided. For there is
no reason why I should be frightened at the
governor's death, and it is fitting that, as the
commander of the castle, I should be alarmed
by the sight of the warship. Now analysis shows
that Herr P is nothing but a substitute for my
own ego (in the dream I am his substitute)*

[326a]
322
I am the governor who suddenly dies. The
dream-thoughts deal with the future of my
family after my premature death. No other
disagreeable thought is to be found among the
dream-thoughts. The alarm which goes with
the sight of the warship must be transferred
from it to this disagreeable thought. Inversely,
the analysis shows that the
region
of
the
dream-thoughts from which the warship comes
is laden with most cheerful reminiscences. In
Venice, a year before the dream, one magically
beautiful day, we stood at the windows of
our room on the Riva Schiavoni and looked
out over the blue lagoon, on which there was
more traffic to be seen than usual. Some Eng
lish ships were expected; they were to be given
a festive reception;
and suddenly my wife
cried, happy as a child: "Here comes the Eng
lish warship!" In the dream I am frightened
by the very same words; once more we see
that speeches in dreams have their origin in
speeches in real life. I shall presently show
that even the element'English in this speech
has not been lost for the dream-work. Here,
then, between the dream-thoughts and the
dream-content, I turn joy into fright, and I
need only point to the fact that by means of
this transformation I give expression to part of
the latent dream-content. The example shows,
however, that the dream-work is at liberty to
detach the occasion of an affect from its con
nections in the dream-thoughts, and to insert it
at any other place it chooses in the dreamcontent.
I will take the opportunity which is here,
incidentally offered of subjecting to a closer
analysis the breakfast ship, whose appearance
in the dream so absurdly concludes a situation
that has been rationally adhered to. If I look
more closely at this dream-object, I am im
pressed after the event by the fact that it was
black, and that by reason of its truncation at
its widest beam it achieved, at the truncated
end, a considerable resemblance to an object
which had aroused our interest in the museums
of the Etruscan cities. This object was a rec
tangular cup of black clay, with two handles,
upon which stood things like coffee-cups or
tea-cups, very similar to our modern service
for
the
breakfast table. Upon inquiry we
learned that this was the toilet set of an Etrus
can lady, with little boxes for rouge and pow
der; and we told one another jestingly that it
would not be a bad idea to take a thing like
that home to the lady of the house. The dreamobject, therefore, signifies a black toilet (toi-

[326b]
Sigmund Freud
lette=dress), or mourning, and refers directly
to a death. The other end of the dream-object
reminds us of the boat (German, Nachen,from
the Greek root,vexuc;, as a philological friend
informs me), upon which corpses were laid in
prehistoric times, and were left to be buried
by the sea. This is associated with the return
of the ships in the dream.
"Silently on his rescued boat the old man
drifts into harbour."
It is the return voyage after the shipwreck
(German: Schiff-bruch = ship-breaking); the
breakfast ship looks as though it were brokeh
off amidships. But whence comes the name
breakfast ship? This is where English comes
in,which wehave left over from the warships.
Breakfast, a breaking of the fast. Breaking
again belongs to shipwreck (Schiff-bruch), and
fasting is associated with the black (mourn
ing).
But the only thing about this breakfast ship
which has been newly created by the dream is
its name: The thing existed4n reality, and re
calls to me one of the merriest moments of my
last journey. As we distrusted the fare in Aqui
leia, we took some food with us from Goerz,
and bought a bottle of the
excellent Istrian
wine in Aquileia; and while the little mailsteamer slowly travelled through the
canale
delle Meeand into the lonely expanse of lagoon
in the direction of Grado, we had breakfast on
deck in the highest spirits—we were the only
passengers—and it tasted to us as few break
fasts have ever tasted. This, then, was the
breakfast ship, and it is behind this very recol
lection of the gayest joie de vivre that the
dream hides the saddest thoughts of an un
known and mysterious future.
The detachment of affects from the groups of
ideas which have occasioned their liberation is
the most striking thing that happens to them
in dream-formation, but it is neither the only
nor even the most essential change which they
undergo on the way from the dream-thoughts
to the manifest dream. If the affects in the
dream-thoughts are compared with those in
the dream, one thing at once becomes clear:
Wherever there is an affect in the dream,
it
is
to
be
found
also
in
the
dreamthoughts; the converse, however, is not true.
In general, a dream is less rich in affects than
the psychic material from which it is elabo
rated. When I have reconstructed the dreamthoughts, I see that the most intense psychic
impulses are constantly striving in them for
self-assertion, usually in conflict with others

[327a]
which are sharply opposed to them. Now, if I
turn back to the dream, I often find it colour
less and devoid of any very intensive affective
tone. Not only the content, but also the affec^
tive tone of my thoughts is often reduced by
the dream-work to the level of the indifferent.
I might say that a suppression of the affects
has been accomplished by the dream-work.
Take, for example, the dream of the botanical
monograph. It corresponds to a passionate plea
for my freedom to act as I am acting, to ar
range my life as seems right to me, and to me
alone.
The
dream which results
from
this
sounds indifferent; I have written a mono
graph; it is lying before me; it is provided
with colouredplates, and dried plants are to be
found in each copy. It is like the peace of a
deserted battlefield; no trace is left of the
tumult of battle.
But things may turn out quite differently;
vivid expressions of affect may enter into the
dream itself; but we will first of all consider
the unquestioned fact that so many dreams ap
pear indifferent, whereas it is never possible to
godeeply into the dream-thoughts withoutdeep
emotion.
The complete theoretical explanation of this
suppression of affects during the dream-work
cannot be given here; it would require a most
careful investigation, of the theory of the af
fects and of the mechanism of repression. Here
I can put forward only two suggestions. I am
forced—for other reasons—to conceive the lib
eration of affects as a centrifugal process di
rected towards the interior of the body, analo
gous to the processes of motor and secretory
innervation. Just as in the sleeping state the
emission of motor impulses towards the outer
world seems to be suspended, so the centrifugal
awakening of affects by unconscious think
ingduring sleep may be rendered more difficult.
The affective impulses which occur during the
course of the
dream-thoughts may thus in
themselves be feeble, so that those that find
their way into the dream are no stronger. Ac
cording to this line of thought, the suppression
of the affects would not be a consequence of
the dream-work at all, but a consequence of
the state of sleep. This may be so, but it can
not possibly be ail the truth. We must remem
ber that all the more complex dreams have
revealed themselves as the result of a compro
mise between conflicting psychic forces. Gn the
one hand, the wish-forming thoughts have to
oppose the contradiction of a censorship; on
the other hand, as we have often seen, even in

[327b]
The Interpretation of Dreams
323
unconscious thinking, every train of thought is
harnessed
to
its
contradictory
counterpart;
Since all these trains of thought are capable of
arousing affects, we shall, broadly speaking,
hardly go astray if we conceive the suppression
of affects as the result of the inhibition which
the contrasts impose upon one another, and
the censorship upon the urges which it has
suppressed. The inhibition of affects would ac
cordingly be the second consequence of the
dream-censorship, just as dream-distortion was
the first consequence.
I will here insert an example of a. dream in
which the indifferent emotional
tone of the
dream-content may be explained by the antag
onism of the dream-thoughts. I must relate the
following short dream, which every reader will
read with disgust.
IV
Rising ground, and on it something like an
open-air latrine; a very long bench, at the end
of which is a wide aperture. The whole of the
back edge is thickly covered with little heaps
of excrement of all sizes and degrees of fresh
ness. A thicket behind the
bench. I
urinate
upon the bench; a long stream of urine rinses
everything clean, the
patches
of excrement
come off easily and fall into the opening.Never
theless, it seems as though something remained
at the end.
Why did I experience no disgust in this
dream?
Because, as the analysis shows, the most
pleasant
and
gratifying
thoughts have
co
operated in the formation of this dream. .Upon
analysing it, I immediately think of the Au
gean stables which were cleansed by Hercules.
I am this Hercules. The rising ground and the
thicket belong to Aussee, where my children
are now staying. I have discovered the infantile
aetiology of the neuroses,and have thus guarded
my own children from falling ill. The bench
(omitting the aperture, of course) is the faith
ful copy of a piece of furniture of which an
affectionate female,patient has made me a pres
ent. This reminds me how my patients honour
me. Even the museum of human excrement is
susceptible of a gratifying interpretation. How
ever much it disgusts me, it is a souvenir of
the beautiful land of Italy, where in the small
cities, as everyone knows, the privies are not
equipped in any other way. The stream of
urine that washes everything clean is an un
mistakable allusion to greatness. It is in this
manner that Gulhver extinguishes the great fire

[328a]
324
i Sigmtjnd Freud
in Lilliput;; to be sure, he thereby incurs the
displeasure of the tiniest of queens. In this
way, too, Gargantua, the superman of Master
Rabelais, takes vengeance upon the Parisians,
straddling Notre-Dame and training his stream
of urine upon the city. Only yesterday I was
turning over the leaves of Garnier's illustra
tions to Rabelais before I went to bed. And,
strangely enough, here is another proof that I
am the superman! The platform of NotreDame was my favourite nook in Paris; every
free afternoon I used to go up into the towers
of the cathedral and there clamber about be
tween the monsters and gargoyles. The circum
stance
that
all
the
excrement
vanishes
so
rapidly before the stream of urine corresponds
to the motto: Affiavit et dissipati sunt, which
I shall some day make the title of a chapter
on the therapeutics of hysteria.
And now as to the affective occasion of the
dream. It had been a hot summer afternoon;
in the evening, I had given my lecture on the
connection between hysteria and the perver
sions, and everything which I had to say dis
pleased me thoroughly, and seemed utterly val
ueless. I was tired; I took not the least pleasure
in my difficult work, and longed to get away
from this rummaging in human filth; first to
see my children, and then to revisit the beau
ties of Italy. In this mood I went from the
lecture-hall to a cafe to get some little refreshr
rhent in the
open air, for my lappetite had
forsaken me. But a member of my audience
went with me; he begged for permission tb sit
with me while I drank my coffee and gulped
down my roll, and began to say flattering things
to me. He told me how much he had learned
from me, that he now saw everything through
different eyes, that I had cleansed the Augean
stables of error and prejudice, which encum^
bered the theory of the neuroses^-in short,
that I was a very great man. My mood was
ill-suited to his hymn of praise; I struggled
with my disgust, and went home earlier in or
der to get rid of him; and before I went to
sleep I turned over the leaves of Rabelais* and
read a short story by G. F. Meyer entitled
Die Leiden einesKnaben {The Sorrows of a
Boy).
The dream had originated from this; mate
rial, and Meyer-s novel had supplied the recol
lections of
scenes of childhood.1 The day's
mood of annoyance and disgust is continued in
the dream, inasmuch as it is permitted to fur
nish nearly all the material for the dream-con1 Cf. the dreain about Count Thun, last scene.

[328b]
tent. But during the night the opposite .mood
of. vigorous,
even immoderate self-assertion
awakened and dissipated the earlier mood. The
dream had to assume such a form as would
accommodate both the expressions of self-de
preciation and exaggerated self-glorification in
the same material. This compromise-formation
resulted in an ambiguous dream-content, but,
owing to the mutualinhibition of the opposites,
in an indifferent emotional tone.
According to the theory of wish-fulfilment,
this dream would not have been possible had
not the opposed, and indeed suppressed, yet
pleasure-emphasized
megalomaniac
train
pf
thought been added to the thoughts of disgust
For nothing painful is intended to *be repre
sented in dreams; the painful elements of our
daily thoughts are able to force their way into
our dreams only if at the same time they are
able to disguise a wish-fulfilment.
The dream-work is able to dispose of the
affects of the dream-thoughts.in yet another
way than by admitting them or reducing them
to zero. It can transform them into their op*
posites. We are acquainted with the rule that
for the purposes of interpretation every,ele
ment of the dream may represent'its opposite,
as well as itself. One can never tell beforehand
which is to be posited; only the context can
decide this point; A suspicion of this state.of
affairs has- evidently found its:way into; the
popular consciousness;:the dream-bobks, intheir
interpretations, often proceed according to the
principle of contraries. This transformation
into the contrary is made possible by the inti-;
mate associative ties which in our thoughts
connect the idea of a thing with.that of its
opposite. Like every other displacement, this
serves the purposes of the censorship, but it is
often the work of wish-fulfilment, for wish-ful
filment consists in nothing more than the sub
stitution of an unwelcome thing by its opposite.
Just as concrete images may be transformed
into their contraries in our dreams, soalso majy
the affects of the dream-thoughts, and it is
probable that this inversion of affectsis usually
brought about by the dream-censorship. The
suppression and inversion of affects is useful
even in social life, as is shown by the familiar
analogy of the dream-censorshipand/ above all;
hypocrisy. If I am conversingwith a person to
whom I must show consideration while I should
Hke to address him as ah enemy, it is almost
more important that I should conceal the ex
pression of my affect from him than that I
should modify the verbal expression of my

[329a]
thoughts. If I address him in courteous terms,
but accompany them by looks or gestures of
hatred and disdain, the effect which I produce
upon him is not very different from what it
would have been had I cast my unmitigated
contempt into his face. Above all, then, the
censorship bids me suppress my affects, and if
I am a master of the art of dissimulation I can
hypocritically
display the
opposite affectsmiling where I should like to be angry, and
pretending affection where I should like to
destroy.
We have already had an excellent example
of such an inversion of affect in the service of
the dream-censorship. In the dream of my
uncle's beard I
feel great affection for my
friend R, while (and because) the dreamithoughts berate him as a simpleton. From this
exampleof the inversion of affects we derived
our first proof of the existence,of the censor
ship. Even here it.is not necessary to assume
that the dream-work creates a counter-affect
of this kind that is altogether new; it usually
finds it lying ready in the material of the
dream-thoughts, and merely intensifies it with
the psychic force of the defences-motives until
it is able to predominate in the dream-forma
tion. In the dream of my uncle, the affection
ate counter-affect probably has its origin in an
infantile source (as the
continuation of the
dream would suggest), for owing to the pe
culiar nature of my earliest childhood experi
ences the relation of uncle and nephew has
become the source of all my friendships and
hatreds (cf. analysis on pp. 304-5above).
An excellent example of such a reversal of
affect is found in a dream recorded by Ferenc
zi.1 "An elderly gentleman was awakened at
night by his wife, who was frightened because
he laughed so loudly and uncontrollably in his
sleep. The man afterwards related that he had
had the following dream: I lay in my bed, a
gentleman known to me came in, I wanted to
turn on the light, but I could not; I attempted
to do so repeatedy, but in vain. Thereupon my
wife got out of bed, in order to help me, but she,
too, was unable to manage it; being ashamed
of her ndgligS in the presence of the gentle
man, she finally gave it up and went back to
her bed; all this was so comical that I had to
laugh terribly. My wife said: What are you
laughing at, what are you laughing at?' but I
continued to laugh until I woke. The following
day the man was extremely depressed; and
suffered from.headache: fFrom too much laugh-
•^Internat. Zeitschri }. Psychoanalyse, IV (1916)

[329b]
The Interpretation of Dreams
325
iter, which shook me up/ he thought.
r "Analytically considered; the dream looks less
comical. In thelatent dream^thoughts the gen
tleman known to him who came into the room
is the image of death as the 'great unknown,'
which was awakened in his mind on the previ
ous day. The^old gentleman, who suffers from
arteriosclerosis, had good reason to think of
death on the day before the dream. The uncon
trollable laughter takes the place of weeping
and sobbing at the idea that he has to die. It
is the light of life that he is no longer able to
turn on. This mournful thought may have as
sociated itself with a failure to effect sexual in*
tercourse, which he had attempted shortly be
fore this, and in which the assistance of his
wife en fiiglige was of no avail; he realized
that he was already on the decline. The~dreamwork knew how to transform the sad idea of
impotence and death into a comic scene, and
the sobbing into laughter."
•
There is one class of dreams which has a spe
cial claim to be called hypocritical, and which
severely tests the theory of wish-fulfilment. My
attention was called to them when Frau Dr. M.
Hilferding proposed for discussion by the Psy
choanalytic Society of Vienna a dream recorded
by Rosegger, which is here reprinted:
In Waldheimat, vol. xi, Rosegger writes as
follows in his story, Fremd gemacht (p. 303):
"I usually enjoy healthful sleep, yet I have
gone without repose on many a night; in addi
tion to my modest existence as a student and
literary man, I have for long years dragged out
the shadow of a veritable tailor's life—hke a
ghost from which I could not become divorced.
"It is not true that I have occupied myself
very often or very intensely with thoughts of
my past during the day. A stormer of heaven
and earth who has escaped from the hide of
the Philistine has other things to think about.
And as a gay young fellow, I hardly gave a
thought to my nocturnal dreams; only later,
when I had formed the habit of thinking about
everything, or when the Philistine within me
began to assert itself a little, did it strike me
that—when I dreamed at all—I was always a
journeyman tailor, and that in that capacity I
had already worked in my master's shop for a
long time without any pay. As I sat there be
side him, and sewed and pressed, I was per
fectly well aware that I no longer belonged
therey and that as a burgess of the town I^had
other things to attend to; but I was always on
a holiday, or away in the country, and so I sat
beside my master and helped him.-I often felt

[330a]
326
Sigmund Freud
far from comfortable, about it, and regretted
the waste of time which I might have employed
for better and more useful purposes. If any
thing was not quite correct in measure and cut
I had to put up with a scolding from my mas
ter. Of wages there*was never a question. Of
ten, as I sat with bent back in the dark work
shop, I decided to give notice and make myself
scarce. Once I actually did so, but the master
took no notice of me, and next time I was sit
ting beside him again and sewing.
"How happy I was when I woke up after
such weary hours! And I then resolved that, if
this intrusive dream should ever occur again,
I would energetically throw it off, and would
cry aloud: 'It is only a delusion, I am lying in
bed, and I want to sleep' . . . And the next
night I would be sitting in the tailor's shop
again.
"So it went on for years, with dismal regu
larity. Once when the master and I were work
ing at Alpelhofer's, at the house of the peasant
with whom I began my apprenticeship, it hap
pened that my master was particularly dissatis
fied with my work. 'I should like to know where
in the world your thoughts are?' he cried, and
looked at me sullenly. I thought the most sen
sible thing to do would be to get up and ex
plain to the master that I was working with
him only as a favour, and then take my leave.
But I did not do this. I even submitted when
the master engaged an apprentice, and ordered
me to make room for him on the bench. I
moved into the corner, and kept on sewing. On
the same day another journeyman was en
gaged; a bigoted fellow; he was the Bohemian
who had worked for us nineteen years earlier,
and then had fallen into the lake on his way
home from the public-house. When he tried to
sit down there w^is no ^room-for him. I looked
at the master inquiringly, and he said to me:
'You have no talent for tailoring; you may go;
you're a stranger henceforth.' My fright on
that occasion was so overpowering that I woke.
"The grey of morning glimmered' through
thexlear windows of my familiar home. Objets
d'art surrounded me; in the tasteful bookcase
stood the eternal Homer, the gigantic Dante,
the incomparable
Shakespeare,
the
glorious
Goethe—all radiant and immortal, From the
adjoining room resounded the clear little voices
of the children, who were waking up and prat*
tling to their mother. I felt as though I had
rediscovered that idyllically sweet, peaceful,
poetical and spiritualized life in which I have
so often and so deeply been conscious of con

[330b]
templative human happiness. And yet I was
vexed that I had not given my master notice
first, but had been dismissed by him.,
"And how remarkable this seems to me: since
that night, when my master 'made a stranger'
of me,. I have enjoyed restful sleep; I no
longer dream of my tailoring-days-, which now
he in the remote past; which in their unpre
tentious simplicity were really so cheerful, but
which, none the less, have cast a long shadow
over the later years of my life."
In this series of dreams of a poet who, in his
younger years, had been a journeyman tailorj
it is hard to recognize the domination of the
wish-fulfilment. AH the delightful things oc
curred in his waking life, while the dream
seemed to drag along with it the ghost-like
shadow of an unhappy existence which had
long been forgotten. Dreams of my own of a
similar character enable me to give some ex
planation of such dreams. As a young doctor,
I worked for a long time in the Chemical Insti
tute withoutbeing able to-accomplish anything
in that exacting science, so that in the waking
state I never think about this unfruitful and
actually somewhat humiliating period of my
student days. On the other hand, I have a re
curring dream to the effectthat I am working
in the laboratory, making analyses, and experi
ments, and so forth; these dreams, Hke the ex*
amination-dreams, are disagreeable, and they
are never very distinct. During the analysis of
one of these dreams my attention was directed
to the word analysis, which gave me the key to
an understanding of them. Since then I have
become an analyst. I make analyses which are
greatly praised^psycho-analyses, of
course.
Now I understand: when I feel proud of these
analyses in my waking life, and feel inclined to
boast ofmy:achievements, my;;.dreams holdup
to me at night those other, unsuccessful analy
ses, of which I have no reason to be proud;
they are the punitive dreams of the upstart,
like those of the journeyman tailor who be
came a celebrated poet. But how is it possible
for a dream to place itself at the service of
self-criticism in its conflict with parvenu pride,
and to take as its content a rational warning
instead of a prohibited wish-fulfilment? I have
alreadyhinted that the answer to this question
presents many difficulties. We may conclude
that the foundation of the dream consisted
at first of an arrogant phantasy of ambition;
but that in its stead only its suppression
and abasement has reached the dream-content.
One must remember that there are masochistic

[331a]
tendencies in mental life to which such an in
version might be attributed. I see no objection
to
regarding
such dreams as punishmentdreams, as distinguished from Wish-fulfilling
dreams. I should not see in this any limitation
of the theory of dreams hitherto as presented,
but merely a verbal concession to the point of
view to which the convergence of contraries
seems strange. But a more thorough investiga
tion of individual dreams of this class allows
us to recognize yet another element. In an in
distinct, subordinate portion of one of my lab
oratory dreams, I was just at the age which
placed me in the most gloomy and most un
successful year of my professional career; I
still had no position, and no idea how I was
jgoing to support myself,whenI suddenly found
that I had the thoifce of several women Whom
I might marryI I wasj therefore, young again
and, what is more* she Was young agairi^the
woman who has shared with me all these dif
ficult years. In this way, one of the Wishes
which constantly gnaws at the heart of the age
ingmanwasrevealed asthe unconscious dreaminstigator. The conflict raging in other psychic
strata between vanity and self-criticism had
certainly determined the dreanveontent, but
the more deeply-rooted wish for youth had
alone made it possible as a dream. One often
sa#s to oneself even in the waking state: "Tb
be sure, things are going well with you today,
and once you found life very hard; but, after
all,life was sweet in those days, when you were
still so young;"1
Another group of dreams* whichI have often
myself experienced, and which I have recog*-
nized to be hypocritical, have as their content
a reconciliation with persons with whom one
haslong ceased to have friendly relations; The
analysis constantly discovers an occasion which
might well induceme to oast asidethe last rem
nants of consideration for these former friends,
and to treat them as strangers or enemies; But
the
dream
chooses to' depict
the
contrary
relation.
In consideringdreams recorded by a novelist
or poet, we may often enough assume that he
has excluded from the record those details
which he felt to be disturbing and regarded as
unessential. His dreams thus set us a problem
Which could be readily solved if we had an
«xact reproduction of the dream-content.
1Ever since psycho-analysis has dissected the per
sonality into an ^ego and a super-ego (GrflwpPsy
chology and the Analysis of the Ego, p. 664 below), it
has been easy to recognize in these punishment-dreams
wishfulnlments of the super-ego*

[331b]
The Interpretation of Dreams
327
0. Rank has called my attention to the fact
that in Grimm's fairy-tale of-the valiant little
tailor^ or Seven at One Stroke, there is related
a very similar dream of an upstart; The tailqr,
who has become a hero, and has married the
king's daughter, dreams one night while lying
beside the princess, his Wife, about his trade;
having become suspicious, on the following
night she places armed guards where they can
listen to What is said by the dreamer, and ar
rest him. But the little tailor is warned, and is
able to correct his dream*
The complicated processes of removal, dimi
nution, and inversion by which the affects of
the dream-thoughts finallybecome the affects of
the dream may be very well surveyed in suit
able syntheses of completely analysed dreams^
I Shall here-discuss-a^few-examples-of affective
manifestations in dreams which wh% I think*
prove this conclusively in some of the cases
cited;
In the dream about the odd task which the
elder Brucke sets me—that of preparing my
own pelvis—-I am aware in the dream itself of
not feeling appropriate horror. Now this is a
wish-fulfilment in more senses, than one. The
preparation signifies the self-analyses which I
perform, as it were, by publishing my book on
dreams, which I actually; found.so painful that
I postponed the. printing of the completed
manuscript for more than a year. The wish now
arises that I may disregard this feeling pf aver
sion, and -for that reason I feel no horror
(Graueti, which also means to grow-grey) in
the dream. I should much like to escape Grauen
in the other sense too, for I am already grow
ing quite grey, and the grey in my hair warns
me to; delay no longer. For we know that at
the end of the dream this thought secures rep
resentation: "I shall have to leave my children
to reach the goal of their difficult journeywith
out my help."
In the two dreams that transfer the expres
sion of satisfaction to the moments immedi
ately after waking, this satisfaction is in the
one ease motivated by the expectation that I
am now goingto learn what is meant by / have
already dreamed of this, and refers in reality
to the birth of my first child, and in the other
case it is motivated by the; conviction that
"that which has been announced by a premoni
tory sign" is now going to happen, and the sat
isfaction is that which I felt on the arrival of
my second son. Here the same affects that

[332a]
328
dominated in
the
dream-thoughts have re
mained in the dream, but the process is proba
bly hot quite so simple as this in any dream.
If the two analyses are examined a little more
closely it will be seen that this satisfaction,
Which does not succumb to the: censorship, re--
c'eives reinforcement from a source which must
fear the censorship, and whose affect would
certainly have aroused opposition if it had not
screened itself by a similar and readily admit
ted affect of satisfaction from the •permitted
source, and had, so to speak, sneaked in behind
it. I am unfortunately unable to show this in
the case of the actual dream, but annexample
from another situation will make iny meaning
intelligible. I will put the following case: Let
there be a person near me whom I hate so
strongly that I have a lively impulse to rejoice
should anything happen to him. But the moral
side of my nature does not give way to this
impulse; I do not dare to express this sinister
wish, and when something does happen to him
which he does not deserve I suppress my satisfaction; and force mys'elf to thoughts and ex
pressions of regrets Everyone Will at some time
have found himself in such a position. But now
let it happen that the hated person/ through
some transgression of his own, draws upon him
self a Well-deserved calamity; I shall now be
allowed to give free rein to my satisfaction at
his being visited by a just puhis^hment; and I
shall be expressing an opinion which coincides
with that of other impartial persons. But I ob
serve that my satisfaction proves to be more
Intense than that of others^ fOrit has received
reinforcement from another source—from my
hatred, which was hitherto prevented by the
inner censorship
from
furnishing the affect,
but which, under the altered circumstances, is
no longer prevented from doing so. This case
generally occurs in social life whenantipathetic
persons or the adherents of an unpopular mi
nority have been guilty of some offence. Their
punishment is then usually commensurate not
with their guilt, but With their guilt plus the illwill against them that has hitherto not been put
into effect; Those who punish them doubtless
commit an injustice, but they are prevented
from becoming aware of it by the satisfaction
arising from the release within themselves of
a suppression of long standing. In such cases
the quality of' the affect is justified, but not its
degree;- and the self-criticism that has been
appeased in respect of the first point is only
too ready to neglect to scrutinize the second
point; Once you-have opened the doors^iriore

[332b]
SlGMUND ^FrEXJD
people enter than it was your original inten
tion to admit;
:
A striking feature of the neurotic character,
namely, that in it causes capable of evoking
affect produce results which are qualitatively
justified but quantitatively excessive, is to be
explained on these lines, in so far as.it admits
of:a psychological explanation at all. But the
excess of affect proceeds from unconscious and
hitherto suppressed affective sources which are
able to establish an associative connection with
the actual occasion, and for whose liberation of
affect the unprotested and permitted source of
affects opens upthe desired path. Our attention
is thus called to the fact that the relation of
mutual inhibition must not be regarded as the
only relation obtaining between the suppressed
and the suppressing psychic institution. The
cases in which ^the two institutions bring about
a pathological result by coroperation. and mur
tual reinforcement deserve just as much, atten
tion; These hints regarding the psychic mech
anism will contribute to-our understanding of
the expressions of affects inidreams. A gratifi
cation'which makes its appearance in a,dream,
and which, of course, may readily be found in
its proper placein the dream-thoughts, may not
always be fully explained by means of this
reference. As a rule, it is necessary to search
for a second.source in the dream-thoughts,
uponwhichthe pressure:of the.censorship rests,
and which, under this pressure, would have
yielded not gratification but the contrary .ef
fect, had it not been enabled by the presence
jof the first dream-source to free its gratifica
tion-affect from repression, and. reinforce the
gratification springing, from the other source.
Hence affects which appear in dreams appear
to be formed by the confluence of several tribu
taries, and are over-determined in respect of
thematerialof the dream-thoughts; Sources of
affect whichare able to furnish the same affect
combine in the dream-work in order to pmduce it.1
•|
Some insight into these involved relations is
gained
from
the^analysis of
the admirable
dream in which Won vixit constitutes the cen
tral point (cf. p. 304). In this dream expres
sions of affect of different qualities are concen
trated at two points in the manifest content.
Hostile and painful impulses (in the dream it
self we have the phrase overcome by strange
emotions) overlap one another at .the point
where I destroy my antagonistic friend with a
- •'* I have since explained the extraordinary,' effect elf
pleasure produced by tendency wit on analogous lines.

[333a]
The Interpretation op Dreams
3?9
Couple of words.At the end of the dream I ani
greatly pleased, and am quite ready to believe
in a possibility which I recognize as absurd
when I am awake, namely, that there arerevenants who can be swept away by a mere wish.
I have not yet mentioned the occasion of this
dream. It is an important one, and leads us far
down;into the meaning of the dream. From my
friend in Berlin (whom I have designated as
Fl) I had receivedthe news-that he was abqut
to undergo an operation, and that relatives of
his living in Vienna would inform me as to his
condition. The first few messages after the op^
eration were not very reassuring, and caused
me great anxiety. I should have liked to go to
him myself, but at that time I was afflicted
with a painful complaint which made•every,
movement a torment. I now learn frpm the
dream-thoughts that I feared for .this dear
friend's life. I knew.that his only sister, wjth
whom I bad: never been acquainted, had died
yqung, after a.very brief illness. (In the dream
Fltells me about^
quarters of an hour she was;-dead'') I.must
have imagined that his own constitution was
not much stronger^ and that I should soon be,
travelling, in spite of myhealthj in.response to
far worse news—and that I should arrive too
late, for. which I,.-?should eternally reproach
myself,1 This:reproach, that I should arrive.-toplate, has(become^the,central point of ithe dream,
but it has been represented in a scene in which
the revered teacher of - my student years----
Brucke—^reproaches meipr the same thing with
a
terrible look from
his
blue eyes.
Whaf,
brought about this alteration of the scene will
soon become, apparent: the dream cannot re
produce the scene itself as I experiencedit. To
be sure,.it leaves,,the blue eyes to the other
man, but it gives me^ the part of the annihilator, an inversion which is obviously the work
of the wish-fulfilment. My concern for the life
of my friend, my\self-reproach for not having
gone to him, my shame (he had come to me in
Vienna unobtrusively), my desire to consider
myself excused on account of my illness--—all
this builds up an emotional tempest which is
distinctly felt in my sleep, and which rages in
that region of the dream-thoughts.
But there was another thing in the occasion
of the dream which had quite, the opposite ef1 It is this fancy from,:, .{he unconscious
dreamthoughts which peremptorily'demands non vivit instead.
oinon vixit. "You have come tooJate, he is no longer
alive." The
fact that the manifest situation of the
dream; aims, at the non vivii bp,s been, nientioned on
page 305.

[333b]
feet. With the unfavourable news during the
first days of the operation I received, also an
injunction to speak to no one about, the whole
affair, which hurt my feelings, for it betrayed
an unnecessary distrust of my discretion! [._"I
knew, of course, that this request did.not prp^
ceed from my friend, but that, it was due to
clumsiness or excessive timidity on the part of
the messenger;, yet theconcealed reproach af-^
fected me very disagreeably, because it was hot
altogether unjustified. As we know; only re
proaches which have something in them have
the poWer to hurt.;:Years' ago, when I
was
younger than I am now, I knew two men who
were friends, and who honoured me!with their
friendship; and I quite superfluously told One
of them: what the other had said of- him; This
incident; of course^ had nothing to do with the
affairs of my friend Fl^ but I have never for^
gotten the reproaches to which I-had to listen
onvthat' occasion. One of the two ^friends'ben
tween-rwhom If made trouble was 1Professor
Fleischl; theotherone: I>wUl:calLbyhis::b*ap-;
tisn-ialt namej Josef^a name which:was!borne
also; by^My friend and antagonistu&,n whb
appears;in thisridream. •, - ;r;
?-I. v.f •
?. -io
In the dream
the element unobtrusively:
points to the'reproach that! cannot-keep any*
things to myself, and- so does the •question of
Fl as:M'how much of.his^affairs* I havetold Pi
But it-is the interventionrof that; old memory
which transposes the reproach for>arriving toff
late from
the present to rthen time; when I
was working in Brucke's laboratory; iand; by
replacing the second person in the annihilation
sceneof the dream joy^a. Josef, I enable this
scene to represent not only,the first reproachthat I
have arrived toor late--but also that
Other reproach, more strongly affected-by^the
Repression, to the ['effect that I do not keep
secrets; The work of condensation and displace
ment in 'this dream, as well as the motives for
it, are now obvious.
My present trivial annoyance at the injunck
tion not to divulge secrets draws reinforcement
from springs that flowfar beneath the surface^
and so swells to a stream of hostile impulses:
towards persons who are in reality dear to meiThe source which furnishes the reinforcement
is to be found in my childhood. I have already
said that my warm friendships as well as my;
enmities, with persons of my own age go back
to my childish relations tOvttiy nephew, who
was a year older than I. In these he had the
upper hand, and I early learned howto defend
myself;; we lived together, were inseparable^

[334a]
J30
SlGMTJND FEEUD
and Ibved one another; but at times j as the
statements of older persons testify, we used to
squabble and accuse one another. In a certain
sense, all my friends are incarnations of this
first figure; they are all revenants. My nephew
himself returned when a young man, and then
we were like Caesar and Brutus. An intimate
friend and a hated enemy have always been
indispensable to my emotional life; I have al
ways been able to create them anew, and not
infrequently my childish ideal has
been so
closely approached that friend and enemy have
coincided in the same person; but not simultaneausly^offCourse;, nor in constant alternation,
as was the case in my early childhood.
How, when such associations exist, a recent
occasion of emotion may cast back to the in
fantile occasion and substitute this as a cause
of affect, I shall not consider now. Such an
investigation would properly belong to the psy
chology of unconscious thought, or a psycho
logical explanation of the neuroses. Let us as
sume, for the purposesof dream-interpretation,
that a childish recollection presents;itself, oris
created by the phantasy with, more or less, the
following content: We two children quarrel on
account of some object-^just what we shall
leave undecided, although the memory, or il
lusion of memory, has a very definite object in
view-—and each,claims that Zre got there first,
and therefore has the first right to it. We come
to blows; Might comes before Right; and, ac
cording to the indications of the dream, I must
have known that I was in the wrong (noticing
the error myself); but this time I am the
stronger, and take possession of the battlefield;
the defeated combatant hurries to my father,
his grandfather, and accuses me, and I defend
myself with the words, which I have heard
from my father: '7 hit him because he hit me."
Thus, this recollection, or more probablyphan
tasy, which forces itself upon my attention in
the^conrse- of the analysis—without further
evidence I myself do not know how—becomes
a central item of the dream-thoughts,;which
collectsthe affective impulses prevailing in the
dream-thoughts, as the bowl of a fountain col
lects the water that flows into it. From this
point the dream-thoughtsflow alongthe follow
ing channels: "It servesyou right that you have
had to make way for me; why did you try to
push me off? I don't need you; I'll soon find
someone else to play with," etc. Then the chan
nels are opened through Which these thoughts
flow back again into the dream-representation.

[334b]
For such an "dte-toi que je m'y mette"* I
brice had to reproach my deceased friend Josef.
He was next to me in the line of promotion in
Brucke's laboratory, but advancement there
was very slow. Neither of the two assistants
budged from his place, and youth became im
patient. My friend, who knew that his days
were numbered, and was bound by no intimate
relation to his superior, sometimes gave free
expression to his impatience. As this superior
was a man seriously ill, the wish to see him
removed by promotion was susceptible of an
obnoxious
secondary
interpretation.
Several
years, earlier,, to be sure; T myself had cher
ished, even more intensely, the same wish—to
obtain a post which had fallen vacant; wher
ever there are gradations of rank and promo
tion the way is opened for the suppression of
covetous wishes. Shakespeare's Prince Hal can
not rid himself of the temptation to see how
the crown fits, even at the bedside of his sick
father. But, as may readily be understood, the
dream inflicts this inconsiderate wish not upon
me, but upon my friend.2
I
"As he was ambitious, I slew him." As he
could not expect that the other man wouldmake
way for him, the man himself has been put
out of the way. I harbour these thoughts im
mediately after attending the unveiling of the
Memorial to the other man at the University.
Part of the satisfaction which I
feel in the
dream may therefore be interpreted: A just
punishment; it serves you right.
At the funeral of this friend a young mstri
made the
following remark,
which seemed
rather out Of place: "The preacher talked as
though the world could no longer exist without
this one human being." Here was a stirring of
revolt in the heart of a sincere man, whose
grief had been disturbed by exaggeration. But
with this speech
are
connected the
dreamthoughts:
"No one is really irreplaceable;
how many men have I already escorted to the
grave!
But I am still alive; I have survivBd
them all; I claim the field." Sucha thought, at
the momentwhen I fear that if I makea jour
ney to see him I shallfind my friend no longer
among the living, permits only of the further
development that I am glad once more to have
survived somebne; that it is not / who have
died but he; that I am master of the field, as
1 Make room for me.—Ed.
2It will have been obvious that the name Josef
plays a great part in my dreams (see the dream about
my uncle). It is particularly easy for,me to.hide my
ego in my dreams behind persons of this name, since
Joseph was the name of the dream-interpreter in the
Bible.

[335a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
33i
once I was in the imagined scene of my child
hood. This satisfaction, infantile in origin, at
the fact that I am master of the field, covers
the greater part of the affect which appears in
the dream. I am glad that I am the survivor;
I express this sentiment with the naive egoism
of the husband who says to his wife: "If one
of us dies, I shall move to Paris." My expec
tation takes it as a matter of course that I am
not the one to die.
It cannot?be -denied«that=.great .selfrcontrol
is needed to interpret one's dreams and to re
port them. One has to reveal oneself as the
sole
villain among all the noble souls with
whom one shares the breath of life. Thus, I
find it
quite comprehensible that revenants
should exist only as long as one wants them,
and that they can be obliterated by a wish. It
was for this reason that my friend Josef was
punished. But the revenants are the successive
incarnations of the friend of my childhood; I
am also gratified at having replaced this person
for myself over and over again, and a substi
tute will doubtless soon be found even for the
friend whonvl am-now-on-the point of losing.
No one is irreplaceable.
But what has
the dream-censorship been
doing in the meantime? Why does it not raise
the most emphatic objection to
a train of
thoughts characterized by such brutal selfish
ness, and transform the satisfaction inherent
therein into extreme discomfort? I think it is
because other unobjectionable trains of thought
referring to the same persons result also in
satisfaction, and with their affect cover that
proceeding from the forbidden infantile sources.
In another stratum of thought I said to myself,
at the ceremony of unveiling the memorial:
"I have lost so many dear friends, some through
death, some through the dissolution of friend
ship;
is
it
not good
that
substitutes
have
presented themselves, that I have gained a
friend who means more to me than the others
could, and whom I shall now always retain, at
an age when it is not easy to form new friend
ships ?" The gratification of having found this
substitute for my lost friend can be taken over
into the dream without interference, but be
hind it there sneaks in the hostile feeling of
malicious gratification from the infantile source.
Childish affection undoubtedly helps to rein
force
the
rational
affection
of
today;
but
childish hatred also has found its way into the
representation.
But besides this, there is in the dream a
distinct reference to another train of thoughts

[335b]
which may result in gratification. Some time
before this, after long waiting, a little daughter
was born to my friend. I knew how he had
grieved for the sister whom he had lost at an
early age, and I wrote to him that I felt that
he would transfer to this child the love he had
felt for her, that this little girl would at last
make him forget his irreparable loss.
Thus this train also connects up with the
intermediary thoughts of
the latent dreamcontent, from which.paths radiate in the most
contrary directions: "No one is irreplaceable.
See, here are only revenants; all those whom
one has lost return." And now the bonds of
association between the contradictory compo
nents of the dream-thoughts are more, tightly
drawn by the accidental circumstance that my
friend's little daughter bears the same name as
the girl playmate of my own youth, who was
just my own age, and the sister of my oldest
friend and antagonist. I heard the name Pauline
with satisfaction, and in order to allude to this
coincidence I replaced one Josef in the dream
by another Josef, and found it impossible to
suppress .the
identical initials in
the name
Fleischl and Fl. From this point a train of
thought runs to the naming of my own chil
dren. I insisted that the names should not be
chosen according to the fashion of the day, but
should be determined by regard for the memory
of those dear to us. The children's names make
them, revenants. And, finally, is not the pro
creation of children for all men the only way
Of access to immortality?
I shall add only a few observations as to the
affects of dreams considered from another point
of view. In the psyche of the sleeper an affec
tive tendency—what we call a mood—may be
contained as its dominating element, and may
induce a corresponding mood in the dream.
This mood may be the result of the experiences
and thoughts of the day, or it may be of somatic
origin; in either case it will be accompanied
by the corresponding trains of thought. That
this ideational content of the dream-thoughts
should at
one
time
determine
the affective
tendency primarily, while at another time it is
awakened in a secondary manner by the somati
cally determined emotional disposition, is in
different for the purposes of dream-formation.
This is always subject to the restriction that
it can represent only a wish-fulfilment, and
that it may lend its psychic energy to the wish
alone. The mood actually present will receive
the
same treatment
as the sensation which
actually emerges during sleep
(cf. p. 234),

[336a]
332
Sigmund Freud
which is either neglected or reinterpreted in
the sense of a wish-fulfilment. Painful moods
during sleep become the motive force of the
dream,inasmuch'asthey awakeenergeticwishes
which the dream has to fulfil. The material in
which they inhere is elaborated until it is serv
iceable for the expression of the wish-fulfil
ment. The more intense and the more domi
nating the element of the painful mood in the
dream-thoughts, the more surely will the most
strongly suppressed wish-impulses take advan
tage of the opportunity to secure representa
tion; for thanks to the actual existence of
discomfort, which otherwise they would have
to create spontaneously, they find that the more
difficult part of the work necessary to ensure
representation has already been accomplished;
and with these observations we touch once more
upon the problem of anxiety-dreams, which
will prove to be the boundary-case of dreamactivity.
/. The Secondary Elaboration
We Will at last turn our attention to the fourth
of the factors participating in dream-formation.
If we continue
our
investigation
of
the
dream-content on the lines already laid down—
that is, by examining the origin in the dreamthoughts of conspicuous occurrences—we come
upon elements that can be explained only by
making an entirely new assumption. I have in
mind cases where one manifests astonishment,
anger, or resistance in a dream, and that, too,
in respect of part of the dream-content itself.
Most of these impulses of criticism in dreams
are not directed against the dream-content, but
prove to be part of the dream-material, taken
over and fittingly applied, as I have already
shown by suitable examples. There are, how
ever, criticisms of this sort which are not so
derived: their correlatives cannot be found in
the
dream-material.
What,
for
instance,
is
meant
by
the
criticism
not
infrequent in
dreams: "After all, it's only a dream"? This
is a genuine criticism of the dream, such as I
might make if I were awakei Not infrequently
it is only the prelude to waking; even oftener
it is preceded by a painful feeling, which sub
sides when the actuality of the dream-state has
been affirmed. The thought: "After all, it's only
a dream" in the dream itself has the same in
tention as it has on the stage on the lips of
Offenbach's Belle Eilhne; it seeks tp minimize
what has just been experienced, and to secure
indulgence for what is to follow. It serves to
lull to sleep a certain mental agency which at

[336b]
the given moment hasevery occasion7to rouse
itself and forbid the continuation of the dream,
Or the scene.But it is more convenient to go
on-sleepingand to tolerate the dream, "because,
after all, it's only a dream." I imagine that the
disparaging criticism: "After all, it's only a
dream," appears in the dream at the moment
when the
censorship, which is never
quite
asleep, feels that it has been surprised by the
already admitted dream. It is too late to suppress the dream, and the agency therefore
meets with this remark the anxiety or painful
emotion which rises into the dream. It is ah
expression of the esprit d'escalier on the part
of the psychic censorship.
In this example we have incontestable proof
that everything which the drearti contains does
not come from the dream-thoughts^ but that
a psychic function, which cannot be differen
tiated from our waking thoughts^ may make
contributions to the dream-content. The ques
tion arises, does this occur only in exceptional
cases, or does the psychic agency; which is
otherwise active only as the censorship, play
a constant part in dream-formation?
One must decide unhesitatingly for the latter
view. It is indisputable that the censoring
agency, whose influence we have so far recog*
nized only in the restrictions Of and omissions
in the dream-content, is likewise responsible
for interpolations in and amplifications of this
content. -Often these interpolations are readily
recognized; they are introducedWith hesitation,
prefaced by an "as if"; they have no special
vitality of their own, and are constantly in
serted at points where they may serve to con
nect two
portions Of the dream-content or
create a continuity between two sections of the
dream. They manifest less ability to adhere in
the memory than do the genuine products of
the dream-material; if the dream is forgotten,
they are forgotten first, and I strongly suspect
that our frequent complaint that although We
have dreamed so much we have forgotten most
of the dream, and have remembered only frag
ments, is explained by the immediate falling
away of just these cementing thoughts. In a
complete
analysis,
these
interpolations
are
often betrayed by the fact that no material is
to be found for them in the dream-thoughts.
But after careful examination I mtist describe
this case as the less usual one; in mdst cases
the interpolated thoughts can be traced' to
material in the dream-thoughts which can claim
a place in the dream neither by its own merits
nor by way of overrdeterrnihation- Only in the

[337a]
The Int£rerS"tation oe Dreams
333
most;fextreme,;case9;does- the psychic/function
in dream-iormatip^.:;which vwe are .now. eonT
sidermgi.rise |p originaJi.:creatipn; whenever
possible it; makes use of anything{appropriate
t]hat it can find:in the dream-material. , .: n :
What distinguishes this part.of the xireamwprk, and also,betrays it, is its tendency:^This
function proc^edssin a.manner which the poet
maliciously.attributes to the philosopher:;with
its rags and tatters it stops up the breaches, in
the structure of,the dream. The result of its
efforts is that the dream loses the appearance
of absurdity and incoherence,, and approaches
the pattern of an inteUigible experience. JBut
the effort.is not always crowned with complete
success. Thus, dreams occur •which may, upon
superficial, examination, seem faultlessly logical
and correct; they start from a possible-situa=
tion, continue it
by
means of consistent
changes, and bring it—although this is rare—
to a not unnatural conclusion. These, dreams
have been subjected to the most searching elab
oration by a psychic function similar to our
waking thought; they seem to have a meaning,
but this meaning is very far removed from
the real meaning of the dream. If we analyse
them, we are convinced that the secondary
elaboration has handled the material with the
greatest freedom, and has retained as little as
possible of its proper relations. These are the
dreams which have, so to speak, already been
once interpreted before we subject them to
waking interpretation. In other dreams this
tendencious elaboration has succeeded only up
to a point; up to this point consistency seems
to prevail, but then the dream becomes non
sensical or confused; but perhaps before it
concludes it may once more rise to a semblance
of rationality. In yet other dreams the elabo
ration has failed completely; we find ourselves
helpless, confronted with: a senseless mass of
fragmentary contents.
I do not wish to deny to this fourth dreamforming power,, which will soon become fa
miliar to us—it is in reality the only one of the
four dream-creating factors which is familiar
to us in other connections—I do not wish to
deny to this fourth factor the faculty of crea
tively making new contributions to our dreams.
But its influence is certainly exerted, like that
of the other factors, mainly in the preference
and
selection
of
psychic
material
already
formed in the dream-thoughts. Now there is a
case where it is to a great extent spared the
work of building, as it were, a fagade to the
dream by the fact that such a structure, only

[337b]
waitidg tp be used* already-exists in the; ma
teriallof\ the*dream-thoughts. I-am accustomed
toidescribe the lelement ofr tM dreamrthougMs
whichsl-have in mind as phantasy-; I-shalhper*
hapsnavoid misunderstandingIf I at once point
to the day-dreamas.sinanalogy in wiaking- life:*
The part played by this element in'our psychic
life has.notyet<been fully.recognized and re
vealed by psychiatrists; though M; iBenedikt
has, it seemsrto me; made a highly promising
beginning. Yet the significance of the day-dream
has not escaped the unerring insight of :the
poets; we are all familiar with the description
of the day-dreams of one of his subordinate
characters which AlphonseDaudet; has given
us in.his Nabob. The study of the psychoneu?
roses; discloses the astonishing fact .that these
phantasies or ;day-dreams;-are the immediate
predecessors
of
symptoms
of-hysteria^^at
least, of a great many of them; for .hysterical
symptoms* are dependent not upon Actual mem
ories, but upon the phantasies built up on a
basis of memories. The frequent occurrence of
conscious day-phantasies brings; these forma
tions to our ken; but while some of .these
phantasies are
conscious^ there is, a super
abundance of unconscious
phantasies^, which
must perforce remain unconscious: on account
of their content and their origin in repressed
material. A more thorough examination of the
character of these day-phantasies shows with
what good reason the same name has been given
to these formations as to the products of noc
turnal thought—dreams. They have essential
features in common with nocturnal dreams;
indeed, the investigation of day-dreams might
really have afforded the shortest and best
approach to the understanding of nocturnal
dreams.
Like dreams, they are wish-fulfilments;, like
dreams, they are largely based upon the im
pressions of childish experiences; like dreams,
they obtain a certain indulgence from the cen
sorship in respect of their creations. If we
trace their formation, we,become aware how
the wish-motive which has been operative in
their production has taken the material oi
which they are built, mixed it together, re
arranged it, and fitted it together into a new
whole. They bear very much the same relation
to the childish memories to which they refer
as many of the baroque palaces of Rome bear
to the ancient ruins, whose hewn stones and
columns have furnished the material for the;
structures built in the modern style,
*Reve, petit r0wa»=day-dream, story. 1
j

[338a]
334
Sigmtjnd Freud
In the secondary elaboration of the dreamcontent which we have ascribed to our fonrth
dream-forming factor* we find once more the
very same activity which is allowed to manifest
itself, uninhibited by other influences, in the
creation of day-dreams. We may say, without
further preliminaries, that this fourth factor
of ours seeks to construct something like a
day-dream from the material which offers it
self. But where such a day-dream has already
been constructed-in--the context"of-the4feamthoughts, this factor of the dream-work will
prefer to take possession of it, and contrive
that it gets into the dream-content. There are
dreams that: consist merely of the repetition
of a day-phantasy, whichhas perhaps remained
unconscious—as, for instance, the boy's dream
that he is riding in a war-chariot with the
heroes of the Trojan war. In my Autodidasker
dream the second part of the dream at least
is the faithful repetition of a day-phantasy—
harmless in itself—-of my dealings with Pro
fessor N. The fact that the exciting phantasy
forms only a part of the dream, or that only
a part of it finds its way into the dream-con
tent, is due to the complexity of the conditions
which the dream must satisfy at its genesis.
On the whole, the phantasy is treated like any
other component of the latent material; but it
is often still recognizable as a whole in the
dream. In my dreams there are often parts
which are brought into prominence by their
producing a different impression from that
produced by the other parts. They seem to me
to be in a state of flux, to be more coherent and
at the same time more transient than other
portions of the same dream. I know that these
are unconscious phantasies Whichfind their way
into the context of the dream, but I have never
yet succeeded in registering such a phantasy.
For the rest, these phantasies, like all the other
component parts of the dream-thoughts, are
jumbled together, condensed, superimposed,
and so on; but we find all the transitional
stages, from the case in which they may con
stitute the dream-content, or at least the dreamfagade, unaltered, to the most contrary case,
in which they are represented in the dreamcontent by only one of their elements, or by a
remote allusion to such an element. The fate
of the phantasies in the dream-thoughts is ob
viously determined by the advantages they can
offer as against the claims of the censorship
and the pressure of condensation.
In my choice of examples for dream-inter
pretation I have, as far as possible, avoided

[338b]
those dreams in which uncon^ciolis phaMksies
play a considerable part, because the introduc^
tion
of
this
psychic
element
Wtfuld have
necessitated an extensive discussion of the psy*
chology of unconscious thought/But even in
this connection I cannot entirely avoid the
phantasy, because it often finds its way into
the drearn complete, and still more Often per^-
eeptibly glimmers through it. 1 might mention
yet one more dream, which seems to be com-
" posedTof-two:distBict and opposed phantasies^
overlapping here and there, of which the first
is superficial, while the second becomes, as ii
were, the interpretation af.the first.1
The dream—it is the only one of which I
possess no careful notes—is roflghly to this
effect: The dreamer—-a young unmarried mail
^-is sitting in his favourite inn, which is seen
correctly; several persons come to fetch him,
among them someone who wants to arrest him.
Be says to his table companions, "I will pay
later, I am coming back." But they cry, smiling
scornfully: "We know all about that; that's]
what everybody says." One guest calls after,
him: "There goes another one." He is then lea
to a small place where he finds a woman with d
child in her arms. One of his escorts says:
"This is Herr Mutter." A commissioner or
some other official is running through a bundle
of tickets or papers, repeating Miiller, Mutter}
Miiller. At last the commissioner asks him a
question, which he answers with a "Yes." He
then takes a look at the woman, and notices
that she has grown a large beard.
The two component parts are here easily^
separable. What is superficial is the phantasy
of being arrested; this seems to be newly cre-l
ated by the dream-work. But behind it the1
phantasy of marriage is visible, and this ma
terial, on the other hand, has been slightly
modified by the dream-work, and the features
which may be common to the two phantasies1
appear with special distinctness, as in Galton's
composite photographs. The promise of the1
young man, who is at present a bachelor, to
11 have analysed an excellent example of a dream
of this kind, having its origin in the stratification of
several phantasies, in the Fragment of an Analysis of
a Case of Hysteria (Collected Papers, vol. III). I
undervalued the significance of such phantasies for
dream-formation as long as I was working principally
on my own dreams, which were rarely based upon
day-dreams but most frequently upon discussions and
mental conflicts. With other persons it is often much
easier to prove the complete analogy between the noc
turnal dream and the day-dream. In hysterical patients
an attack may often be replaced by a dream; it is then
obvious that the day-dream phantasy is the first step
for both these psychic formations.

[339a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
335
return to his place at his accustomed table—*
the scepticism
pf his drinking
companions,
made wise by their many experiences-^their
calling after him: "There goes (marries) an*
other owe"—-are all features easily susceptible
of the other interpretation, as is the affirmative
answer given to the official. Running through
$ bundle of papers and repeating the same name,
corresponds to a subordinate but easily recog-r
nized feature of the marriage ceremony—-the
reading aloud of the congratulatory telegrams,
which have arrived at irregular intervals, and
which, of course, are all addressed to the same
name. In the personal appearance of the bride
in this dream the marriage phantasy has even
got the better of the arrest phantasy which
screens it. The fact that this bride finally wears
a beard I can explain from informationreceived
—I had no opportunity of making an analysis.
The dreamer had, on the previous day, been
crossing the street with a friend
who was
just as hostile to marriage as himself, and had
called his
friend's
attention to a
beautiful
brunette who was coming towards them. The
friend
had
remarked:
"Yes, if
only
these
women wouldn't get beards as they grow older,
like their fathers."
Qf course,, even in this dream there is no
lac.k of elements with which the dream-distort
tion has done, deep work. Thus, the speech, "I
will pay later," may have reference to the be
haviour feared on the part of the tfat&e&m^aw'
in the matter of a dowry. Obviously all sorts
of misgivings are preventing the dreamer from
surrendering himself with pleasure to the phan
tasy of marriage. One of these misgivings—
that with rnarriage, he might lose his freedomhas embodied itself in the transformation of a
scene of arrest.
If we once more return to the thesis that
the dream-work prefers to make use of a readymade phantasy, instead of first creating one
from the material of the dream-thoughts, we
shall perhaps be able to solve one pf the most
interesting problems of the dream. I have re
lated the dream of Maury, who is struck on
the back of the neck by a small board, and
wakes after a long dream-—a complete romance
of the period of the French Revolution, Since
the dream is produced-ma coherent •formvand
completely fits the explanation of the wakingstimulus, of whose occurrence the sleeper could
have had no forboding, only one assumption
seems possible, namely, that the whole richly
elaborated dream must have been composed,
and dreamed in the short interval of tim£ be

[339b]
tween the falling of the board on Maury's
cervical vertebrae and the waking induced by
the blow. We should not venture to ascribe
such rapidity to the mental operations of the
waking state, so that we have to admit that
the dream-work has the privilege of a remark
able acceleration of its issue.
To this conclusion, which rapidly became
popular,
more
recent
authors
(LeLorrain,
Egger^ and others) have opposed emphatic ob-»
jeqtions; some of them doubt the correctness;
of Maury's record of the dream, some seek to
show that the rapidity of our mental operations
in waking life is by no means inferior to that
which we can, without reservation, ascribe to
the mental operations -in dreams. The discus-*
sion raises fundamental questions, which I do
not think are at all near, solution. But I must
confess that Egger's objections, for example,
to Maury's dream of the guillotine, do not
impress me as convincing. I would suggest the
following explanation of this dream; Is it so
very improbable that Maury's dream may have
represented a phantasy which had bee;n pre
served for years in his memory, in a completed
states and which wa§ awakened*^-! should like;
to sayv alluded to—at the moment when be
became aware
of the waking stimulus? The
whole difficulty of composing so long a story^
with all its details, in the exceedingly short
space of time which is here at the dreamer^
*^sposaMfeen5diisappea^^'tiie^sfeor^-w^^fiad.y^
composed. If the board had struck Maury^sj
neck when he was awake, there would perhaps
have been time for the thought: "Why,/that's
just like being guillotined." But as he is struck
by
the board while asleep, the dream-work
quickly utilizes the incoming stimulus for the
construction
of
a
wish-fulfilment,
as if it
thought (this is to be taken quite figuratively)v
"Here is a good opportunity to
realize ther
wish-phantasy which I formed at such and such
a time while I was reading." It seems to me
undeniable that this dream-romance is
just
such a,one as a young man is wont to construct
under the influence of exciting impressions.
Who has not been fascinated—above all, a
Frenchman and a student of the history of
civilization—by descriptions of the Reign of
Terror, in which-<the :aristocraey^meni^and
women, the flower of the,nation,, showed that it
was possible to die with a light heart, and pre
served their ready wit and the refinement of
their manners up to the moment of the last
fateful summons? How tempting to fancy one
self in the midst of all this, as one of these

[340a]
336
•; SiGMTjBfr)Fee©d
young men who take leave of their ladies with
a kiss ox" the hand, and fearlessly ascend the
Scaffold !fi Of perhaps ambition was the rulhig
motive of the: ^hantasy^-the ambition; to put
oneself in the place of one of those powerful
personalities who, by their sheer force of in
tellect and their fiery eloquence, ruled the city
mrwhich the heart of mankind was then beat
ing so convulsively; who were impelled by their
convictions to send thousands of ^human beings
to their death; and were paving the way for
the transformation of Europe; who, in the
meantime, were not sure of their own heads,
and might one day lay them under the knife
of the guillotine, perhaps in the role of a
Girondist or the hero Danton? The detail pre
served in the memory of the dream, accom
panied by an enormous crowds seems to show
that Maury's phantasy wak an ambitious one
of just this character.
"But the phantasy prepared so long ago need
not be experienced again in sleep; it is enough
that it should be, so to"speak, •'touched off."
What Tmerinis this: If a few notes are struck^
and someone says; as in Don Juan: "That is
from
The Marriage of Figaro» by Mozart,"
memories suddenly surge up within me, none
of which I can recall to consciousness a mo
ment later. The phrase serves as a point of
irruption from
which a complete whole is
simultaneously put into a condition of stimu
lation. It may well be the same in unconscious
thinking. Through the waking stimulus the psy
chic station is excited which gives access to
the whole guillotine phantasy; This phantasy;
however- is not run through in^isleep; but only
in the memory of the awakened sleeper; Upori
waking, the sleeper remembers in detail the
phantasy which was transferred as a whole in
to the dream. At the same time, he has no
means of assuring himself that he is really re
membering something which Was dreamed. The
Same explanation—namely, that one is dealing
with
finished
phantasies
which
have
been
evoked as wholes by the waking stimulusmay be applied toi other dreams which are
adapted to the-waking stimulus—-for example^
to Napoleon's dream of a battle before the
explosion of a bomb. Among the dreams col
lected by Justine Tobowblska in her disserta
tion on
the
apparent duration of
time
in
dreams,11 think the most corroborative is that
related by Macario (1857) as having been
dreamed by a playwright, Gasiihir Bdnjour.
1Justine Tbbbwolska, Etude sur les illusions de
temps dans les rives du sommeil normal (1900)^ P.53K

[340b]
Bonjour intended one-evening to witness the
first performanceofone of his own plays, but
he was so tired that he dozed off' in his xihair
behind the scenes^just as the ctirtaih was ris
ing In his sleep he went through all thefive
acts oT'Bis play, "and"observed ai the Various
sighs 6f emotion-which were manifested by the
audience during each individual scene. At; the
close of the performaneey to his:great satisfac
tion, he heard his name called out amidst the
most lively manifestations of applause.' Sud*
denly he Woke. He could hardly believe his
eyes or his ears; the performance had hot gone
beyond the first lines of the first scene; he
could not have been asleep for more than two
minutes. As for the dreamy the running through
the five acts of the play and the observing
the attitude of the public towards each individ
ual scene need not, we may venture to assert,
have been something new, produced
whilfe
the dreamer was asleep; it may have been %
repetition of an already completed work of the
phantasy. Tobowolska and other authors have
emphasized a ;common characteristic' of dreams
that showan accelerated flow of ideas: namely*
that they seem to be especially coherentj arid
not at all like other dreams, and that the
dreamer's memory of them is summary rather
than detailed. But these are precisely the chari
acteristics which would necessarily be exhifr
ited by ready-made phantasies touched off by
the dream-work—a conclusion which is not; of
course, drawn by these authors. I do not mean
to assert that all dreams due to a waking stim
ulus admit of this explanation^ or that the
problem of the accelerated flux of ideas irk
dreams-is entirely disposed of in"'this mannerl
And here we are forced to Consider the rel
lation
of this secondary elaboration of- the
dream-content
to
the
Other
factors
of
the
dream-work. May not the procedure perhaps
be as follows? The dream-forming factors, the
efforts at condensation, the necessity of evad-^
ing the censorship, and the regard for representability by the psychic means of the dreaim
first of all create from the dream-material ai
provisional
dream-content,
which
is
subset
quently modified until- it
satisfies as far aS
possible the exactions of a secondary agency
No, this is hardly probable. We must rather
assume that the requirements of this agenc?
constitute from the very first one of the con
ditions which the dream must satisfy, and that
this condition, as wellas the conditions of eon-;
densation, the opposing censorship, dnd representabflity, simultaneously influence, in an in-

[341a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
337
ductive and selective manner, the whole mass
of material in the dream^thoughts; But of the
four conditions inecessary for dream-formation,
the last recognized is that whose exactions ap
pear to be-least binding upon the dream. The
following
consideration makes it seem very
probable that this psychic function, which un
dertakes the so-called secondary elaboration of
the dream-content, is identical with the work
of our waking thought: Our waking (preconscious) thought behaves towards any given per
ceptual material precisely as the function in
question behaves towards the dream-content.
It is natural to our waking thought to create
order in such material, to construct relations,
and to subject it to the requirements of an
intelligible coherence. Indeed, we go.rather too
far in this respect; the tricks of conjurers be-,
fool us by taking advantage of this intellectual
habit of ours. In the effort; to combine:in an
intelligible
manner
the
sensory impressions
which present themselves we often commit the
most curious mistakes, and even distort the
truth of the material before us. The proofs of
this fact are so familiar that we need not give
them further consideration here. We overlook
errors which make nonsense of a printed page
because we imagine the proper words. The edi
tor of a widely read French journal is said to
have made, a bet that he could print the words
from in front or from behind in every sentence
of a long article without any of his readers
noticing it. He won his bet. Years ago I came
across a comical example of false association
in a newspaper. After the session of the French
Chamber in which Dupuy quelled the panic,
caused by the explosion of a bomb thrown by
an anarchist, with the courageous words, "La
siance continue,,m the visitors in the gallery
were asked to testify as to their impressions
of the outrage. Among them were two provin
cials. _One of these said that immediately after
the end of a speech he had heard a detonation,
but that he had thought that it was the parli
amentary custom to fire a shot whenever a
speaker had finished. The other, who had ap
parently already listened to several speakers,
had got hold of the same idea, but with this
variation, that he supposed the. shooting to be
a sign of
appreciation following a specially
successful speech.
Thus, the psychic agency which approaches
the dream-content with the demand
that it
must be intelligible, which subjects it to a first
1 The meeting will continue.—Ed.

[341b]
interpretation, arid in doing so leads to the
complete misunderstanding of it, is none other
than our normal thought. In our interpretation
the rule will be, in every case, to disregard
the apparent coherence of the dream-as being
of suspicious origin and, whether the elements
are confused or clear, to follow the same re
gressive path to the dream-material
At the same time, we note. those factors
upon which the above-mentioned (p.. 272) scale
of quality in dreams-—from confusion to clearr
ness-^is essentially dependent. Those parts of
the dream seem to us clear in which the sec
ondary elaboration has been able to accomplish
something; those seem confused where the pow
ers of this performance have failed; Since the
confused parts of the dream are often likewise
those which are less vividly presented, we
may conclude that the secondary dream-work
is
responsible: also
for
a
contribution
to
the plastic intensity of the individual dreamstructures.
If I seek an object of comparison for the
definitive formation of the dream, as it mani
fests itself with the assistance of normal think
ing, I can think of none better than those mys
terious inscriptions with which Die Fliegende
Blatter'has so long amused its readers. In a
certain sentence which, for the sake of con
trast, is in dialect, and whose significance1 is as
scurrilous as possible, the reader is led to ex
pect a Latin inscription. For this purpose the
letters of the words are taken out of their
syllabic groupings, and are rearranged. Here
and there a genuine Latin word results; at other
points, on the assumption that letters have been
obliterated by weathering, or omitted, we al
low ourselves to be deluded about the signifi
cance of certain isolated and meaningless let
ters. If we do not wish to be fooled we must
give up looking for an inscription, must take
the letters as they stand, and combine them,
disregarding their arrangement, into words of
our mother tongue.
The secondary elaboration is that factor of
the dream-work which has been observed by
most of the writers on dreams, and whose im
portance has been duly appreciated. Havelock
Ellis gives an amusing allegorical description
of its performances: "As a matter of fact, we
might even imagine the sleeping consciousness
as saying to itself: 'Here comes our master,
Waking
Consciousness,
who
attaches
such
mighty importance to reason and logic and so
forth. Quick! gather things up, put them in

[342a]
338
SlGMUND
order—any order will do—before he enters
to take possession.' "x
The identity of this mode of operation with
that of waking thought is very clearly stated
by Delacroix in his Sur la structure logique du
reve (p. 526): "Cette fonction d'interprdtation
n'est pas particulare au reve; c'est le meme
travail de coordination logique que nous faisons
sur nos sensations pendant la veille."2
J. Sully is of the same opinion; and so is
Tobowolska :"Sur ces successions incoherentes
d'hallucinations, I'esprit s'efforce de faire le
meme travail de coordination logique qu'il fait
pendant le veille sur les sensations. II relie
entre elles par un lien imaginaire toutes ces
images: decousues et
bouche les hearts trop
grands qui se trouvaient entre elles"* (p. 93).
Some authors maintain that this ordering
and interpreting activity begins even in the
dream and is continued in the waking state.
Thus Paulhan (p. 547): "Cependant j'ai souvent pense qu'il pouvait y avoir une certain
deformation, ou plutbt reformation du reve
dans le-souvemr. . . .La tendence systematisante de Vimagination pourrait fort bien achever
aprhs le riveil ce qu'elle a ebauche pendant le
sommeil. De la sorte, la rapidite reellede la pensee serait augmentee en apparence par les perfectionnements dus a Vimagination eveillee."4,
Leroy and Tobowolska (p. 592): "Dans le
reve, au contraire, Vinterpretation et la co
ordination se font non seulement a I'aide des
donnees du reve, mais encore a I'aide de celles
de la veille. . . "B
It was therefore inevitable that this
one
recognized factor of dream-formation should
be over-estimated, so that the whole process of
creating the dream was attributed to it. This
creative work was supposed to be accomplished
at the moment of waking, as was assumed by
1 The World of Dreams, pp. 10, 11 (London, 1911).
2 This
function of interpretation is not particular
to the dream; it is the same work of logical coordina
tion that we use on our sensations when awake.—Ed.
3 With these series of incoherent halucinations, the
minctmust do the same work of logical coordination
that it does with the sensations when awake. With a
bon of imagination, it reunites all
the disconnected
images, and fills in the gaps found which are too great.
—Ed.
4 However, I have often thought that there might
be a certain deformation,
or
rather reformation, of
the dream when it is recalled. . . . The systematizing
tendency of the imagination can well finish, after wak
ing, the sketch begun in sleep. In that way, the real
speed of thought will be augmented in appearance by
improvements due to
the wakened imagination.—Ed.
5 In the dream, on the contrary, the interpretation
and coordination are made not only with the aid of
what is given by the dream, but also with what is
given by the wakened mind.—Ed.

[342b]
Freud
Goblot, and with deeper conviction by Foucault, who attributed to waking thought the
faculty of
creating the
dream out
of
the
thoughts which emerged in sleep.
In respect to this
conception, Leroy and
Tobowolska express themselves as follows:"Oh
a cru pouvoir placer le reve au moment du reveil et Us ont attribui d la pensee de la veille
la fonction de construire le reve avec les im
ages•presentes dans la pensie du sommeil."6
To this estimate of the secondary elabora
tion I will add the one fresh contribution tp
the dream-work which has been indicated by
the sensitive observations of H. Silberer. Sil
berer has caught the transformation of thoughts
into images in flagranti, by forcing himself to
accomplish intellectual work while in a state
of fatigue and somnolence. The elaborated
thought vanished, and in its place there ap
peared a vision which proved to be a substitute
for—usually abstract—thoughts. In these ex
periments it so happened that the emerging
image, which may be
regarded as a dreamelement, represented something other than the
thoughts which were waiting for elaboration!:
namely, the exhaustion itself, the difficulty or
distress involved in this work; that is, the sub
jective state and the manner of functioning of
the person exerting himself rather than the
object of his exertions. Silberer called this case,
which in him occurred quite often, the func
tional phenomenon, in contradistinction to the
material phenomenon which he expected.
"For example: one afternoon I am lying, ex
tremely sleepy, on my sofa, but I nevertheless
force myself to consider a philosophical prob
lem. I endeavour to compare the views of Kant
and Schopenhauer concerning time. Owing to
my somnolence I do not succeed in holding on
to both trains of thought, which would have
been necessary for the purposes of comparison.
After several vain efforts, I once more exert all
my will-power to
formulate for myself trie
Kantian deduction in order to apply it to Scho
penhauer's statement of the problem. There
upon, I directed my attention to the latter,
but when I tried to return to Kant, I found
that he had again escaped me, and I tried in
vain to fetch him back. And now this fruitless
endeavour to rediscover the Kantian documents
mislaid somewhere in my head suddenly pre
sented itself, my eyes being closed, as in a
6 It was thought that the dream could be placed at
the moment of waking, and they attributed to the wak
ing thoughts the function of constructing the dream
from the images present in the sleeping thoughts.—Ed,

[343a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
sm
dream-image^ in.the form of-a visible, plastic
symbol: I demand informationsfa grumpy sec
retary, who7, bent over a desk, does not allow
my urgency to disturb him; half straightening
himself, he gives me a look of angry refusal."1
Other examples, which relate to the fluctuar
tion between sleep and waking:
"Example No. 2. Conditions: Morning, while
awaking. While to a certain extent asleep (cre
puscular state), thinking over a previousdream,
in a way repeating and finishing it, I feel my
self drawing nearer to the waking state, yet I
wish to remain in the crepuscular state.
. ."Scene: I am stepping with one foot over a
stream, but I at once pull it back again and
resolve to, remain on this side"z
'. "Example No. 6. Conditions the same as in
Example No. 4 (he wishes to remain in bed a
little longer without oversleeping). I wish to
indulge in a little longer sleep.
. ."Scene: I am saying good-bye to somebody,
and I agree to meet him (or her) again before
long." .
I will now proceed to summarize this long
disquisition on the dream-work. We were con
fronted by the question whether in dreamformation the psyche exerts all its faculties to
their full extent, without inhibition, or only a
fraction of them, which are restricted in their
action. Our investigations lead us to reject such
a statement of the problem aswholly inadequate
in the circumstances. But if, in our answer, we
are to remain on the ground upon which the
question forces us, we must assent to two con
ceptionswhichare apparently opposedand mu
tually exclusive. The psychic activity in dreamformation resolves itself into two achievements:
the production of the dream-thoughts and the
transformation of these into the dream-content.
The dream-thoughts are perfectly accurate, and
are formed with all the psychic profusion of
which we are capable;
they belong to the
thoughts which have not become conscious,
from which our conscious thoughts also result
by means of a certain transposition. There is
doubtless much in them that is worth knowing,
and also mysterious, but these problems have
no particular relation to our dreams, and can
not claim to
be treated under the head of
dream-problems.8 On the other hand, we have
%Jahrb„ i, p. 514.
2Jahrb., iii, p. 625.
8 Formerly I found it extraordinarily difficult to ac
custom my readers to the distinction between the man
ifest
dream-content
and
the latent
dream-thoughts.
Over and over again arguments and objections were
adduced from the uninterpreted dream as it was re-

[343b]
the process which changes the unconscious
thoughts into the dream-content, which is pe
culiar to the dream-life and characteristic of
it.
Now,
this peculiar dream-work is much
farther removed from the pattern of waking
thought than has been supposed by even the
most decided depredators of the psychic activ
ity in dream-formation. It is not so much that
it is more negligent, more incorrect, more'for
getful, more incomplete than waking thought;
it is something altogether different; :qualitative-r
ly, from waking thought, and cannot therefore
be compared with it. It does not think, calcu
late, or judge at all, but limits itself to the
work of transformation. It may be exhaustively
described if we do not lose sight of thei condi
tions
which its product must satisfy. This
product, the dream, has above all to be with
drawn from the censorship, and to this end
the dream^work makes use of the displacement
of psychic intensities, even to the transvaluation of all psychic values; thoughts must be
exclusively or predominantly reproduced in the
material of visual and acoustic memory-traces,,
and from this requirement there proceeds the
regard of the dream-work for representabilityr
which
it
satisfies
by
fresh
displacements.
Greater intensities have (probably) to be pro
duced.than are at the disposal of the night
dream-thoughts, and this purpose is served by
the extensive condensation to which the con
stituents of the dream-thoughts are subjected*
Little attention is paid to the logical relations
of the thought-material; they ultimately find
a veiled representation in the formal peculiar
ities of the dream. The affects of the dreamthoughts undergo slighter alterations than their
conceptual content. As a rule, they are sup
pressed; where they are preserved, they are
freed
from
the
concepts and
combined in
tained in the memory, and the necessity of interpreting
the dream was ignored. But now, when the analysts
have at least become reconciled to substituting for the
manifest dream its meaning as found by interpretation,
many of them are guilty of another mistake, to which,
they adhere just as stubbornly. They look for the es
sence of the dream in this latent content, and thereby
overlook the distinction between-latent dream-thoughts
and
the dream-work.
The
dream
is
fundamentally
nothing more than a special form of our
thinking,
which is made possible by the conditions of the sleep
ing state. It is the dream-work which produces this
form, and it alone is the essence of dreaming—the only
explanation of its singularity. I say this in order, to
correct the reader's judgment of the notorious pro
spective tendency of dreams. That the dream should
concern itself with efforts to perform the tasks with
which our psychic life is confronted is no more re
markable than that our conscious waking life should
so concern itself, and I will only add that this work
may be done also in the preconscious, a fact alreadyfamiliar to us.

[344a]
340
SigmundtFretjb
accordance; with their similarity. Only one part
-ofi thejdream-work—the revision, variable in
amount^ which-is effected by the partially wak
ened conscious thought—is at
all consistent
with the conception which the writers on the
subject have endeavoured to
extend to the
whole performance of dream-formation.
VII. The Psychology of the Dream
Processes
Among the dreams which have been commu
nicated to me by others, there is one which is
at this point especially worthy of our atten
tion. It was told me by a female patient who
had heard it related in a lecture on dreams. Its
original source is unknown tome. This dream
evidently made a deep impression upon the
lady, since she went so far as to imitate it, i.e.,
to repeat the elements of this dream in a dream
of her Own; in order, by this transference, to
express her agreement with a certain point in
the dream.
The preliminary conditions of this typical
dream-were as follows:
A
father had been
watching day and night beside the sick-bed of
his child; After the child died, he retired to
rest in an adjoining room, but left the door
ajar so that he could look from his room into
the next, where the child's body lay surrounded
by tall candles. An old,man, who had been
installed as a watcher, sat beside the body,
murmuring prayers. After sleeping for: a few
hours the father dreamed that the child was
standingby his bed, clasping his arm and cry
ing reproachfully: "Father, don't you see that
I am burmngl" The father woke up and no
ticed a hright light coming from the adjoining
room. Rushing in, he found that the old man
had fallen asleep, and the sheets and one arm
of the beloved body were burnt by a fallen
candle.
The meaning of this affecting dreamis simple
enough, and the explanation given by the lec
turer, as my patient reported itvwas correct
The bright light shining through the open door
On to the sleeper's eyes gave him the impres
sion which he would have received had he been
awake: namely, that a fire had been started
near the corpse by a falling candle It is quite
possible that he had taken into his sleep his
anxiety lest the aged watcher should not be
equal to his task.
rWe can find nothing to change in this in
terpretation; we can only add that the .content,
of the dream must be oyerdeterrnined, and
that the speech of the child must have con

[344b]
sisted of phrases which it had uttered while
still alive, and, which were associated with im-:
portant events for the father.- Perhaps the
complaint,•••?</ dm burning," wasassociated with
the fever from which the child died, ahd "Fa
ther, don't you see?" to some other affective
occurrence unknown to us.
Now, when we have come to recognizethat the
dream has meaning, and can be fitted into the
context Of psychic events, it may be surprising
that a dream should have occurred in circum
stances which called for such an immediate
waking. We shall then note that even this
dream is not lacking in a wish-fulfilment. The
dead child behaves as.though alive; he warns
his father himself; he comes to his father's bed
ahd clasps his arm, as he probably did in the
recollection from which the dream obtained
the first part of the child's speech. It was fpr
the sake of this wish-fulfilment that the father
slept a moment longer. The dream was given
precedence over waking reflection because it
was able to show the child still living. Ifthe
father had waked first, and bad then drawn
the conclusion which led him into the adjoin
ing room, he would have shortened the child's
life by this one moment;
There can be no doubt about the peculiar
features in this brief dream which engage our
particular interest. So far, we have. endeavh
oured mainly to ascertain wherein.the secret
meaning of the dream'consists, how it is to be
discovered, and what means the' dream-work
uses to conceal it; In other words, our greatest
interest has
hitherto
been centered on
the
problemsiof interpretation. Now, however^we
encounter a dream which is easily explained,
and the meaning of whichis without disguise;
we note that nevertheless this dream preserves
the essential characteristicswhich conspicuoush
ly differentiate a dream from. our waking
thoughts, and this difference demands ah ex*
planation. It is only when we have disposed
of all the problems of interpretation that we
feel how incomplete is our psychology of
dreams,
r .
,. . r
},
; j
But before we turn our attention to this new
path of investigation,let us stop:and lookback,
and consider whether we have not overlooked
something important oh our way hither; For
we must understand that the easy and com
fortable part of our journey lies behind lis.
Hitherto, all the paths that we have followed
have led, ifj mistake not, to light, to explana
tion, and to full understanding; but from the
moment when we seek to penetrate more deep-

[345a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
5*i
ly into the psychic processesi iri dreaming, all
paths leadinto darkness; It is quiteimpossible
tb explain the dream' as a jpsychic process; for
to explairi means to1 trace^back to the knownj
and ias yet we have no psychological knowk
edge to whfch we carif refer such explanatory
fundamentals as may be inferred from the psy
chological investigation
of dreams. On the
contrary, we shall be compelled to advance a
number of new assumptions, which do little
more than conjecture the structure of the psy
chic apparatus and the play of the energies
active in it; and we shall have to be careful
not to go too far beyond the simplest logical
construction, since otherwise its value will be
doubtful. And even if we should be unerring
in our inferences, and take cognizance of all
the logical possibilities, we should still be in
danger of arriving at a completely mistaken
result^ owing to the probable incompleteness of
the preliminary statement of our elementary
data. We shall not be able to arrive at any
conclusions as to the structure and function of
the psychic instrument from
even the most
careful investigation of dreams, or of any other
isolated activity; or, at all events, we shall not
be able to confirm our conclusions. To do this
we shall have to collate such phenomena as
the comparative study of a whole series of
psychic activities proves to be reliably con
stant. So that the psychological assumptions
which we base on the analysis of the dreamprocesses will have to mark time, as it were,
until they can join up with the results of other
investigations which, proceeding from another
starting-point, will seek to penetrate to the
heart of the same problem.
A. The Forgetting of Dreams
I propose, then, that we shall first of all turn
our attention to a subject which brings us to a
hitherto disregarded objection, which threatens
to undermine the very foundation of our efforts
at
dream-interpretation.
The
objection
has
been made from more than one quarter that
the dream which we wish to interpret is really
unknown to us, or, to be more precise, that
we have no guarantee that* we know it as it
really occurred.!
What we recollect of the dream, and what
we subject to our methods of interpretation,
is, in the first place, mutilated by the unfaithr
fulness
of our
memory, which seems quite
peculiarly incapable of retaining dreams; and
which may have omitted precisely the most
significant parts of their content; For when

[345b]
we try to consider our dreams attentively, we
often have reason"tocorhplaih that we havb
dreamed much more thair wie remember; thai
unfortunately we know nothing more than this
one fragment, and that our recollection of even
this fragment seems to us strangely uncertain;
Moreover, everything goes to prbve that our
memory reproduces the dream not only "in*
completely but also untruthfully, in a falsify^
ing manner. As, on the one hand, we may doubt
whether what we dreamed was really as dis
connected as it is in our recollections, so on
the other hand we may doubt whether a dream
was really as coherent as our account of it;
whether in our attempted reproduction we have
not filled in the gaps which really existed, or
those which are due to forgetfulness, with neW
and arbitrarily chosen material; whether we
have not embellished the dream, rounded it
off arid corrected jit, so that any coticlusion
as to its real content becomes impossible. In
deed,; one writer
(Spitta)^ surmises that all
that is orderly and coherent is really first put
into the dream during the attempt to recall it.
Thus we are in danger of being deprived of the
very object whose value we have undertaken
to determine.
In all our dream-interpretations we have
hitherto ignored these warnings. On the eoritraryj indeed, we have found that the smallest,
most insignificant, and most uncertain com
ponents of the dream-content invited interpre
tations no less emphatically than those which
were distinctly and certainly contained in the
dream. In the dream of Irma's injection we
read: "I quickly called in Dr. M," and we
assumed that even this small addendum would
not have got into the dream if it had not been
susceptible of a special derivation. In this way
we arrived at the history of that unfortunate
patient to whose bedside I quickly called my
older colleague. In the seemingly absurd dream
which treated the difference between fifty-one
and fifty-six as a quantity ndgligeable the num
ber fifty-one was mentioned repeatedly. Instead
of regarding this as a matter of course, or a
detail of indifferent value, we proceeded from
this to a second train of thought in the latent
dream-content, which led to the number fiftyone, and by following up this clue we arrived
at the fears which proposed fifty-one years as
the term of life in the sharpest opposition to
a dominant train of thought which was boaste
fully lavish of the years. In the dream Non
1 Similar views are expressed by Foiicault and Tan
nery.

[346a]
342
SlGMUND
vixit I .found, rasan insignificant interpolation,
that I had at first overlooked the sentence: As
P does not understand him, Fl asks me, etc*
The interpretation then coming to a stand
still, I
went
back to these words, and
I
found through them the way to the infantile
phantasy which appeared in the dream-thoughts
as an intermediate point.of junction. This came
about by means of the poet's verses:
Selten habt ihr mich verstanden,
Selten auch verstand ich Euch,
Nur wenn wir im Kot uns fanden
So verstanden wir uns gleich!1
Every analysis will afford evidence of the fact
that the
most
insignificant features of the
dream are indispensable to interpretation, and
will show how the completion of the task is
delayed if we postpone our examination of
them. We have given equal attention, in the
interpretation pf dreams, to every nuance of
verbaj expression found in them; indeed, when
ever we are confronted by a senseless or in
sufficient wording, as though we had failed to
translate the dream into the proper version, we
have respected even these defects of expres
sion. In brief, what other writers have regarded
as arbitrary improvisations, concocted hastily
to avoid confusion, we have treated like a
sacred text. This contradiction calls for ex
planation.
It wpuld appear, without doing any injustice
to the writers in question, that the explana
tion is in pur favour. From the standpoint
of our newly-acquired insight intp the origin
of dreams, all contradictions are completely
reconciled. It is true that we distort the dream
in our attempt to reproduce it; we once more
find therein what we have called the secondary
and often misunderstanding elaboration of the
dream by the agency of normal thinking. But
this distortion is itself no more than a part of
the elaboration to which the dream-thoughts
are constantly subjected as a result of the
-dEeapsseeB^orship. Other writers have here sus
pected or observed that part of the dreamr
distortion whose work is manifest; but for us
this is of little consequence, as we know that
a far -more extensive work of distortion, not
so easily apprehended, has already taken the
dream for its object from among the hidden
dream-thoughts. The only mistake of
these
writers consists in believing the modification
^Seldom have you understood me,
Seldom have I understood you,
But when we found ourselves in the mire,
We at once understood each other/

[346b]
Freud
effected in the dream by its recollection and
verbal expression to be arbitrary, incapable pf
further solution, and consequently liable to
lead us astray in our cognition of the dream.
They underestimate the determination of the
dream in the psyche. Here there is nothing
arbitrary. It can be shown that in all cases a
second train of thought immediately takes
over the determination of the elements which
have been left undetermined by the first. For
example, I wish quite arbitrarily to think of a
number; but this is not possible; the number
that occurs to me is definitely and necessarily
determined by thoughts within me which may
be quite foreign to my momentary purpose.*
The modifications which the dream undergoes
in its revision by the waking mind are just as,
little arbitrary. They preserve an associative
connection with the content, whose place they
take, and serve to show us the way to this
content, which may itself be a substitute for
yet another content.
In analysing the dreams of patients I im*
pose the following test of this assertion, and)
never without success. If the first report of 4
dream seems not very comprehensible, I re^
quest the dreamer to repeat it. This he rarely
does in the same words. But the passages in
which the expression is modified are thereby
made known to me as the weak points of the
dream's disguise; they are what the embroir
dered emblem on Siegfried's raiment was to
Hagen. These are the points from which the
analysis may start. The narrator has been adr
monished by my announcement that I intend
to take special pains to solve the dream, and
immediately, obedient to the urge of resistance!,
he protects the weak points of the dream's
disguise, replacing a treacherous expression by
a less relevant one. He thus calls my attention
to
the expressions which he has
discarded.
From the efforts made to guard against the
solution of the dream, I can also draw concluf
sions about the care with which the raiment
of the dream has been woven.
The writers whom I have mentioned are,
however, less justified when they attribute so
much importance to the doubt with which our
judgment approaches the relation pf the dream.
For this doubt is not intellectually warranted;
pur memory can give no guarantees, but never
theless we are compelled to credit its state
ments far more frequently thanis objectively
justifiable. Doubt concerning the accurate re
production of the
dream,
or of
individual
? Cf. The Psycho-pathology of Everyday Life*

[347a]
data of the dream, is only another offshoot
of the dream-censorship, that is, of resistance
to the emergence of the dream-thoughts into
consciousness.
This
resistance
has
not
yet
exhausted itself by the displacements and sub
stitutions which it has effected, so that it still
clings, in the form of doubt, to whathas been
allowed to
emerge. We can recognize this
doubt all the more readily in that it is careful
never to attack the intensive elements of the
dream, but only the weak and indistinct ones.
But we already know that a transvaluation of
all the psychic values has taken place between
the dream-thoughts and the dream. The dis
tortion has been made possible only by de
valuation; it constantly manifests itself in this
way and sometimes contents itself therewith.
If doubt is added to the indistinctness of an
element of the dream-content, we may, follow
ing this indication, recognize in this element
a direct offshoot of one of the outlawed dreamthoughts. The state of affairs is like that ob
taining after a great revolution in one of the
republics of antiquity or the Renaissance. The
once powerful, ruling families of the nobility
are now banished; ail high posts are filled by
upstarts; in the city itself only the poorer and
most powerless citizens, or the remoter follow
ers of the vanquished party, are tolerated.
Even the latter do not enjoy the full rights pf
citizenship. They are watched with suspicion.
In our case, instead of suspicion we have
doubt! I must insist, therefore, that in the
analysis of a dream ope must emancipate
oneself from the whole scale of standards of
reliability; and if there is the slightest possi
bility that this or that may have occurred in
the dream, it should be treated as an absolute
certainty. Until one has decided to reject all
respe.ct for appearances in tracing the dreamelements, the analysis will remain at a stand
still. Disregard of the element concerned has
the psychic effect, in the person analysed, that
nothing in connection with the unwished ideas
behind this element will occur to him. This
effect is really not self-evident; it would be
quite reasonable to say, "Whether this or that
was contained in the dream I do not know for
certain; but the
following ideas happen to
occur to me." But no one ever does say so; it
is precisely the disturbing effect of doubt in
the analysis that permits it to be unmasked
as an pffshoot and instrument of the psychic
resistance. Psycho-analysis is justifiably sus
picious. One of its rules runs: Whatever djs-

[347b]
The Interpretation of Dreams
343
turbs the progress of the work is a resistance.*
The forgetting of dreams, too, remains in-?
explicable until we seek to explain it by the
power of the psychic censorship. The feeling
that one has dreamed a great deal during the
night and has retained only a little of it may
have yet another meaning in a number of
cases: it may perhaps mean that the dreamwork has continued in a perceptible manner
throughout the night, but has left behind it
only one brief dream. There is, however, np
possible doubt that a dream is progressively
forgotten on waking. One often forgets it in
spite of a painful effort to recover it. I believe,
however, that just as one generally overesti
mates the extent of this forgetting, so also one
overestimates the lacunae in our knowledge of
the dream due to the gaps occurring in it. All
the dream-content that has been lost by for
getting can often be recovered by analysis; in
a number of cases, at all events, it is possible
to discover from a single remaining fragment,
not the dream, of course—which, after all, is
of no importance—but the whole of the dreamthoughts. It requires a greater expenditure of
attention and self-suppression in the analysis;
that is all; but it shows that the forgetting of
the dream is not innocent of hostile intention.3
A convincing proof of the tendencious na
ture of dream-forgetting—of the fact that it
serves the resistance—is obtained on analysis
by investigating a preliminary stage of for
getting.3 It often happens that, in the midst
of an interpretation, an omitted fragment of
the dream suddenly emerges which is described
as having been previously forgotten. This part
of the dream that has been wrested from for
getfulness is always the most important part.
It lies on the shortest path to the solution of
1This, peremptory statement:
"Whatever disturbs
the progress of the work is a resistance'.' might easily
be misunderstood. It has, of course, the significance
merely of a technical rule, a warning for the analyst.
It is not denied that during an analysis events may
occur which cannot be ascribed to the intention of the
person" analysed. The patient's father may die in other
ways than by being murdered by the patient, or a war
may break out and interrupt the analysis. But despite
the obvious exaggeration of the above statement there
is still something new and useful in it. Even if the
disturbing event is real and independent of the patient,
the extent of the disturbing influence does often de
pend only on him, and the resistance reveals itself
.unmistakably in the ready and immoderate exploita
tion of such an opportunity.
2 As an example of the significance of doubt and
uncertainty in a dream with a simultaneous shrinking
of the dream-content to a single element, see my Gen
eral Introduction to Psycho-Analysis ike dream of the
sceptical lady patient, p. 492 below, the analysis of
which was successful, despite a short postponement.
? Concerning ;the intention of forgetting in general,
see my The Psycho-pathology of Everyday Life,

[348a]
344
Sl&MUND
the dreamt and for that very reason it Was
most exposed to the resistance. Among the 'ex
amples of dreams that I have included in the
text of this treatise, it once happened that-I
had subsequently to interpolate a fragment of
dream-content. The dream is a dream of travel,
which revenges itself on two unamiable trav
eling companions; I have left it almost entirely
uninterpreted, as part of its content is crudely
obscene. The part omitted reads: "/ said, re
ferring to a book of Schiller's: 'It is from . . .'
but corrected myself, as I realized my mistake:
'It is by . . .' Whereupon the man remarked to
his sister, 'Yes, he said it correctly'."*
Self-correction in
dreams, which to some
writers seems so wonderful, does not really
call for consideration. But I will draw from
my own memory an Instance typical of verbal
errors in dreams. I was nineteen years of age
when I visited England for the first time, and
I spent a day on the shore of the Irish Sea.
Naturally enough, I amused myself by picking
up the marine animals left on the beach by
the tide, and I was just examining a starfish
(the
dream
begins
with
Hollthurn^Holothurian) when a pretty little girl came up to
to me and asked me: "Is it a starfish? Is it
alive?" I replied, "Yes, he is alive," but theri
felt ashamed of my mistake, and repeated the
sentence correctly. For the grammatical mis
take which I then made, the dream substitutes
another which is quite common among German
people. "Das Buck ist von Schiller" is not to
be translated by "the book is from," but by
"the book is by." That the dream-work accorh^
plishes
this substitution, because
the
word
from, owing to its consonance with the German
adjective fromm (pious, devout) makes a re
markable
condensation
possible,
should
no
longer surprise us after all that we have heard
of the intentions of the dream-work and its
unscrupulous selection of means. But what re
lation
has this harmless recollection of the
seashore to my dream? It explains, by means
of a very innocent example, that I.have used
the word—the word denoting gender, or sex or
the sexual fye)-r-m the wrong place. This is
surely one of the keys to the solution of the
dream. Those who have heard of the derivation
of the book-title Matter and Motion (MoHere
1 Such corrections in the use of foreign languages
are taotrare in dreams, but they are usually attributed
to foreigners. Maury (p. 143), while he was studying
English, once dreamed that he informed someone that
he had called on him the day before in the following
words: «I called for you yesterday." The other ans
wered, correctly: "You mean: I called on you yester
day."

[348b]
in Le Malade Imdginaire: La Mature est-elle
laudable?—A Motion of the bowels) "mil fead^
fly be able to supply the missing parts.
<
Moreover^ I can prove conclusively, by a
demonstratio ad oculos, that the forgetting of
the dream is in a large measure the work of the
resistance. A
patient tells me that he has
dreamed, but that the
dream has vanished
without leaving a trace, as if nothing had hap
pened. We set to work, however; I come upon
a resistance which I explain to the patient; en
couraging and urging him, I help him to be
come reconciled to some disagreeable thought j
and I have hardly succeeded in doing so when
he
exclaims:
"Now
I
can
recall
what
I
dreamed I'' The same resistance which that day
disturbed him in the work of interpretation
caused him also to forget the dream. By over
coming this resistance I have brought back the
dream to his memory.
•.
J
. In the same way the patient, having reached
a certain part of the work, may recall a dreani
which occurred three, four, or more days ago|
and which has hitherto remained in oblivion.1
Psycho-analytical experience has furnished
us with yet another proof of the fact that the
forgetting of dreams depends far, more on the
resistance than on the mutually alien char
acter of the waking and sleeping states, as
some writers have believed it to depend. It
often happens to me, as well as to other ana
lysts, and to patientsundertreatment, that we
are waked from sleep by a dream, as we say,
and that immediately thereafter, while in full
possession of our mental faculties, we begin
to interpret the dream. Often in such cases
I have not rested until I have achieved a full
understanding of the dream, and yet it has
happened that after waking I have forgotten
the interpretation-wOrk as completely as I have
forgotten the dream-content itself, though I
have been aware that I have dreamed and that
I had interpreted the dream. The dream has
far more frequently taken the result of the in-^
terpretatioh with it into forgetfulness than the
intellectual faculty has succeeded in retaining
the dream in the memory. But between this
work of interpretation and the waking thoughts
there is not that psychic abyss by which other
writers have sought to explain the forgetting
of dreams. When Morton Prince objects to
my explanation of the forgetting of dreams on
2 Ernest Jones describes an analogous case of fre
quent occurrence; during the analysis of
one dream
another dream of -the;-*same night is often recalled
which until then was not merely forgotten, but was
not even suspected; "

[349a]
the ground that itis only atspeeial case of the
amnesia of dissociated psychic states, and that
the impossibility of applying my explanation
of this special amnesia to other types of am
nesia makes it valueless even for its immediate
purpose, he reminds the reader that in all his
descriptions^ of such dissociated states he has
never attempted to discover the dynamic ex
planation underlying these phenomena. For had
he done so, he would surely have discovered
that repression (and the resistance produced
thereby) is the cause not of these dissociations
merely, but also of the amnesia of their psy
chic content.
>
That dreams are as little forgotten as other
psychic actsy •that even in their power of im-;
pressing themselves on the memory they may
fairly be compared withithe other psychic per^
formances, was proved to,me by an experiment
which I was able to make while preparing ithe
manuscript of this book; I had preserved in
my notes a great many >dreams^of my, own
which, for-one reason or another; I could not
interpret, or, at the time of-dreaming them,
could interpret only very imperfectly.-In/order
to obtain material.to illustrate my assertion,
I attempted rJm-interpret some of them a year
of two later. In this,attempt I was invariably
successful; indeedj I may: say that the inter*
pretation was effected: more;easily after all this
time than when the: dreams were;'of.recent
occurrence; As a possible::explanation of this
fact, 1 would suggest that I had \ overcome
many of the internal resistances which1had
disturbed me. at the time of dreaming. In such
subsequent interpretations wk haver compared
the old yield:of dream-thoughts with the presV>
ent result, which has usually: been more abun
dant, and I havel invariably found
the old
dream-rthoiights unaltered among the present
ones. However, I soon ^recovered from my sur-;
prise wheh I reflected that I had long been
accustomed to;interpret dreams of former years
that had occasionally been related to me by
my patients as though they had been dreams
of the night before; by the same method, and
with the same success. In the section on anxi^
ety-drearns .-1 shall include two examplesiof
such delayed dream-interpretations.. When I
made this experiment for the first.time I ex
pected; not unreasonably, that dreams would
behave in. this connection merely like neurotic
symptoms. For when 1 treat a psychoneurotic,
for instancej an hysterical patient, by psycho^
analysis, I am compelled to find explanations'
for the; first ^symptoms of the. malady,t which.

[349b]
The Interpretation m Dreams
34S
have •longt since disappeared, as owell as f0$
those : still
existing
symptoms
which
have
broughtthe patient to me; and I findthe.formes
problem easier to solve than the more exigent
one of today. In the Studies in Hysteria?L pub
lished as early as 1895, I was able to givethe
explanation of a first hysterical attack which
the patient, a woman over: forty years of age,
had experienced in her fifteenth year.2
,-•:*
I will now make a few rather unsystematic
remarks
relating
to
the. interpretations: of
dreams, which will perhaps serve as a, guide
to the reader who wishes to test my assertions
by the analysis of his own dreams/
. He must not ^expect that itr will be a jsimpfe;
and easy matter to interpret his own dreams.,
Even the observation of endpptic phenomena*
and
other
sensations
which -are
commonly
immune j from ~attention,
calls
for practice,
although this group; of observations is :not.
opposed by any psychic motive. It is very
much more difficult-to get hold oi^ne unwished
ideas. He1who seeks to do so must fulfil the
requirements; laid; dpwn> in this, treatise, and
while, following the, rules here igiveri, he must
endeavour to restrain all criticism, all preconn
eeptions, and all -affective; or?intellectual bias
in himselfduringthework,of analysis. Me:must
be ever mindful of the precept which Claude;
Bernard held up to th^. experimenterj in rth^
physiological. laboratory:i/"Travaitterbrcomme
line-bete"r-th2Lt is,-he;must be:asy enduring-as]
an:animal, and:also as jdisinter^stedinrth^^e^
suits?ofMs workcHe who will follow this; adyice
will no longedJind .the task-a difficult pne.rfEhe
interpretation of a idream cannot always !h$ac
complished in one session; after follpwingUB
a chain of associations you wiUfroften feel: that
your working capacity is exhausted.; :the?dreamwill not tell you anything more that day; it
is then best to hreak. off, and to resume^ the
work the following:, day. Another portionr of
the dream-content then solicits your attention,;
and you thus obtain access to a fr,esh stratum!
of the dream4houghts. One might call this the
fractional interpretation of dreams^
,
i,a,
'••; It is most difficult to induce, the beginner in
dream-interpretatipn to recognize the fact that,
his task is not finished when heis in pqssessidn
xStudien iibet' Hysterie, Case II.
2 Dreams which have occurred during the first years
of childhood, and which have sometimes been retained
in the memory for decades with perfect sensorial fresh-,
ness; are
almost always of great'importarice fQr the
understanding' of the development andithe rieurosis of •
the dreamer. The analysis; of them protects ,the physic
ciah from errors and uncertainties whichmight confuse
him even theoretically. "•••••'•"•
'-•
•
A
! : o0

[350a]
346.
SlGMUND ErEUD
of a complete interpretation of the dream
which is both ingenious and coherent, and
which gives particulars of all the elements of
the dream-content. Besides this, another inter
pretation, an over-interpretation of the same
dream, one which has escaped him, may be
possible. It is really not easy to form an idea
of the wealth of trains of unconscious thought
striving for expression in our minds, or to
credit the adroitness displayed by the dreamwork in killing—soto speak—sevenflies at one
stroke, like the journeyman tailor in the fairy
tale, by means of its ambiguous modes of
expression. The reader will constantly be in
clined to reproach the author for a superfluous
display of ingenuity, but anyone who has had
personal experience
of dream-interpretation
will know better than to do so.
On the other hand, I cannot accept the
opinion, first expressed by H. Silberer, that
every dream—or even that many dreams, and
certain groups of dreams^calls for two dif
ferent interpretations, between which there is
even supposed to be a fixed relation. One of
these, which Silberer calls the psycho-analytic
interpretation, attributes to the dream any
meaningyou please, but in the main an infantile
sexual one. The other, the
more important
interpretation, which he calls the anagogic intrepretation, reveals the more serious and often
profound thoughts which the dream-work has
used as its material. Silberer does not prove
this assertion by citing a number of dreams
which he has analysed in these two directions,
I am obliged to object to this opinion on the
ground that it is contrary to facts. The majority
of dreams require no over-interpretation, and
are especially insusceptible of an anagogic in
terpretation. The influence of a tendency which
seeks to veil the fundamental conditions of
dream-formation and divert our interest from
its instinctual roots is as evident in Silberer's
theory as in other theoretical efforts of the
last few years. In a number of cases I can con*
firm
Silberer's assertions;
but in these the
analysis shows me that the dream-work was
confronted with the task of transforming a
series of highly abstract thoughts, incapable
of direct representation, from waking life into
a dream. The dream-work attempted to ac
complish this
task by seizing upon another
thought-material which stood in loose and often
allegorical relation to the abstract thoughts, and
thereby diminished the difficulty of representing
them. The abstract interpretation of a dream
originating in this manner will be given by the

[350b]
dreamer, immediately, but the correct interpret
tation
of
the
substituted;-: material
can: be
obtained
only
by
means
of
the
familiar;
technique.
The question whether every dream can be
interpreted is to be answered in the negative.
One should not forget that in the work of in
terpretation one is opposed by the psychic
forces that are responsible for.the distortion
of the dream. Whether one can master the
inner resistances by one's intellectual interest,
one's capacity for self-control, one's psycho-;
logical knowledge, and one's experience inj
dream-interpretation depends on the relative
strength of the opposing forces. It is always
possible to make some progress; one can at all
events go far enough to become convinced that
a dream has meaning, and generally far enough
to gain.some idea of its meaning. It very ofteni
happens that a second dream enables us to
confirm and
continue the
interpretation as
sumed for the first. A whole series of dreams,;
continuing for weeks or months, may have a;
common basis, and should therefore be.inter!-]
preted as a continuity. In dreams that follow
one another, we often observe that one dream
takes as its central point something that is only
alluded to in the periphery of the next dreamy
and conversely, so that even in their interpret
tations the two supplement each other. That;
different dreams of the: same night are always!
to be treated, in the work of interpretation^
as a
whole,
I
have already shown by ex
amples.
In the best interpreted dreams we often have
to leave one passage in obscurity because we!
observe during the interpretation that we have;
here a tangle of dream-thoughts which cannotj
be unravelled, and which furnishes no fresh!
contribution to the dream-content: This, then,i
is the keystone of the dream, the point at which
it ascends into the unknown. For the dream-j
thoughts which we encounter during the intertj
pretation commonly have no termination, but;
run in all directions into the net-like entangle
ment of our intellectual world. It is fromrsome
denser part of this fabric that the dream-wish
then
arises,
like
the
mushroom
from
its
mycelium.
Let us now return to the facts of. dream-for
getting. So far, of course, we have failed to
draw any important conclusion from them.
When our waking life shows an unmistakable
intention to forget the dream which has been
formed during the night, either as a whole,
immediately after waking,
or little by little

[351a]
The Interpretation op Dreams
347
in the course of the day, and when we recog
nize as the
chief
factor in this process of
forgetting the psychic resistance against the
dream which has already done its best to op
pose the dream at night, the question then
arises: What actually has made the dreamformation possible against this resistance? Let
us consider the most striking case, in which the
waking life has thrust the
dream aside as
though it had never happened. If we take into
consideration the play of the psychic forces,
we are compelled to assert that the dream
would never have come into existence had the
resistance prevailed at night as it did by day.
We conclude, then, that the resistance loses
some part of its force during the night; we
know that it has not been discontinued, as we
have demonstrated its share in the formation
of dreams—namely, the work of distortion. We
have therefore to consider the possibility that
at night the resistance is merely diminished,
and that
dream-formation becomes
possible
because of this slackening of the resistance;
and we shall readily understand that as it re
gains its full power on waking it immediately
thrusts aside what it was forced to admit while
it was feeble. Descriptive psychology teaches
us that the chief determinant of dream-forma
tion is the dormant state of the psyche; and
we may now add.the following explanation:
The state of sleep
makes
dream-formation
possible by reducing the endopsychic censor
ship.
We are certainly tempted to look upon this
as the only possible conclusion to be drawn
from the facts of dream-forgetting, and to de
velop from this conclusion further deductions
as to the comparative energy operative in the
sleeping and waking states. But we shall stop
here for the present. When we have penetrated
a little farther into the psychology of dreams
we shall find that the origin of dream-forma
tion may be differently conceived. The resist
ance which tends to prevent the dream-thoughts
from
becoming- conscious
may
perhaps
be
evaded without suffering reduction. It is also
plausible that both the factors which favour
dream-formation, the reduction as well as the
evasion of the resistance, may be simultaneous
ly made possible by the sleeping state. But we
shall pause here, and resume the subject a
little later.
We
must
now
consider another series of
objections against our procedure In dreaminterpretation. For we proceed by dropping all
the directing ideas which at other times control

[351b]
reflection, directing our attention to a single
element of the dream, noting the involuntary
thoughts that associate themselves with this
element. We then take up the next component
of the dream-content, and repeat the operation
with this; and, regardless of the direction taken
by the thoughts, we allow ourselves to be led
onwards by them, rambling from one subject
to another. At the same time, we harbour the
confident hope that we may in the end, and
without intervention on our part, come upon
the
dream-thoughts from
which
the
dream
originated. To this the critic may make the
following objection: That we arrive somewhere
if we start from a single element of the dream
is not remarkable. Something can be associatively connected with every idea. The only
thing that is remarkable is that one should
succeed in hitting upon the dream-thoughts in
this
arbitrary and
aimless
excursion. It is
probably
a
self-deception;
the
investigator
follows the chain of associations from the one
element which is taken up until he finds the
chain breaking off, whereupon he takes up a
second element; it is thus only natural that
the originally unconfined associations should
now become narrowed down. He has the former
chain of associations still in mind, and will
therefore in the analysis of the second dreamidea
hit
all
the
more readily upon
single
associations which have something in common
with the associations of the first chain. He then
imagines that he has found a thought which
represents a point of junction between two of
the dream-elements. As he allows himself all
possible freedom of thought-connection, except
ing only the transitions from one idea to an*
other which occur in normal thinking, it is
not difficult for him finally to concoct out of a
series
of
intermediary
thoughts,
something
which he calls the dream-thoughts; and with
out any
guarantee, since they are otherwise
unknown, he palms these off as the psychic
equivalent of the dream. But all this is a purely
arbitrary procedure, an ingenious-looking ex
ploitation of chance, and anyone who will go
to this useless trouble can in this way work
out any desired interpretation for any dream
whatever.
If such objections are really advanced against
us, we may in defence refer to the impression
produced by our
dream-interpretations,
the
surprising connections with other dream-ele
ments which appear while we are following up
the individual ideas,
and
the
improbability
that anything which so perfectly covers and

[352a]
34?
explains the dream as dp our dream-interpre
tations could be achieved otherwise thanahy
following previously established .psychic-con-:
nectipns. We might also point to the fact
that the procedure in dream-interpretation is
identical with the procedure followed in the
resolution of hysterical symptoms, where the
correctness of the method is attested by the
emergence and disappearance of the symptoms
—that is, where the interpretation of the text
is confirmed by the interpolated illustrations.
But we have no reason to avoid this problem-^-
namely, how one cap arrive at a pre-existent
aim by following an arbitrarily and aimlessly
maundering chain of thoughts—since we shall
be able not to solve the problem, it is true, but
to get rid of it entirely.
-•-.-,-;
For it is demonstrably incorrect to state that
we abandon ourselves to an aimless excursion
of thought, when, as in the interpretation of
dreams, we renounce reflection and allow the
involuntary ideas to come to the surface.; It
can be shown that we are able to reject only
those directing ideas which are known to us,
and that with the cessation of these the un
known-—or, as we inexactly say, unconscious—
directing ideas immediately exert their influ
ence, and henceforth determine the flow of the
involuntary ideas. Thinking without directing
ideas cannot be ensured,by any influence we,
ourselves exert on pur own psychic life; neither
do I know of any state of psychic derangement
in which such a mode of thought establishes
itself.1; The
psychiatrists have here far top
1 Only recently has my attention been called to the
fact that Ed. von Hartmann took the same view with
regard to this psychologically important point: Inci
dental to the discussion of the role of the unconscious
in artistic creation (Philo.s. d. Unbew., Vol. i, Sect. B.,
Chap. V) Eduard von Hartmann clearly enunciated the.
law of association of ideas which is directed by un^-
conscious directing ideas, without however realizing
the scope of this law. With him it was a question of
demonstrating that "every combination of a sensuous
idea when it is not left entirely to chance, but is di-;
rected to a definite end, is in need of help from the
unconscious," and that the conscious interest in any
particular thought-association is a stimulus for the un
conscious to discover from among the numberless pos
sible ideas the one which corresponds to the directing
idea. "It is the unconscious that selects, and appro
priately, in accordance with the aims of the interest:
and this holds true for
the
associations in
abstract
thinking (as sensible representations and artistic com
binations as well as for flashes of wit)." Hence, a lim
iting of the association of ideas to ideas that evoke and
are evoked in the sense of pure association-psychology
is untenable. Such a restriction "would be justified only
if there were states in human life in which man was
free not only from any conscious purpose, but also
from the domination or cooperation of any unconscious
interest, any passing mood. But such a state hardly
ever comes to pass,, for even if one leaves one's train
of thought seemingly altogether to chance, or if one
surrenders oneself entirely to the involuntary dreams

[352b]
Sigmu^jEreud
prematurely relinquished the idea of the.solidity of the psychic structure..I know that an
unregulated
stream
of
thoughts,
devoid
of
directing ideas, can occur as little in;the realm
pf hysteria and paranoia as in the formation
or solution of dreams. Perhaps it does not
occur at all in the endogenous psychic affec
tions, and, according to the ingenious hypothesis
of Lauret, even the deliria observed in confused
psychic states have meaning and are incompre^
hensible to us only because of omissions. I have
had the same conviction whenever I have had
an opportunity of observing such states. The
deliria are the work of a censorship which;nq
longer makes any effort to conceal its swayj
which, instead of lending its support to a revision that is no longer obnoxious to it, cancels
regardlessly anything to which it objects, thus
causing the remnant to appear disconnected;
This censorship proceeds like the Russian cen+
sorship on the frontier, which allows only those
foreign journals which have had certain passr
ages blacked out to fall into the hands of the
readers to be protected.
The free play of ideas following any chain
of associations may perhaps occur in, cases of
destructive
organic affections
of
the brain.
What, however, is taken to be such in the psy
choneuroses may always be explained as the
influence
of
the
censorship on a
series
of
thoughts which have
been pushed info the
foreground by the concealed directing ideas.1*
It has been considered an unmistakable sign
of free association unencumbered by directing
ideas if the emerging ideas (or images) appear
to be connected by means
of the so-called
superficial associations—that is, by assonance,
verbal ambiguity, and temporal coincidence,
without inner relationship of meaning; in other
words, if they are connected by aU those assor
of phantasy, yet always other leading interests, dom
inant feelings and moods prevail at one time rather
than another, and these will always exert an influence
on the association of ideas." (Philos. d. Unbew., nf
Aufl. i. 246). In semi-conscious dreams there always
appear only such ideas as correspond to the (unconf
scious) momentary main interest. By rendering prom
inent the feelings and moods over the
free thoughtseries, the methodical procedure of psycho-analysis is
thoroughly justified even from the standpoint of Hartmann's Psychology (N. E. Pohorilles, Internat. Zeitschrift. f. Ps.A., 1, [1913], p. 605). Du Prel concludes
from the fact that a name which we vainly try to re
call suddenly occurs to the mind that there is an un-.
conscious but none the less purposeful thinking, whose
result then appears in consciousness (Philos. d. Mystik, p. 107).
9Jung has brilliantly corroborated this statement by
analyses of dementia praecox. (Cf. The Psychology of
Dementia Praecox, translated by A. A. Brill. Mono
graph
Series,
[Journal" of Nervous and Mental Dis
eases Publishing Co., New York].)

[353a]
The iNTERpidsTftTSotf of Dreams
ciations whidh> we allow ourselves to ;exploit
assddktions; ;Which-otrcur
in wit"and ih'playing-1upon words: This*:o!i§-
tinguishtng mart holds good With associations
Which lead lis from' the elements of the dreamcontent •'• to
the ^intermediary *;th6ughts^; and
from these to the dream-thou^its-proper; in
many analyses of dreams we :ihave found^sur
prising examples of this: In these no connection
was too loose ahd no witticisrii too objectionableito serve'as a1 bridge frbm^bne thought to
another. But the correct understanding of such
surprising tolerance is not far to seek. When*
ever one psychic element is jconnected with
another by an obnoxiousand superficial associ
ation, there exists also a correct and more
profound connection between the two, which
succumbs to the resistance of the censorship.
The correct explanation for 'the predomi
nance of the superficial associations is the
pressure of the censorshipj and not-the sup
pression of the directing ideas. Whenever the
censorship renders the normal connective paths
impassable, the superficial associations Will re-^
place the deeper ones in the representatiohr It
is as-though in a mountainous region•a general
interruption of traffic, for example an inundationy should render the broad highways impasse
able: traffic would then have to be maintained
by steep and inconvenient tracks used at other
times only by the-hunter.
-
;rr:^
We can here-distinguish two cases which*
however, are essentially one: In the first case^
the censorship is1 directed only'against the con-i
nection Of two thoughts which, being detachdd
from one another- escape its opposition*'• The
two thoughts then enter successively into con
sciousness; their connectionremains concealed;
but in its place there occurs'to us a superficial
connection between the two which would not
otherwise have occurred to us, and which as a
rule connects with another angle of the con
ceptual complex instead of that from Which
the suppressed but essential connection pro
ceeds. Or, in the second case, both thoughts;
owing to their content, succumb to the censor
ship; both then appear not in their correct
form but in a modified, substituted form; arid
both substituted thoughts are so selected as to
represent,
by
a
superficial
association, the
essential relation which existed between those
that they have replaced. Under the pressure of
the censorship, the displacement of a normal
and vital association by one superficial and ap
parently absurd has thus occurred iti/both cases.
Because we know of these displacements; we
unhesitatingly rely upon even the superficial

[353b]
349
ft* the- course' of
dream^nterpretatioh;* :
:
•^->
r $The- psycho-analysis of
neurotics
makes
abundant' use of the two principles:' that With
theabandonment •of the conscious directing
ideasvthe control over the flow- of^ideas- is
transferred to the concealed directing-* ideas;
and that superficial associations are
only a
displacement-substitute
fOr
suppressed
and
more profound ohesv Indeed, psycho-analysis
makes these two .principless the foundatiori-r
stones of its-technique. When I
request a
patient to dismiss all reflection, and to report
to me whatever comes into his mind, I firmly
cling to the assumption that he will not. ibe
able to drop the directing idea of the treat
ment, and I feel justfied, in concluding-*Ithat
what he reports, even though itmay /seem ito
be.quite ingenubiis and^ arbitrary^ has some
connection
with
Ms
morbid -state;; Another
directing idea of which the patient has no sus4
pition is -my<own personality; The full appreeiatibny as well as the detailed proof of both
these explanations," belongs to the description
ofthe psycho-analytic technique as a therapeu^
tic method; We have here reached one of >the
junctions,1 so;to speak, at <whjcfe we purposely
drop the subject of dream-interpretation.2
:'
Of all the objections raised, only one is justi^
fied and still remains to'be met; namely* that
we ought not to ascribe all the associations of
the interpretation-work to the nocturnal dream*
work- By interpretation in -the waking state
we are actually opening a path running back
frbm
the^
dream-elements
to
thedreamthoughts. The dream-work has
followed
the
contrary'direction, and it is not at all probable
that these paths are equally passable in opposite
directions';• On 'the contrary, it appears *hat
during the day; by- means of new thought-con
nections, We sink shafts that strike the inter
mediary thoughts and the dream-thoughts now
in this place, now in that. We can see how the
recent thought-material of the day forces its
way into the interpretation-series, and how the
1 The same considerations' naturally hold good pf the
case in which superficial associations are exposed in
the dream-content, as, for example, hi:both the dreams
reported by Maury (p. 50, pilerinage^pelletier—pelle,
kildmeter^kil6grams—-gitolo,
Lobelia—Lopez—
Lotto) ; T know from my work'" with' neurbtics what:
kind of reminiscence is prone to represent its'df;in=;tlu>
manner. It is the consultation of encyclopedias. by
which most people have satisfied their need of ait'ex^
planation xof the sexual mystery when obsessed by the
curiosity. of puberty. .
aThe above statements; which when written sounded
very improbable, have since been corroborated and ap
plied experimentally by, Jung and his pupils- rin; the
Didgnosiiche Assoziationsstudien.

[354a]
3SP
SiGMixisrp Freud
additional resistance which has appeared: since
the night probably compels it to make; new
and further detours. But the number and form
of the collaterals which we thus contrive du^
ing
the
day are,
psychologically speaking^
indifferent, so long as they point the way to
the dream-tboughte which we ate seeking;
B. Regression
Now that we have defended ourselves against
the objections raised,,or have at least indicated
our weapons of defence, we must no longer
delay entering upon the psychological invests
gations for which we have so long been prepar
ing. Let us summarize, the main results of oxur
recent investigations: The dream is a psychic
act full of import; its motive power is invari
ably a wish craving fulfilment;. the fact that
it is unrecognizable as a wish, and its many
peculiarities and absurdities, are due to the
influence of the psychic censorship to which it
has been subjected during its formation. Be
sides the necessity of evading the censorship,
the following factors have played a part in its
formation:
first, a, need for condensing the
psychic material; second, regard for representability in sensory images; and third (though
not constantly), regard for a rational and in
telligible exterior of the dreara-sfcructure. From
each of the.se propositions a path leads onward
to psychological postulates, and assumptions.
Thus, the reciprocal relation of the wish-mo-*
lives, and the four conditions, as well as the
mutual relations of these conditions,, must now
be investigated; the dream must be inserted in.
the context of the psychic, life.
At the beginning of this section we cited a
certain dream in order that it might remind
us of the problems that are still unsolved. The
interpretation of this dream (of the burning
child)
presented no difficulties,
altho.ugb in
the analytical sense it was not given in full. We
asked ourselves why, after all, it was necessary
that the father should dream instead of waking,
and we recognized the wish to represent the
child as living as a motive of the dream. That
there was yet another wish operative in the,
dream we shall be able to show after further
discussion. For the present, however, we may
say that for the sake of the wish-fulfilment the
thought-process of sleep was transformed into
a dream.
If the wish-fulfilment is cancelled out, only
one characteristic remains which distinguishes
the two kinds of psychic events. The dreamthought would have been: "I see a glimmer;

[354b]
coming from the room in whiqh the body is
lyings Perhaps a candle has fallen over, and
the child is .burning!" The dream reproduces
the result, of this reflection unchanged, but rep
resents it in a situation which exists in the
present, and is perceptible by the senses like
an experience erf the waking state. This, how
ever, is the most common and the most striking
psychological characteristic of the dneam; a
thought, usually the. one wished for, is, objecti
fied in. the dream,: and represented as a sceja^
or—as we think—experienced.
But how are we now to explain this, chara
teristic peculiarity of the dream-work, ©jr^to
put it moremodestiy-T-how are wet to> briagr it
into relation with the psychic processes?
On closer examination, it is plainly evident
that the manifest form of the dream* is marked
by two
characteristics which are almost, in?
dependent of each other. One is its representar
tion as a present situation with the omission of
perhaps; the. other is the translation of the
thought into visual images: and speech.
The transformation to which the dreamy
thoughts are subjected because the expectation
is put into the present tense is, perhaps, in this
particular dream not so very striking. This is
probably due to the special and really sub
sidiary role of the msh.4uifilment
ha
thijs
dream. Let us take another dream,, in which
the dream-wish does not break away from the
continuation of the waking; thoughts in sleep;
for example, the dream of Irma's injection.
Here the dream-thought achieving representa
tion isc in; the conditional: "If only Otto, could
be blamed for Irma's illness!" The dream, sup
presses; the conditional, and replaces it. by a
simple present tense: "Yes, Otto is to blam^
for Irma's illness." This,, then* is, the first, of
the transformations which even the undistorted
dream imposes on the dream-thoughtsv But we
will not linger over this first peculiarity of the
dream. We dispose of it by a reference^ to thk
conscious phantasy, the day-dream, which be
haves in a similar fashion with its conceptual
content. When Daudet's M^ Joyeuse wanders.
unemployed; through the streets of Paris while
his daughter is led to believe that he has a post
and is sitting in his office, he dreams, in the
present tense, of circumstances,that.might help
him to obtain a recommendation and employ
ment. The dream, then, employs the present
tense in the same manner and with the same
right as the day-dream. The present is the
tense in which the
wish is represented as
fulfilled.

[355a]
The iNTERPfiETAifoN -d# Dreams
45*
Ife second quality peculiar to. the dream
alone, as distinguished from the day-dream, Is
that the conceptual content is not thought, but
is transfoltaed into visual images, to which we
give credence, and which we believe that we
experience, Let us add, however, that not all
dreams show this transformation of ideas into
visual Images. There are dreams which consist
solely of thoughts, but we cannot on that ac
count deny that they are substantially dreams.
My- dream,. Aytodidasker^-the: tty-pk#nta$y
about Professor N is of this character; it is
almost as free of visual elements as though I
had thought its content during the day^ More*
over* every long dream contains elements which
have not undergone this transformation into the
visual, and which are simply thought or known
as we an?e wont to think or know in our waking
state. And we must here reflect that this trans*
formation of ideas into visual images does
not occur in dreams alone* but also in halluci
nations and visions, which may appear sptfn^
taneously in health, or as symptoms in the
psychoneuToses, In brief, the relation which
we are here investigating is by no means an
exclusive one; the fact remains, however, that
this characteristic of the dream, whenever it
occurs, seems to be its most noteworthy char
acteristic, so
that we
cannot think of the
dream-life without it. To understand it, how
ever, requires a very exhaustive discussion.
Among all the observations relating to the
theory of dreams to be found in the literature
of the subject, I should like to lay stress upon
one as being particularly worthy of mention.
The famous G. T. H. Fechner makes the con
jecture,1 in a discussion as to the nature of
the dreams, that the dream is staged elsewhere
than in the waking ideation. No other assump
tion
enables us to
comprehend the
special
peculiarities of the dream-life.
The idea which is thus put before us is one
of psychic locality. We shall wholly ignore the
fact that the psychic apparatus concerned is
known to us also as an anatomical preparation,
and we shall carefully avoid the temptation to
determine the psychic locality in any anatom
ical sense. We shall remain on psychological
ground, and we shall do no more than accept
the invitation to think of the instrument which
serves the psychic activities much as we think
of a compound microscope, a photographic
camera, or other apparatus. The psychic local
ity, then, corresponds to a place within such
an apparatus in which one of the preliminary
1 Psychophysik, Part. II, p. 520.

[355b]
phases of the image comes into existence. Ai
is Well known, there are in the microscope and
the telescope such ideal localities or plattesj In
which ho tangible portion of the apparatus is
located, I think it superfluous to apologise f8£
the imperfactions of this and all similar figures*
These comparisons are designed only t& assist
us in our attempt to make intelligible the
complication of the psychic performance by
dissecting it and referring the individual per
formances to the-individual componentsof the
apparatus. Sb far #s I am aware, no attempt
has yet bees made to divine the construction
of the psychic instrument by means of such
dissection. I see no harm in such an attempt;
I think that We should give free rein to our
conjectures, provided we keep our heads and
do not mistakethe scaffolding for the building.
Since for the first approach to any unknown
subject weneed the help only of auxiliaryideas,
we shall prefer the crudest and most tangible
hypothesis to all others.
Accordingly, we conceive the psychic appara
tus as a compound instrument, the component
parts of which we shall call instances, or, for
the sake of clearness, systems*. We shall then
anticipate that these systems may perhaps
maintain a constant spatial orientation to one
another, very, much as do the different and
successive systems of lenses of a telescope.
Strictly speaking, there is no need to assume
an actual spatial arrangement of the psychic
system. It will be enough for our purpose if a
definite sequence is established, so that in cer
tain psychic events the system will be traversed
by the excitation in a definite temporal order.
This order may be different in the case of
other processes; such a possibility is left open.
For the sake of brevity, we shall henceforth
speak of the component parts of the appara
tus as {//-systems.
The first thing that strikes us is the fact
that the apparatus composed of ^-systems has
a direction. All our psychic activities proceed
from (inner or outer) stimuli and terminate
in innervations. We thus ascribe to the appara
tus a sensory and a motor end; at the sensory
end we find a system which receives the per
ceptions, and at the motor end another which
opens the sluices of motility. The psychic pro
cess generally runs from the perceptive end to
the motor end. The most general scheme of the
psychic apparatus has therefore the following
appearance as shown in Fig. 1 on page 352. But
this is only in compliance with the requirement,
long familiar to us, that the psychic apparatus

[356a]
352
T SlGWJiND ifiUSUUr"\
mus,t0be-constructed like .^-reflex, apparatu;si
The^flexactrrqmains.the^type of teygry^psyt
chic activity asiwelW Ii-.-:
•- =' •
^ -• i?i
'
:: We-now have reason to admit.fa;first differentiation at thersensory end. Theiriercepts that
come to Ms leave in our psychic: apparatus -m
trace, which we may call a memory-trace. The
function related to this memory-trace we; call
the memory. If we hold seriously to our resolu
tion to connect the psychic processes into
systems, the memory-trace can consist only
of lasting changes^ in the elements of the sys^
terns. But^as has already been shown elsewhere,
p •
. •
>:;.-
M
/
Fig; i
obvious difficulties arise when one and the same
system is faithfully to preserve changes in its
elements and still to remain fresh and recep
tive in respect of new occasions of change. In
accordance with the principle which, is direct
ing our attempt, we shall therefore ascribe
these two.functions to two different systems.
We assume that an initial system of this ap
paratus receives the stimuli of perception but
retains nothing of them — that is, it has no
memory; and that behind this there lies a sec
ond system, which transforms the momentary
excitation of the first into lasting traces. The
following would then be the diagram of our
psychic apparatus:
P
Mem Mem* Mem"
M
/
\
Fig. 2
We know that of the percepts which act upon
the P-system, we retain permanently something
else as well as the content itself. Our percepts
prove also to be connected with one another
in the memory, and this is especially so if they
originally occurred simultaneously.
We
call
this the fact of association. It is now clear that,
if the P-system is entirely lacking in memory, it
certainly cannot preserve traces for the asso
ciations; the individual P-elements would be
intolerably hindered in their functioning if a
residue of a former connection should make

[356b]
its--influence:felt] against.•;a, nefr ^perception.
Hence we. must; rather assumetftba&the mem*
ory-system 'is-the basis of -association;].» The
factlof iassociatipn, tben> consists in this-r- that
ia consequence4of a lessening of resistance and
a smoothing of the ways from one of the wetttelements, the. excitation transmits itselfto la
second rather than to a. third niem-eAement.
On further investigation we find it neces
sary to assume not one but many such memsystems, in which the same excitation trans?
mitted by the ^elements undergoes a diversi
fied fixation. The first of;these ffiemrsysterqs
will in any case contain the fixation of the as
sociation through simultaneity, while in those
lying farther away, the- same material of; ex
citation-j will be: arranged according to ;other
forms of combination; so that relationships of
similarity, etc,, might perhaps be represented
by these later systems. It would, of course, be
idle to attempt to express in words the psychic
significance of such a system. Its characteris?
tic would lie in the intimacy of its.relations to
elements of raw material of memory—that is
(if we wish to bint at: a ..more comprehensive
theory) in the gradations,of the conductive re
sistance on the way to these elements.
An observation of a general nature, which
may possibly point to something of importance,
may here be interpolated. The P-system, which
possesses no capacity for preserving changes,
and hence no memory, furnishes to conscious
ness the complexity and variety of the sensory
qualities. Our memories, on the other hand; are
unconscious in themselves; those that are most
deeply impressed form no, exception. They can
be made conscious, but there is no doubt that
they unfold all their activities in the uncon
scious state. What we term our character is
based, indeed, on the memory-traces of our
impressions, and it is precisely those impres
sions that haye affected us most strongly, those
of our early youth, which hardly ever become
conscious.
But when memories become con
scious again they show no sensory quality, oria
very negligible one in comparison with the per
ceptions. If, now, it can be confirmed that for
consciousness memory andquality aremutually
exclusive in the if/-systems, we have gained a
most promising insight into the determinations
of the neuron excitations.1
What we have so far assumed concerning
the composition of the psychic apparatus at
1 Since writing this, I have thought that conscious
ness occurs* actually in the locality of the memorytrace. (Cf. "Notiz iiber den WUnderblock" 1925, Ge's.
Schriften, Vol. vi.)

[357a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
353
the sensible end has: been assumed regardless
of dreams and of the psychological explanations
which we have hitherto derived from them.
Dreams, however, will serve as a source*of evi
dence for Our knowledge of another part of the
apparatus. We have seen that it was impossible
to explain dream-formation unless we ventured
to assume two psychic instances, one of which
subjected the activities of the other to •criti
cism, the result of which was exclusion from
consciousness.
•
'
.
We have concluded that the criticizing in
stance maintains closer relations with'the con
sciousness than the instance criticized^It stands
between the latter'- and the consciousness like
a screen: Further, we have found that there is
reason to identify the criticizing instance'vttih
that which directs our waking lifel and deter
mines our voluntary conscious activities: If, in
accordance with our assumptions, we now re
place these instances by systems, the criticiz
ing system will therefore be moved to the mo
tor end. We now enter both systems in bur di
agram, expressing,' by the names given them,
their relation to consciousness.
Ucs
The last.of the systems at the.motor end we
call the preconscious (Pes.) to denote that the
excitingprocesses in this system can reach cpnr
sciousness without any further detention, pro
vided certain other conditions are fulfilled, e.g.,
the attainment of a definite degree of intensity,
a certain apportionment of that function which
we must call attention, etc. This-is at the same
time the system which holds the keys of vol
untary motility. The system behind it we call
the unconscious (Ucs), because it has no access
to consciousness except through the precon
scious, in the passage through which the exci
tation-process must submit to certain changes.1
In which of these systems, then, do we-lo
calize the impetus to dream-formation? For
the sake of simplicity,.let us say in the system
Ucs, We shall find, it is true, in subsequent
discussions, that this is not,altogether correct;
1 The further elaboration of this linear diagram will
have to reckon with: the: assumption' that the system
following the Pes--represents the one to Which we must
attribute consciousness (Cs), so that P = Cs.

[357b]
that dream-formation is obliged to make com
nection With dream^thoughts which belong to
the system of the preconscious. But we shall
learn elsewhere, when we come to deal with
the dream-wishj that the motive-power of the
dream is furnished by the Ucs, and on account
of;this factor we shall assume the unconscious
system as the starting-point for dream-forma
tion. This dream-excitation, like all the other
thought-structures, will now strive to continue
itself in the Pes, andthence to gain admission
to the consciousness.
Experience teaches us that the path leading
through the preconscious to consciousness is
closedto the dream-thoughts during the dayby
the resisting censorship. At night they gain ad
mission to consciousness; the question arises:
In what way and because of what changes?r If
this admission were rendered possible to the
dreams-thoughts•by the weakening, during the
night, of the resistance watching on the bound
ary between the unconscious and the precon
scious, we should then have dreams in the
material of our ideas, which would not display
the hallucinatory character that interests1us at
present.
''
The weakening of the censorship between the
two systems, Ucs and Pes,can explain to us
only such dreams as the Autodidasker dream
but not' dreams like that of the burning child,
which—aswill be remembered—we stated as
a problem at the: outset in bur present inves
tigations.
r
What takes ^place in the hallucinatory dreain
We can describe in ho other way thari by say^
ing that the excitation follows a retrogressive
course. It communicates itself not to the mptof
end of the apparatus, but to the sensory ehd^
and finally reaches the system of perception.
If we call the direction which the psychic pfo^
cess
follows
from
the unconscious into the
waking state progressive, we may then speak
Of the dream as having a regressive character.2
This regression is therefore assuredly one of
the most important psychological peculiarities
of the dream-process; but we must not forget
that it is not characteristic of the dream alone.
Intentional recollection and other component
2 The first indication of the element of regression is
already encountered in the; writings of Albertus Mag
nus-According to him the imagination constructs the
dream out of the tangible objects which it has retained,
The process is the converse of that operating in the
waking state. Hobbes states (Leviathan, ch. 2): "In
sum pur dreams are the reverse of our imagination,
the motion, when we are awake, beginning at one end,
and when we dream at another" (quoted by Havelock
Ellis, loc. cit., p. 112).

[358a]
354
Sigmund Freud
processes of our normalthinking likewise neces
sitate a retrogression in the psychic apparatus
from some complex act of ideation to the raw
material of the memory-traces which underlie
it. But during the waking state this turning
backwards does not reach beyond the memoryimages; it is incapable of producing the hallu
cinatory revival of the perceptual images. Why
is it otherwise in dreams? When we spoke of
the condensation-work of the dream we could
not avoid the assumption that by the dreamwork the intensities adhering to the ideas are
completely transferred from one to another. It
is probably this modification of the usual psy
chic process which makes possible the cathexis1 of the system of P to its full sensory viv
idness in the reverse direction to thinking.
I hope that we are not deluding ourselves
as regards the importance of this present dis*
cussion. We have done nothing more than give
a name to an inexplicable phenomenon. We call
it regression if the idea in the dream is changed
back into the visual image from which it once
originated. But even this step requires justifi
cation. Why this definition if it does not teach
us anything new? Well, I believe that the word
regression is of service to us, inasmuch as it
connects a fact familiar to us with the scheme
of the psychic apparatus endowed with direc
tion. At this point, and for the first time, we
shall profit by the fact that we have constructed
such a scheme. For with the help of this scheme
we shall perceive, without further reflection,
another peculiarity of dream-formation. If we
look upon the dream as a process of regresr
sion within the hypothetical psychic apparatus,
we have at once an explanation of the empi
rically proven fact that all thought-relations of
the
dream-thoughts
are
either
lost
in
the
dream-work or have difficulty in achieving ex
pression.
According
to
our
scheme,
these
thought-relations are contained not in the first
mem-systems, but in those lying farther to the
front, and in the regression to the perceptual
images they must forfeit expression. In regres
sion, the structure of the dream-thoughts breaks
up into its raw material.
But what change renders possible this regres
sion which is impossible during the day? Let
us here be content with an assumption. There
must evidently be changes in the cathexis of
the individual systems, causing the latter to
become more accessible or inaccessible to the
1From the Greek Kathexo, to occupy, used here in
place
of
the
author's term Besetzung,
to
slgfiify a
charge or investment of energy.—Tr.
"

[358b]
discharge of the excitation; but in any such
apparatus the same effect upon the course of
the excitation might be produced by more than
one kind of change. We naturally think of the
sleeping state, and of the many cathectic
changes which this evokes at the sensory end
of the apparatus. During the day there is a
continuous stream flowing from the ^-system
of the P toward the motility end; this current
ceases at night, and can no longer block the
flow of the current of excitation in the oppo
site direction. This would appear to be that
seclusion from the outer world which, accord
ing to the theory of some writers, is supposed
to explain the psychological character of the
dream. In the explanation of the regression of
the dream we shall, however, have to take into
account those other regressions which occur
during morbid waking states. In these other
forms of regression the explanation just given
plainly leaves us in the lurch. Regression occurs
in spite of the uninterrupted sensory current
in a progressive direction.
The hallucinations of hysteria and paranoia,
as well as the visions of-mentally normal per
sons, I would explain as corresponding, in fact,
to regressions, I.e., to thoughts transformed
into images; and would assert that only such
thoughts undergo this transformation as are in
intimate connection with suppressed memories,
or with memories which have remained un
conscious. As an example, I will cite the case
of one of my youngest hysterical patients—a
boy of twelve, who was prevented from falling
asleep by "green faces with red eyes," which
terrified him. The source of this manifestation
was the suppressed, but once conscious mem
ory of a boy whom he had often seen four
years earlier, and who offered a warning ex
ample of many bad habits, including mastur
bation, for Which he was now reproachinghim
self. At that time his mother had noticed that
the complexion of this ill-mannered boy was
greenish and that he had red (i.e., red-rimmed)
eyes. Hence his terrifying vision, which mere
ly determined his recollection of another say
ing of his mother's, to the effect that such boys
become demented, are unable to learn anything
at school, and are doomed to an early death. A
part of this prediction came true in the case
of my little patient; he could not get on at
school, and, as appeared from his involuntary
associations, he was in terrible dread of the re
mainder of the prophecy. However, after a
brief period of successful treatment his sleep
was restored, his anxiety removed, and he fin-

[359a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
ished his scholastic year with an excellent
record.
'
Here I may add the Interpretation of a vision
described to me by an hysterical woman of
forty, as having occurred when she was in
normal health. One morning she opened her
eyes and saw her brother in the room, although
she knew him to be confined in an insane asy
lum. Her little son was asleep by her side. Lest
the child should be frightened on seeing his
uncle, and fall into convulsions, she pulled the
sheet over his face. This done, the phantoiti
disappeared. This apparition was the revision
of one of her childish memories, which, al-
"• though •?conscious,vwas most,intimately con
nected with all the unconscious material in
her mind. Her nurserymaid had told her that
her mother, who had died young (my patient
was then only eighteen months old), had sufc
fered from epileptic or hysterical convulsions,
which dated back to a fright caused by her
brother (the patient's uncle) who appeared to
her disguised as a spectre with a sheet over
his head. The vision contains the same elements
as the
reminiscence, viz., the appearance Of
the brother, the sheet, the fright, and its ef
fect.
These elements, however, are arranged
in a fresh bontexty and are transferred to otb^
er persons. The obvious motive of the 'vision,
and the thought which it replaced, was her
solicitude lest her little son, who bore a strike
ing resemblance to his uncle, should share the
latter's fate.
Both examples here cited are not entirely
unrelated to the state of sleep, and may for
that reason be unfitted to afford the evidence
for the sake of which I have cited them. I will,
therefore, refer to my analysis of an hallucina
tory paranoic woman patient1 and to the results
of my hitherto unpublished studies on the psy
chology of the psychoneuroses, in order to em
phasize the fact; that in these cases of regres
sive thought-transformation one must not over
look the influence of a suppressed memory,
or one that has remained unconscious, this being usually of an infantile character.
This
memory draws into the regression, as it were,
the thoughts with which it is connected> and
which are kept from expression by the censor
ship—that is, into that form of represeiitation in which the memory itself is psychically
existent. And here I may add, as a result of my
studies of hysteria, that if
one succeeds in
bringing
to
consciousness
infantile
scenes
„-1 Selected Papers on Hysteria, "Further Observations
oii the^Defence-Neuro-Psychoses," p. 97 above.

[359b]
355
(whether they are recollections or phantasies)
they appear as hallucinations, and are divested
6f this character only when they are communi
cated. It is known also that even in persons
Whose memories are not otherwise visual; the
earliest infantile memories
remain vividly
visual until late in life.
If, now, We bear in mind the part played in
the dream-thoughts
by the infantile experi
ences, or by the phantasies based upon them,
and recollect how often fragments of these reemerge in the dream-content, and how even
the dream-wishes often proceed from them, we
Cannot deny the probability that in dreams,
toOj the transformation of thoughts into visual
images may be the result of the attraction ex
ercised by the visually represented memory,
striving for resuscitation, upon the thoughts
severed from the consciousness and struggling
for expression. Pursuing this conception, we
may further describe the dreain as the sub
stitute for the infantile scene modified by transi*
ference to recent material. The infantile scene
cannot enforce its own revival, and must there
fore be satisfied to return as a dream.
-"-'--'
This reference to the significance of the m*
fantile scenes (or of their phahtastic repetiitions) as in a certain degree furnishing the pat*
tern for the dream-content renders stiperfliious the assumption made by Schemer and his
pupils
concerning inner sources of
stimuli.
Schemer assumes a state of visualexcitation,
of internal excitation in the organ of sight,
when the Tdreams'manifest a special vividness
or an extraordinary abundance of visual ele
ments. We need raise no objection to this -as
sumption;''we may perhaps content ourselves
with assuming such a state of excitation only
for the psychic perceptive system of the or
gan of Vision; we shall, however, insist that
this state of excitation is a reanimation by the
memory of a former actual visual excitation; I
cannot, from my own experience, give a good
example showing such an influence of an infan
tile memory; my own dreams are altogether
less rich in perceptual elements than I imagine
those of others to be; but in my most beautiful
and most vivid dream of late years I can easily
trace
the
hallucinatory
distinctness
of
the
dream-contents to the visual qualities of re
cently
received
impressions.
On
p.
321
I
mentioned a dream in which the dark blue of
the water, the.brown of the smoke issuing
from the ship-s funnels, and the sombre brown
and red of;the, buildings which I saw made a;
profound and lasting impression upon my mind*

[360a]
356
SlGMUND
This dream, if any, must be attributed to visual
excitation, but what was it that had brought
my organ of vision into this excitable state?
It was a recent impression which had joined
itself to a series of former impressions. The
colours I beheld were in the first place those
of the toy blocks with which my children had
erected a magnificent building for my -admi
ration, on the day preceding the dream. There
was the sombre red on the large blocks, the
blue and brown on the small ones. Joined to
these were the colour impressions of my last
journey in, Italy: the beautiful blue of the
Isonzo and the lagoons, the brown hue of the
Alps. The beautiful colours seen in the dream
were but ^repetition of those seen in memory.
Let us [summarize what we, have learned
about this peculiarity of dreams: their power
of recasting their,idearContentn*visual images.
We may not have:explained this character of
the dream^work by referring: it [to, the Mown
laws of psychology, but we have singled it out
appointing to unknown relations, and have
given it the mme of the regressive character*
Wherever such regression has occurred, wehave
regarded it as 7an effect of the resistance which
opposes thenprpgress of thought on-its normal
way to' cpnscionsjraesSj-and of the simultaneous
attraction .exerted upon it by vivid,memories.1;
The regressionin dreams is perhaps facilitated
by -fthe
cessation
of
the progressive stream
flowing from the sense-organs during the day;
for which auxiliary factor there must be some
compensation, in. the other forms of regression,
by the strengthening of the other ^regressive
motives. .We must also bear; in mind that in
pathological: cases of regression, just as in
dreams, ;the, process
of
energy^transference
must be differentfrom: thatoccurringin the re
gressions of normal psychic life, since it ren
ders possible a.|ull hallucinatory cathexis. of
the perceptive system^ What we have described
in the analysis of the dream-work as regardfor
representability.,may be referred to the; selec
tive-attraction of visually remembered scenes
touched by the dreamrthoughts.
; As to the regression) we may further observe
that it playsc a no less important part in the
theory of neurotic symptom-formation than in
the theory of dreams. We may therefore dis-
*Ina statement of the theory of repression it should
be
explained that a thought passes
into repression
owing to the co-operation of two of the factors which \
influence it." On the'one side (the censorship of Cs)
it is pushed^ and from the other side. i(the Ucs), it
is pulled, much as one is helped.to the top of the
Great Pyramid.
(Comparis' the paper Repression, p.
422'below^ii* .' i
i!'

[360b]
Freud
tinguish a threefold species of regression: (a£
a topical one, in the sense of the scheme of the
^-systems here exponded; (b) a temporal' one,
in so far as it is a regression to older psychic
formations; and (c) a formal one, when primi
tive modes of expression and representation
take the place of the customary modes. These
three forms of regression are, however, basic-?
ally one^ and; in the majority of cases they eo-f
incide, for that which is older in point of time
is at the same time formally primitive and, in
the psychic topography,:,nearer to the percepT
tion-end.
-;••
|
We cannot leave the theme of regression in
dreams without giving utterance to an impres
sion which has already and repeatedly forced
itself upon, us, and which wiU return to us re
inforced after a. deeper study of the psycho-;
neuroses: namely,that dreamingis on the whole
an act of regressipnpto the earliest relationships
ofthe.dreamer, a resuscitation of hischildhood^
of the impulses which were then dominant: and
the modes of expression which were, then javailfabler Behind this childhood:of-thefindividuaj
we are!then promised an insight intodthe phylpf
genetic childhood, into the evolution oftthe hu
man race, of which the development,pf the)in
dividualfis,-only an. abridged repetition influ
enced by, the fortuitousjcircumstances0of?l}%
We begin to suspect thatr!|*iedrich Nietzsche^
was right when he said that in a dreamj'tbere
persists a primordialrpartj of; humanity which
we can no longer reach by a direct path," ^d
we are encouraged to expect, from the analysis
of dreams, a knowledge of the archaic inherfo
tance of man, a knowledge of psychical things^
in him that are innate. It would seem that
dreams and neuroses have preserved for us
more of the psychical antiquities than we susk
pected; so that psycho-analysis may claim 7a
high
rank among those sciences which en
deavour to reconstruct the oldest and darkest
phases of the beginnings of mankind.
^
,, It is quite possible that we shall not find
this first part of:purpsychological evaluationojf
dreams particularly •satisfying. We must, however, console ourselves with the;thought that we
are, after all, compelled to build put into: the
dark. If we have not gone altogether astray, we
shall surely reach approximately the same place
from another starting-point, and then, perhaps,
we-shallfee better able to find pur bearings, :
v
C.The Wiih^i0ment
;
:-
The dream of the burning child (cited above)
affords us a welcome opportunity for appreci-

[361a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
ating the difficulties confronting the theory of
wish-fulfilment. That a dream should be noth
ing but a wish-fulfilment must undoubtedly
seem strange to us all-rfand not only because of
the contradiction offered by the anxiety-dream.
Once our first analyses had given us the enlight
enment that meaning and psychic value are con
cealed behind our dreams, we could hardly have
expected so unitary a determination of this
meaning; According to the correct but summa
ry definition of; Aristotle, the dream is a con
tinuation of thinking in sleep. Now if, during
the day, our thoughts perform such,a diversity
of psychic: acts-^judgments, conclusions, the
answering of objections, expectations, inten
tions, etc.—why should they be forced at night
to confine themselves to the. production of
wishes only?) Are there not, on the contrary,
many dreams that-present an altogether differ?
ent psychic act in .dream-form~for> example^
anxious care-—and is.not the father's unusual
ly transparent:dreamt
child such
a dream? From the gleam of.light that falls
upon his eyes while he is asleep the father
draws
the
apprehensive
conclusion
that
a
candle has fallen: over and may be burning the
body; he ^transforms this
conclusion into a
dream by embodying it in an obvious situation
enacted in the present .tense, What part is
played in this dream by the wish-fulfilment?
And how can we.possibly .mistake the predom^
inance of the thought continued from the wakr
ing state or evoked by the new sensory impres
sion?
.
;
.
. All these considerations are: justified, and
force us to look more closely into the role of
the wish-fulfilment in dreams, and the signifi
cance of the waking
thoughts continued in
sleep.
It is precisely the wish-fulfihnent that has
already caused us to divide all dreams into two
groups. We have: found dreams which were
plainly wish-fulfilments; and others'in which
the wish^fulfilment was
unrecognizable :and
was often concealed by every available means>
In this latter class of dreams, we recognized
the influence of the dream-censorship. The un
disguised wish-dreams were found chiefly in
children; short, frank wish-dreams seemed (I
purposely emphasize this word) to occur also
in. adults.
We may now ask whence in each case does
the wish that is realized in the dream originate?
But to what opposition or to what diversity do
we relate this whence? I think to the opposi
tion between conscious^ daily' life and an un-

[361b]
357
conscious psychic activity whichis able^o.make
itself perceptible only at night. I thus, find a
threefold possibility for the origin of a wish,
Firstly, it may have been excited during the day,
and owing to external circumstances may have
remained unsatisfied; there is thus left for the
night an acknowledged and unsatisfied wish,
Secondly, it may have emerged duringthe day,
only to be rejected; there is thus left for the
night an unsatisfied but suppressed wish* Third
ly, it may have no relation to daily life, but
may belong to those wishes which awake only
at night out of the suppressed material in uSi
If(we turn to our scheme of the psychic appar
ratus, we can localize a wish of the first order
in the system Pes. We may assume that a wish
of the secondorder: has been forced back frotfa
the\:Pcs system into the Ucs system, where
alonej; if anywhero,can it maintain .itself; as
for thejwishrimpulse of thethird order, We be
lieve that it is wholly incapable of leaving the
Uts^ystemU .Now, have the wishes arising from
these; different sources the same: value for the
dream,1 the same power toiinciteua dream?
On surveying the: dreams at our disposal
with a view to answering this question,,we are
at once moved to add as a fourth source of
the dream-wish the actual wish-impetus which
arises during the night (for?example, the stim
ulus of thirst> and sexual* desire). It then seems
to us probable that the source of the dreamwish does not affect its: capacity to incite a
dream. I have in mind the dream of the child
who continued the voyage that had been inter
rupted during the day, and the other children's
dreams cited in the same chapter; they ate
explained by an ^unfulfilled but unsuppressed
wish of the daytimej That wishes suppressed
during the day assert themselves inrdrearris is
shown by a great many examples; I/willxnenr
tion a very simple dream of this kind. A rath
er-sarcastic lady, whose younger friend has be
come engaged to be married, is asked, in the
daytime by her acquaintances whether she
knows her friend's fiance, and what she thinks
of/himuShe replies with unqualified praise, im
posing silence on her own judgment, although
she would have liked to tell the truth, name
ly, that he is a commonplace'fellow-^rone
meets such by the dozen (Dutzendmensch).
The; following'..night she dreams that the same
question is put to ner, and that she replies with
the 'formula: "In case\ of [subsequent orders,
itwill suffice to[mention thereference number'9
Finally/as the result of numerous analyses, we
learnthat thewish inalldreams thathave bee^

[362a]
358
SiGMtffff) Freud
subject to distortion has its origin in the uricoiiscious, arid could not become perceptible by
day. At first sight, then; it seems that in•in
spect of dream-formation all wishes are of
equal value and equal power.
I cannot prove here that this is not really
the true state of affairs, but I am strongly in
clined to assume a stricter determination of the
drearri-wish. Children's dreams leave us in riO
doubt that a wish unfulfilled during the day
may instigatea dream. But we must not forget
that this is, after all, the wish of a child; that
it is a wish-impulse of the strength peculiar
to childhood. I very much doubt whether a wish
unfulfilled in the daytime would suffice to cre
ate a dream in an adult. It would rather seem
thatj as we learn to control our instinctual" life
by intellection, w£ moire and more renounce
as unprofitable the formation or retention Of
such intense wishes as are natural to child
hood. In this, indeed, there may be individual
variations; sonde retain the infantile type of
the psychit processes longer than others; just
as we find such differences in the gradual de
cline of the originally vivid visual imagination.
In general, however, I am of the opinion that
unfulfiled wishes of the day are insufficient to
produce a dream in adults. I will readily admit
that the wish-impulses originating in conscious
ness contribute to the-instigation of dreams*but
they probably do no more, The dream would
not occur if the preconscious wish were not re
inforced from another source.
That source is the unconscious. I
believe
that the conscious wish becomes effective in ex
citing a dream only whenit succeeds in arous
ing a similar unconkcious wish which reinforces
it. From the indications obtained in the psycho
analysis of the neuroses, I believe that these
unconscious wishes are always active and ready
to express themselves whenever they find ah
opportunity of allying themselves with an im
pulse from consciousness,and transferring their
own greater intensity to the lesser intensity of
the latter;1 It must, therefore, seem that the
conscious wish alone has been realized in the
, xThey share this character of indestructibility with
.all other psychic acts that are really unconscious—that
is, with psychic acts belonging solely to the system
V6s. These paths are opened once and for all;
they
never fall into disuse;
they conduct the excitationprocess to discharge as often as they are charged again
with unconscious excitation. To speak metaphorically,
they suffer no other form, of annihilation than did the
Shadesof the lower regions in the Odyssey, who awoke
to new life the moment they drank blo^d/The-prbcesses
depending on the preconscious system are destructible
jba quite another sense. The psychotherapy of the neuStofees is based on this difference.

[362b]
drearn; but a slight peculiarity in the* form of
the dream will put us on the track of the pow
erful ally from the Unconscious. These everactive and, as it were, immortal wishes of our
unconscious recall the legendary Titans who,
from time immemorial, have been buried un
der the mountains which were once hurled updfi
them by the victorious gods; and even how quiv
er from time to time at the convulsions of their
mi&hty limbs. These wishes, existing iii repres
sion, are themselves of infantile origin^ as we
learn from the psychological investigation of
the neuroses. Let me, therefore^ set aside the
view previously expressed, that it matters lit
tle whence the dream-wish originates, and re*
place it by another, namely: the wish mdnu
fested in the dream must be an infantile wish.
Iti the adult it originatel4h-theUcs^ whileTin
the child, in whorii no division and censorship
exist as yet between the Pes and Ucs, or hi
whorii these are only in process of forma
tion j it is an unfulfilled arid urirepresscd Wish
from the waking state. I am aware that this
conception cannot be generally derhbristrated•,
but I;maintain that it can often be demon
strated even where brie would not have sus
pected it, and that it cannot be generally
refuted.
In dream-formation, the wish-impulses which
are left over from the conscious Waking li|e
are, therefore', to be relegated to the backgrbund. I cannot admit that they play any
part except that attributed tb the "material of
actual sensations during sleep in relation to
the dream^cohteht. If I now take into account
those other psychic instigatibris left over from
the waking life of the day, which are not wish
es, I shall merely be adhering to the course
mapped out for me by this line of thought.
We riiay succeed in provisionally disposing of
the energetic cathexis of our waking thoughts
by deciding to go to sleep. He is a good sleeper
who can do this; Napolebn I is reputed to have
been a model of this kind. But we do not al
ways succeed in doing it, or in doing it com
pletely. Unsolved problems, harassing cares,
overwhelming impressions, continue the activr
ity of our thought even during sleep, maintain
ing psychic processes in the system which we
have termed the preconscious. The thought-im
pulses continued into sleep majrbe divided in
to the following groups:
i.
Those which have riot been completed
during the day, owing to some accidental
cause.
2.
Those which have heen left uncomplete

[363a]
The Intekproeta^jqn of Dreams
359
ed because ourmentalpower? have failed
us, i.e., unsolved problems.
3.
Those which have been turned back and
suppressed during the day. This is rein
forced by a powerful fourth group:
4.
Those which have been excited in our
U;c& during vtJj&. day by the workings of
the Pes; andjfeajly;we;:may;;adda fifth,
consisting of:
5.
The indifferent impressions of the day,
which have therefore been left unsettled.
We need not underrate the psychic intensi
ties introduced into sleep by these residues of
the day's waking life, especially those ema
nating from the group of the unsolved issues.
It is certain that these excitations continue to
strive for expression during the night, and we
may assume with equal certainty that the state
of sleep renders impossible the usual continu
ance of the process of excitation in the precon
scious and its termination in becoming con
scious. In so far as we can become conscious
of our mental processes in the ordinary way,
even, during:, the night, tp that extent we are
simply not asleep. I cannot say what change is
produced in the Pes system by the state of
sleep,1 but there is no doubt that the psycho
logical characteristics of sleep are to be sought
mainly in the cathectic changes occurring just
in this system, which dominates, moreover, the
approach to motility, paralysed during sleep.
On the other hand, I have found nothing in
the psychology of dreams to warrant the as
sumption that sleep produces any but secon
dary changes in the conditions of the Ucs sys
tem. Hence, for the nocturnal excitations in
the Pes there remains no other path than that
taken by the wish-excitations from the Ucs;
they must seek reinforcement from the Ucs,
and follow the detours of the unconscious ex
citations. But what is the relation of the pre
conscious day-residues to the dream? There is
no doubt that they penetrate abundantly into
the dream; that they utilize the dreamrcontent
. to obtrude
themselves
upon
consciousness
even during the night; indeed, they sometimes
even dominate the dream-content, and impel it
to continue the work of the day; it is also cer
tain that the day-residues may just as well
have any other character as that of wishes. But
it is highly instructive, and for the theory of
wish-fulfilment of quite decisive importance*
11 have endeavoured to penetrate farther into the
relations of the sleeping state and the conditions of
hallucination in my essay, "Metapsychological Supple
ment to the Theory of Dreams," Collected Papers, TV,
P.
137.
.'-j,-:
-

[363b]
to see what conditions they must cqmply with
in order to be received into the dream.
. Let us pick out one of the dreams cited
above, e.g., the dream in which my friend Ottp
seems to show the symptoms of Basedow's disr
ease (p.
249). Otto's appearance gave me
some concern during the day, and this worry,
Jike.veverything.else.relating to him, greatly
affected me. I may assume that this concern
followed me into sleep. I was probably bent on
finding out what was the matter with him. Dur
ing the night my concern found expression in
the dream which I have recorded. Not only
was its content senseless, but it failed to show
any wish-fulfilment. But I began to search
for the source of this incongruous expression
of the solicitude felt during the day, and anal
ysis revealed a connection. I identified my
friend Otto with a certain Baron L and myself
with a Professor R, There was only one explan
ation of my being impelled to select just this
substitute' for the day-thought. I must always
have been ready in the Ucs to identify myself
with Professor R, as this meant, the realization
of one of the immortal infantile wishes, viz.,
the wish to become great. Repulsive ideas re
specting my friend, ideas that would certain
ly have been repudiated in a waking state, took
advantage of the opportunity to creep into the
dream; but the worry of the day had likewise
found some sort of expression by means of
a substitute in the dream-content. The daythought, which was in itself not a wish, but
on the contrary a worry, had in some way to
find a connection with some infantile wish,
now unconscious and suppressed, which then
allowed it^-duly dressed up—to arise for con
sciousness. The more domineering the worry
the more forced could be the connection to be
^established; between the content of the wish
and that of the worry there need be no connec
tion, nor was there one in our example.
It would perhaps be appropriate, in dealing
with this problem, to inquire hpw a dream be
haves when ...material.is offered to it in the
dream-thoughts which flatly opposes a wishfulfilment; such as justified worries, painful
reflections and distressing realizations.
The
many possible results may be classified as fol
lows: (a) The dream-work succeeds in replac
ing all painful ideas by contrary ideas, and sup
pressing the painful affect belonging to them.
This, then, results in a pure and simple satis
faction-dream, a palpable wish-fulfilment, con
cerning which there is nothing more to be said,
(b) The painful ideas find their way into the

[364a]
36o
Sigmund Freud
manifest dream-content; more or less modi
fied, but nevertheless quite recognizable; This
is the case which raises doubts about the wishtheory of dreams, arid thus calls for further
investigation. Such dreams with a painful con
tent may either be indifferent in feeling, or
they may convey the whole painful affect,
which the ideas contained in them seem to
justify, or they may even lead to the develop
ment of anxiety to the point of waking.
Analysis then shows that even these painful
dreams are wish-fulfilments. An unconscious
and repressed wish, whose fulfilment could
only be felt as painful by the dreamer's ego,
has seized the opportunity offered by the con
tinued cathexis of painful day-residues, has
lent them its support, and has thus made them
capable of being dreamed. But whereas in case
(a) the unconscious wish coincided with the
conscious one, in case (b) the discord between
the unconscious and the conscious-^the re
pressed riiaterial and the ego—is revealed, and
the situation in the
fairy-tale,
of the three
wishes which the fairy offers to the married
couple, is realized (see p.' 534 below). The
gratification in respect of the fulfilment of the
repressed wish may proveto be so great that it
balances the painful affects adheringto the dayresidues; the dream is then indifferent in its
affective tone, although it is on the one hand
the fulfilment of a wish, and on the other the
fulfilment of a fear. Or it may happen that the
sleeper'sego plays an even more extensive part
in the dream-formation, that it reacts with vio
lent resentment to the accomplished satisfac
tion of the repressed wish, and even goes so
far as to make an end of the dream by means
of anxiety. It is thus not difficult to recognize
that dreams of pain and anxiety are, in accord
ance with our theory, just as much wish-ful
filments as are the straightforward dreams of
gratificatiom
Painful dreams may also be
punishment
dreams. It must be admitted that the recogni
tion of these dreams adds something that is,
in a certain sense, new to the theory of dreams.
What is fulfilled by them is once more an un
conscious wish—the Wish for the punishment of
the dreamer for a-repressed, prohibited wishimpulse. To this extent, these dreams comply
with the requirement here laid down: that the
motive-power behind the
dream-formation
must be furnished by a wish belonging ttf the
unconscious^: But a finer psychological -dissee*
tion allows us to recognize the- difference be*
tween this and the iother wish-dreams. In the

[364b]
dreams of group (b) the unconscious dreamforming wish belonged to the repressed ma
terial; In the punishment-dreams it is likewise
an unconscious wish, but One which we must
attribute not to the repressed material but to
the ego.
Punishment-dreams point, therefore, to the
possibility of a still more extensive participa
tion of the ego in dream-formation. The mech
anism of dream-formation becomes indeed in
every way more transparent if in place of the
antithesis conscious and unconscious, we put
the antithesis: ego and repressed. This, how<-
ever, cannot be done without taking into ac
count what happens
in the psychoneuroses,
and for this reason it has not been done in this
book. Here I need only remark that the oc
currence of punishment-dreams is not generally
subject to the presence of painful day-residues.
They originate; indeed, most readily if the con
trary is true, if the thoughts which are dayresidues are of a gratifying nature, but express
illicit gratifications. Of these thoughts noth
ing, then, finds its way into the manifest dream
except their contrary, just as was the case in
the dreams of group (a). Thus it would be the
essential characteristic of punishment-dreams
that in them it is not the unconscious wish from
the repressed material (from the system Ucs)
that is responsible for dream-formation, but the
punitive wish reacting against it, a wish per
taining to the ego, even though it is uncon
scious (i.e., preconscious).1
I will elucidate some of the foregoing obser
vations by means of a dream of my own, and
above all I will try to show how the dreamwork deals with a day-residue involving pain
ful expectation:
i
Indistinct beginning. / tell my wife I have
some news for her, something very special. She
becomes frightened, and does not wish to hear
it. I assure her that on the contrary it is some
thing which will please her greatly, and I begin
to tell her that our son's Officers9 Corps has
sent a sum of money (5,000 k.f) ... something
about honourable mention.. . distribution . . .
at the same time I have gone with her into a
small room, like a store-room, in order to fetch
something from it. Suddenly I see my son ap
pear; he is not in uniform but rather in a tightfitting sports suit (like, a seal?) with a small
cap: He climbs on to a basket which stands
to one,side near a chest,.in order to put some
thing on this chest. I address him;- no answer.
, ? Here one -may- consider the. idea of the. super-ego
which was later recognized by psycho-analysis.
... -

[365a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
It seems to me that his face or forehead is
bandaged, he arranges something in his mouth,
pushing something into it. Also his hair shows
a glint of grey* I reflect: Can he be. so ex
hausted? And has he false teeth? Before I can
address him againI awake without anxiety, but
with palpitations. My clock points to 2.30
a.m.
•
To give a full analysis is once more impossible.
I shall therefore confine myself to emphasizing
some decisive points. Painful expectations of
the day had given occasion for this dream;
once again there had been no news for over
a week from my son, who was fighting at the
Front It is easy to see that in the dream^content the conviction that he has been killed: or
wounded finds expression. At the beginning* of
the dream one can. observe an energetic effort
to replace the painful thoughts by their con
trary. I have to impart something very pleas
ing, something about sending1 money, honour
able mention, and distribution. (The sum of
money originates in a gratifying incident of my
medical practice; it is therefore trying to lead
the dream away altogether from its theme.)
But this effort fails. The: boy's mother has a
presentiment of something terrible and does
suit wish to listen. The disguises are too thin;
the reference to the material to be suppressed
shows through everywhere. If my sonis killed,
then his comrades!will send back:his property:;
I shall have to ^distribute whatever he has -left
among his sisters,1 brothers/arid otherspeople.
Honourable mention is frequently awardedito
an officer after1he hasdied the "herb's death;?'
The .dream thus strives to give direct expres
sion to what it at first wished to deny; whilst
at the same time the wish-fulfilling tendency
reveals itself by distortion. (The change of lo
cality in the dream is no doubt to be under
stood as threshold symbolism, in line with Sil
berer's view.) We have indeed no idea what
lends it the requisite motiverpower. But my son
does not appear as falling (on the field of bat
tle) but climbing.—He was, in fact, a daring
mountaineer.-—He is riot in uniform, but in a
sports suit; that is,- the place of the fatality
now dreaded has been taken by an accident
which happened to him at one time when he
was ski-running,iwheti he.fell and fractured
his thigh*But the nature of his costume, which
makes him look like a seal,recalls immediately a
younger person, our comical little grandson; the
grey hair recalls his father, our son-in-law, who
has had a bad time in the Wan What does this
signify? But let us leave this: the locality, a

[365b]
pantry, the chest, from which he .wants to take
something (in the dream, to put something on
it), are unmistakable allusions to. an accident
of my own, brought upon myself when I was
between two and three years of age. I climbed
on a foot-stool in the pantry,,in order to get
something nice which was on a chest; or table.
The footstool tumbled over and its edge struck
me behind the lower jaw. I might very well
have knocked all my teeth out. At this point,
an admonition presents itself: it serves you
right—like a hostile impulse against the valiant
warrior. A profounder analysis enables me to
detect the hidden impulse, which would be
able to find satisfaction in the dreaded mishap
to my son. It is the envy of youth which the
elderly man believes,that; he has thoroughly
stifled in actual life. There is no mistaking the
fact that it was the very:intensity of theHpainftil apprehension!lest such a misfortune should
really happen that searched out for its allevia
tion such arepressed wish-fulfilment>
I can; now clearly define what the uncon
scious wish means for the dream. I will ad
mit that there is a whole class of dreams in
which the incitement on&natesjmainly oreyen
exclusively from the residues of the day; and
returning to,• the dream about my friend Otto,
I believe that even my desire; to become at
last a professor extraordinariusmovid have • al
lowed me to sleep in peace that nighty had not
-the day's concern,for• my friend'si^healthcon
tinued active. But this worry1alone would no,t
ihaveJ produced a? dream; the motive-power
-needed by the dream had to be contributed by
a wish, and it was the business of my concern
to find such a wish for itself, as the motive
power of the dream. To^put it figuratively,cit
is quite possible that a>dayrthdught!plays the
part of the entrepreneur iH the drearn; but the
entrepreneur, who, as we say, has ther idea, and
feels impelled to realize it, can do nothing
without capital; he needs a capitalist who will
defray the expense, and this capitalist, who con
tributes the psychic expenditure for the dream,
is Invariably arid indisputably, whatever the
nature of the waking thoughts, a<wish from,the
unconscious.
.
In .other cases the capitalist himself:is the
entrepreneur; this, -indeed* seems to be the more
usual case. An unconscious wish is excited by
.the day's work, and this now creates the dream.
And the dream-processes provide a parallel for
all the other possibilities of the economic rela
tionship here used as an illustration. Thus the
entrepreneur may himself contribute a little

[366a]
of the capital,^or several entrepreneurs may
seek the aid of the same capitalist, or several
capitalists may jointly supply the capital re
quired by the entrepreneurs. Thus there are
dreams sustained by more than one dreamwish, and many similar variations, which may
be readily imagined, and which are of no fur
ther interest to us. What is still lacking to our
discussion of the dream-wish we shall only be
able to complete later on.
The terHum comparationis in the analogies
here employed, the quantitative element of
which an allotted amount is placed at the free
disposal of the dream, admits of a still closer
application to the elucidation of the dreamstructure. As shown on p. 263, we can recog
nize in most dreams a centre supplied with a
special sensory intensity. This is, as a rule,
the direct representationof the wish-fulfilment;
for, if we reverse the displacements of the
dream-work, we find= that the psychic inten
sity of the elements in the dream-thoughts is
replaced by the sensory intensity of the ele
ments in the dream-content. The elements in
the neighbourhood of the wish-fulfilment have
often nothing to do with its meaning,but prove
to be the offshoots of painful thoughts which
are opposed to the wish. But owing to their
connection with the central element, often ar
tificially established, they secure so large a
share of its intensity as to become capable of
representation. Thus, the representative ener
gy of the wish-fulfilment diffuses itself over a
certainsphere of association, within which all
elements are raised to representation, includ
ing even those that are in themselves without
resources. In dreams containing several dy
namic wishes we can easily separate and delimit
the spheres of the individual wish-fulfilments,
and we shall find that the gaps in the dream
are often of the nature of boundary-zones.
Although the foregoing remarks have re
stricted the significance of the day-residues
for the dream, they are none the less deserv
ing of some further attention. For they must
be a necessary ingredient in dream-formation,
inasmuch as experience reveals the surprismg
fact that every dream shows in its content
a connection with a recent waking impression,
often of the most indifferent kind. So far we
have failed
to understand the necessity for
this addition to the dream-mixture (p. 212).
This necessity becomes apparent only when
we bear in mind the part played by the uncon
scious wish, and seek further information in
the psychology of the neuroses. We shall then

[366b]
362
SlGMUND Freud
learn that an unconscious idea, as such, is quite
incapable of entering into the 'preconscious,
and that it can exert an influence there only
by establishing touch with a harmless idea
alreadybelonging to the preconscious, to which
it transfers its intensity, and by which it al
lows itself to be screened. This is the fact of
transference,whichfurnishesthe explanation of
so many surprising occurrences in the psychic
life of neurotics. The transference may leave
the
idea from the preconscious unaltered,
though the latter will thus acquire an unmer
ited intensity, or it may force upon this some
modification derived from the content of the
transferred idea.T trust the reader will pardon
my fondness for comparisons with daily life,
but I feel tempted to say that the situation
for the repressed idea is Hkethat of the Amer
ican dentist in Austria, who may not carry on
his practice unless he can get a duly installed
doctor of medicine to serve him as a signboard
and legal "cover." Further, just as it is not ex
actly the busiest physicians who form such al
liances with dental practitioners, so in the psy
chic life the choice as regards covers for re
pressed ideas does not fall upon such precon
scious or conscious ideas as have themselves
attracted enough of the attention active in the
preconscious. The unconscious prefers to en
tangle with its connections either those imjpressions and ideas of the preconscious which
have remained unnoticed as being indifferent
or those which have immediately had attention
withdrawn from them again (by rejection). It
is a well-known proposition of the theory of
associations, confirmed by all experience, that
ideas which have formed a very intimate con
nection in one direction assume a negative typje
of attitude towards whole groups of new con
nections. I have even attempted at one time to
base a theory of hysterical paralysis on this
principle.
If we assume that the same need of trans
ference on the part of the repressed ideas,
of which we have become aware through the
analysis of the neurosis, makes itself felt in
dreams also, we can at once explain two of
the problems of the dream: namely, that every
dream-analysis reveals an interweaving of a
recent impression, and that this recent element
is often of the most indifferent character. We
may add what we have already learned else
where, that the reason why these recent and
indifferent elements so frequently find their
way into the dream-content as substitutes for
the very oldest elements of the dream-thoughts

[367a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
363
is that they have the least to fear from the re
sisting censorship. But while this freedom from
censorship explains only the preference shown
to the trivial elements, the constant presence
of recent elements points to the necessity for
transference. Both groups of impressions satis
fy the demand of the repressed ideas for ma
terial still free from associations, the indiffer
ent ones because they have offered no occasion
for extensive associations, and the recent ones
because they have not had sufficient time to
form such associations.
We thus see that the day-residues, among
which
we may now include the indifferent
impressions, not only borrow something from
the Ucs when they secure a share in dreamformation—namely, the motive-power at the
disposal of the repressed wish—but they also
offer to the unconscious something that is in
dispensable to it, namely, the points of attach
ment necessary for transference. If we wished
to penetrate more deeply into the psychic pro
cesses, we should have to throw a clearer light
on the play of excitations between the precon
scious
and the unconscious, and indeed the
study of the psychoneuroses would impel us to
do so; but dreams, as it happens, give us no
help in this respect.
Just one further remark as to the day-resi
dues. There is no doubt that it is really these
that disturb our sleep, and not our dreams
which, on the contrary, strive to guard our
sleep. But we shall return to this point later.
So far we have discussed the dream-wish;
we have traced it back to the sphere of the
Ucs, and have analysed its relation to the dayresidues, which, in their turn, may be either
wishes, or psychic impulses of any other kind,
or simply recent impressions. We have thus
found room for the claims that can be made
for the dream-forming significance of our wak
ing mental activity in all its multifariousness.
It might even prove possible to explain, on
the basis of our train of thought, those extreme
cases in which the dream, continuing the work
of the day, brings to a happy issue an unsolved
problem of waking
life.
We merely lack a
suitable example to analyse, in order to un
cover the infantile or repressed source of wish
es, the tapping of which has so successfully
reinforced the efforts of the preconscious ac
tivity. But we are not a step nearer to answer
ing the question: Why is it that the uncon
scious can furnish in sleep nothing more than
the motive-power for a wish-fulfilment? The
answer to this question must elucidate the psy

[367b]
chic nature of the state of wishing: and it
will be given with the aid of the notion of the
psychic apparatus.
We do not doubt that this apparatus, too,
has only arrived at its present perfection by a
long process of evolution. Let us attempt to
restore it as it existed in an earlier stage of
capacity. From postulates to be confirmed in
other ways, we know that at first the appara
tus strove to keep itself as free from stimula
tion as possible, and therefore, in its early
structure, adopted the arrangement of a reflex
apparatus, which enabled it promptly to dis
charge by the motor paths any sensory excita
tion reaching it from without. But this simple
function was disturbed by the exigencies of
life, to which the apparatus owes the impetus
toward further development. The exigencies of
life first confronted it in the form of the great
physical needs. The excitation aroused by the
inner need seeks an outlet in motility, which
we may describe as internal change or expres
sion of the emotions. The hungry child cries or
struggles helplessly. But its situation remains
unchanged; for the excitation proceeding from
the inner need has not the character of a mo
mentary impact, but of a continuing pressure.
A change can occur only if, in some way (in
the case of the child by external assistance),
there is an experience of satisfaction, which
puts an end to the internal excitation. An es
sential constituent of this experience is the ap
pearance of a certain percept (of food in our
example),
the
memory-image
of
which
is
henceforth associated with the memory-trace
of the excitation arising from the need. Thanks
to the established connection, there results, at
the next occurrence of this need, a psychic im
pulse which seeks to revive the memory-im
age of the former percept, and to re-evoke the
former percept itself; that is, it actually seeks
to re-establish the situation of the first satis
faction. Such an impulse is what we call a
wish; the reappearance of the perception con
stitutes the wish-fulfilment, and the full cathexis of the perception, by the excitation spring
ing from the need, constitutes the shortest path
to the wish-fulfilment. We may assume a primi
tive state of the psychic apparatus in which this
path is actually followed, i.e., in which the wish
ends in hallucination. This first psychic ac
tivity therefore aims at an identity of percep
tion : that is, at a repetition of that perception
which is
connected with the satisfaction of
the need.
This primitive mental activity must haye

[368a]
3U
Sigmxjnd Freud
been modified- by bitter practical experience
into a secondary and more appropriate activ
ity. The establishment of identity of pefcep-:
tion by the short regressive path withinthe ap
paratus does not produce the same result in
another respect as follows upon cathexis of
the same perception coming from without. The
satisfaction does not occur, and the need con
tinues. In order to make the internal cathexis
equivalent to the external one, the former:
would have to be continuously sustained* just
as actually happens in the hallucinatory psy
chosesand in hunger-phantasies, which exhaust
their performancein maintaining their hold on
the object desired. In order to attain to more
appropriate use of the psychic energy, it be
comes necessary to suspend the full regression,
so thatit does not proceed beyond the memoryimage, and thence can seek other paths, leatiV
ing ultimately to the production of the desired
identity from the side of the outer world.*
This\inhibition, as3.well,as the subsequent de
flection of the excitation, becomes the task of
a second systemj which controls voluntary mo*
tility, i.e., a system whose activity first leads
on to the use of motility for purposes remem
bered in advance. But all this
complicated
mental activity,-which works its way from the
memory-image to the production of identity of
perception via the outer world, merely repre
sents a roundabout way to wish-fulfilment
made necessary by experience.2 Thinking is in
deed nothing but a substitute for the halluci
natory wish; and if the dreamis called a wishfulfilment, this becomes somethingself-evident,
sincenothing but a wishcan impel our psychic
apparatus to activity. The dream, which fulfils
its wishes by following the short regressive
path, has thereby simply preserved for us a
specimen of the primary method of operation
of the psychic apparatus,whichhas been aban
doned as inappropriate. What once prevailed
in the waking state, when our psychic life was
still young and inefficient, seems to have been
banished into our nocturnal life; just as we still
find in the nursery those discarded primitive
weapons of adult humanity, the bow and ar
row. Dreaming is a fragment of the superseded
psychic life of the child. In the psychoses;
aIn other
words:
the introduction
of
a
test of
reality is recognized as necessary.
2Le Lorrain
justly extols
the wish-fulfilments of
dreams:
"Sans fatigue
serieuse, sans Stre oblige de
recourir & cette lutte opinidtre et longue qui use et
corrode les jouissances poursuivies" [Without serious
fatigue, without being obliged to have recourse to that
long and stubborn struggle which exhausts and wears
away pleasures sought.]

[368b]
thosemodes of operation of the psychic appa^.
ratus which are normally suppressed. in :the
waking state reassert themselves, and there
upon betray their inability to satisfy our de
mands in the outer world.3
The
unconscious wish-impulses evidently
strive to assert themselves even during the day,
and the fact of transference, as well as the psy
choses, tells us that they endeavour to force
their way through the preconscious system to
consciousness and the command of motility.
Thus, in the censorship between Ucs and Pes,.
which the dream forces us to assume, we must
recognize and respect the guardian of our psy
chic ,health. But is it not carelessness on the;
part of this guardian to diminish his vigilance
at night, and to allow the suppressed impulses
of the Ucs to achieve expression, thus again
making possible the process of hallucinatory
regression? I think not, for when the critical
guardian goes to rest-^—and we have proof that
his slumber is not profound—-he takes care to
close the gate to motility. No matter what im
pulses from the usually inhibited lies may
bustle about the stage, there is no need to inr
terfere with them; they remain harmless, be
cause they are not in apposition to setin motion
the motor apparatus which alone can operate
to produce any change in the outer world.
Sleep guarantees the security of the fortress
which has to be guarded. The state of affairs is
less harmless when a displacement of energies
is produced, not by the decline at night in the
energy put forth by the critical censorship, but
by the pathological enfeeblement of the latter,
or the pathological reinforcement of the un>-
conscious excitations, and this while the pre
conscious is cathected and the gates of motility
are open. The guardian is then overpowered;
the unconscious excitations subdue the Pes,
and from the Pes they dominate our speech
and action, or they enforce hallucinatory re
gressions, thus directing an apparatus not de
signed for them by virtue of the attraction
exerted by perceptions on the distribution of
our psychic energy. We call this condition
psychosis.
t
We now find ourselves in the most favour
able position for continuing the construction of
our psychological scaffolding, which we left
after inserting the two systems, Ucs and Pes.
81 have further elaborated this train of thought
elsewhere, where I have distinguished the two prin
ciples involved as the pleasure-prinoipleand the real
ity-principle. Formulations regarding the Two Prin
ciples in Mental Functioning, in Collected Papers,
Vol. ivy p. 13.

[369a]
THE iNTERBRSr^TiTGN -of Dreams
§6$
However,:#e still have reason to give; further
consideration to the wish as the sole psychic
motive-power in the dream. We have accepted
the iexp^ianation'that the reason'why' the-dream
is in every case a wish-fulfilment Us that it is a
function of the^ system Ucs, which knows no
other aim than wish-fulfilmenti'and which has
at its disposal no forces other than the wishi
impulses. Now if we want to continue for a
single moriient longer to maintain our tight to
develop such far-reaching psychological speculatibns from the facts of dream-interpretation;
we are in duty bound to show that they insert
the dream into a context which can also em
brace other psychic structures. If there exists
a system of the Ucs--or something sufficiently
analogous for the purposes of our-discussion-^
the dream cannot be its sole manifestation;
every dream may be a wish^fuMlmenty but
there must be other forms ofabriormaL wishfulfilment as well as dreams. Arid in fact'the
theory of all psychoneurotic symptoms culiriinates in the one proposition thdt they, too>
must be conceived
ds wish-fulfilments
of
the unconscious* Our explanation makes the
dream only the first member of a series of the
greatest importance for the psychiatrist, the
understanding Of which means the solution of
the purely psychologicalpart of the psychiatric
problem.2 But in other members-ofthis group
of wish-fulfilments^—for exainple, in thfei^hys
terical symptoms—I know of
one
essential
characteristic which I have so far;failed to find
in the dreairi. Thus, from the investigations
often alluded torn this treatise; T know that
the formation of an hysterical symptom needs a
junction of both the"currents1 of bur psychic
life. The syiriptorii is ribfe merely the expression
of a realized unconscious wish; the latter must
be joined by another wish from1 the precon
scious, which is fulfilled by the sarne symptom;
so that the syflaptom is at least doubly deters
mined, once by each of the conflicting systems.
Just as in dreams, there is no liriiit to further
over-determination. The deteririihatibri which
does not derive from the Ucs is,!as fair as I can
see; invariably a thought-stream of reaction
against the unconscious wish; for example, a
self-punishment. Hence' I can say, quite gen
erally, that an hystericdl symptom1originates
^Expressed more exactly:!One;portion of the symptqm corresponds to the. unconscious -wishrfulfilment?
while the other corresponds %o the^ reaction-formation
opposed to it.:-
. -
u:
v
:
^a>
£ Hughlingst Jackson: has expressed; himself as]fol
lows: "Find out ..all about,breams,,.and,ypu will,have
found out all about insanity."
'!i'
:-••'-'

[369b]
only where two contrary wish-fulfilments^:navr
ing,their-sourcein differentpsychicsystemsr;are
able tormeetAn a single expression^ Examples
would help us but little here^a&nothing^ butna
complete unveiling of the complications*in ques
tion cab carry c6nviotion.: I will therefore-'cori^
tent .myself with the bare assertion, i"andi /will
cite •one example, not because it proves'.any*
thing, but simply as an illustration!. Therhys?
terical vomiting ofiaifemale patient proved, on
the one hand, to be the fulfilment of an uricon>
scious phantasy from the years -.of pubefty-^-
harhely, the wish that she might be continu
ally pregnant, and have a multitude of children;
arid this was subsequently supplemented by
the wish that she might have them by as riaany
fathers as possible. Against: this immoderate
wish there arose a powerful defensiveireaetionl
But as by the vomiting the patient mighthave
spoilt her figure and her beauty* so that she
would no longer find favour in any man's eyes*
the symptom was also in keepingswith the
punitive trend of thought, arid so, being ad^
missible ori'both sideSj itiwas-allowed to be*
cbme a reality^This is the iame way of acced
ing ;to a wish-fulfilment as thequeen of the
Parthians was pleased to adopt in the case" of
the -triumvir Crassus. Believing that he had
undertaken his campaign out of greed for gold;
she caused molten gold to be poured: into the
throat of the corpse. "Here thou hast what
thou hast longed for!"
•
;
; >
Of the dream we know as yet only that it
expresses a wish-fulfilment of the unconscious;
and apparently the dominant preconscious sys
tem permits this fulfilment when it has com
pelled the wish to uridergo certain distbrtiOns,
We are/moreover, riot in fact in' a positionnb
demonstrate regularly the presence of 7a •train
of thought opposed to the dream-wishpwhich
is realized in the dream as well as its antago
nist. Grily now and then have we found in
dream-analyses signs of reactiori-products as;
for instance, my affection for my friend R in
the dream of my uncle (p. 195). But the con-i
tributiori from the preconscious which is miss
ing here may be found in another place;' The
dream can provide expression for a-wish from
theUcs by meansof all sorts ofdistortions* Once
the dominant "system has;withdrawn itself into
the'wish to sleep, andhai realized this; wish by
8Cf. my latest formulation (in Zeitschrift fiir SexuaU
wissenschaft, Bd. I) of the origin of hysterical syrnpfonts;=3n< >the; treatise on ?'Hysterieal Phantasies-and
then?-Relation' to Bisexuality," Collected Papers, n,:
pp-gi. This forms chapter' X of Selected Papers owHfs*
teria, p. 115 above.

[370a]
366
SlGMUND
producing the changes of cathexis within the
psychic apparatus which are within its power;
thereuponholding on to the wish in questionfor
the whole duration of sleep.1
Now this persistent wish to sleep on the part
of the preconscious has a quite general facili
tating effect on the formation of dreams. Let
us recall the dream *of4 the-father-wbo, by the
gleam of light from the death-chamber, was
led to conclude that his child's body might have
caught fire. We have shown that one of the
psychic forces decisivein causing the father to
draw this conclusion in the dream instead of
allowinghimself to be awakened by the gleam
of light was the wish to prolong the life of the
child seen inthe dream by one.moment. vQther
wishes originatingm the repressed have probar
bly escaped us, for we are. unable to analyse
this dream. But as a second source of motivepower in this dream we may add the fathers
desire to sleep, for, like the life of the child,
the father's sleep is prolonged for a moment
by the dream. The underlying motive is: "Let
the dreamgo on, or I must wake up." As in this
dream, so in all others, the wish to sleep lends
its support to the unconscious wish. On page
189 we eited dreams which were manifestly
dreams of convenience. But in truth all dreams
may claim this designation. The efficacy of the
wish to go on sleeping is most easily recognized
in the awakening dreams, which so elaborate the
external sensory stimulus that it becomes com
patible with the continuance of sleep; they
weave it into a dream in order to rob it of any
claims it might make as a reminder of the
outer world. But this wish to go on sleeping
must also play its part in permittingallothe?
drearns, which can only act as disturbers of
the state of sleep from within. "Don't worry;
sleep on; it's only a dream," is in many cases
the suggestion of the Pes to consciousness
when the dream gets too bad; and this de
scribes in a quite general way the attitude of
our dominant psychic activity towards dream
ing, even though the thought remains unuttered. I must draw the conclusion that throughout the whole- of our sleep we are just-as cer- ~
tain that we are dreaming as we are certain
tliatweyare sleeping. It is imperative to disre^
gard the objection that our consciousness is
never directed to the latter knowledge, and that
it is directed to the former knowledge only on
1 This idea has been borrowed from* the; theory of
sleep of Li6bault, who revived hypnotic research; in
modern times 0H Sommeil provoqui, etc.* Paris
[1S89]).

[370b]
Freud
special occasions, when the censorship feels, as
it were, taken by surprise, On the contrary*
there are persons in whom the retention at
night of the knowledge that they are sleeping
and dreaming becomes quite manifest, and whQ
arethus apparently endowed with the conscious
faculty of guiding their drean^llfe* Such a
dreamer, for example, is dissatisfied with the
turn taken by a dream; he breaks it off with
out waking, and begins it afresh, in order tp
continue it along different lines, just like a
popular author who, upon request, gives a hapf
pier ending tohis play. Or on another occasjon[
when the dream places him in a sexually excitr
ing situation, he thinks in his sleep: "I don't
want to continue this dream and exhaust myself
by an emission; X would rather save it fox a
real situation,"
j
The Marquis Hervey (Vaschide) declared
that he had gained such power over his dreams
that he could accelerate their course at wiH^
and turn them in any direction he wished. It
seems that in him the wish to sleep had acr
corded a place to another, a preconscious wishj,
the wish to observe his dreams and to derive
pleasure from them. Sleep is just as compati
ble with such a wish-resolve as it is with some
proviso as a condition of waking up (wetnurse's sleep), We know, too, that in all per
sons an interest in dreams greatly increases
the number of dreams remembered after wak
ing,
Concerning other observations as to the guidr
ance of dreams, Ferenczi states: "The dream
takes the thought that happens to occupy our
psychic life at the moment, and elaborates it
from all sides. It lets any given dream-picture
drop when there is a danger that the wish-ful
filment will miscarry, and attempts a new kind
of solution, until it finally succeeds in creating
a wish-fulfilment that satisfies in one compror
mise both instances of the psychic life."
D. Waking Caused by Dreams. The Function
of Dreams. The Anxiety Dream
Now that we know that throughout the night
the preconscious Is oriem^tedrto^the^wish to
sleep, we can follow the dream-process with
proper-understanding. But let us first summar
ize what we already know about this process.
We have seen that day-residues are left over
from the waking activity of the mind, residues
from which it has not been possible to with
draw all cathexis. Either one of the unconscious
wishes has been aroused through the waking ac
tivity during the day or it so happens that the

[371a]
The lNT£fePKETA?rtoisr w
Dreams
two coincide; we havo^already discussed the
multifarious possibilities. Either already dur
ing the day or only on the establishment of the
state of sleep the unconscious wish has made
its way to the day-residues, and has effected a
transference to them. Thus there arises a wish
transferred to recent material;
or the sup^
pressed recent wish is revived by a reinforce
ment from the unconscious. This wish now
endeavours to make its way to consciousness
along the normal path of the thought proc
esses, through the preconscious, to whichindeed
it belongs by virtue of one of its constituent
elements. It is, however, confronted by the cen
sorship which still subsists,•-and^toNwhose in--
fluence it soon succumbs. It now takes on the
distortion for which the way has already been
paved by the transference to recent material.
So far it is on the way to becoming something
resembling an obsession, a delusion, or the like,
i.e., a thought reinforced by a transference, and
distorted in expression owing to the censorship.
But its further progress is now checked by the
state of sleep of the preconscious; this system
has presumably protected itself against inva
sion by diminishing its excitations. The dreamprocess, therefore, takes the regressive course,
which is just opened up by the peculiarity of
.the, sleeping, state,*and in-so^doing-^follows,the >
attraction exerted on it by memory-groups,
which are, in part only, themselves present as
visual cathexis, not as translations into the
symbols of the later systems. On its way to
regression it acquires representability. The sub
ject of compression will be discussed later.
The dream-process has by this time covered
the second part of its contorted course. The
first part threads its way progressively from the
unconscious scenes or phantasies to the precon
scious, while the second part struggles back
from the boundary of the censorship to the
tract of the perceptions. But when the dreamprocess becomes a perception-content, it has,
so to speak, eluded the obstacle set up in the
Pes by the censorship and the sleeping state.
It succeeds in drawing attention to itself, and
in being remarked by consciousness. For con
sciousness, which for us means a sense-organ
for the apprehension of psychic qualities, can
be excited in waking life from two sources:
firstly, from the periphery of the whole appa
ratus, the
perceptive system; and secondly,
from
the
excitations
of pleasure and
pain
which emerge
as the
sole psychic qualities
yielded by the transpositions of energy in the
interior of the apparatus. All other processes in

[371b]
SH
the ^-systems, even those in the preconscious;
are devoid of all psychic quality, and are there
fore not objects of consciousness, inasmuch as
they do not provide either pleasure or pain for
its perception. We shall have to assume that
these releases of pleasure and pain automati
cally regulate the course of the cathectic proch
esses. But in order to make possible more deli
cate
performances,
it
subsequently
proved
necessary to render the flow of ideas more in
dependent of pain-signals. To accomplish this,
the Pes system needed qualities of its own
which could attract consciousness, and most
probably received them through the connection
o£thepr^0Ti#Ed©i*s^
memorysystem of speech^symbols, which was not de
void of quality. Through the qualities of this
system, consciousness/hitherto only a senseorgan for
perceptions, now
becomes also a
sense-organ for a part of our thought-processes.
There are now, as it were, two sensorysurfaces,
one turned toward perception and the other
toward the preconscious thought-processes.
I must assume that the sensory surface of
consciousness which is turned to the precon
scious is rendered far more unexcitable by
sleep than the surface turned toward the P-system. The giving up of interest in the nocturnal
thought-process,is,-of course,-an appropriate
procedure. Nothing isto happen inthought; the
preconscious wants to sleep. But once the dream
becomes perception, it is capable of exciting
consciousness through the qualities now gained.
The sensory excitation performs what is in fact
its function; namely, it directs a part of the
cathectic energy available in the Pes to the
exciting cause in the form of attention. We
must therefore admit that the dream always
has a waking effect—that is, it calls into ac
tivity part of the quiescent energy of the Pes.
Under the influence of this energy, it now un
dergoes the process which we have described
as secondary elaboration with a view to coher
ence and comprehensibility. This means that
the dream is treated by this energy like any
other perception-content; it is subjected to
the same anticipatory ideas as far, at least, as
the material allows. As far as this third part of
the dream-process has any direction, this is
once more progressive.
To avoid misunderstanding, it will not be
amiss to say a few words as to the temporal
characteristics of these dream-processes. In a
very interesting discussion, evidently suggested
by Maury's puzzling guillotine dream, Goblot
tries to demonstrate that a dream takes up no

[372a]
568
*v:A?KzaS$&ffim.
othebtimeythanithe trar/rftion^period'betwees
sleeping ^an^iwakingijirhe -process, of waking up
requires;time;-during.this,thne the^dream *&&*
curs.Jit isj supposed- that-the-vfinal"picture; of
thedreamis sovividlthatit forces, the dreamer
to wake;,in•reality it is so vivid only because
when it-appears the, dreameryis already, very
near wakingJf'BnMvej c'estunr4veil qui com
mence"1
:6
".
er.~;
rlt has already been pointed put by Dugas
that Goblotj in order:to generalize his theory,
was forced to ignorea greatmany facts.. There
are also dreams from which we dp not:awaken;
for example, ma>ny dreams in,which we dream
that wedream: From, our knowledge of. the
dream-rwork, we can by-no means admit that it
extends only oyerthe period of waking. Qnthe
contrary, we must-consider it probable that the
first part of the dream-work is; already begun
during: the day,.:when we are still under the
domination of the preconscious, .The second
phase ofthedream-work, viz., thealteration by
the censorship, the attraction exercised by un-.
conscious scenes, and the penetration to, per
ception, continues probably all through, the
night, and accordingly we may always be cor
rect when we report a feeling that we have
been dreaming, all night,, even although we can
not say whatwe have dreamed. I do not, how
ever, think that it is necessary to assume that
up. to the time of becoming conscious the
dream-processes really follow the temporal se
quence which we have described; viz., that
there is first the transferred dream-wish, then
the process of distortion due to the censorshipj
and thenthe change of direction to regression,
etc. We were obliged to construct such a se
quence for the sake of description; in reality,
however, it is probably rather a question of
simultaneously trying this path and that, and
ofr the excitation fluctuating to and fro, until
finally, because it has attained the most appo
site concentration, one particular grouping re
mains in the field. Certain personal experiences
even incline me to believe that the dream-work
often requires more than onedayand onenight
to produce its result, in which case the extra
ordinary art manifested in the construction of
the dream is shorn of its miraculous character.
In my opinion, even the regard for the comprehensibility of the dream as a perceptual
event may exert its influence before the dream
attracts consciousness to itself. From this point,
however, the process is accelerated, since the
dream is henceforth subjected
to the same
1A dream is the beginning of-wakening.-—Ed.
~y _•

[372b]
treatment; asanyoti^er.pe^ception. Ifris like fee
works, which require .hqu^?:{fox-:(their;,pr^para^
tion and %en.flare-up,in a.momeinV ,-,-.,.. ^-
-Through,the dream^workj "the dr^m^process
now either gains:sufi^cient intensity to attract
consciousness to itself and to arouse-the pre
conscious (quite independently of the tmaeor
profundity of sleep), or its intensity-is insuf
ficient, and it must wait iri readiness,until attion, becoming more alert immediately before
waking, meets ithalfrway. Most dreams seem
to operate with relatively slight psychic inten-:
sities, for they wait for theprocess, of waking.
This, then; explains the,fact that as a,rule we
perceiyesomething dreamed# we are suddenly
roused from a deep sleePtHereras.well as m
spontaneous waking^ our.first glancelights upon
the perception-content created by the dreamwork, while,the next falls on that provided by
the outer world.
T
But of greater theoretical interest are those
dreams which:are capable of waking us in the
midst of our sleep. We. may bear in mind the
purposefulness which can be demonstrated iiti
all other cases, and ask ourselves why the
dream, that is, the unconscious wish, is granted
the power to disturb our sleep,, i.e., the fulfil
ment of the preconscious wish. The explana
tion is probably to be found in.certain rela
tions of energy which we do not yet under
stand. If we did so, we should probably find
that the freedom given to the dream and the
expenditure upon it of a certain detached at
tention represent a saving of energy as against
the alternative case of the unconscious having
to be held, in check at night,just as it is duririg
the day. As experience shows, dreaming, even
if it interrupts our sleep several times a night*
still remains compatible with sleep. We Jwake
up for a moment, and immediately fall asleep
again. It is like driving offa flyin our sleep; we
awake ad hoc. When we fall asleep again we
have removed the cause of disturbance. The
familiar examples of the sleep, of wet-nurses,
etc., show that the fulfilment of the wish to
sleepis quite compatible with the maintenance
of a certain amount of attention in a given
direction.
But we must here take note of an objection
which is based on a greater knowledge of the
unconscious processes. We have ourselves de
scribed the unconscious wishes as always ac
tive, whilst nevertheless asserting that in the
daytime they are not strong enough to make
themselves perceptible. But when the state of
sleep supervenes, and the unconscious wish has

[373a]
The Interpretation oe Dreams
shown its power to form a dream, and with it
to awaken
the preconscious, why does this
power lapse after cognizance has been taken of
the dream? Would it not seem more probable
that the dream should continually renew itself,
like the disturbing'fly which, when driven
away, takes pleasure in returning again and
again? What justification have we for our as
sertion that the dream removes the disturbance
to sleep?
It is quite true that the unconscious wishes
are always active. They represent paths which
are always practicable, whenevera quantum of
excitation makes use of them. It is indeed an
outstanding
peculiarity
of
the
unconscious
processes that they are indestructible. Nothing
can be brought to an end in the unconscious;
nothing is past or forgotten. This is impressed
upon us emphatically in the study of the neu
roses, and-especially'of hysteria; The uncon
scious path of thought which'leads to the dis
charge through an attack is forthwith passable
again when there is a sufficient accumulation
of excitation. The mortification suffered thirty
years ago operates, after having gained access
to the unconscious sources of affect, during all
these thirty years as though it were a recent
experience. Whenever its memory is touched j
it revives, and shows itself to be
cathected
with excitation which procures a motor dis
charge for itself in an attack: It is precisely
here that psychotherapy must intervene, its
task being to ensure that the unconscious proc
esses are settled and forgotten. Indeed, the
fading of memories and the weak affect of im
pressions which are ho longer recent, which we
are apt to take as self-evident, and to explain
as a primary effect of time on our psychic
memory-residues,
are
in
reality
secondary
changes brought about by laborious work. It is
the preconscious that accomplishes this work;
and the only course which psychotherapy can
pursue is to bring the Ucs under the dominion
of the Pes.
There are, therefore, two possible issues for
any single unconscious excitation-process. Ei
ther it is left to itself, in which case it ulti
mately breaks through somewhere and secures,
on this one occasion, a discharge for its excita
tion into"motility,/or it succumbs to the influ
ence of the preconscious, and through this its
excitation becomes bound instead of being dis
charged. It is the latter edse thai occurs in the
dream-process. The
cathexis from
the
Pes
which goes to meet the dream once this has at
tained to perception, because ithas been drawn

[373b]
369
thither by the excitation of consciousness, binds
the unconscious excitation of the dreain and
renders it harmless as a disturber of sleep.
When the dreamer wakes up for a moment,
he has really chased away the fly that threat
ened to disturb his sleep. We may now begin
to suspect that it is really more expedient and
economical to give way to the unconscious
wish, to leave clear its path to regression so
that it may form a dream, and then to bind and
dispose of this dream by means of a small out
lay of preconscious work, than to hold the un
conscious in check throughoutthe wholeperiod
of sleep. It was, indeed, to be expected that
the dream, even if originally it was hot a pur
poseful process, would have seized upon" some
definite function in the play of forces of the
psychic life. We now see what this function iS;
The dream has taken over the- task of bring
ing the excitation of the Ucs, which had been
left free, back under the domination of the
preconscious; it thus discharges the excitation
of the Ucs, acts as a safety-valve for the latter^
and at thesame time, by a slight outlay of
waking activity, secures the sleep of the pre
conscious. Thus, like the other psychic forma
tions of its group, the dream offers itself as a
compromise, serving both systems simultanebusly, by fulfilling the wishes of both, in so
far as1they are mutually compatible. A glance
at Robert's "elimination theory" will show that
we must agree with this author on his main
point, namely, the determination of the func
tion of dreams, though we differ from him in
our general presuppositions and in our estima
tion of the dream-process.1
1 Is this the only function, which we can .attribute to
dreams? I know of no other; A. Maeder,' to be sure,
has endeavoured to claim for the dream yet other sec
ondary functions. He started from the just observa
tion that
many dreams contain attempts to provide
solutions of conflicts, which are afterwards actually
carried through. They thus behave like preparatory
practice for waking activities. He
therefore drew
a
parallel between dreaming and the play of animals and
children, which is to be conceived as a training of the
inherited instincts, and a preparation for their later
serious activity, thus setting up a. fonction ludique for
the dream. A little while before Maeder, Alfred Adler
likewise emphasized the, function of thinking ahead in
the dream. (An analysis which I published in 1905
contained a dream Which may be conceived as a resolu*
.tion-dream, which was repeated night after night until
it was realized.)
But
an
obvious reflection must show us that this
secondary function of the dream has no claim to rec
ognition within the framework of any dream-ihterpretation. Thinking ahead; making resolution^/sketching
but attempted solutions which can then perhaps be
realized in waking life—these and many more
per
formances are
functions of the unconscious and pre^
conscious activities of the mind which continue as dayresidues in the sleeping state, and can then combine
with an unconscious wish to form a dream (p. 362 above).

[374a]
3?0
SlGMUND
The above qualification—in so far as the
two wishes are mutually compatible—contains
a suggestion that there may be cases in which
the function of the dream fails. The dreamprocess is, to begin with, admitted as a wishfulfilment of the unconscious, but if this at
tempted wish-fulfilment disturbs the precon
scious so profoundly that the latter can no
longer maintain its stateof rest, the dream has
broken the compromise, and has failed to per
form the second part of its task. It is then at
once broken off, and replaced by complete
awakening. But even here it is not really the
fault of the dream if, though at other times
the guardian, it has now to appear as the dis
turber of sleep, nor need this prejudice us
against its averred purposive character. Thisis
not the onlyinstance in the organism in which
a contrivance that is usually to the purpose
becomes inappropriate and disturbing so soon
as something is alteredin the conditions which
engender it; the disturbance, then, at all events
serves the new purpose of indicating the
change, and of bringing into play against it the
meansof adjustment of the organism. Here, of
course, I amthinking of the anxiety-dream, and
lest it should seem that I try to evade this wit
ness against the theoryof wish-fulfilment when
ever I encounter it, I will at least give some
indicationsas to the explanation of the anxietydream.
That a psychic process which develops anx
iety may still be a wish-fulfilment has long
ceased to imply any contradiction for us. We
may explain this occurrence by the fact that
.the wish belongs to one system (the Ucs),
whereas the other system (the Pes) has re
jectedandsuppressed it.1The subjection of the
Ucs by the Pes is not thoroughgoing even in
perfect psychic health; the extent of this sup
pression indicates the degree of our psychic
normality. Neurotic symptoms indicate to us
that the two systems are in mutual conflict;
the symptoms are the result of a compromise
in this conflict, and they temporarily put an
end to it. On the one hand, they afford the Ucs
a way out for the discharge of its excitation—
they serve it as a kind of sally-gate—while, on
the other hand, they give the Pes the possiThe function of thinking ahead in the dream is thus
rather a function of preconscious waking thought, the
result of which may be disclosed to us by the; analysis
of dreams or other phenomena. After the dream has so
long been fused with its manifest content, one must
now guard against confusing it with the latent dreamthoughts.
1General Introduction to Psycho-Analysts, p. 534
below.

[374b]
Freud
bility of dominating the Ucs in some degree.
It is instructive to consider, for example^ the
significance of a hysterical phobia, or of agora
phobia. A neurotic is said to be incapable of
crossing the street alone, and this we should
rightly call a symptom. Let someone now re
move this symptom by constraining him to this
action which he deems himself incapable of
performing. The result will be an attack of
anxiety, just as an attack of anxiety in the
street has often been the exciting cause of the
establishment of an agoraphobia. We thus learn
that the symptom has been constituted in or
der to prevent the anxiety from breaking out.
The phobia is thrown up before the anxiety
like a frontier fortress.
We cannot enlarge further on this subject
unless we examine the role of the affects in
these processes, which can only be done here
imperfectly. We will therefore affirm the prop
osition that the principal reason why the sup
pression of the Ucs becomes necessary is that,
if the movement of ideas in the Ucs were al
lowed to run its course, it would develop an
affect which originally had the character of
pleasure, but which, since the process of re
pression, bears the-cbaracter: of pain.,The aim,
as well as the result, of the suppression is to
prevent the development of this pain. The
suppression extends to the idea-content of the
Ucs, because the liberation of pain might ema
nate from this idea-content. We here take as
our basis a quite definite assumption as to the
nature of the development of affect. This is re
garded as a motor or secretory function, the
key to the innervation of which is to be found
in the ideas of the Ucs. Through the domina
tion of the Pes these ideas are as it were stran
gled, that is, inhibited from sending out tie
impulse that would develop the affect. The
danger which arises, if cathexis by the Pes
ceases, thus consists in the fact that the un
conscious excitations would liberate an affect
that—in consequence of the repression that has
previously occurred—could onlybe felt as pain
or anxiety.
\
This danger is released if the dream-process
is allowed to have its own way. The conditions
for its reahzation are that repressions shall
have occurred, and that the suppressed wishimpulses can become sufficiently strong. They,
therefore, fall, entirely outside the psychologi
cal framework of dream-formation. Were it not
for the fact that our theme is connected by
just one factor with the theme of the develop
ment of anxiety, namely,by the setting free of

[375a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
the Ucs during sleep, I could refrain from the
discussion of the anxiety-dream altogether, and
thus avoid all the obscurities involved in it.
The theory of the anxiety-dream belongs, as
I have already repeatedly stated, to the psy
chology- of the neuroses; I might further add
that anxiety in dreams is an anxiety-problem
and .not a dream-problem. Having once ex
hibited the point of contact of the psychology
of the neuroses with the theme of the dreamprocess, we have nothing further to do with it
There is only one thing left which I can do.
Since I have asserted that neurotic anxiety has
its origin in sexual sources, I can subject anx
iety-dreams to analysis in ordeT^o^demonstrate?
the sexual material in their dream-thoughts.
For good reasons, I refrain from: citing any
of the examples so abundantly placed at my
disposal by neurotic patients,and prefer to give
some anxiety-dreams of children.
Personally, I have had no real anxiety-dream
for decades, but I do recall one from my sev
enth or eighth year which I subjected to inter
pretation some thirty years later. The dream
was very vivid, and showed me my beloved
mother,with a peculiarlycalm,sleeping counte
nance^ carried into the room and laid on the
bed by two (or three) persons with
birdsbeaks. I awoke crying and screaming, and dis
turbed my parents' sleep. The peculiarly draped,
excessively taH figures with beaks I had taken
from the_illustrations of -Philippson's •Bible; I.
believe they represented deities with the heads
of sparrowhawks from an Egyptian tomb-re
lief: The analysis yielded, however, also the
recollection of a house-porter's boy; who used
to play with us children on a meadow in front
of the house; I might add that his name was
Philip. It seemed to me then that Xfirst heard,
from this boy the vulgar word signifying sex
ual intercourse,; which is replaced among edu
cated persons by the Latin word coitus, but
which the dream plainly enough indicates by
the choice of the birds' heads. I must have
guessed the sexual significance of the word from
the look of my worldly-wise teacher. My moth
er's expression m the dream was copied from
the countenance of my, grandfather, whom I
had seen a few days before his death snoring
in a state of coma. The interpretation, of the
secondary elaboration in the dream must there^
fore have been that my mother"was dying; the.
tomb-reliei, too, agrees with this. I awoke with
this anxiety, and could not calm myself until I
had waked my parents. I remember that I sud
denly became calm when I sawmy mother; It

[375b]
371
was as though I had needed the assurance:
then she wasnot dead. But this secondary in
terpretation of the dream had only taken place
when the influence of the developed anxiety
was already at work. I was hot in a state of
anxiety because I had dreamt that my mother
was dying; I
interpreted the dream in this
manner in the preconscious elaboration be
cause I was already under the domination of
the anxiety. The latter, however, could be
traced back, through the repression to a dark,
plainly sexual craving, whichhad found appro
priate expression in the visual content of the
dream.
A~man-twen*^seyen^yea*s^ of» age, who had
been seriously ill for a year, had repeatedly
dreamed, between the ages of eleven and thir*
teen, dreams attended with great anxiety, to
the effect that a man with a hatchet Was run
ning'after hint; he wanted to run away,- but
seemed to be paralysed, and could hiot move!
from the spot; This may be taken as; a good
and typical exampleof a very common amdety-I
dfeani, free from any suspicion of a sexual
meaning, Iri the analysis, the; dreamer /first
thought of a story told him
by his uncle;
(chronologically later than the dream); viz.,
that he was attacked at nightinthe streethy a;
suspicious-lookingindividual; and he conduded
from this association that he might have heard
of a similar episode at the time of the dream.
In association with the hatchet;1 he" recalled
that during this period of his life he once hurt
his hand with a hatchet while chopping wood.
This immediately reminded himpfhis relations
with his younger brother, whom he used/to
maltreat and knock down. He recalled, in par
ticular, one occasion when he hit his brother's
head with his boot and made it bleed, and his
mother said: "I'm afraid he will Itill him one
day " While he seemed to be thus held by the
thenie of violence, &memory from his ninth
year suddenly emerged. His parents had coriie
home late and had gone to bed, Whilst he was
pretending to be asleep. He soon heard pant>
ing, and other sounds that seemed to him mys
terious, and he could also guess,the position of
his parents in bed. His further thoughts showed
that he had established an analogy between this
relation': between his parents and his ownrela
tionto his youngerbrother. He substimed: what
was happehihg 'between his parent^ uuder' the
notion of uaii act of violence and a fight." The
fact thaThe had frequently noticed blood iriMs
mother's bed corroborated this conception^ r
That the sexual intercourse of adults appears

[376a]
372
SlGMUND
strange and alarming to children who observe
it, and arouses anxietyin them, is, I may say, a
fact establishedby everyday experience. I have
explained this anxiety on the ground that we
have here, a sexual excitation which is not mas
tered by the child's understanding, and which
probably also encounters repulsion because their
parents are^involved, and is therefore trans
formed into anxiety. At a still earlier period of
life the sexual impulse towards. the parent of
opposite sexdoes not yet suffer repression, but
as we have seen;(pp. 244-45) expresses itself,
freely.
For the night terrors with hallucinations (pa->
vornocturnus)'so frequent in childrenI should
without hesitation offer the same,explanation.
These' tqof can only be due to misunderstood
and rejected sexual impulses which, if record-:
ed,would probably: show a -temporal:peri-;
qdicityi since an intensification of, sexual libido^
may equallybe produced by accidentallyexcit
ing impressions tand by spontaneous periodic
processes, of deyelppment.
-
;
:;
I have not the -necessary observational ma
terial for the full demonstration of this,expla-;
nation.1.iPn the, other hand, pediatrists ;seem,
to lack;the point of, view which alone.makes
intelligible the iwhole series of phenomena,;;bqth
from,the somatjc and frpm the psychic side. To.
illustrate by,a comical examplehow closely,,ifone is made blind by-the blinkers of medical;
mythology,-one may pass by the understanding
of such cases, I willjcife a case whichI found:
in a thesis on pavor nocturnus (Debacker, 1881,
, r - - 1
A boy of thirteen, in delicate health, began
to be anxious .and dreamy;/ his sleep became,
uneasy, and once almost every week it was in
terrupted by,an.acute attack of anxiety with
hallucinations.;; The-memory, of these dreams
was always very distinct Thus he was able to
relate," that the devil.had shouted at him:. "Now.
we: have, you, now. we have you!" and then,
there was ar;smell;;of pitch and brimstone,,and{
the fire burnec! his skin. From this dream he
woke. in; terror;-at firstJhe could not cry out;
then'his voice iCame back to him, and he was
(hstmctiy heard to say: "No; no, ;not rne;,I.;
haven't done anything," or: "please, cjonjt;. I.
will never, do it again,!" At other times he said:
"Albert^has.never done;that 1" Later he avoid*
ecf; undressing,,"because, the., fire attacked jhim,
only when-he was undressed.'V In the midst of
these,.evil.dreams, which were; endangering hish
1 This- material has'since' been provided in abtihdanse by the literature-of psycho-analysis.5 ;?

[376b]
Fretjd
health, he was sent into the country, where he
recovered in the course of eighteen months.
At the age of fifteen he confessed one day: "Je
n'osais pas Vavouer, maisj'Sprouvais continuellement des picotements et des surexcitations
aux parties;2 -d la fin, cela m'Snervait tant que}
plusieurs fois j-aipensS me jeter parktfenetre
du dortoir."*
It is, of course, not difficult to guess: 1. That
the boy had practised masturbation in former
years, that he had probably denied it, and was
threatened with severe punishment for his bad
habit (His confession: Je ne le ferai phis;i
his denial: Albertn'a jamaisfait ga.5): 2; That,l
under the advancing pressure of pubertyj the
temptation
to masturbate was re-awakened
through the-titillation of the genitals. 3. That
now, however,;there arose;within him a struggle
for repression, which suppressed the libido and
transformed it into
anxiety,
and
that
this,
anxiety now gathered up the punishments with
which he was originally threatened,
=-(•).
Let us, on the other hand; see what conclu
sions were drawn by the author (p. 69):
:r
" 1. It is clear from7 this observation that the
influence of puberty may produce in a hoyoi:
delicate health va condition of extreme weak*;
hess, and that this may lead to a very marked:
cerebral anaemia?
.
:^
"2. TMs cerebral anaemia produces an alterf
ation7 of character, demono^maniacali halluci
nations; and-very violent nocturnal,andi>erhaps
also diurnal, states^ of anxiety. ;
f:
"3: The demonomania and the self-reproaches
of the boy can be traced to the influences of a
religious education which had acted upon him;
as a child.
•:.•
;
J
-\
"4.Allmanifestations disappeared as a result
of a lengthy sojourn in the country^ bodil^
exercise, and the return of physical strength^
after the termination of puberty.
r
"$.• Possibly an influence predisposing to the
development of the boy's cerebral state maly
be attributed to heredity and to the father'sformer syphilis."
"
•Then-finally come the concluding remarks:
"Nous avons fait entrer ceite observation dans
le cadre dilifes apyritiques dHmmiion, car
' aThe emphasis-is my own, though' the1 meaning is;
plain enough without it;
*
?I did not dare admit it, but I .continually? felt
tiiiglings and overexcitements of the pdrts;&i i&e end,
it wearied me so miich :that several timed I thought
to throw myself,from t]he;4or(mitory window.—-Ed. ,-v-r
*i will riot do it agairi.-^EO.
'
5 Albert1 never did that;—ED;f:
6The italics are mine.
•
*,
V

[377a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
pest APischimie c&ribrale que nous rattachons
cetSiatparticulier."1
E. The Primary and Secondary Processes.'"'/
Repression
In attempting to penetrate more profoundly
into the psychology of the dream-processes, I
have undertaken a difficult task, to which, in
deed, my powers of exposition are hardly
adequate. To reproduceAthe simultaneity of so
complicated a scheme in terms of a successive
description, and at the same time to make each
part appear free from all assumptions, goes
fairly beyond my powers. I haye nowto atone
for the factthat in my exposition of the psyr
chology of dreams I have been unable to follow
the historic development of my own insight
The lines of. approach to the comprehension
ofthe dream were laid down for me byprevious
investigations into the psychology of the neu>
roses, to which I should not referhere; although
I am constantly obliged tp do so; whereas I
should like to work in the opposite direction,
starting from the dream, and,then proceeding
to establish its junctionwiththe psychology;of
the neuroses. I am conscious of all the diffi
culties which this involves for the reader, but
I know of no way to avoid them.
.[
Since I am dissatisfied with this; state of
affairs, I am glad to dwell upon another point
of view, which would seem to enhance the value
of my efforts. As was showninthe introductory
section, I
found myself confronted with a
theme which had-been marked by the sharpest
contradictions on the part of those who had
written on it. In the course of pur treatment
of the problems of the dream, room has been
found for most of these contradictory views.
We have been compelled to take decided exr
ceptipn to two only of the views, expressed:
namely, that thq dream is a meaningless pro
cess, and that it is< a somatic process. Apart
from these, we have been ableto find a place
for the truth of all the contradictory opinions
at one point or another of the complicated
tissue of the facts, and we have been able to
show that each expressed something, genuine
and correct. Thatour dreams continue the im
pulses and interests of waking life .has been
generally confirmed by the discovery of the
hidden dream-thoughts; These concern them
selves only with things that seem to us.impor
tant andofgreatinterest. Dreams neveroccupy
# *We putthis case in the file of apyretic deliriasof
inanition, for it is to cerebral anaemia ;that we attach
this particular state.—Ed«; c
v
::ij

[377b]
373
themselves with trifles,rBut we hayo accepted
also the opposite view, namely- that the,dream
gathers up the indifferent residues of the day,
and.cannot seize upon any important interest
of the day until it has in some measure with
drawn itself ,frpm waking activity. We haye
found that this holds true of the drteam-content^
which by means of distortion gives the dreamr
thought an altered expression. We ihaye said
that the dream-process, owing to the nature
of;the mechanism of association,- finds it easier
to obtain possession of recent or indifferent
material, which has not yet been put under an
embargo by pur, waking; mental activity; -and
that, on-account of the censorship, it transfers
the psychic intensity of the significant but also
objectionable material to the indifferent The
hypermnesia of the dream and its ability to
dispose,of infantile material have become the
main foundations of our,; doctrine;-in [our
theorypf dreams wehaveassignedtoa wis,h of
infantile, origin the part,of;:the indispensable
motive-power of dream-formation..Itnasiiot,
of course, occurred to us to doubt the^ experir
mentally demonstratecl significance;ofEternal
sensory stimuh\ during sleepji butiwe liave
pkced this material in the;same relationto the
dream-wish,as the thpught-re^d^^
frpm^pur wakipg activity. We ne^^pjt^aispute
t£e, fact that the dream interpretsr objective
sensory stimuli after the,manner pfcan iilusipn;
butwe have suppliedfthe mptiye^fpr.this inter
pretation, which has been left jndeternunafce
by. other writers. .The interpretation proceeds
in sucha way that the perceived'Object is ren
dered harmless as a source of disturbance of
sleep, whilst; it ismade usable for the^wish^fulfilment, Though we dp noj admit asJa special
source ofcreams thesubjective stateof .excitar
tion ofthe sensory organs during sleep(which
seems to have been demonstrated by Trunibull
Ladd), wejare, neverthejiess, ablei to explain this
state pf excitation by the regressive revival of
the memories active behind the dream. As to the
internal organic sensations, whicharewontto be
takenasthe cardinal pointof the explanation of
dreams, these, top, finda placeinourconception,-
though indeed a more modest one. These sensa
tions—the sensations pffalling, ofsoaring, orof
being inhibited—represent an ever-ready-mar
terial,which the dream-work can emplpy to ex
press the.dream-thought as often as need arises.
.That the..dream-process is a rapid and
momentary one is, we believe, true as regards
thpj perception by consciousness of^ thef.pre-
^^eddream-cpntent; but wehayefpun4 that

[378a]
374
SlGMUND
the preceding portions of the dream-process
probably follow a slow, fluctuating course. As
for the riddle of the superabundant dreamcontent compressed into the briefest moment
of time, we have been able to contribute the
explanation that the dream seizes upon readymade formations of the psychic life. We have
found that it is true that dreams are distorted
and mutilated by the memory, but that this
fact presents no difficulties, as it is only the
last manifest portion of a process of distortion
which has been going on from the very begin
ning of the dream-work. In the embittered
controversy, which has seemed irreconcilable,
whether the psychic life is asleep at night, or
can make the same use of all its faculties as
during the day, we havebeen able to conclude
that both sides are right, but that neither is
entirely so. In the dream-thoughts we found
evidence of a highly complicated intellectual
activity, operating with almost allthe resources
of the psychic apparatus; yet it cannot be
denied that these dream-thoughts have orig^
inated during the day, and it is indispensable
to assume that there is a sleeping state of the
psychic life; Thus, even the doctrine of partial
sleep received its due, but we have found the
characteristic feature of the sleeping state not
in the disintegration of the psychic system of
connections, butinthespecial attitude adopted
by the psychic system which is dominant during
the day-^the attitude of the wishto sleep. The
deflection from the outer world retains its sig^
nificance for our view, too; though not the
only factor at work, it helps to make possible
the regressive course of the dream-representa
tion. The abandonment of voluntary guidance
Of the flow of ideas is incontestable; but psy^
chic life does notthereby become aimless, for
we have seen that upon relmquishmeht of the
voluntary directing ideas, involuntary ones
take charge. On the other hand, we have not
onlyrecognized the loose associative connection
of the dream, but have brought a far greater
area within the scope of this kind of connection
than could have been suspected; we have,
however, fPund it merelyanenforced substitute
for another, a correct and significant type of
association. To be sure, we too have called the
dream absurd, but examples have shown lis
hoW wise the
dream is when
it
simulates
absurdity. As regards the functions that have
been attributed to the dream, we are able to
accept them all; That the dream relieves the
mind, like a safety-valve, and that, as Robert
has put it, all kinds of harmful material ate

[378b]
Freud
rendered harmless by representatidh in the
dream, not only coincides exactlywith oilt own
theory of the twofold wish-fulfilment in the
dream, but iri its very wording becomes more
intelligible for us than it is for Robert himself.
The free indulgence of the psyche in the play
of its faculties is reproduced in dtif theory as
the non-interference of the precdnsridUS activ
ity with the dream. The return of the embryo
nal standpoint oj psychic lifein the dream^and
Havelock Ellis's remark that the dream is "an
archaic world of vast emotions and imperfect
thoughts," appear to us as happy anticipatidfjs
of our own exposition, which asserts that
primitive modes of operations that are suj>-
pressed during the day play-a part 4n the
formation of dreams. We can fully identify
ourselves with Sully-s statement, that "our
dreams bring back again our earlier and suc
cessively developed personalities, our old ways
Of regarding things, with impulses and modes
of reaction Which ruled us long ago"; and for
lis, as for Delage, the suppressed material be
comes the mainspring pf the dream.
!
We have fullyaccepted the rolethat Schemer
ascribes to the dream^pbantasy, and his own
interpretations, but we have been obliged to
transpose them, as it wfere, to another part of
the problem. It is not the dream that creates
the phantasy, but the activity of unconsdois
phantasy that plays the leading part in the
formation of the dream*thoughts. We remain
indebted to Schemer for directing us to the
source
Of the
dream-thoughts,
but almost
everything that he ascribes to the dream-work
is attributable to the activity of the uncon
scious during the day, which instigates dreams
no less than neurotic symptoms. The dreamwork we had to separate from this activity as
something quite different and far more closely
controlled/Finally, we have by no means re
nounced the relation of the dream to psychic
disturbances, but have givenit, oh new ground,
a more solid foundation.
Held together by the new features in our
theory as by a superior unity, we find the most
varied and most contradictory conclusions of
other writers fitting into our structure; many
of thetii are given a different turn, but only a
few of them are wholly rejected. But Pur own
structure is still Unfinished. For apart from the
many obscure questions in which we have in
volved ourselves by our advance into.the dark
regions of psychology, we are now, it would
seem, embarrassed by a new contradiction. On
the one hand,we have madeit appear that the

[379a]
dream-thoughts proceed from perfectly normal
psychicactivities,but on the other handwe have
found among the dream-thoughts a number
of entirely abnormal mental processes, which
extend also to the dream-content, and which we
reproduce in the interpretation of the dream.
All that we have termed the dream-work seems
to depart so completely from the psychic
processes which we recognize as correct and
appropriate that the severest judgments ex
pressed by the writers mentioned as to the low
level of psychic achievement of dreams must
appear well founded.
Here, perhaps, only further investigations
can provide an explanation and set us on the
right path. Let me pick out for renewed atten
tion One of the constellations which lead to
dream-formation.
We have learned that the dream serves as
a substitute for a number of thoughts derived
from our daily life, and which fit together with
perfect logic. We cannot, therefore, doubt that
these thoughts have their own origin in our
normal mental life. All the qualities which we
value
in
our
thought-processes,
and which
mark them out as complicated performances
of a high order* we shall find repeated in the
dream-thoughts. There is, however, no need to
assume that this mental work is performed
during sleep; such an assumption would badly
confuse the conception of the psychic state of
sleep to which we have hitherto adhered. On
the contrary, these thoughts may very well
have their origin in the daytime, and, unre
marked by our consciousness, may have gone
on from their first stimulus until, at the onset
of sleep, they have reached completion; If we
are to conclude anything from this state of
affairs, it can only be that it proves that the
most complex mental operations are possible
without the cooperation of
consciousness—a
truth which we have had to learn anyhow from
every psycho-analysis of a patient suffering
from hysteria or obsessions. These dreamthoughts are certainly riot in themselves incap
able of consciousness; if we have not become
conscious of them during the day, this may
have been due to various reasons. The act of
becoming conscious depends upon a definite
psychic function—attention—-being brought to
bear. This seems to be available only in adeterminate quantity, whichmay have been diverted
from the train of thought in question by' other
aims. Another way in Which such trains of
thought may be Withheld from consciousness
is^ the followingr From our conscious reflection

[379b]
The Interpretation of Dreams
375
we know that, when applying our attention, we
follow a particular course. But if that course
leads us to an idea which cannot withstand
criticism, we break off and allow the cathexis
of attention to drop. Now* it would seem that
the train of thought thus started and abandoned
may continue to develop without our attention
returning to it, unless at some point it attains
a specially high intensity which compels atten
tion.
An
initial conscious
rejection t-by . our:
judgment, on the ground of incorrectness or
uselessness for the immediate purpose of the
act of thought, may, therefore, be the cause of
a thought-process going on unnoticed by con
sciousness until the onset of sleep.
Let us now recapitulate: We call such a
train of thought a preconscioustrain, *an&.we
believe it to be perfectly correct, and that it
may equally well be a merely neglected train
or one that has
been interrupted and
sup
pressed. Let us also state in plain terms how
we visualize the movement of our thought. We
believe that a certain quantity of excitation,
which we call cathectic energy, is displaced
from apurposiveideaalongthe associationpaths
selected by this directing idea. A neglectedtrain
of thought has
received no such cathexis,
and the cathexis has been withdrawn from one
that was suppressed or rejected; both have
thus been left to their own excitations. The
train of thought cathected by some aim be
comes able under certain conditions to attract
the attention
of
consciousness, iand by the
mediation of
consciousness it then receives
hyper-cathexis. We shall be obliged presently
to elucidate our assumptions as to the nature
and function of consciousness.
A train of thought thus incited in the Pes
may either disappear spontaneously, or it may
continue* The former eventuality we conceive
as follows: it diffuses its energy through all the
association paths
emanating
from
it,
and
throws the entire chain of thoughts into a state
of excitation, which continues for a while, and
then subsides, through the excitation which
had called ?for discharge being transformed into
dormant cathexis: If this first eventuality oc
curs, the process has no further significance
for dream-formation. But other directing ideas
are lurking in Pur preconscious, which: have
their source in our unconscious and ever-active
wishes. These may gain control of the excita
tionm the circle of thoughts thus left to itself,
establish a connection between it and the un
conscious wish, and transfer to it the energy
inherent in the unconscious wish. Henceforth

[380a]
37*
Sigmtjnd Freud
the neglected or suppressed train of thought
is in a position to maintain itself, although
this reinforcement gives it no claim to access
to consciousness. We may say, then, that, the
hitherto preconscious train of thought has been
drawn into the unconscious.
Other constellations leading to dream-for-:
mation might be as follows: The preconscious
train of thought might have been connected
from the beginning with the unconscious wish,
and for that reason might have met with ter
jection by the dominating aim-cathexis. Or an
unconscious wish might
become
active
for
other (possibly somatic) reasons, and of its own
accord seek a transference to the psychic resi
dues not cathected by the Pes. All three cases
have the same result: there is established in
the preconscious a train of thought which,
having been abandoned by the preconseipus
cathexis, has acquired cathexis from the un
conscious wish.
From this point onward the train of thought
is subjected to
a
series of
transformations^
which we no longer recognize as normal psychic
processes, and which give a result that we find
strange, a psychopathplogieal formation. Let
us now emphasize and bring together these
transformations:
i. The intensities of the individual ideas be
come capable of discharge in their entirety,
and pass from one idea to another, so that in
dividual ideas are formed which are endowed
with great intensity. Through the
repeated
occurrence of this process, the intensity of an
entire train of thought may ultimately be con
centrated in a single conceptual unit. This is
the fact of compression or condensation With
which
we
become acquainted when investi
gating the dream-work. It is condensation that
is mainly responsible for the strange impression
produced by dreams; for we know of nothing
analogous to it in the normal psychic life that
is accessible to consciousness; We get here,
too, ideas which are of great psychic signifi
cance as nodal points or as end-results of whole
chains _• of thought, hut this value as not exr
pressed by any character actually manifest ior
our internal perception; what is represented in
it is not in any way made more intensive. In
the process of condensation the whole set -of
psychic connections becomes transformed into
the intensity of the idea-content. The situation
is [the same as When, in the case of ai book, I
italicize or print in heavy type any word; to
which I attach outstanding value; for theainder*
standing;-of. the- text;
In speech, :I •should

[380b]
pronounce the same word loudly, and deliber
ately, and with eriiphasis. The first simile points
immediately to one of the examples which were
given of the dream-work- (trimethylamine in
the dream of Irma's injection)> Historians of
art call our attention to the fact that the most
ancient sculptures known to history follow a
similar principle, in expressing the rank-of the
persons represented by the size of the statues.
The king is made two or three times as tall as
his retinue or his vanquished enemies. But a
work of art of the Roman period makes use
of more subtle means to accomplish the same
end. The figure of the Emperor is placed in the
centre, erect and in his full height, and special
care is bestowed on the modelling
of this
figure; his enemies are seen cowering at his
feet; but he is no longer made to seem a giant
among dwarfs. At the same time, in the bowing
of the subordinate to his superior, even in our
own day, we have an echo of this ancient prin
ciple of representation.
The direction followed by the condensations
of the dream is prescribed on the one hand by
the true preconscious relations of the dreamW
thoughts,; and, on the
other hand,
by
the
attraction of the visual memories in the un
conscious. The success of the condensationwork
produces
those
intensities
which
are
required for penetration to the perception^
system.
1
2. By the free transference of mtensities,
and in the service of the condensation, inter
mediary ideas—compromises, as it were—are
formed (cf. the numerous examples). This,
also; is something unheard of in the normal
movement of our ideas, where what is of most
importance is the selection and the retention
of the.right conceptual material. On the other
hand, composite and compromise formations
occur with extraordinary frequency when we
are trying to find verbal expression for preconp
scious thoughts; these are considered .slips of
the tongue.
:
.;••••
3. The ideas which transfer their intensities
to one another are very loosely connected, and
are joined together by such forms: of associK
ation as are disdained by pur serious thinking,
and left to be exploited solely by jwit Ijji
particular, assonances and punning associations
are treated as equalr in 0value tovanyj other?
associations.
:
r :•:;.;
;
4. Contradictory; thoughts -do :not 1try to
eliminate one another, but continue side by
side, and often eombineLtQiiorni condensations
products, as ihough-m con^aMctionvemte^

[381a]
The Interpretation oe Dreams
m
or they form compromises for which we should
never forgive oiir thought, but which we frer.
quently sanction in our action.
These are some of the most conspicuous ab
normal processes to which the dream-thoughts
which have previously been rationally formed
are subjected in the course of the dream-work.
As the main feature of these processes, we may
see that the greatest importance is attached to
rendering the catheeting: energy mobile and
capable'of discharge; the content and the in
trinsic significance of the psychic elements to
which these cathexes adhere become; matters
of secondary importance; One might perhaps
assume
that
condensation
and
compromiseformation are effected only in; the service of
regression, when the occasion arises for chang
ingthoughts into images. But the analysis-—and
still more'plainlythe synthesis-—*)f such dreams
as show no regression towards images, e.g., the
dream Autodidasker: Conversation with Pro
fessor' N, reveals the same processes of dis
placement and condensation as do the rest.
We cannot, therefore, avoid the conclusion
that two kinds of essentially different psychic
processes participate in dream-formation; one
forms'" perfectly correct: and fitting idream*
thoughts, equivalent to the results- of normal
thinking, while the: other deals with these
thoughts in a most astonishing and,;asv it seems,
incorrect way;1 -The latter processfiiwe^ihave
already set apart^m chapter vi as the dream--
work proper. What can we.say now as to the
derivation of 'this psychic process?
/
•:•
•-:• -t
It
would be
impossible to
answer
this
question here if we had not penetrated a con
siderable way: into the psychology of the neu
roses, and especially of hysteria. From this,
however, we learn that the same "incorrectf7
psychic processes-^-as well as others not enu
merated—control the production of hysterical
symptoms. In hysteria, too, we find at first a
series of perfectly correct and fitting thoughts,
equivalent to
our conscious ones, of whose
existence in this form we can, however, learn
nothing; i.e., which we can only subsequently
reconstruct. If they have forced their way any
where to perception, we discover from:! the
analysis of the symptom >formed that these
normal thdughts have been subjected to; ab
normal treatment, and that by means of con
densation and •oompromise+formationj through
superficial associations which covermp contra
dictions, and eventually along the path oj* re
gressiony they -have' been conveyed into the
symptoms In view of the complete identity

[381b]
between the peculiarities of the dream-work
and those of the psychic activity which issues
in
psychoneurotic
symptoms,
we shall- feel
justified in transferring to the xiream the con
clusions urged upon us; by hysteria..
From the theory of hysteria we borrow the
proposition that such
an abnormal psychic
elaboration of a normal train of.thought talies
place only-when the latter has been used j or
the transference of an unconscious wish which
dates from the infantile life and is in a state
of repression. Complying with this proposition,
we have, built up the theory of the dream on
the assumption that the, actuating,;dream-wish
invariably originates;in the unconscious; which,
as we- have
ourselves admitted,, cannot )?e
tinivers'ally demonstrated, even thoughj it-can*
not beArefuted. But in order to enable us tp say
just rmhatirepression is, aft^.eniployingvthi§
term:so freely, we shall be obliged to make a
further addition to our psychological scaffold
ings
'<•:•<
-
--
--;
We had elaborated the fiction of a .primitive
psychic apparatus, the work of which is regu
lated by the effort to avoid accumulation of
excitation, and as far as; possible to maintain
itself free from excitation. For this reason it
was ^constructed after the plan of a reflex
apparatus;? motility, in the first place;^as the
path >to changes within the body, was.the chanr
neliof: discharge at itSi disposal. We then dis
cussedi the psychic results of experiences of
gratificationj and iwere-able at thistipoint to
introduce aifsecond. assumption, namely, that
the accumulation of; excitation-^by processes
that do not concern us here—is felt aspain^ and
sets the!apparatus in operation,in order to
bring about again a state of gratification, in
which the diminution of excitation is perceived
as pleasure. Such a current in the apparatus, is
suing from pain:and strivingior pleasure, we call
a wish. We have said that nothing but a wish is
capable of setting the.apparatus in motion and
that the course of any excitation, in the appa^
ratus is;regulated automatically by-the percep
tion of pleasure and pain. The first occurrence
of wishing may welUhave taken the form of a
hallucinatory cathexis of ithe memory of grati
fication. Butithis hallucination,,unless it could
be
maintained to- the point :Of rie^haustion,
proved incapable ;of bringing abouta cessa
tion of the need, and consequently of securing
the pleasure connected with gratification.
•- • *
.
Thus, there was required a second activity^-
in our terminology the activity- of a second
system—which would not allow the memory-

[382a]
378
Sigmund
catheads to force its way to perception and
thence to bind the psychic forces, but would
lead the excitation emanating from the needstimulus by a detour, which by means of vol
untary motilitywould ultimatelyso change the
outer world as to permit the real perception
of the gratifying object. Thus far we have al
ready elaborated the schemeof the psychic ap
paratus; these two systems are the germ of
what we set up in the fully developed apparatus
as the Ucs and Pes.
To change the outer world appropriately by
means of motility requires the accumulation of
a large total of experiences in the memorysystems, as well as a manifold consolidation of
th^^Telations which: are:revoked in this memorymateriar by various directing ideas.
We will
now proceed further with our assumptions. The
activity of the second system, groping hi many
directions, tentatively sending forth cathexes
and retracting them, needs on the one hand
full command over all memory-material, but
on the other hand it would be a superfluous
expenditure of energywereit to send along the
individual thought-paths large quantities of
cathexis, which would then flow away to no
purposeand thus diminish the quantity needed
for changing the outer world. Out of a regard
for purposiveness, therefore, I postulate that
the second system succeeds in maintaining the
greater part of the energic cathexes in a state
of rest, and in using only a-small portion for
its operations of displacement. The mechanics
of these processes is entirely unknown to me;
anyone who seriously wishes to follow up these
ideas must address himself to the
physical
analogies, and find some way of getting a pic
ture of the sequence of motions which ensues
on the excitation of the neurones. Here I do no
more than hold fast to the idea that the activi
ty of the first i/r-system aims at the free out
flow of thequantities of excitation, and that the
second system, by means of the cathexes ema
nating from it, effectsan inhibition of this out
flow, a transformation into dormant cathexis,
probably with a rise of potential. I therefore
assume that the course taken by any excitation
under the control of the second system is bound
to quite different mechanical conditions from
those which obtain under the control of the first
system. After the second system has completed
its work of experimental thought, it removes
the inhibition and damming up of the excita
tions and allows them to flow off into motility.
An interesting train of thought now presents
itself if we consider the relations of this inhibi-

[382b]
Freud
tion of discharge by the second system to the
process of regulation by the pain-principle.Let
us now seek out the counterpart of the primary
experience of gratification, namely, the objec
tive experience of fear. Let a perception-stimu
lus act on the primitive apparatus and be the
source of a pain-excitation. There will then en
sue uncoordinated motor manifestations, which
will go on until one of these withdraws the ap
paratus from perception, and at the same time
from the pain. On the reappearance of the per
cept this manifestation will immediately be re
peated (perhaps as a movement of flight), until
the percept has again disappeared. But in this
case no tendency will remain to recathect the
perception" of the source, of pain by^-hallucina
tion or otherwise. On the contrary, there will
be a tendency in the primary apparatus to turn
away again from this painful memory-image
immediately if it is in any way awakened, since
the overflow of its excitation into perception
would, of course, evoke (or more precisely, be
gin to evoke) pain. This turning away from a
recollection, which is merely a repetition of the
former flight from perception, is also facili
tated by the fact that, unlike the perception, the
recollection has not enough quality to arouse
consciousness, and
thereby to
attract fresh
cathexis. This effortless and
regular turning
away of the psychic process from the memory
of anything that had once been painful gives
us the-prototype and the first example of psy
chic repression. We all know how much of this
turning away from the painful, the tactics of
the ostrich, may still be shown as present even
in the normal psychic life of adults.
In obedience to the pain-principle, therefore,
the first ^-system is quite incapable of intro
ducing anytning unpleasant into the thoughtnexus.
The system cannot do anything but
wish. If this were to remain so, the activity pf
thought of the second system, which needs lio
have at its disposal all the memories stored Up
by experience, would be obstructed. But two
paths are now open: either the work of the sec
ond system frees itself completely from the
pain-principle, and continues itscourse, payhjg
no heed to the pain attached to given memories,
or it contrives to cathect the memory of the
pain in such a manner as to preclude the liber
ation of pain. We can reject the first possibil
ity, as the pain-principle also proves to act as a
regulator of the cycle of excitation in the sec
ond system; we are therefore thrown back up
on the second possibility, namely, that this sys
tem cathects a memory in such a manner as to

[383a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
379
inhibit any outflow of excitation from it, and
hence, also, the outflow,comparable to a motorinnervation, needed for the, development..of
pain. And thus, setting out from two different
starting-points, i.e., from regard for the painprinciple, and from the principle of the least
expenditure of innervation, we are led to the
hypothesis that cathexis through the second
system is at the same time an inhibition of the
discharge of excitation. Let us, however, keep
a close hold on the fact—for this is the key to
the theory of repression—that the second sys
tem can only cathectan idea whenit is in a po
sition to inhibit any pain emanating from this
idea. Anything that withdrew itself from this
inhibition would also remain inaccessible ibr
the second system, i.e., would immediately be
given up by virtue of the pain-principle. The
inhibition of pain, however, need not be com
plete; it must be permitted to begin, since this
indicates to the second system the nature of the
memory, and possibly its lack of fitness for the
purpose sought by the process of thought.
The psychic process which is alone tolerated
by the first system I shall now call the primary
process;and that which results under the inhib
iting action of the second system I shall call
the secondary process. I can also show at an
other point for what purpose the second sys
tem is obliged to correct the primary process.
The primary process strives for discharge of
the excitation in order to establish with the
quantity of excitation thus collected an identity
of perception; the secondary process has aban
doned this intention^ and has adopted instead
the aim of an identity of thought. All thinking
is merely a detour from the memory of gratifi
cation (taken,as a purposive idea) to the.iden
tical cathexis of the same memory, which is
to be reached once more by the path of motor
experiences. Thought must concern itself with
the connecting-paths between ideas without al
lowing itself to be misled by their intensities.
But it is obvious that condensations of ideas
and intermediate or compromlse-fGrmations-are
obstacles to the attainment of the identity
which is aimed at; by substituting one idea
for another they swerve away from the path
which would have led onward from the first
idea. Such procedures are, therefore, carefully
avoided in
our
secondary thinking. It will
readily be seen, moreover, that the pain-prin
ciple, although at other times it provides the
thought-process with its most important clues,-
may also put difficulties in its way in the pur
suit of identity of thought. Hence, the ten

[383b]
dency of the thinking process must always be
to free itself more and more from exclusive
regulation by the painTprinciple, ,and;tO restrict
the development of affect through the work of
thought to the very minimum which remains
effective as a signal. This refinement in func
tioning is to be achieved by a fresh hyper-cathexis, effected with the help of consciousness.
But we are aware that this refinement is sel
dom successful, even in normal psychic life,
and that our thinking always remains liable to
falsification by the intervention of the painprinciple.
This, however, is not the breach in the func
tional efficiency of our psychic apparatus which
makes it-possible forethoughts representing the
result of the secondary thought-work to fall
into the power of the primary psychic process;
by which formula we may now describe the op
erations resulting in dreams and the symptoms
of hysteria. This inadequacy results from the
converging of two factors in our development,
one of which pertains solely to the psychic ap
paratus, and has exercised a determining influ
ence on the relation of the two systems, while
the other operates fluctuatingly, and introduces
motive forces of organic origin into the psychic
life. Both originate in the infantile life, and
are a precipitate of the alteration which our
psychic and somatic organism has undergone
since our infantile years.
When I termed one of the psychic processes
in the psychic apparatus the primary process,
I did so not only in consideration of its status
and function, but was also able to take account
of the temporal relationship actually involved.
So far as we know, a psychic apparatus possessing only the primary process does not <exisV
and is to that extent a theoretical fiction; but
this at least is a fact: that the primary proces
ses are present in the apparatus from the begin
ning, while the secondary processes only take
shape gradually during the course of life, in
hibiting and overlaying the primary, whilst
gaining- complete control over them ^perhaps,
only in the prime of life. Owing to this belated
arrival of the secondary processes, the essence
of our being, consisting of unconscious wishimpulses, remains something which cannot be
grasped or inhibited by the preconscious; and
its part is once and for all restricted to indicat
ing the most appropriate paths for the wishimpulses originating in the unconscious. These
unconscious wishes represent for all subsequent
psychic strivings a compulsion to which they
must submit themselves, although they may

[384a]
SSo
Sigmunp Freud
perhaps endeavour to divert them and to guide
them to-superior aims. In consequence of this
retardation, an extensive region of the mem*
ory-material remains in fact inaccessible to pre
conscious cathexis,
:
.Now among -these wish-impulses; originat
ing in the infantile life,. indestructible.-:«and
incapable of inhibition, there are_some; the
fulfilments of Which have come to be in contra
diction with the purposive ideas of our second
ary thinking. The fulfilment of these wishes
would no longer produce an affect of pleasure,
but one of pain; and it is just this conversion
of affect that constitutes the essence of what
we call repression. In what manner and by what
motive forces such a conversion can take place
constitutes the problem of repression, which
we need here only to touch upon in passing. It
will suffice to note the fact that such;a conver
sion of affect occurs in the course of develop
ment (one need only think of the emergence
of disgust^ originally absent in infantile life),
and that it is connected with the activity of the
secondary system* The memories from which
the^ unconscious; wish evokes a
liberation of
affect have never been accessible to the Pes,
and for that reason this liberation cannot be
inhibited. Itis,precisely on account of this gen
eration of affect that these ideas are not now
accessible even by way of the preconscious
thoughts to which they have transferred the en
ergy of the wishes connected with them. Oh the
contrary, the pain-principle comes into play,,
and causes the Pes to turn away from these'
transference-thoughts. These latter are left to
themselves, are repressed, and thus, the exist
ence of a store of infantile memories, with
drawn from the beginning from the Pes, be
comes the preliminary condition of repression.
In the most favourable case, the generation
of painterminates so soon as the cathexis is
withdrawn from-the transference-thoughts in
the Poland this result shows that the interven
tion of the pain-principle is appropriate. It is
otherwise, however, if the repressed uncon
scious wish receives an organic reinforcement
which it can put at the service of its trahsference-thoughtSi and by which it can enable them;
to attempt to break through witlrtheir excita*-
tion, even if the cathexis; of the Pes has been
taken away from them. A defensive struggle1
then ensues, inasmuch as the Pes reinforces the.
opposite to 3the repressed thoughts (eoukter^;
cathexis), and the eventual outcome is that the;
transferehee-thoughts (the carriers of the un-,.
conscious,wish) break through in some form of

[384b]
compromise through symptom-formation. But
from the moment that the repressed: thoughts'
are powerfully; cathected by the unconscious
wish-impulse, but forsaken by the preconscious;
cathexis, they succumb, to the.primary psychic
process^and aim only atimotor discharge; or,
if the way is clear, at hallucinatory revival of
the desired identity of perception! We have al
ready
found, empirically, that the incorrect
processes described
are
enacted
only with
thoughts which are in a state of repression. We
are now in a position to grasp yet another part
of the total schemeof the facts. These incorred
processesare the primary processes of the psy
chic apparatus; they
occur
wherever
ideas
abandoned by the preconscious cathexis are left
to themselves and can become filled with the
uninhibited energy which flows from the un-;
conscious and strives for discharge. There are!
further facts whichgo to showthat the proces-j
ses described as incorrect are not really falsi-:
fixations of our normal procedure, or defective;
thinking, but the modes of operation of the;
psychic apparatus when freed from inhibition.
Thus we see that the processof the conveyance!
of the preconscious excitationto motility occurs;
in accordance with the same procedure, and
that in the linkage of preconscious ideas with
words we may easily find manifested the same
displacements and confusions (whichwe ascribe;
to inattention). Finally, a proof of the increased'
work made necessary by the inhibition of these:
primary modes of procedure mightbe:found inthe fact that weachieve a comical effect, a sur-">
plus to be discharged through laughter, if we<
allow these modes of thought to come to cori-'
sciausness. ;
The theory of the psychoneuroses asserts!
with absolute certainty that it can only be sex-J
ual wish-impulses from the infantile life, which
have undergone repression (affect-conversion)j
during the developmental period of childhood,
which are capable of renewal at later periods!
of development (whether as a result of our sex
ual constitution, which has, of. course, grown
out of an original bi-sexuality, or in conse
quence of unfavourable influences in our sexual
life); and which therefore supply the motivepower for alii psychoneurotic symptom-formatibh.lt is :only by the introduction of these
sexual forces that the gaps still demoristfable.
in the,theory of repression can be filled. Here,"
I willleave it undecidedWhether the postulate
of the sexualand infantile holds good for the
theory-of dreams as well; I am not completing
the latter, becausehi assumingthat the dreams

[385a]
The Interpretation op Dreams
3«i
Wish invariably originates m the unconscious
I have already gone a step beyond the demon
strable.1 Nor will I inquire further into the na
ture of the difference between the play of psy
chic forces in dream-formation and in the for
mation of hysterical symptoms, since there is
missing here the needed fuller knowledge of one
of the two things to be compared. But there is
another point which I regard as important, and
I will confess at once that it was only on ac
count of this point that I entered upon all the
discussions concerning the two psychic systems,
their modes of operation, and the fact of re
pression. It does not greatly matter whether I
have conceived the psychological relations at
issue with approximate correctness, or, as is
easily possible in such a difficultmatter, wrongly
and imperfectly.
However our views may
change about the interpretation of the psychic
censorship or the correct and the abnormal elab
oration of the dream-content, it remains certain
that such processes are active in dream-forma
tion, and that in their essentials they reveal
the
closest analogy with the
processes ob
served in the formation of hysterical symp
toms. Now the dream is not a pathological
phenomenon; it does not presuppose any dis
turbance of our psychic equilibrium; and it
does not leave behind it any weakening of our
1 Here, as elsewhere, there are gaps in the
treat
ment of the subject, which I have deliberately left,
because to fill them up would, on the one hand, require
excessive labour, and, on the other hand, I should have
to depend on material which is foreign to the dream.
Thus, for example, I have avoided stating whether I
give the word suppressed a different meaning from that
of the word repressed. No doubt, however, it will have
become clear that the latter emphasizes more than the
former
the
relation to the unconscious.
I
have not
gone into the problem, which obviously arises, of why
the dream-thoughts undergo distortion by the censor
ship even when they abandon the progressive path to
consciousness, and choose the path of regression. And
so with other similar omissions. I
have, above all,
sought to give some idea of the problems to which the
further dissection of the dream-work leads, and to indi
cate the other themes with which these are connected.
It was, however, not always easy to decide just where
the pursuit should be discontinued. That I have not
treated exhaustively the part which the psycho-sexual
life plays in the dream, and have avoided the interpre
tation of dreams of an obviously sexual content, is due:
to a special reason—which may not perhaps be that
which the reader would expect. It is absolutely alien to
my views and my neuropathological doctrines to regard
the sexual life as a pudendum with which neither the
physician nor the scientific investigator should concern
himself. To me, the moral indignation which prompted
the translator of Artemidorus of Daldis to keep from
the reader's knowledge the chapter oh sexual dreams
contained
in
the
Symbolism
of
Dreams
is
merely
ludicrous. For my own part, what decided my'proce
dure was solely the knowledge that iri the explanation
of sexual dreams I should be bound to get deeply in
volved in the still unexplained problems of perversion
and bisexuality; it*was for this reason that I reserved
this material for treatment elsewhere.

[385b]
efficiency or capacities. The objection that no
conclusions can be drawn about the dreams of
healthy persons from my own dreams and from
those' of my neurotic patients may be rejected
without comment. If, then, from'the nature of
the given phenomena We infer the nature of
their motive forces, we find that the psychic
mechanism utilized by the neurosesis not new
ly-created by a morbid disturbance that lays
hold of the psychic life, but lies in readiness
in the normal structure of our psychic appa
ratus. The two psychic systems, the frontiercensorship between them, the inhibition and
overlaying of the one activity by the other, the
relations of both to consciousness—<ir whatever
may take place of these concepts on a jtister
interpretation of the actual relations—all these
belong to the normal structure of our psychic
instrument; and the dream shows us one of the
paths which lead to a knowledge of this struc
ture. If we wish to be content with a minimum
of perfectly assuredadditions to our knowledge,
we shall say that the dream affords proof that
the suppressed material continues to exist even
in thenormalpersonandremainscapableof psy
chic activity. Dreams are one of the manifesta
tions of this suppressed material; theoretically,
this is true in all cases; and in tangible experi
ence, it has been found true in at least a great
number of cases, which happen to display most
plainly the more striking features of the dreamlife. The suppressed psychic material, which
in the Wakingstate has been prevented from ex^
pression and cut off from internal perception
by the mutual neutralization of contradictory
attitudes, findsways and means,under the sway
of compromise-formations, of obtruding itself
on consciousness during the night.
Flectere si nequeo superos, Acheronta movebo.2
At any rate, the interpretation of dreams is
the via regia to a knowledge of the unconscious
element in our psychic life.
By the analysis of dreams we obtain some
insight into the composition of this most mar
vellous and hiPst mysterious of instruments;
it is true that this only takes us a little way,
but it gives us a start which enables us, setting
out from the angle of other (properly patho
logical) formations, to penetrate further .in
Pur disjoining of the instrument For disease-—
at all events that which is rightly called func
tional—does not necessarily presuppose the
destruction of this apparatus, or the establish2 If
I
cannot
influence
the
gods, I
wiH stir up
Acheron.—Ed.
v

[386a]
382
Sigmund Freud
ment of new cleavages in its interior; it can be
explained dynamically by
the
strengthening
and weakening of the components of the play
of forces, so many of the activities of which
are covered up in normal functioning..It might
be shown elsewhere how the fact that the appa
ratus is a combination of two instances also
permits of a refinement of its normal function
ing which would have been impossible to a
single system.1
F. The Unconscious and Consciousness. Reality
If we look more closely, we may observe that
the psychological considerations examined in
the foregoing chapter require us to assume, not
the existence.of two systems near.the motor end
of the psychic apparatus, but two kinds of
processes or courses taken by excitation. But
this does not disturb us; for we must always
be ready to drop our auxiliary ideas, when we
think we are in a position to replace them by
something which comes closer to the unknown
reality. Let us now try to correct certain views
which may have taken a misconceived form
as long as we regarded the two systems, in the
crudest and most obvious sense, as two locali
ties within the psychic apparatus—views which
have left a precipitate in the terms repression
and penetration. Thus, when we say that an
unconscious thought strives for. translation in
to the preconscious in order subsequently to
penetrate through to consciousness, we do not
mean that a second idea,has to be formed, in
a new locality, like a paraphrase, as it were,
whilst the original persists by its side; and sim
ilarly, when we speak of penetration into con
sciousness, we wish carefully to detach from
this notion any idea of a change of locality.
When we say that a preconscious idea is re
pressed and subsequently absorbed by the un
conscious,
we might
be tempted by these
images, borrowed from the idea of a struggle
for a particular territory, to assume that an
arrangement is really broken -up in the one:psy
chic locality and replaced by a new one in the
other locality. For these comparisons we will
substitute a description which would seem to
correspond more closely to the real state of
1 The dream is not the only phenomenon that per
mits us to base our psycho-pathology on psychology. In
a short unfinished series of articles in the Monatsschrijt
furPsyuhiatrieund Neurolagie ("fiber den psychischen
Mechanismus der Vergesslichkeit," 1898,
and "uber
Deckerinnerungen," 1899) I attempted to interpret a
number of psychic manifestations from everyday life
in support of the same conception. (These and other
articles on
"Forgetting," "Lapses of
Speech," etc.,
have now been published in the Psycho-pathology of
Everyday Life.)

[386b]
affairs; we will say that an energie cathexis is
shifted to or withdrawn from a certain arrange
ment, so that the psychic formation falls under
the domination of a given instance or is with
drawn from it. Here again we replace a topo^
graphical mode of representation by a dynamic
one; it is not the psychic formation that ap
pears to us as the mobile element, but its in
nervation.2
Nevertheless, I think it expedient and justi
fiable to continue to use the illustrative idea of
the two systems. We shall avoid any abuse of
this mode of representation if we remember|
that ideas, thoughts, and psychic formations in
general must not in any case be localized in or
ganic elements,of thejiervous system but, so to
speak, between them, where resistances and as^
sociation-tracks form the correlate correspond
ing to them. Everything that can become an
object of internal perception is virtual, like the
image in the telescope produced by the crossing
of light-rays. But we are justified in thinking
of the systems—which have nothing psychic in
themselves, and which never become accessible
to our psychic perception—as something simi
lar to the lenses of the telescope, whichproject
the image. If we continue this comparison, we
might say that the censorship between the two
systems corresponds to the refraction of rays
on passing into a new medium.
Thus^far, we havedeveloped* our psychology1
on our own responsibility; it is now time to
turn and look at the doctrines prevailing in
modern psychology, and to examine the rela
tion of these to our theories. The problem of
the unconscious in psychology is, according to
the forcible statement of Lipps,8 less a psycho
logical problem thantheproblem of psychology.
As long as psychology disposed of this problem
by the verbal explanation that the psychic is
the conscious, and that unconscious psychic
occurrences are an obvious contradiction, there i
was no possibility of a physician's observations •
of abnormal mental- states -being turned to any;
psychological account. The physician and the!
philosopher can meet only when both acknowl- i
edge that unconscious psychic processes is the
appropriate and justified expression for an es
tablished fact. The physiciancannot but reject,
with a shrug of his shoulders, the assertion that
2This- conception' underwent elaboration and modifi
cation when it was recognized that the essential char
acter of a preconscious idea was its connection with
the residues of verbal ideas. See The Unconscious, p.
428 below.
8Der Begriff des Unbewussten in der Psychologie.
Lecture delivered at the Third International Psycho
logical Congress at Munich, 1897.

[387a]
consciousness is the indispensable quality of
the psychic; if his respect for the utterances
of the philosophers is stillgreat enough, he may
perhaps assume that he and they do not deal
with the same thing and do not pursue the same
science. For a single intelligent observation of
the psychic life of a neurotic, a single analysis
of a dream, must force upon him the unshak
able conviction that the most complicated and
the most accurate operations of thought, to
which the name of psychic occurrences can
surely not be refused, may take place without
arousing consciousness.1 Thephysician, it istrue,
does not learn of these unconscious processes
until they have producedan effect on conscious
ness which admits of communication or obser
vation. But this effect on consciousness may
show a psychic character which differs com
pletely from the unconscious process, so that
internal perception cannot possibly recognize
in the first a substitute for the second. The
physician must reserve himself the right to
penetrate, by a process of deduction, from the
effect on consciousness to the unconscious psy
chic process; he learnsin this way that the ef
fect on consciousness is only a remote psychic
product of the unconscious process, and that
the latter has not become conscious as such, and
has,moreover, existed and operated without in
any way betraying itself to consciousness.
A return from the over-estimation of the
property of consciousness is the indispensable
preliminary to any genuine insight into the
course of psychic events. AsLipps has said, the
unconscious must be accepted as the general
basis of the psychic life.The unconscious is the
larger circle which includes thesmaller circle of
the conscious; everything conscious has a pre
liminaryunconscious stage,whereas the uncon
scious can stop at this stage, and yet claim to
be considered a full psychic function. The un
conscious is the true psychic reality; in its inner
nature it is just as much unknown to us as the
reality of the external world, and it is just as
11 am happy to be able to point to,an author who
has drawn from the study of dreams the.saine conclu
sion as regards the relation betweenconsciousness and
the unconscious.
Du Prel says: "The problem: what is the psyche,
manifestly requiresi a prelimihary examination as to
whether consciousness and psyche are identical. But it
is just this preliminary question which is answered in
the negative by the dream, which shows that the con
cept of the psyche extends beyond that of conscious
ness, muchas the gravitational force of a star extends
beyond its'sphere of luminosity" (Philos. d. Mystik,
"It is a truth which cannot be sufficiently emphasized
that the Concepts of consciousness and of the psyche
are not co-extensive" (p. 306).

[387b]
The Interpretation of Dreams
383
imperfectly communicated to us by the data
of consciousness as is the external world by the
reports of our sense-organs.
Wegetrid of a series of dream-problems which
have claimed much attention from earlier writ
ers on the subject when the old antithesis be
tween conscious life and dream-life is discarded,
and the unconsciouspsychic assigned to its prop
er place.Thus,manyof the achievements which
are a matter for wonder in a dream are now
no longer to be attributed to dreaming, but to
unconscious thinking, which is active also dur
ing the day. If the dream seems to make play
with a symbolical representation of the body,
as Schemer has said, we know that this is the
work of certain unconscious phantasies, which
are probably under the sway of sexualimpulses
and find expression not only in dreams, but also
in hysterical phobias and other symptoms. If
the
dream
continues
and completes mental
work begun during the day, and even brings
valuable new ideas to light, we have only to
strip off the dream-disguise from this, as the
contribution of the dream-work, and a mark of
the assistance of dark powers in the depths of
the psyche (cf. the devil in Tartini's sonatadream). The intellectual achievement as such
belongs to the same psychic forces as are re
sponsible for all such achievements during the
day. We are probably much too inclined to
over-estimate the conscious character even of
intellectual and artistic production. From the
reports of certainwriterswhohave beenhighly
productive, such as Goethe and Helmholtz, we
learn, rather, that the most essential and orig
inal part of their creations came to them in the
form of inspirations, and offered itself to their
awareness in an almost completed state..In
other cases, where there is a concerted effort
of all the psychic forces, there is nothing
strange in the fact that conscious activity, too,
lends its aid. But it is the much-abused privi
lege of conscious activity to hide from us all
other activities wherever it participates.
It. hardly seems worth while to take-up-the
historical significance of dreams as a separate
theme. Where, for instance, a leader,has-been
impelled: by a dream to engage ina bold under
taking, the success of which has had the.effect
of changing history, a new problem arises only
so long as the dream is regarded as a myster
rious power and contrasted with other more
familiar psychicforces.The problemdisappears
as soon as we regard the dream as a form of
expression for impulses to which a resistance
was attached during the day, whilst at night

[388a]
384
Sigmund Freud
they were able tb draw reinforcement^ from
deep-lying sources of excitation.1 But the great
respect with which the ancient peoples regarded
dreamsis based on a just piece of psychological
divination: It is a homage paid to the unsub
dued and indestructible element in the human
soul,to the demonic power which furnishes
the dream-wish, and which we have
found
again in our unconscious.
It is not without purpose that I use the ex
pression in ourunconscious, for what we so call
does not coincide with the unconscious of the
philosophers,
nor
with the
unconscious
of
Lipps. As they use the term, it merely means
the opposite of the conscious. That there exist
not only conscious but also unconscious psy
chic processes is the opinion at issue, which is
so hotly contested and so energetically defend
ed. Lipps enunciates the more comprehensive
doctrine that everything psychic exists as un
conscious, but that some of it may exist also
as conscious. But it is not to prove this doc
trine that we have adduced the phenomena of
dreams and hysterical symptom-formation; the
observation of normal life alone suffices to es
tablish its correctness beyond a doubt. The nov
el fact that we have learned from the analysis
of psycho-pathological formations, and indeed
frOm the first member of the group, from
dreams, is that the unconscious—and hence all
that is psychic—occurs as a .function of two
separate systems, and that as such it occurs
even in normal psychic life. There are conse
quently two kinds of unconscious^ which have
not as yet been distinguished by psychologists.
Both
are
unconscious in
the -psychological
sense; but in our sense the first, which we call
Ucs, is likewise incapable of consciousness;.
whereas the second we call Pes because its ex
citations, after the observance of certain rules,
are capable of reaching consciousness; perhaps
not before they have again undergone censor
ship, but nevertheless regardless of the Ucs sys
tem. The fact that in order to attain conscious
ness the
excitations
must pass
through
an
unalterable series,a succession of instances,as is
betrayed; by the changes produced in them by
the censorship, has enabled us to describe them
by analogy in spatial! terms. We described' the
relations' of theJtwp systems to each other! arid
toi -consciousness by saying >ihat the system
Pes is like a screen between the-system-.'Ucs and
consciousness. The system Pes -hot; only bars
access to consciousness, but also controls the
*Ci £p. 179 above) the dream.(SA-T&pbs) of Alex
ander the Great at the siege-ofTyre.
r

[388b]
access to voluntary mbtility;\and has control^of
the emission of a mobile cathectic energy, a
portion of which is familiar to us as attentibnl2
We must also steer clear of the distinction
between the super-conscious and the subcon
scious, which has found such favour in the more
recent literature on the psychoneuroses, for just
sucha distinctionseemsto emphasize the equiv
alence of what is psychic and what is conscious.
What role is now left, in our representation
of things, to the phenomenon of consciousness;
once so all-powerful and over-shadowing all
else? None other than that of a sense-organ
for the perception of psychic qualities. Accord-i
ing to the fundamental idea of our schematic
attempt we can regard conscious perception
only as the function proper to a special system
for which the abbreviated designation Cs com-:
mends itself. This system we conceive to be
similar in its mechanical characteristics to; the
perception-system P, and hence excitable by
qualities, and incapable of retaining the trace
of changes: i.e.,devoidof memory. The psychic
apparatus which, with the sense-organ of the
/^systems, is turned to the outer world, is
itself the outer world for the sense-organ of
Cs, whose teleological justification depends on
this relationship. We are here once more con
fronted with the principle of the succession of
instances which seems to dominate the;struc
ture of the apparatus. The material of excita
tion flowsto the sense-organ Cs from two sides:
first from the P-system,whose excitation, qual^
itatively conditioned, probably undergoes a new
elaboration until it attains conscious percept
tion; and, secondly, from the interior of the
apparatus itself, whose quantitative processes
are perceived as a qualitative series of pleasures
and pains once, they have reached conscious
ness after undergoing certain changes.
The philosophers, who became aware that'j
accurate and highly complicated thought-struc*
tures are possible even without the co-operation;
of consciousness, thus found it difficult to as-i
cribe any function to consciousness; it appeared
tip them: a; superfluous mirroring of the com-1
pletedpsychic process. The analogy of pur Csl
system with, the perception-systems relieves us
bf this embarrassment. Yfie sfee that pertgption
through our sense-organs results in directing
anattention-cathexis to the paths along which
the incoming sensory exeita^ohldiffuses itself;v
. 2Cf. here my remarks in the Proceedings 0)' ,ihe\
Society for Psychical Research, vol. xxvi, in which the
descriptive, dynamic^and systematic meanings of the
ambiguous word: Unconscious are .distinguishedr•f^on^
one another.
.
••
.", :.

[389a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
m
the qualitative excitation of the P-system serves
the mobile quantity in the psychic apparatus as
a regulator of its discharge. We may claim the
same function: fory the- overlying sense-organ
of the Cs system. By perceiving new qualities,
it furnishes.a new contribution for the guid
ance and suitable distribution of the mobile
cathexis-quantities. By means bf perceptions
of pleasure and pain, it influences the course of
the
cathexes
within the psychic apparatus,
which otherwise operates unconsciously and by
the displacement of quantities. It is probable
that the pain-principle first bf all regulates the
displacements of cathexis automatically, but it
is quite possible that consciousness contributesa
second and more subtle regulation of these
qualities, which may even oppose the first, and
perfect the functional capacity of the apparatus,
by placing it in a position contrary to its Orig
inal design, subjecting even that which induces
pain to cathexis and to elaboration. We learn
from neuro-psychology that an important part
in the functional activity of the apparatuses
ascribed to these regulations by the qualitative
excitations of the sense-organs. The automatic
rule of the. primary pain-principle, together
with the limitation of functional capacity bound
up with it, is broken by the sensoryregulationsj
which are themselves again automatisms. We
find that-repressiony which, though originally
expedient, nevertheless finally brings about a
harmful lack of inhibition and of psychic con
trol, overtakes memories much more easily
than it does perceptions, because in the former
there is fno additional cathexis from the exci
tation of the psychic sense-organs. Whilst an
idea which is to be warded off may fail to be
come conscious because it has succumbed to
repression, it may on other occasions come to
be repressed simply because it has been withe
drawn
from
conscious perception on
other
grounds. These are clues which we make use
of in therapy in order to undo accomplished
repressions. :
.
.:-'"
The value of the hyper-cathexis which is
produced by the regulating influence of the
Cs sense-organs on the mobile quantity is dem
onstrated in; a teleological context by noth
ing more clearly than by the creation of a hew
series of qualities, and consequently a new
regulation, which constitutes the prerogative of
man over animals. For the mental processes
are in themselves unqualitative except for the
excitations of pleasure and pain which accomr
pany them:; which, as-we know, must be kept
within limits as possible disturbers of thought;

[389b]
In order to endow them with quality, they are
associated in man with verbal memories, the
qualitative residues of which suffice to draw
upon
them
the
attention "of consciousness,
which in turn endows thought with a new mo
bile cathexis.
1
It is only on a dissection of hysterical men
tal processes that the manifold nature of the
problems of consciousness becomes apparent.
One then receives the impression that the tran
sition from the preconscious to the conscious
cathexis is associated with a censorship simi
lar to that'between Ucs and Pes. This censor
ship, too, begins to act only when a certain
quantitative limit is reached, so that thoughtformations which are not very intense escape
it. AU possible cases- of detention from con
sciousness and of penetration into conscious
ness under certain
restrictions are included
within the range of psychoneurotic phenomena;
all point to the intimate and twofold connection
between the censorship and consciousness.
I
shall conclude these psychological considera
tions with the record of two such occurrences.
On the occasion of a consultation a few years
ago, the patient was an intelligent-looking girl
with a simple, unaffected manner. She was
"strangely attired; for whereas a woman's dress
is usually carefully thought out to the last
pleat, one of her stockings was hanging down
and two of the buttons of her. blouse were un
done. She complained of pains in one of her
legs, and exposed her calf without being asked
to do so. Her chief complaint, however, was as
follows: She had a feeling in her body as though
something were sticking into it which moved
to andfro andshook her through and through.
This sometimes seemed to make her whole body
stiff: On hearing this, my colleague in consul
tation looked at me; the trouble was quite ob
vious to him: To both of us it seemed-peculiar
that this suggested nothing to the patient's
mother, though she herself must repeatedly
have been in the situation described by her
child. As for the girl, she had no idea of. the
import of her words, or she would never have
allowed them to pass her lips. Here the censor
ship had been hoodwinked so successfully that
under the mask of an innocent complaint a
phantasy was admitted to consciousness-which
otherwise would have remained hi ithe precon
scious. n
-";,
•••' -
^
•
V Another example: I began the: psychoan
alytic treatment of a boy fourteen who was
suffering from tic convulsif, hysterical vornuV
ing, headache, etc*, by.assuring him that [after

[390a]
386
Sigmtjnd Freud
closing his eyes he would see pictures or that
ideas would occur to him, which he was to
communicate to me. He replied by describing
pictures. The last impression he had received
before coming to me was revived visually in
his memory. He had been playing a game of
checkers with his uncle, and now he saw the
checkerboard before him. He commented on
various ^positions that were favourable or un
favourable, on moves that were not- safe to
make. He then saw a dagger lying on the check
er-board—an object belonging to his father,
but which his phantasy laid on the checker
board. Then a,sickle was lying on the board; a
scythe was added; and finally, he saw the im
age of an old peasant mowing the grass in front
of his father's house far away. A few days
later I discovered the meaning of this series
of pictures. Disagreeable family circumstances
had made the boy excited and nervous. Here
was a case of a harsh, irascible father, who had
lived unhappily with the boy's mother, and
whose
educational
methods
consisted
of
threats; he had divorced his gentle and deli
cate wife, and remarried; one day he brought
home a young woman as the boy's new mother.
The illness of the fourteen-year-old boy de
veloped a few days later. It was the suppressed
rage against his father that had combined these
images into intelligible allusions. The material
was furnished by a mythological reminiscence.
The sickle was that with which Zeus castrated
his father; the scythe and the image of the
peasant represented Kronos, the violent old
man who devours his children, and upon whom
Zeus wreaks his vengeance in so unfilial a man
ner. The father's marriage gave the boy an op
portunity of
returning the
reproaches
and
threats which the child had once heard his
father utter because he playedwith his genitals
(the draught-board; the prohibited moves; the
dagger with which one could kill). We have
here long-impressed memories and their uncon
scious derivatives which, under the guise of
meaningless pictures, have slipped into con
sciousness by the devious paths opened to them;
If I were asked what is the theoretical value
of the study of dreams, I should reply that it
lies in the additions to psychological knowledge
and the beginnings of an Understanding of the
neuroses which we thereby obtain. Who can
foresee the importance a thorough knowledge
of the structure and functions of the psychic
apparatus may attain, when even our present
state of knowledge permits of successful thera
peutic intervention in the curable forms of psy

[390b]
choneuroses? But, it may be asked, what of
the practical value of this study in regard to
a knowledge of the psyche and discovery of
the hidden peculiarities of individual charac
ter? Have not the unconscious impulses re
vealed by dreams the value of real forces in
the psychic life? Is the ethical significance of
the suppressed wishes to belightly disregarded,
since, just as they now create dreams, they
may-some day create other things?
I do not feel justified in answering these
questions. I have not followed up this aspect
of the problem of dreams. In any case, howi
ever, I believe that the Roman Emperor was in
the wrong in ordering one of his subjects to be
executed because the latter had dreamt that he
had killed the Emperor. He should first of all
have endeavoured to discover the significance
of the man's dreams; most probably it was not
what it seemed to be. And even if a dream of
a different content had actually had this trea
sonable meaning,Jt would, still have been well
to recall the words of Plato—-that the virtuous
man contents himself with dreaming of that
which the wicked man does in actual life. I am
therefore of the opinion that dreams should be
acquitted of evil. Whether any reality is to be
attributed to the unconscious wishes, I cannot
say. Reality must, of course, be denied to all
transitory and intermediate thoughts.
If we
had before us the unconscious wishes; brought
to their final and truest expression, we should
still do well to remember that psychic reality
is a special form of existence which must not
be confounded with material reality. It seems^
therefore, unnecessary that people should re
fuse to accept the responsibility for the im
moralityof their dreams. With an appreciation!
of the mode of functioning of the psychic ap
paratus, and an insight into the relations be
tween conscious and unconscious, all that is!
ethically offensive in our dream-life and the!
life of phantasy for the most part disappears.;
"What a dream has toldus of our relations to j
the present (reality) we will then seek also in
our consciousness, and wemust not be surprised
if we discover that the monster we saw under
the magnifying-glass of the analysis is a tiny
little infusorian" (H. Sachs).
For all practical purposes in judging human
character, a man's actions and conscious ex
pressions of thought are in most cases sufficient.
Actions, above all, deserve to be placed in the
front rank; for many impulses which penetrate
into consciousness are neutralizedby real forces
in the psychic life before they find issue in

[391a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
387
action; indeed, the reason why they frequently
do not encounter any psychic obstacle on their
path is because the unconscious is certain of
their meeting with resistances later.
In any
case, it is highly instructive to learn something
of the intensively tilled soil from which our
virtues proudly emerge. For the complexity
of human character, dynamically moved in all
directions, very rarely accommodates itself to
the arbitrament of a simple alternative, as our
antiquated moral philosophy would have it.
And what of the value of dreams in regard

[391b]
to our knowledgeof the future? That, of course,
is quite out of the question. One wouldrlike to
substitute the words: in regard to our knowl
edge of the past. For in every sense a dream
has its origin in the past. The ancient belief that
dreams reveal the future is not indeed entirely
devoid of the truth. By representing a wish as
fulfilled the dream certainly leads us into the
future; but this future, which the dreamer
accepts as his present, has been shaped, in,
the likeness of the past by the indestructible
wish.

[392a]


[392b]
\~t
<T »f i\ •>* *-L ru ozAJL/
i-ij1"!
r
•
-j. ->;!/ IA' err oj,0 .:.:u
•• ^'.JJ ^o ma ?fi*-py
**'-' 5 :- ^ttuu s-rf.-^q <rm T»ir«ioT:o "-»og <!o
tKf^ *• isil'-O jic,b~f,i :>r:7 /"-rrrifjj rri nitho z 1
r!
^rinj_*-:iv:£ n-ryt cj ,_v
.»-. 'n -'Tr"-" " I 1,,-j- *
"l ihiV I
I • 1*
' '..".«! ri1. i£l>/lU -".r^S ;•
yyyi
•^"\ n' rot ],

[393a]
Bibliography
(A) Before the Publication of the First
German Edition of this Book",'(1.900)
Achmetis, F. Serim, Oneirocriticae, ed. Nik. Rigaltius, Paris, 1603.
Alberti, iVIiCHAEL, Diss, de insomniorum infiuxi
in sanitatem et morbos, Resp. Titius Halae
M., 1744.
Alix, "Les Reves," Rev. Scientif., 3e serie, Vol.
VI (32* de la coll.), 3e annee, 20 sem„ Nov.,
1883^ pp. SS4-56I.
"
Etiide du reve, M6m. de Pacad. de sa, etc., de
Toulouse, 90' serie, Vol. I, pp. 283-326, Tou
louse, 1889.
Almoli,Salomo, PithrdnChaldm6th,SdlkieWj 1848.
Aristqteles, Uber Trdume und Traumdeuiungen,
trans. Bender (On Dreams).
Von der Weissagung im Traume (On Prpphecying by Dreams).
Artemidoros of Daldis, Symbolik der Trdume,
trans. Friedr. S. Krauss, Vienna, 1881.
"Erotische Traume und ihre Symbolik," Anthrbpophyteia, Vol. IX, pp.. 316-328. ;
Artigues, Essai sur la valeur sSmiiologique du
rive, These de Paris, 1884.
Bacci Domenico, Sui sogni e sul sonnombulismo,
pensieri fisiologico-metafisici, Venice, 1857.
Ball, La Morphinomanie, les rives prolonges,
Paris, 1885.
Beneze, Emil, Das Traummotiv in der mittelhochdeutschen Dichtung bis1250 und in alien
deutschenVolksliedern, Halle, 1897. (Beneze,
Sagengesch, und lit.-hist., Uhiers.
1, Das
Traummotiv.)
Benini, V., "La Memoria e la durata dei sogni,"
Rivistd italiana di filosofia,March, April, 1898.
"Nel moneto del sogni," // Pensiero
nuovq,
April/ 1898^
Binz, C, Uber den traunp, Bonn, 1878.
Birkmaier, Bieron, Licht im Finsterniissder
nachtlichen Gesichte und Trdume, ISfurtfberg,
1715.
V.'"'"'
'.-•''
Bisland, E;, "Dreams and their Mysteries," N.
Ann. Rev., 1896, 152, pp. 716-726.
Borner, J. Das Alpdrucken, seine Bergrmdung
und Verhutung, Wurzburg, 1855.
Bradley, J. H;, "On the Failure of Movement ih
Dream," Mind, July, 1894.
Brander, R., Der Schlaf und das Traumleben,
Leipzig, 1884.
Bouche-Leclercq, Eistorie de la divination dans
Vantiquitii Vol. I, Paris, 1879.
-
Bremer, L., "Traum und Krankheiten," New York
Med. Monthly, 1893, V, i>p. 281-286.
' ?•--
BucHSENSCHtfTZ, BJ, Traum und Traumdeutung
im Altertunf, Berlins 1868.
] Ll

[393b]
Burdach, Die Physiojogieals Erfakrungswissenr
y';ithaftj VbL IH, 1830.':,i':
'
; ;
BuSsola,
SERAFisrO,
De
sotiiniis.
Diss. Hcini
Reg., 1834.
"
'
: ; '' ^ ,
Gaetani-Lovatelli, "I Sogni e riphotismo nel
mondp antico," Nuova Antol., 1, December,
1889.
x
-V
Calkins, Mary Whiton, "Statistics of Dreams,"
Amer. J. of Psychology, V, 1893;
Cane, Francis E., "The Physiology of Dreams,"
The Lancet, December, 1889.
rr
CardanuSj HrERON, Synesiorum somniorum, omni
generis insomnit, explicantes libri IV, Basileae,
1562. (2nd edition in Opera Omnia Catdani,
Vol. V, pp. 593-727» Lugduni, 1603.)
Cariero, Alessandro, De somniis deque divinatione per somnia, Patavii, 1575.
-
Carpenter, "Dreaming" in Cyclop, o)\ Amt, and
Phys., IV, p. 687.
Chabaneix, Le Subconscient chez les artistes, les
savants et les icrivains, Paris, 1897.
Chaslin, Ph., Du Rdle du rive dansVivokttion du
delire, These de Paris, 1887.
Claviere, "La Rapidite de la pens^e dans le reve,"
Revue philosophique, XLIII, 1897.
Coutts, G. A, "Night-terrors," Americ.J. of Med.
Sc, .1896.
D. L., "A propos de ^appreciation du temps dans
le reve," Rev. philos., Vol. 40, 1895, pp. 69-72.
DAgonet, "Du RSve et du delire alCooliqueV' Ann.
mid.-psychol., 1889, serie 7, Vol. X, p. 193.
Dandolo, G., La coscienza nel sonno, Padua, 1889.
Davidson, Wolf, Versuch uber den Schlaf, 2nd
edition, Berlin, 1799.
Debacker, Terreurs nocturnes des enfants. These
de Paris, 1881.
Dechambre, "Cauchemar," Diet, encyd. de sc.
mid.
Delage, Yves, "Une Theorie du
reve,- Revue
scientifique, II, July,:•
18.91.
Delbceuf, J., Le Sommeil et les rives^ Paris* 1885.
Dietrich, Joh. Dav., An, ea, quae hominibuSj in
somno et somnio accidunt iisdem possint imputari? resp. Gava Vitembergae, 1726.
DocHMASA, A. M., Dreams and their Significance
as Forebodings of Disease, Kazan, 1890.
Dreher; E., "Sinneswahrnehmung und Traumbild,"
Reichs-med. Anzeiger, Leipzig, 1890, XV.
Ducoste, ,M., Les Songes d'attaques epUeptiques,
1889.
DugAs, "Le Souvenir du r6ve," Revue pMosophique, XLIV, 1897.
'
"Le Sommeil et la cerebration inconsqente durantlesommeil," Revue philosophiqu^&ITI,
1897; '"'
• " -
'•••>''"

[394a]
390
Sigmund Freud
Du Prel, Carl, "Oneirokritikon; der Traum vom
Standpunkte
des
transcend.
Idealismus,"
Deutsche Vierteljahrschrift, Vol. II, Stuttgart,
1869.
Psychologie der Lyrik, Leipzig, 1880.
Die PhUosophie der Mystik, Leipzig, 1887.
"Kunstliche Traume," Sphinx, July, 1889.
Egger, V., "Le Sommeil etla certitude, le sommeil
et la: mempire," La Critique philos.,May,
188S, I, pp. 341-350.
"La Duree apparente des reves," Revue philosophique, July, 1895.
"Le Souvenir dans le reve," Revuephilosophique,
XLVI, 1898.
Ellis, Havelock, "On Dreaming of the Dead,"
The Psychological Revue, II, No. 5, Sep
tember, 1895.
"The Stuff that Dreams are Made of," Appleton's Popular Science Monthly> April, 1899.
"A Note on Hypnagogic Paramnesia," Mind,
April, 1897.
Erdmann, J. E., Psychologische Briefe,6th edition,
Leipzig, 1848.
ErnsteSpiele (XII: Das Trdumen), 3rd edition,
Berlin, 1875.
Erk, Vnxrz v., Uber den Unterschied von Traum
und Wachen, Prague, 1874.
Escande de Messieres, Les rives chez les hysteriques, Th. m6d., Bordeaux, 1895.
Faure, "Etude sur les reves morbides, Rives per
sistants," Arch. ginir., de mid., 1876, Vol. I,
P. 558.
Fechner, Q. Th., Elemente der Psychophysik,
2nd edition, 1889.
Fenizia, "L'azione suggestiva delle cause esterne
nei sogni," Arch, per VAnthrop., XXVI.
Fere, Ch., "A Contribution to the Pathology of
Dreams and of Hysterical Paralysis," Brain,
January, 1887.
"Les Reves d'acces chez les epileptiques*" La
Med. mod., 8. Dec, 1897.
Fichte, J. H., Psychologie, Die Lehre vom bewussten Geiste des Menschen, Vol. I, Leipzig,
1864.
Fischer, Joh., Ad artis veterum onirocriticae historiam symbola, Diss. Jenae, 1899.
-----
Florenttn, V., "Das Traumleben, Plauderei," Die
alte und die neue Welt, 1899, 33. J., p. 725.
FORNASCHON, H., "Geschichte eines Traumes als
Beitrag der transcendentalen Psychologie,"
Psychische Studien, 1897, pp. 274-281.
Frexligrath, Traumbuch ^Biographic von Buchner).
Frensberg, Schlaf und Traum. Samml. gemeinverst. wiss. Vortr. Virchow Holtzendorf, Ser.
XX, H. 466, Berlin, 1885.
Frerichs, Joh. H., Der Mensch: Traum, Herz,
Verstand, 2nd edition, Norden, 1878.
Galenus, Von der Weissagung im Traume.

[394b]
Giessler, C. M., Beitrag zur Phanomenologie des
Traumlebens, Halle, 1888.
Aus den Tiefen des Traumlebens, Halle, 1890.
Die physiologischen Beziehungen der Traumvorgdnge, Halle, 1896.
Girgensohn, L., Der Traum, psychol.-physiol.
Versuch., S. A. 1845.
Gleichen-Russwurm, A. v., "Traum in der Dichtung," Nat.-Ztg., 1899, Nos..553-559.
Gley, E.,"Appreciation du temps pendant le som
meil," Ulntermidiare Ides
Biologistes,
20
March, 1898, No. 16, p., 228.
GoBLOT, "Sur le Souvenir des reves," Revue philosophique, XLII, 1896.
Gomperz, Th., Traumdeutung
und Zauberei,
Vortrag., Vienna, 1866.
Gorton, D. A, "Psychology of the Unconscious,"
N. Y. Med. Times, 1896, XXIV, 33, 37.
Gould,
Dreams—Sleep—Consciousness,
Open
Court, 1899.
Grabener, Gottl. Chr., Ex antiquitate iudaica de
menudim bachalom sive excommunicatis per
insomnia exerc. resp. Klebius, Vitembergae,
1710.
-
Graffunder, Traum und Traumdeutung, 1894.
Greenwood, Imaginations in Dreams and Their
Study, London, 1899.
Grtesinger, Pathologie und Therapie der psychischen Krankheiten, 3rd edition, 1871.
Grot Nicolaus, Die Trdume, ein Gegenstand wissenschaftl. Analyse (russ.). Kiev, 1878.
Guardia, J. M., "La Personnalite dans les reves,"
Rev, philos., Paris 1892, XXXIV, pp. 225258.
Gutfeldt, J., "Ein Traum," Psych. Studien, 1899,
pp. 491-494.
.
Haffner,
P.,
Schlafen
und
Trdumen,
1884.
Frankfurter zeitgemdsse Broschuren, Vol. v]
No. 10.
Hallam, Fl., and Sarah Weed, "A Study of the
Dream Consciousness," Amer, J. of Psychol
ogy, VII, No. 3, April, 1896.
Hampe, Th., "Uber Hans Sachsens Traumgedichte,"
Zeitschrift fiir den deutschen Unterricht, 10
Jahrg., 1896, p. 616 f.
Heerwagen, "Statist. Untersuch, uber Traume u.
Schlaf.," Philos. Stud.,V, 1888, p. 88.
Hennings, Justus
Chr.,
Von
Trdumen und
Nachiwandlern, Weimar, .1802.
Henzen, Wilh., Uber die Trdume in der altnord.
Sagaliteratur, Diss. Leipzig, 1890.
d'Hervey, Les Rives et les moyens de les dinger,
Paris, 1867 (anonym.).
Hildebrandt, F. W., Der Traum und seine Verwertung furs Leben, Leipzig, 1875.
Hiller, G., "Traum. Ein Kapitel zu den zwolf
Nachten," Leipz. Tagbl. und Anz., 1899, No.
657, i. Teil. •'•-=.
Htppokrates, Buck uberdieTrdume, in Sdmtliche
Werke, translated by Dr. Robert Fuchs*
Munich, 1895-1900, Vol. 1^ pp. 361-369.

[395a]
Hitschmann,
F.,
Blinden," Zeitschr. f. Psychol., VII, 5-6, 1894.
Ideler, "Die Entstehung des Wahnsinns aus den
Traumen," ChariUAnnalen, 1862, Vol. HI.
Jastrow, "The Dreams of the Blind," New Princetown Rev., New York, January, 1888.
Jean Paul, Blicke in die Traumwelt. In Werke, ed.
by Hempel, Vol. 44, pp. 128-152.
Uber Wahl- und Halbtrdume, ibid., p. 142 f.
Wahrheit aus seinem Leben, Vol. 2, pp. 106-126.
Jensen, Julius, Traum und Dehken, Berlin, 1871.
(Sammh gemeinverst, wiss. Vortr. VirchowHoltzendorf, Ser. VI, No. 134).
Jessen, Versuch einer wissenschaftlichen Begrilndung der Psychologie, Berlin, 1856.
Jodl, Lehrbuch der Psychologie, Stuttgart, 1896.
(3rd edition, 1908.)
Kant, J., Anthropologic in pragmatischer Hinsicht,
ed. Kirchmann, Leipzig, 1880.
Kingsford, A. B., Dreams and Dream-stories, ed.
Maitland, 2nd edition, London, 1888.
Kloepfell, F., "Traumerei und Traum. Allerlei aus
unserem Traumleben," Universum, 1899, 15.
J., pp. 2469-2484, 2607-2622.
KramAr, Oldrich, O spdnku a snu, Prager Akad.
Gymn., 1882.
Krasnicki, E. v., "Karls IV. Wahrtraum," Psych.
Stud., 1897, p. 697.
Krauss, A., "Der Sinn im Wahnsinn," Allgemeine
Zeitsckrift
fiir Psychologie, XV and XVI.
1858-1859.
Kucera, Ed., Aus dem Traumleben, Mahr-Weisskirchen Gymn. 1895.
Ladd, "Contribution to the Psychology of Visual
Dreams," Mind, April, 1892.
Laistner, Ludw., Das Rdtsel der Sphinx, 2 Vols.,
Berlin, 1889.
Landau, M., "Aus dem Traumleben," Munchner
Neueste Nachrichten, g. January, 1892.
Lasegue, "Le Delire alcoolique n'est pas un delire,
_, mais un reve," Arch, gen de mid., 1881. (Re
printed in Etudes mid. Vol. II, pp. 203-227,
Paris, 7e serie, Vol. VI, pp. 513-536, 1884.)
Laupts, "Le Fonetionnement cerebral pendant le
reve et pendant le sommeil hypnotique," Annales mid.-psychol., 1895.
Letdesdorf, M., Das traumleben, Vienna, 1880.
Le Lorratn, "La Duree du temps dans les reves,"
Rev. philos., Vol. 38, 1894, pp. 275-279.
"Le Reve," Revue philosophique, July, 1895. .:
Lelut, "Memoire sur le sommeil, les songes et le
somnambulisme,"-.Ann* mid.rpsych., 1852, Vol.
IV.
Lemotne, Du Sommeil au point de vue physiologique et psychologiquer,VanSi 1855.
yy
Lerch, Math., Fr., "Das Traumleben und seine
Bedeutung," Gymn. Progr. Komotau, 1883^
1884.
Liberali, Francesco, Dei Sogni, Diss, Padova,
1834.

[395b]
The Interpretation of Dreams
gpi
"Uber
das
Traumleben
der
Liebeault* A., Le sommeil provoqiii et les Stats
analogues, Paris, 1889.
"A travers les itats passifs, le sommeil et les
reves," Rev. de Vhypoth., etc. Paris, 1893, 4,
VIII, 41, 65, 106. .'•'"'..
Ltpps, Th., Grundtatsachen des Seelenlebens;'Bonn,
1883.
Luksch, L., Wunderbare Trdumerfullung dls Inhalt des wirklichen Lebens, Leipzig; 1894;
Macario, "Du Sommeil, des reves et du somnambu
lisme dans T6tat de sant6 et dans Petat de
inaladie," Ann, mid.-psychol., 1858, Vol. IV,
V.
"Des reves consideres sous le rapport physiologique et pathologique," Ibid., 1846, Vol. VIII.
"Des reves morbides," Gaz. mid. de Paris, No. 8,
1889.
Macfarlane,
A.
W.,
"Dreaming,"
The
Edinb.
Med. /., 1890, Vol. 36.
Maine de Biran, Nouvelles considirations sur le
sommeil, les songes et le somnambulisme, ed.
Cousin, 1792.
Sleep; Its Physiology, Pathology and Psycholo
gy, London, 1897.
Manacetne, Marie de, Le sommeil, tiers de notre
we, Paris, 1896.
Sleep: Its Physiology, Pathology and Psychol
ogy, London, 1897.
Maudsley, The Pathology of Mind, iSjq.
Maury, A., "Analogies des phenomenes du reve et
de ralienation mentale," Annates mid. psych.,
1853, V, VI.
"De certains faits observes dans les reves," Ann.
med.-psychol., 1857, Vol. III.
Le sommeil et les rives, Paris, 1878.
Meisel
(Pseud.),
Naturlich-gottliche
und teuflische Trdume, Sieghartstein, 1783.
Meltnaud, "Dream and Reality," Pop. Sc. Mo.,
Vol. LIV, pp. 96-103.
Melzenttn, C, l&ber wissenschaftliche Traum
deutung," Die Gegenwart, No. 50, 1899."
JSIentz, Rich., Die Traume in den alifranzosischen
Karls- und Artus-Epen., Marburg, i8$8.
Monroe, W. S., "A Study of Taste-Dreams," Am.
J. of Psychol., January, 1899.
Moreau de la Sarthe, "R6ve," Diet. des. sc. mid.
Vol. 48. Paris, 1820.
Moreau, J., "De Pldentite' de Petat de r6ve et de
folie," Annales mid.-psych., 1855, p. 261.
Morselli, A., "Dei sogni nei Genii," La Cultura,
1899.
Motet, "Cauchemar," Diet, de mid. et de chir.
pratiques.
Murry, J. C, "Do we ever Dream of Tasting?"
Proc. oj the Americ. Psychol., 1894, 20.
Nagele, Anton, "Der Traum in der epischen Dichtung," Programm, der Redtschtde, Marburg,
1889.
Nelson, J., "A Study of Dreams," Amer. J. of
Psychology, I, 1888.
^

[396a]
392
SigmundFreud
Newbold,
W.
R.,
"Sub-conscTous
Reasoning,?
Proc. Soc. Ps. Res.i 1896, XII, 11-26.
"Uber Traurnleistuhgen," Psychol. Rev., March,
1896, p. 132.
Passavanti, Jac, Libro dei sogni: Bibl. diamante,
Rome/ 1891* Z ;•>
v
^
;
•
Paulhan, Uactivite mentale et
les iliments de
. Vesprit^.J>ari&iiLS89.
; v
;
"APropos de lfaetivit£ de l'esprit dans le reve,"
j^ev., piijlos., VoL 38, 1894, pp.. 546-548.
Pfaff, E. R., Das Traumleben und seine D^utung
nach den Prinzipien der Araber, Perser, Griechen, Indier und Agypter, Leipzig, 1868.
Pichon, Contribution a Vitude des dilires oniri-
,ques ou dilires de rive, These, de Bordeaux,
1896.
Pick, A., "Uber pathologische Traumerei und ihre
Beziehungen zur Hysterie," Jahrbuch fur Psy*
chiatrie, 1896.
Pilcz, "Uber eine gewisse Gesetzmassigkeit in den
Traumen," Monatsschrift fiir Psychologie und
Neurologie, March, 1899.
Prevost," "Quelques observations psychologiques
sur le sommeil." Bibl. univ. des sc., belles-lettres
et arts, -1834, Vol. I, Littirature, pp. 225-248.
Purkinje, "Wachen, Schlaf, Traum und verwandte
Zustande" in Wagners Hatidworterbuch der
Physiologie, 1846.
Radestock, 'P., Schlaf und Traum, Leipzig, 1878.
Ramm, Konrad, Diss-,- pertractans somnia, Vienna,
1889.
:
.
Regis, "Les Reves," La Gironde (Variitis), Bor
deaux, May 31, 1890.
"Des
Hallucinations
oniriques
des
degeneres
mystiques," C.R. du Congrhs des mid. aliinistes, etc., 5th sess., 1894, Paris, 1895, p. 260.
"Reves et l!hypnotisme," Le Monde, August 25,
1890.
'
Richard, Jerome, La thiorie des songes, Paris,
1766.
Richardson, B. W., "The Psychology of Dreams,"
The Asclep., London, i?92, IX, 129, 160.
Robert, W., Der traum als Natumotwendigkeit
erkldrt, Hamburg, 1886.
Richter, Oneirologie ou dissertation sur les songes
considiris dans Vitat de
maladie, These., de
Paris, 1816.
Robinson, L., "What Dreams are made of," N*
Americ. Rev. New York, 1893, CI, VII, 687697;
Rousset, Contribution d Vitude du
cauchemar,
,
These de Paris, 1876.
;
-
Roux, J., "Les Reves et les delires oniriques,,,
Province mid., 1898,.p. 212.
Ryff, .Walther Herm., Traumbuchlein, Strassburg,. 1554.
j
Sante <jte Sanctis, Emozione e sogni; 1896.-
"I Sogni nei delinquenti," Arch, di psichiatr. e
antrpp. criminate, Turin, 1896, XVII, 4887498*
VSogni eil sonno nelVisterismo e nella epilessia,
Rome, 1896.

[396b]
Les Maladies mentales titles rives, 1897,' (Ex
tract from Annates de la Sociiti de midecine
de Gand)*
ri:
"Sui Rapporti d? identita, oU jsomigUanza, di analpgia e di equiyilenza fra sogno e pazzia,"
Rivista quindicinale di Psicologia, Psichiatria,
Neuro-patoiogia, 15. Nov., 1897.
"I sogni dei neurbpatici e dei pazzi," Arch, di
psichiatr. e. antrop. crim., 1898,'4. Vols.
"Psychoses et reves," Rapport au Congrhs de
neurol. et oVhypnologie de Bruxelles, 1898.
Comptes rendus. H, p. 137.
I Sogni, Torino, 1899 (German trans, by O.
Schmidt, Halle, 1901).
Santel, Anton, "Poskus raz kladbe nekterih pomentjivih prikazni spanja in sanj.," Progr.
Gym. Gbrz, 1874.
Sarlo, F. de, "I Sogni," Saggio psicologico, Naples,
1887.
Sch., Fr., "Etwas uber Traume," Psych. Studien,
'
1897, pp. 686-694.
Scherner, R. A., Das Leben des Traumes, Berlin,
1861.
Schleich,
K.
L.,
"Traum
und
Schlaf,"
Die
Zukunft, 1899,Vol. 29, pp. 14-27, 54-65.
ScHLErERMACHER, Fr, Psychologie, edited by L.
George, Berlin, 1862.
Scholz, Fr., Schlaf und Traum, Leipzig, 1887;
Schopenhauer, "Versuch uber das Geistersehen
und was damit zusammenhangt," in Pareri %
und'Paralipomena, Berlin, 1857.
Schubert, Gotthtlf Heinrich, Die Symbolik des
Traumes, Bamberg, 1844.
Schwartzkopff,
P.,
Das
Leben im
Traum,
Eine Studie, Leipzig, 1887.
r
"Science of
Dreams," The
Lyceum.
Dublin,
October, 1890, p. 28.
Siebeck, A., Das Traumleben der Seele, 1877,
Sammliing Virchow-Holtzendorf, No. 279.
Simon, M., Le monde des rives,
Paris, 1888,
Bibliothhque scieniifique contemporaine.
'.-.•.
SpItta, W., Die Schlaf-- und Traumzustdnde der
menschlichen Seele, 2nd. edition,
Freiburg
i. B., 1892*
I
•' .
Stevenson, R. L., "A Chapter-on Dreams," in
AcrossthePlains, 1892.
-
Stricker, Studien uber das Bewusstsein, Vienna,
" "v
".-
Studien uber die Assoziation der Vorstellungen,
Vienna, 1883^ •;•
Strumpell, L; Die Natur und Entstehung der
Trdume, Leipzig; 1877.
StryKj M. v., "Der Traurn und die Wirklichkeit,"
(nach C. Melinaud) Baltische Monatsschrift,
•Riga, 1899, pp. 189-216.
Stumpf, E. j. G., tier Traurn undseine Deutung,
r Leipzig, i'899.•'"•"•-•-
---•'•"
r";
^v • .
Sully, J:, "Etude sur les-reves," Rtfo sckntif.,
i8?2, Pv.385.
... .
...
• ;
Les Uliisions des sens eiJ'de Veiprit. /Mbi
scientif. internat., vol. 62. Paris.

[397a]
Human mind, London, 1892;!
".,:.
"Dreams as a Revelation," Fortnightly
Rev.
March, 1893.
"Laws of:Dream-Fancy," Cornhill Mag., Vol. L,
p. 540;
"Dreams," in Encyclop. Brit.j 9th edition. <
Summers, ,T. O., -'The Physiology of Dreaming,"
Saint-Louis Clin., 1895, VIII, 401-406.
Surbled, Le Rive, 2nd edition, 1898.
"Origine des reves," Rev. de quest, scient., 1895.
Synesius,
Oneiromantik
(German
trans,
by
.
Krauss), Vienna, 1888.
Tannery, M, P., "Sur PActivit6 de l'esprit dans le
reve,"JRei). philos,, XXXVIII, pp. 630-634,
1894.
i "Sur les Reves des,rnath6maticiens," Rev. philos.,
1898, I, p/639.
' r
"Sur la Paramnesie dans les reyes," Rev. philos.,
"Sur la Membire dans le rSve," Revue philosophique^XLV, 1JS98.
; /
Thtery, A., "Aristote et Psychologie physiologique
du reve," Rev. ric6. scol., iSg6, IH, 260-271.
Thomayer, S:, "Sur la Signification de quelques
reves," Rev. ncUrot., No. 4, 1897.
"Beitr. zur Patholdgie der Traume," Poliklinik
der tschechischen Universitdt, Prag, 1897.
Tissie,
Ph., "Les Reves; reves
pathogenes et
therapeutiques; reves photographies," Journ.
de mid. de Bordeaux, 1896; XXVI.
.;-\
Les reves, physiologie et pathologic, 1898. Bibli
othhque de philosophic contemporaine.
Titchener, "Taste Dreams," Amer.J. of Psy-
^ otology] VI, 1893.
Tonnini, "Suggestione e sogni," Arch, di psichiatr.
antrop. crvm., IH, 1887.
.,
Tonsor, J. Hetnrich, Disp. de vigUia, somno et
somniis, prop. Lucas, Marpurgi, 1627.
"Traum," Allgemeinen Enzyklppddie der Wissenschaft und Kunste,von Ersch und Gruber.
Traumbuch.
Apomasaris
(Gerrrian trans,
from
the Latin trans, from the Greek by Leweriklaw). Wittemberg.
--
Tuke Hack, "Dreaming," Diet, of Psycholog.
Med., 1892.
Ullrich, M. W., Der Schlaf und das Traumleben,
Geisteskraft und Geistesschwdche, 3rd edition,
Berlin, 1897.
Unger, F.,Die Mdgie des Traumes als Unsterblichkeitsbeweis.
Nebst Vorw.: Okkultismus und
Sozialismus von O. du Prel, 2nd edition, Mini
ster, 1898.
Utility of Dreams. Edit. J. Cpmp. Neurol.Grznville, 1893, JII, 17-34.
.
VASCHDDEi; "Recherches experim. sur les reves/'
.
Comptes,•rendus
de Vacad. des sciences, 17
July, 1899. .
Vespa, B., "I sogni nei neuro-psicopatici," Bull.
'" S6c. Lancisiana, Rome, 1897.
ViGNOLi, "Von den Traumen, Illuslonen und Halluzinationen.
Internationale wiisenschaftliche
Biblioihek, Vol. 47.

[397b]
The Interpretation of Dreams
393
Vischer,
F. Th., "Studien
uber den
Traum,,?
Beilage z. Allg. Ztg., 1876, Nos. 105-107.
Vold,
J.
Mourly,
"Einige
Experimente .uber
Gesichtsbilder im Traume," Dritter interna-
.-.,. tipnaler Kongress fiir Psychologie in Munchen,
1897; Zeitschr. fiir Psychologie und Physio
logie der Sinnesorgane, XIII, 66-74.
Expiriences sur les rives et en particulier sur
ceux d'origine musculdire et optique, Chris
tiana, 1896; reprinted in Revue phUosophique,
XLII. 1896.
Vyko^jkal, F. V., Uber Trdume und Traumdeutungeh
(tschechisch), Prague, 1898.
\Vedel, R., "Untersuchungen auslandischer Gelehr-
'•rV* ter iiber gew. Traumphanomene," Beitrdge
'zur'Grenzwissenschaft, 1899, PP- 24-77.
Weed, Hallam, and Phtnney, "A Study of the
prearn-.Consciousness," Americ. J. of Psychol^
''' *• Vol. VII, ifcgtfy pp. 405-4ii.r
Wehr, Hans, "Das UnBewusste im menschlichen
Dehkenv" Progratkm der Oberrealschule zu
Kldjgenfurt, 1887.
Weil, Alex, La philosophic du rive,i Paris.
.'
Wendt, K., Kriemhilds Traum, Diss; Rostock, 1858.
Weygandt, W. j ftntstehung dm'Trdume,, Leipzig,
-^893^
'•
•-••
'
'••••
- •-•-
Wilks, S., "On the Nature of Dreams," Med. Mag.
London, 1893-1894, II, 597-606.
Williams, H. S. "The Dream State and its Psy-
• : chic: Correlatives^" Americ. J.
of
Insanity,
1891-1892, Vol.- 17, 445-457.
Woodworth, "Note on the Rapidity of Dreams,"
X': PsyckohRevieWylVpi&g'jy'No. 5..
•...?;:
Wundt, Grundzuge der<[p.hysiologischen Psychox\ - logic, 2 Vols., 2nd, edition, 1880.. =
X, "Ce qu'on peutreverent cinq secondes," Rev. sc,
./- 3e serie, I, XII, 30 October, 1886.
.
„ ,
Zucarrelli, "Pollutions nocturnes et epilepsie,"
,, . . Ftull. de la Soc. le mid, mant. de Belgique,
March, 1895.
.
,t
(B) Since 1900
Abraham, Karl, Traum und Mythos, Eine Studie
zur Vbikerpsychologie. Schriften zur angew.
Seelenkunde, No. 4, Vienna and Leipzig, 1900.
"Uber hysterische Traumzustande," Jahrbuch f.
psychoanalyt. und psychopathol. Forschungen.
; Vol; II, I9IO.
"Sollen wir die Pat ihre Traume aufschreiben
lassen?" Intern. Zeitschr. fiir drztl. Ps.-A., I,
1913,
P194.
"Zur narzisstischen Bewerttirig der Exkretidnsvorgange im Traum und Heurose," Internat.
Zeitschr; f< Ps.-A., VI, 64.*
T
Adler, Alfred, "Zwei Traume einer Prpstituier-
•ten," Zeitschrift f. Sexualwissenschafp,igoS,
_;.
NO. 2.
,.
".Ein erlpgener Traum." Zentralbl, f. Psycho^
r.
analyse,".1910, No. 3.
"Traum und Traumdeutung," Ibid., til, ^9121 1913, p. 174.

[398a]
394
SlGMUND
Amram,
Nathan,
Sepher pithrdn
chalomdth,
Jerusalem, 1901.
Banchieri, F., "I Sogni dei bambini di cinque anni," Riv.di psicol., 8, 325-330.
Betlhetm u. Hartmann, "Uber Fehlreaktionen
bei der Korsakoffschen Psychose," Arch. f.
Psychiatrie, Vol. 72v 1924.
Bleuler, E., "Die Psychoanalyse Freuds," Jahrb.
f. psychoanalyt. u. psychopatholog. Forschungen, Vol. II, 1910.
"Traume mit auf der Hand liegender Deutung,"
Miinch. Med.
Wock. 60. Jahrg. No. 47, n
November, 1913.
Bloch, Ernst, "Beitrag zu den Traumen nach
Coitus interruptus," Zentralbl. fiir Ps.-A., II,
1911-1912, p. 276.
Brewster, E, T., "Dreams and Forgetting, New
discoveries in dream psychology," McClure's
Magazine, October, 1912.
Brill, A. A., "Dreams and their Relation to the
Neuroses," New
York Medical Journ., 23
April, 1910.
Psychoanalysis, Its theory and practical applica
tion, Philadelphia and New.York, 1912.
"Hysterical Dreamy States," New York Medical
Journ., 25 May, 1912.
"Artificial Dreams and Lying," Journ. of Abn.
Psych., Vol. IX, p. 321.
"Fairy-tales as a Determinant of Dreams and
Neurotic Symptoms,"
New
York
Medical
Journ., 21 March, 1914.
Brown, W., "Freud's Theory of Dreams," The
Lancet, 19 and 26, April, 1913.
Bruce, A. H., "The Marvels of Dream-Analysis,"
McClure's Magazine, November, 1912.
'-
Burckhard, Max, "Ein modernes Traumbuch,"
Die Zeit, i960, Nos. 275, 276.
Busemann, A., "Traumleben der Schulkinder,"
Ztschr. f. pad. Psychol., 10, J. 1909, 294-301.
"Psychol, d. kindl. Traumerlebnisse," Zeitschr.
f. pad. Psychol., 1910, XI, p. 320.
Claparede, E., "Esquisse d'une theorie biologique
du sommeil," Arch, de Psychol, Vol. IV, Nos.
15-16, February-March, 1905.
"Reve utile," Arch.de Psychol., 9, 1910, 148.
Coriat, I., "Zwei sexual-symbolische Beispiele von
Zahnarzt-Traumen," Zentralbl. f. Ps.-A., Til,
1912-1913, p. 440.
"Traume vom Kahlwerden," Int. Zeitschr. f. Ps.-
A., II, p. 460.
The Meaning of Dreams, Mind and Health se
ries. London, Heinemann.
Delacroix, "Sur la structure logique du reve,"
Rev. metaphys., November, 1904.
"Note sur la coherence des reves" Rapp. et C.
R. du 2. Congrhs intern, de Philos., 556-560.
Delage, "La Nature des images hypnagogiques et
le role des lueurs entoptiques dans le reve,"
Bull, de VlnstU. giniral psychol., 1903, pp.
235-247.

[398b]
FREUD
Doglia, S., and Bianchieri, F., "I sogni dei bam
bini di tre anni, L'ihizio dell' attivita onirica,"
Contribute psicol., 1, 9.
Eder, M. D., "Freud's Theory of Dreams," Trans
actions of the Psycho-Medic. Soc, London,
Vol. HI, Part 3, 1912.
"Augentraume," Internat. Ztschr. f. arztl. Ps.-A*
I, 1913, p. 157.
Eeden, Frederik van, "A Study of Dreams," Pro
ceedings of the Society for Psych. Research,
Part LXVII, Vol. XXVI.
Ellis, Havelock, "The Logic of Dreams," Contemp. Rev., 98, 1910, pp. 353-359-
"The
Symbolism
of
Dreams,"
The
Popular
Science Monthly, July, 1910.
"Symbolismen in
den -Traumen," Zeitschr.
f.
Psychotherapie, HI, 1911, pp. 29-46.
The World of Dreams, London, 1911.
"The
Relation of
Erotic
Dreams to
Vesical
Dreams," Journ.
of Abn. Psychol., VIH, 3,
August^September, 1913.
Federn, Paul, "Ein Fall von pavor nocturnus mit
subjektiven
Lichterscheinungen,"
Internat.
Zeitschr. j. arztl. Ps.-A., I, 1913, H. 6.
"Uber zwei typische Traumsensationen," Jahrb.
f. Ps.-A., VI, p. 89.
"Zur Frage
des Hemmungstraumes," Internat.
Zeitschr. f. Ps.-A., VI, p. 73Ferenczi,
S., "Die
psychologische Analyse der
Traume,"
Psychiatrisch-Neurologische
Wochenschrift,
XII.
Nos.
11-13,
June*
1910.
(English
translation:
"The • Psychological
Analysis of Dreams," The American Journal
of Psychology, April, 1910.)
"Symbolische Darstellung des Lust- und Realitatsprinzips im Odipus-Mythos" Imago,
I,
1912, p. 276.
"Uber lenkbare Traume," Zentralbl. f. Ps.-A.,
n, 1911-1912, p. 31.
"Vergessen eines Symptoms und seine Aufklarung im Traume," Internat. Zeitschr. f. Ps.-A.,
II, p. 384.
"Affektvertauschung
im
Traum," . Internat.
Zeitschr. f. Ps.-A., IV, p. 112.
"Traume von Ahnungslosen," Internat. Zeitschr.
f. Ps.-A., TV, p. 208.
"Pollution ohne orgastischen Traum und Orgasmus im Traum
ohne Pollution," Internat.
Zeitschr. f. Ps.-A., TV, p. 187.
Flournoy, "Quelques ReVes au sujet de la signifi
cation symbolique de Feau et du feu," Inter
nat. Zeitschr. f. Ps.-A., VI, p. 328.
Forster, M., "Das lat.-altengl. Traumbuch," Arch,
f. d. Stud. d. n. Spr. u. Lit., Vol. 120, p. 43^;
Vol. 125, pp. 39-70; Vol. 127, p. iff.
"Mittelenglische Traumbucher,"
Herrings Archiv, 1911.
Foucault, Marcel, Le Rive, Etudes et observa
tions,
Bibl.
de
Philosophic
contemporaine.
Paris, 1906.

[399a]
The Interpretation of Dreams
Ertedjung, J.
K., "Traum eines sechsjahrigen
Madchens," Internat. Ztschr. f. arztl. Ps.-A.,
If 9i3, P. 7i.
Frink, H. W., "Dreams and their^Analysisin Refer
ence
to
Psychotherapy,"
Med.
Record, 27
May, 1911.
"On Freud's Theory of Dreams," Americ. Med.,
Burlington, New York, VI, pp. 652-661.
"Dream and Neurosis," Interstate Med. Journ.,
1915Gincburg,
Mira,
"Mitteilung
von
Kindheits
traumen mit spezieller Bedeutung," Int. Ztschr.
f. arztl. Ps.-A., I, 913, p. 79Gottschalk, "Le Reve D'apres les idees du prof.
Freud," Archives de Neurol., 1912, No. 4.
Gregory, J. C, "Dreams asa By-product of Wak
ing Activity," Westm. Rev., London, 1911,
Vol. 175, pp. 561-567.
Harnik, J., "Gelungene Auslegung eines Traumes,"
Zentralbl, f. Ps.-A., II, 1911-1912, p. 417.
Hitschmann, Ed., Freuds Neurosenlehre, Nach
ihrem gegenwdrtigen Stande zusammenfassend
dargestellt, Wien und Leipzig, 1911, 2nd edi
tion, 1913 (chapter 5 "Der Traum") (Eng
lish translation by C. R. Payne, New York,
1912).
"Ein Fall von Symbolik fiir Unglaubige," Zen
tralbl. f. Ps.-A., I, 1910-1911, p. 235.
"Beitrage zur Sexualsymbolik des Traumes,"
Ibid., p. 561.
"Weitere Mitt, von Kindheitstraumen mit spez.
Bedeutung," Intern. Ztschr. fiir arztl. Ps.-A.,
I, 1913, P. 476.
"Goethe als Vatersymbol in Traumen," Ibid.,
No. 6.
"Uber
Traume
Gottfried
Kellers,"
Internat.
Zeitschr. f. Ps.-A., II, p. 41.
"Weitere Mitteilung von Kindheitstraumen mit
spezieller Bedeutung," Internat. Zeitschr. f.
Ps.-A., II, p. 31.
"Uber eine im Traum angekundigte Reminiszenz
an
ein
sexuelles Jugenderlebnis,"
Internal.
Zeitschr. f. Ps.-A., V, p. 265.
Hug-Hellmuth, H. v., "Analyse eines Traumes
eines sVl
jahrigen Knaben," Zentralbl.
f.
Ps.-A., II, 1911-1912, pp. 122-127.
"Kindertraume," Internat. Zeitschr. f. arztl. Ps.-
A., I, 1913, P. 470.
Aus dem Seelenleben des Kindes. Schr. z. angew.
Seelenk.,
ed.
Freud,
No.
15, Vienna
and
Leipzig, 1913.
"Ein Traum, der sich selber deutet," Internat.
Zeitschr. f. Ps.-A., Ill, p. 33.
Jones, Ernest, "On the Nightmare," American
Journ. of Insanity, January, 1910.
"The Oedipus-Complex as an Explanation of
Hamlet's
Mystery:
A
Study
in
Motive,"
American
Journ.
of
Psychology,
January,
1910, pp. 72-113.
"Freud's Theory of Dreams," American Journ.
of Psychology, April, 1910.

[399b]
395
"Remarks
on
Dr.
M.
Prince's
Article:
The
Mechanism and Interpr. of Dreams'," Journ.
of Abn. Psychol., 1910-1911, pp. 328-336.
"Some Instances of the Influence of Dreams on
Waking Life," Journ. of Abn. Psychol., AprilMay, 1911.
"The Relationship between Dreams and Psycho
neurotic Symptoms," American Journ. of In*
sanity, Vol. 68, No. 1, July, 1911.
"A Forgotten Dream," Journ. of Abn. Psychol.,
April-May, 1912.
Papers on Psycho-Analysis, London, 1912.
Der Alptraum m seiner Beziehung zu gewissen
Formen des mittelalterl. Aberglaubens. Schriften zur angew. Seelenk, ed. Freud, No. 14,
Leipzig and Vienna, 1912.
"Die Theorie der Symbolik," Internat, Zeitschr.
f. Ps.-A., V, p. 244.
Jung, C. G., "L'analyse des reves," L'annie Psychologique, Vol. XV.
Assoziation, Traum und hysterisches Symptom.
Diagnostische
Assoziationsstudien.
Beitrage
zur experimentellen Psychopathologie, ed. C.
G. Jung, vol. II, Leipzig, 1910 (No. VIII,
pp. 31-66).
"Ein Beitrag zur Psychologie des Geriichtes,"
Zentralbl. fiir Psychoanalyse., I, 1910, No. 3.
Jung, C. G., "Ein Beitrag zur Kenntnis des Zahlentraumes," ibid. 1910-1911, pp. 567-572.
"Morton Prince's: 'The Mechanism and Inter
pretation of Dreams,' Eine kritische Besprechung,"
Jahrb.
f.
Ps.-A.
u.
psychopathol.
Forsch., Ill, 1911.
Iwaya, S., "Traumdeutung in Japan," Ostasien,
1902, p. 302.
Karpinska, L., "Ein Beitrag zur Analyse sinnloser
Worte im Traume," Internat. Zeitschr, f. Ps.-
A., Ill, p. 164.
Kazodowsky, A., "Zusammenhang von Traumen
und
Wahnvorstellungen,"
Neurolog.
Cbl.,
1901, pp. 440-447, 508-514.
Kostylefe, "Freud et le probleme des reves," Rev.
philos., Vol. 72, July-December, 1911, pp. 491522.
Kraepelin, E., "Uber Sprachstorungen im Trau
me," Psychol. Arbeiten, 5, Leipzig, 1907.
Lauer, Ch., "Das Wesen
des
Traumes in
der
Beurteilung
der
talmudischen und
rabbinischen
Literatur,"
Intern.
Ztschr.
f.
arztl.
Ps.-A., I, -1913, No. 5.
Lehmann,
Aberglaube
und
Zauberei
von
den
dltesten Zeiten bis in die Gegenwart. Deutsch
von Petersen. (2nd enlarged edition.) Stutt
gart, 1908.
Leroy, B., "A propos de quelques reves symboliques," Journ. de psychol. Norm, et pathpl,
5, 1908, pp. 358-365.
and Tobowolska, J., "Mecanisme intellectuel
du reve," Rev. philos., 1901, I, Vol. 51, pp.
570-593.

[400a]
396
Sigmund Freud
Lowinger, Der Traum in der jiidischen Literatur,
Leipzig, 1968. MitteHungen zur jiid. Volkskunde, 10. Jahrg., Nos. 1 and 2.
Maeder,
Alphonse,
"Essai
d'iiiterpretatibn
de
quelques rives," Archives de Psychol., Vol. VI,
No. 24, April, 1907.
"Die
Symbolik
in
den
Legenden,
Marchen,
Gebrauchen
und
Traumen,"
PsychidirischNeurolog. Wochenschr., X. Jahrg., 1968.
"Zur Entstehung der Symbolik im Traum, in
der Dementia praecox, etc." Zentralblatt f.
Ps.-A., I, 1910-1911, pp. 383-389.
"Uber die Funktion des Traumes," Jahrb. f.
psychoanalyt. Forsch., IV, 1912.
"Uber das Traumproblem," Ibid., V,
1913* P»
647.
"Zur Frage der teleologischen Traumfunktion,"
Ibid., p. 453.
Marcinowski,
J.,
"Gezeichnete Traume," Zen
tralbl. f. Ps.-A., II, 1911-1912, pp. 490-518.
"Drei Romane in Zahlen," Ibid., pp. 619-638.
Mitchell, A., About Dreaming, Laughing and
Blushing, London, 1905.,
Miura, K., "Japanische Traumdeuterei," Mitt. d.
::
deutsch. Ges. f. Natur- u, Volkerk Ostasiens,
X, pp. 291-306..
Nacke, P., "Uber sexuelle Traume," H. Gross*
Archiv., 1903, p. 307,
"Der Traum als feinstes Reagens f. d. Akt d.
sexuellen Empfindehs,"Monatsschrift f. Krim.-
Psyckol., 1905.
"Kontrasttraume und spez. sexuelle Kontrast
traume," H. Gross* Archiv, Vol. 24, 1907, pp.
1-19.
"Beitrage zu den sexuellen Traumen," H. Gross?
Archiv., 29, pp.;_ 3*63 ff.
"Die diagnostische und prognostische Brauchbarkeit der sex. Traume," Arztl. Sachv.-Ztg.,
1911, No. 2.
Negelein, J. v., Der Traumschliissel des Yaggaddeva, Giessen, 1912. (Relig. Gesch. Vers., XI,
Vacsantokl, D., "Der Traum als Ursprung von
Wahnideen bei Alkoholdeliranten," Zentralbl.
f. Nervenheiik-, 32.'Jahrg;., 1909, p. 796.
Pear, T. H.,
"The, Analysis of Some Personal
. Dreams, with Special Reference to
Freud's
' Interpretation; Meeting at the British Assoc.
for the advancement of science, Birmingham,
16-17
September,
1913," British Journ.
of.
Pfychol., VI, 3-4j February, 1914.
- i.1,1
Potzl, Otto, "Experimentell erregte Traumbilder
in ihren Beziehungen zum indirekten Sehen,"
Zeitschr. f. d. ges. Neurol, u. Psych., Vol. 37,
' ri9i'7."-':"
;
."""f-:-
Peister, Oskar, "Wahnvorstellung und Scliulersejbstmord. Au,f Grund emer Traiimanalyse
bele^clxt'et," Sdhweiz. BlatterfiirSchulgesundr;
heitspfiege, 1909, No. i.
'
:
'

[400b]
"Kryptblalie, Kryptographie und unbewusstes
Vexierbild bei Normalen;" Jahrb. f. Ps.-A.
Forschg., V, 1, 1913.
Princej Morton, "The Mechanism and Interpret
tation-of Dreams," Journ. of Abn. Psychol.,
October-November, 1910.
. "The Mechanism and Interpretation of Dreams;
a reply to Dr. Jones," Journ. of Abn. Psychol.,
:i9io-i9ii, pp. 337-353. -:
Putnam, J. J., "Aus der Analyse zweier TreppenTraume," Zentralbl. f. Ps.-A., II, 1911-1912J
p. 264.
"Ein charakteristiseher Kindertraum," Ibid., p.
328.
!
"Dream-interpretation and the theory of Psy
cho-analysis," Journ.
of Abn. Psychol., IX,
No, 1, p. 36^
Raalte,
F.
van, "Kinderdroomen,"
Het
Kind,
1912., January.
Rank, Otto, Der Mythus von der Geburt des
Helden. Schr. z. angew. Seelenkunde, No. 5,
Vienna and Leipzig, 1909.
t>
"Beispiel
eines verkappten
Odipus-Traumes,"
Zentralblatt fur Psychoanalyse, I, 1910.
"Zum Thema der Zahnreiztraume," Ibid.
"Das Verlieren als Symptomhandlung, zugleich
ein Beitrag zum Verstandnis der Beziehungen
des Traumlebens zu den FehUeistungen des
Alltagslebens," Ibid.
"Ein Traum, der sich selbst deutet," Jahrbuch
fiir
psychoanalyt.
und
psychopdthol.
Forschungen, Vol. II, 1910.
"Ein Beitrag zum Narzissmus," Ibid., Vol. Ill,
1911.
"Fehlleistung und Traum," Zentralbl. f. Ps.-A.,
II, 1911-1912, p. 266.
"Aktuelle
Sexualregungen
als
Traumanlasse,"
Ibid., pp. 596-602;.
"Die Symbolschichtung im Wecktraum und ihre
Wiederkehr im mythischen Denken,":/afcr&. /.
Ps.-A., IV, 1912.
Das
Inzestmotiv
in
Dichtung
und . Sage,
Qrundzuge einer Psychologie des dichterischen
Schaffens, Vienna and Leipzig, 1912.
"Die Nacktheit in Sage und
Dichtung. Eine
Ps.-A.. Studie," Imago, II, 1912.
"Eine noch nicht beschriebeneForm des Odipus^
Traumes," Intern. Zeitschr. f. arztl. Ps.-A., I,
11913, p. 151.
"Fehlhandlung und Traum," Internat. Zeitschr.
/.>s.-^; HI, p. 158.
"Die Geburtsrettungsphantasie in Trauin und
Dichtung," Internat. Zeitschr. f. Ps.-A.,
II,
.-' \ '
"Ein gedichteter Traum," Internat. Zeitschr. f.
Ps.-A., Ill, p. 231.
;
Rank, O., and Sachs, H., "Die Bedeutung der
Psychoanalyse fiir die Geisteswissenschaften."
Grenzfr.
d.' Nerven- ii.Seelenletiens,
ed.
Lowenfeld, Nov 93, Wiesbaden, 1913.
Reik, Th., "Zwei. Traume Flauberts," Zentralbl.
f. Ps.-A., Ill, 1912-1913, p. 223. ;
;

[401a]
"Kriemhilds Traum," Ibid., II, p. 416.
"Beruf und Traumsymbolik," Ibid., p, 531.
"Der Nacktheitstraum eines Forschungsveisenden," Internat. Zeitschr. f. Ps.-A., II, p. 463.
"Gotthilf Schuberts 'Symbolik des Traumes',"
Internat. Zeitschr. f. Ps.-A,, III, p. 295.
"Volkerpsychologische Parallelen zum Traumsymbol des Mantels," Internat. Zeitschr. f.
Ps.-A., VI, p. 310.
"Zum Thema: Traum und Traumwandeln," In
ternat, Zeitschr. f. Ps.-A., VI, p. 311.
Robitsek, Alfred, "Die
Analyse von Egmonts
Traum," Jahrb fiir psychoanalyt. und psychopathol. Forschungen, Vol. II, 1910.
"Die Stiege, Leiter, als sexuelles Symbol in der
Antike," Zentralbl. f. Ps.-A., I, 1910-1911, p.
586.
"Zur Frage der Symbolik in den Traumen Gesunder," Ibid., II, p. 340.
R6heim, G., "Die Urszene im Traume," Internat.
Zeitschr. f. Ps.-A., VI, p. 337Sachs,
Hanns,
"Zur
Darstellungstechnik des
Traumes," Zentralbl. f. Ps.-A. I, 1910-1911.
"Ein Fall intensiver Traumentstellung," Ibid.,
p. 588.
"Traumdeutung und Menschenkenntnis," Jahrb.
f. Ps.-A., Ill, 1911, p. 568.
"Ein Traum Bismarcks," Intern. Ztschr. f. arztl.
Ps.-A., I, 1913, H. 1.
"Traumdarstellungen analer Weckreize," Ibid.,
p.
489.
"Das Zimmer als Traumdarstellung des Weibes,"
Internat. Zeitschr. f. Ps.-A., II, p. 35.
"Ein absurder Traum," Internat. Zeitschr.
f.
Ps.-A., Ill, p. 35.
Sadger, J., "Uber dass Unbewusste und die
Traume bei Hebbel," Imago, June, 1913.
Schrotter, Karl, "Experimentelle Traume," Zen
tralbl. f. Ps.-A., II, 1912, p. 638.
Schwarz, F., "Traum
u. Traumdeutung nach
'Abdalgani an Nabulusi'," Zeitschr.d. deutsch.
morgenl. Ges., Vol. 67, 1913, No. 3, PP- 473493.
Secker, F., "Chines. Ansichten iiber den Traum,"
Neue
metaph. Rdschr., Vol.
17, 1909-1910,
p. 101.
Silberer, Herbert, "Bericht iiber eine Methode,
gewisse symbolische Halluzinations-erscheinungen hervorzurufen und zu beobachten,"
Jahrb. Vol. I, 1909.
"Phantasie und Mythos," Ibid. Vol. II, 1910.
"Symbolik des Erwachens und Schwellensymbolik iiberh." Ibid., Ill, 1911.
"t)ber die Symbolbildung," Ibid.
"Zur Symbolbildung," Ibid., IV, 1912.
"Spermatozoentr'aume," Ibid.
"Zur Frage der Spermatozoentr'aume," Ibid.
Spielrein, S., "Traum vom 'Pater Freudenreich',"
Intern. Ztschr. f. arztl. Ps.-A., I, 1913, p. 484.

[401b]
The Interpretation oe^Dreams
397
Spitteler, Karl, "Meine friihesten Erlebnisse. ;L
Hilflos und sprachlos. Die Traume des Kindes," Sudd. Monatsh., October, 1913.
.
Starcke, August, "Ein Traum, der das Gegenteil einer Wunscherfiillung zu verwirklichen
;o
sehien, zugleich ein
Beispiel eines Trauines;
der von einem anderen Traum gedeutet wird,"
Zentralbl. f. Ps.-A., II, 1911-1912, p. 86.
"Traumbeispiele," Internat. Zeitschr. f. Ps.-A.,
II, p. 381.
Starcke, Johann, "Neue Traumexperimente in
Zusammenhang
mit
alteren
und
neueren
Traumtheorien," Jahrb. f. Ps.-A., V, 1913, p.
233.
Stegmann, Marg., "Darstellung epileptischer Anfalle im Traume," Intern. Zeitschr. f. arztl.
Ps.-A., I, 1913.
"Ein Vexiertraum," Ibid., p. 486.
Stekel, Wilhelm, "Beitrage zur Traumdeutung,"
Jahrbuch fiir psycho-analytische und psychopatholog. Forschungen, Vol. 1. 1909.
Nervose Angstzustdnde und ihre
Behandlung,
Vienna-Berlin, 1908, 2nd edition, 1912.
Die Sprache des Traumes. Eine Darstellung der
Symbolik und Deutung des Traumes in ihren
Beziehungen zur kranken und gesunden Seele
fiir Artze und Psychologen, Wiesbaden, 1911.
Die Traume der Dichter, Wiesbaden, 1912.
"Ein prophetischer Nummerntraum," Zentralbl.
f. Ps.-A., II, 1911-1912, pp. 128-130.
"Fortschritte der Traumdeutung," Zentralbl. f.
Ps.-A., Ill, 1912-1913, pp. 154, 426.
"Darstellung der Neurose im Traum," Ibid., p.
26.
Swoboda, Hermann, Die Perioden des menschlichen Organismus, Vienna and Leipzig, 1904.
Tausk, V., "Zur Psychologie der Kindersexualitat,"
Intern. Zeitschr. f. arztl. Ps.-A., I, 1913, p.
444.
"Zwei homosexuelle Traume," Internat. Zeitschr.
f. Ps.-A., II, p. 36.
"Ein Zahlentraum," Internat. Zeitschr. f. Ps.-A.,
II, p. 39Tftnkdji, Joseph, Abbe, "Essai sur les songes et
l'art de les interpreter (onirocritie) en Mesopotamie," Anthropos, VIII, 2s. 3d.,
MarchJune, 1913.
Tobowolska, Justine, "Etude sur les illusions de
temps dans les rives du sommeil normal"
These de Paris, 1900.
Vaschide, N. Le Sommeil et les rives, Paris, 1911,
Bibl. de Philos. scient. (66)
(Contains bibli
ography of other titles by the same author on
dreams and sleep).
and Pieron. La psychol. du rive au point de vue
midical, Paris. 1902.
Vold, J. Mourly, Uber den Traum, Experimentell-psychologische
Untersuchungen,
ed.
O.
Klemm, Vol. I, Leipzig, 1910; Vol. II, 1912.
Weiss, Edoardo, "Totemmaterial im Traume," In
ternat. Zeitschr. f. Ps.-A. II, p. 159.

[402a]
398
Siomund Freud

[402b]
Weiss,
Karl, "Ein
Pollutionstraum," Internat.
Winterstein, Aler. v., "Zum Thema: 'Lenkbare
Zeitschr. f. Ps.-A., VI, p. 343.
Traume'," Zentralbl. f. Ps.-A., II, 1911-1912,
Weygandt, W., "Beitr. z. Psychologie des Traup> 2gQm
mes," Philos. Studien, Vol. 20, 1902, pp. 456-
„T
^
-:._.
.
'
4
„
.g6
Wulef, M., "Ein mteressanter Zusammenhang
WiggAm, A., "A Contribution to the Data of
von Traum, Symbolhandlung und KrankheitsDream Psychology," Pedagogical Seminary,
symptom," Internat. Ztschr. f. arztl. Ps.-A.,
June, 1909.
I> I9i3> No. 6.

[403a]
On Narcissism: an Introduction1
r The word narcissism is taken from clinical
j terminology and was chosen by P. Nacke2 in
j 1899 to denote the attitude of a person who
: treats his own body in the same way as other-
; wise the body of a sexual object is treated;
j that isto say, he experiences sexual pleasure in
;; gazing at, caressing and fondling his body, till
complete gratification ensues upontheseactivi-
. ties. Developed to this degree, narcissism has
the significance of a perversion, which has ab
sorbed the whole sexual life of the subject;
consequently, in dealing with it we may expect
;to meet with phenomena similar to those,for
Iwhich we look in the study of all perversions.
Now those engaged in psycho-analytic ob
servation were struck by the fact that isolated
features of the narcissistic attitude are found
in many peoplewhoare characterized by other
aberrations—for instance, as Sadger states, in
homosexuals—and at last it seemed that a dis
position of the libido which must be described
as narcissistic might have to be reckoned with
in a much wider field, and that it might claim
a place in the regular sexual development of
human beings:3 Difficulties in psycho-analytic
work upon neurotics led to the same supposk
tion, for it seemed as though this kind of nar
cissistic attitude in them was one of the factors
hmiting their susceptibility to influence. Nar
cissism in this sense would not be a perversion,
but the libidinal complement to the egoism of
the instinct of self-preservation, a measure of
which may justifiably be attributed to every
living creature.
A pressing motive for occupying ourselves
with the conception of a primary and normal
narcissism arose when the attempt was made
to bring our knowledge of dementia praecox
(Kraepelin), or schizophrenia (Bleuler), into
line with the hypothesis upon which the libidotheory is based. Snch patients, whom I propose
to term paraphrenics, display two fundamental
characteristics: they suffer from megalomania
and they have withdrawn their interest from
1 First
published in Jakrbuck, Vol. VI, 1914;
re
printed in Sammlung, 4th Series.
*[In a later paper Professor Freud has corrected
this slip and added the name of Havelock Ellis.—Ed.]
8 Otto Rank, Ein Beitrag zum Narzissmus.

[403b]
the external world (people and things). In con
sequence of this latter changein them, they are
inaccessible to the influence of psycho-analysis
and cannot be cured by our endeavours. But
this turning awayof the paraphrenic from, the
outer world needs to be more precisely charac
terized. A patient suffering from hysteria or
obsessional neurosis has also, as far as the in
fluence of his illness goes,,abandoned his rela
tion to reality. But analysis shows that he has
by no means broken off his erotic relations to
persons and things. He still retains them in
phantasy; i.e., he has, on the one hand, sub
stituted for actual objects imaginary objects
founded on memories, or has blended the two;
while, on the other hand, he has ceased to di
rect his motor activities to the attainment of
his aims in connection with real objects. It is
only to this condition of the libido that we may
legitimately apply the term introversion of the
libido which is used by Jung indiscriminately.
It is otherwise with the paraphrenic. He seems
really to have withdrawn his libido from per
sons and things in the outer world, without re
placing them by others in his phantasy. When
this, does happen, the process seems to be a
secondary one, part of an effort towards re
covery, designed to lead the libido back to
wards an object.4.
The question arises: What is the fate pf the
libido when withdrawn from external objects
in schizophrenia? The megalomania character
istic of these conditions affords a clue here. It
has doubtless come into being at the expense
of the object-libido. The Hbido withdrawn fronf^T
the outer world has been directed on to the
•
ego, giving rise to a state which we may calLf
narcissism. But the megalomania itself is no
new phenomenon; on the contrary, it is, as we
know, an exaggeration and plainer manifesta
tion of a condition which had already existed
previously. This leadsus to the conclusion that
the narcissism which arises when libidinal ca
thexes are called in away from external objects
must be conceived of as a secondary form,
* Compare with these propositions my discussion of
the end of the world in the analysis of Senatsprasident
Schreber, Collected
Papers, m,
"Psycho-Analytic
Notes upon an Autobiographical Account of a Case of
Paranoia (Dementia Paranoides)." Also Abraham, Die
psychosexuellen Differenzen der Hysteric und der De
mentia Praecox.

[404a]
4oo
Sigmund Freud
superimposed upon a primary one that is ob
scured by manifold influences.
Let me expressly state that I am not attempt
ing here to explain or penetrate further into
the problem of schizophrenia, but am merely
putting together what has been said elsewhere,
in order that I may justify this introduction of
the concept of narcissism.
This development of the libido-theory—in
my opinion, a legitimatedevelopment—receives
reinforcement from a third quarter, namely,
from the observations wemake aridthe (concep
tions;we form of the mental life of primitive
peoples and of children. In the former, we find
characteristics which, if the;y occurred singly,
might be put down to megalomania: an overestimation of the power of wishes and mental
processes, the omnipotence of thoughts, a be
lief in the magical virtue of words, and a
method of dealing with the outer world—the
art of magic—which appears to be a logical ap
plication of these grandiose premises.1 In the
child of our own day, whose development is
much more obscure to us, we expect a perfectly
analogous attitude towards the external world.2
Thusweform a conception of an original libidi
nal cathexis of the ego, part of which cathexis
is later yielded up to objects, but Which funda
mentally persists and is related to the objectcathexes much as the body of a protoplasmic
anirnalcule Is related to thepseudoptodla which
it puts out. In our researches, taking, as they
did, neurotic symptoms for their starting point,
this part of the disposition of the libido neces
sarily remained hidden from us at the outset.
We were struck only by the emanations from
this libido—the object-cathexes, which can be
put forth and drawn back again. We perceive
also, broadly speaking, a certain reciprocity be
tween ego-libido and object-libido. The more
that is absorbed by the one,the more impover
ished does the other become. The highest form
of development of which object-libido is capa
ble is seen in the state of being in love, when
the subject seems to yield up his whole perr
SOiiaiity in iavor qf ob}ect-cathexis; while We
have the opposite' coniditlon in the paranoiac's
phantasy (or self-perception) of the eiidfbf
the world.9 Finally, with reference to the dif
ferentiation of the energies operating r8l the
1 Cf. the corresponding sections on this subject in
my Totem and Taboo, (19x3.)
;2Cf. Ferenczi, Stages in the Development of the
Sense of Reality;
3There iare two mechanisms in -this end of the
world idea: in one case, the whole libidinal cathexis is
drained off to the loved object, while, in the other,.it
all flows back to the ego.

[404b]
mind, we infer that at first in the narcissistic
state they existsideby sideand that our analy
sis is not a fine enough instrument to distin
guish themyonly where there is bbject-cathexis
is it possible to discriminate a sexual energy—
the libido—from an energy pertaining to the
ego-instincts.
Before going any further, I must touch on
two questions which lead us to the heart of
the difficulties of our subject.In the first place:
what is the relation of the narcissism of which
We are now speaking to auto-erotism, which
we have describedas an early state of the libi
do? And secondly: if we concede to the ego a
primary cathexis of libido,-why is there any
necessity for further distinguishing a sexual
libido from a non-sexual energy pertaining to
the ego-anstincts? Would not the assumption of
a uniform mental energy save us all the diffi
culties of differentiating the energy of the egoinstincts from ego-libido, and ego-libido from
object-libido? On the first point I would com
ment as follows: it is impossible to suppose
that a unity comparable to the ego can existin
the individual from the very start; the egohas
to develop. But the
auto-erotic instincts are
primordial; so there must be somethingadded
to auto-erotism—some new operation in the
mind—rin order that narcissismmay come into
being.
To be required to give a definite answer to
the second question must occasion perceptible
uneasiness in every psycho-analyst. OneJdis
likes the thought of abandoning observation for
barren theoretical discussions, but all the same
we must not.shirk an attempt at explanation.
Conceptions such as that of an ego-libido; an
energy pertaining to the ego-instincts, and s6
on, are certainly neither very easy to grasp nor
is their content sufficiently rich; a speculative
theory of theserelations of which we are speakr
ing would,in the first place, require as its basis
a sharply defined concept. But J am off=the
opinion that that is just the difference between
a speculativetheory and a science foundedupon
constructions arrived; at empirically. The latter
will not begrudge to speculationfits-privilege of
a smooth, logically unassailable' structure, but
will itself j be gladly content with nebulous,
scarcely imaginable conceptions,, whichit hopes
to apprehend more clearly in the course of its
development, or which it is even prepared to
replace by others. For these ideas are not the
basis of the science upon which everything
restsv that| on the contrary, is observation
alone.'They arenot the; jfbiopda

[405a]
On Narcissism
401
the copingof the Whole:structure, and they can
be replaced and discarded without damaging it.
The same-thing is happening in our day in the
science of .physics, the fundamental notions of
which as regards matter, centres of force, at
traction, etc., are scarcely less debatable than
the corresponding ideas in psychoanalysis.^
The value of the: concepts ego-libido and
object4ibido is that they are derived from the
study of the; essential characteristics of. neu
rotic and psychotic processes^ The differentia?
tion of the libido into that which is-proper to
the ego and that which attaches itself taobr
jects is a necessary extension* of an original
hypothesis which discriminated between ego-in
stincts and ;sexual instincts. At any rate, anaryi
sis of the pure transference neuroses,(hysteria
and the obsessional neurosis) compelled me> so
to discriminate, and I only know that all at
tempts to account for these phenomena by
other means have been completely unsuccessful.
In the complete absence of any theory of the
instincts which would help us to find our bear
ings, we may be permitted, or rather, it is.in*,
cumbent upon us, in the first place to work out
any hypothesis to its logical conclusion, until
it either fails or becomes confirmed. There aire
various points in favour of the hypothesis of a
primordial* differentiation between sexual in
stincts and other instincts, ego-instincts, toesides the usefulness' of such an assumption in
the analysis of the transference neuroses. I acU
mit that this latter consideration alone would
not be decisive* for it might be a question of
an indifferent energy operating in the mind
which was converted into libido only by-the
act of object-cathexis. But, in the first place*
this differentiation of Concepts corresponds to
the distinction between hunger and: love, so
widely current. And, in the second place, there
are biological considerations in its favour; The
individual does actually carry on a double ex
istence: one designed to serve his own pur
poses and another as a link in a chain, in which
he serves against, or atanyrate without, any
volition of his Own. The individual himself re
gards sexuality as one of his own ends; while
from another point of view he is only an ap
pendage to his germ-plasm, to which he lends
his energies, taking in return his toll of pleasure
—the mortal vehicle of a (possibly) immortal,
substance—like the inheritor of
an
entaile
property Who is only the temporary holder of
an estate which survives him; The differentia
tion of the sexual instincts from the egostihcts would simply Reflect this dbuble func

[405b]
tion of the individual. Thirdly, we must recollect
that all our provisional ideas in psychology will
some day be based on an organic substructure.
This makes it probable that special substances
and special chemical processes control the op
eration of sexuality and provide-for the con<-
tinuation of the individual life in"1that of the
species. We take this probability into account
when we substitute special forces in the mind
for special' chemical substances.
•'.' Just-because I try in general to keep apart
from psychology everything that is not 'strictly
within its sco£e, even biological thought, I
wish at this point expressly to admit that the
hypothesis of separate ego-instincts and sexual
instincts (that is to say, the libido-theory) rests
scarcelyiat all upon a psychological basis* but
is essentially supported upon the facts of bi*
ology. So I shall also be consistent enough to
drop this hypothesis if psycho-analytic work
itself should suggest as more valuable another
hypothesis about the
instincts. So far,
this
has not happened. It may then be that—when
we penetrate deepest and furthest—sexual en
ergy,; the libido, will be found to be only the
product of a differentiation in the energy at
work generally in the mind. But such a state
ment is of no importance. It has reference to
matters so remote from the problems of our
observation and so emptyof available knowl
edge, that to dispute it is asidle as to affirm
it; it is possible that this primordial identity
has as little to do with our analytical Interests
as the primordial kinship of all human races
has to do with the proof of kinship with a
testator required by the Probate Court All
these speculations lead nowhere; since we"car*-
not wait for another science to present us with
a theory of the> instincts ready-made, it is far
more to the purpose that we should try to see
what light may be thrown upon •this basic
problem of biology by a synthesis of'psychoslogicalphenomena. Let usjfriullyiaware of the
possibility of errbrj^btif^do not let w^ de
terred from car^ymg to its logical conclusion
the hypothesiswe first adopted of an-antithes:
between/ego-instincts and sexual instincts (an\
hypothesis to which we were impelled by analysisPof the transference neuroses), and so from
seeing whether ititurns out to be consistent
and fruitful, and whether it may be applied tb
other affections also, e.g., to schizophreniai.
iOf course, it would be a very different matter
if it were proved that the libido-theory had al
ready come to grief in the attempt to explain
the last-named disease. That this is so has been

[406a]
402
Sigmund Freud
maintained by C. G. Jung,1and so I have been
obliged to enter upon this last disquisition,
which I would gladly have been spared. I should
have preferred, without any discussion-of the
premises, to follow out the course embarked
upon in the analysis of the Schreber case. But
Jung's assertion is, to say the least of it, pre
mature. The grounds he gives for it are scanty.
At the outset, he quotes me as saying that I
myself have been obliged, owing to the,difficul
ties of the Schreber analysis, to extend the
conception of the libido, i.e., to give up its
sexual content and to identify libido with psychic interest in general. Ferenczi, in an exhaus
tive criticism of Jung's work, has already said
all that is necessary in correction of this errone
ous interpretation.21 can only corroborate this
critic and repeat that I have never thus re
tracted the libido-theory. Another argument bf
Jung's, namely, that we must not assume that
the loss of the normal function of appreciating
reality can be brought about only by the with
drawal of the libido, is no argument but a
dictum. It begs the question, it anticipates the
decision, and waives discussion; for whether
and how this is possible is just what has to be
investigated. In his next large work,8 Jung just
misses the solution which I had long since in
dicated.: "At the same time there is this to be
taken
into
consideration, a
point to
which
Freud refers in his work on the Schreber case*
that the introversion of the libido sexualis leads
to a cathexis of the ego and that possibly it is
this that produces the effect of a loss of reality.
It is indeed a tempting possibility to explain
the psychology of the loss of reality in this
fashion." But Jung discusses this possibility
very little further. A few pages later, he dis
misses it with the remark that from this condi
tioning factor
"would result, not dementia
praecox, but the psychology of an ascetic an
chorite." How little this inept comparison can
help us to a conclusion may be learnt from the
reflection that an anchorite who "tries to erase
every trace of sexual interest" (but only in the
popular sense of the word sexual) does not
even necessarily display any pathogenic dispo
sition of the libido. He may have turned away
his interest from human beings entirely, and
yet may have sublimated it to a heightened
interest in the divine, in nature, or in the ani
mal kingdom, without his libido having under
1 Wandlungen und Symbole der Libido.
2 Zeitschrift, Vol.. I, 1913.
8 Versuch einer Darstellung der psychoanalytischen
Theorie.

[406b]
gone introversion to his phantasies or retro*
gression to his ego. This comparison would
seem to rule out in advance the possibility of
differentiating between interest emanating from
erotic or that from other sources. Further,
when we remember that the researches of the
Swiss school, however meritorious, have eluci
dated only two features in the picture of de
mentia praecox—the existence of complexes
common to healthy and neurotic persons alike,
and the similarity of the phantasy-formations
of that disease to popular myths—but have not
been able to throw any further light on the
pathogenic
mechanism,
we
may
repudiate
Jung's
assertion
that
the
libido-theory has
broken down in the attempt to understand de
mentia praecox, and is therefore rendered in
valid for the other neuroses also.
II
It seems to me that certain peculiar difficul
ties lie in the way of a direct study of narcis
sism. Our chief means of access to an under
standing of this condition will probably remain
the analysis of paraphrenics. As the transfer^
ence neuroses have enabled us to trace the
libidinal instinctual impulses, so dementia prae
cox and paranoia will give us insight into the
psychology of the ego. Once more, in order to
arrive at what is normal and apparently so
simple, we shall have to study the pathological
with its distortions and exaggerations. At the
same time, there are other sources from which
We may derive a knowledge of narcissism, Which
I Will now mention in their order—namely, the
study of organic disease, of hypochondria, and
pf love-between the sexes.
In estimating the influence of organic dist
ease upon the distribution of the libido, I
follow a suggestion of S. Ferenczi's, which he
made to me in conversation. It is universally
known, and seems to us a matter of course}
that a person suffering organic pain and dis-f
comfort relinquishes his interest in the things,
of the outside world, in so far as they do not
concern his suffering. Closer observation teaches
us that at the same time he withdraws libidinal
interest from his love-objects: so long as he
suffers, he ceases to love. The banality of this
fact is no reason why we should be deterred
from translating it into terms of the libido-,
theory. We should then say:
the sick man
Withdraws his libidinal cathexes back upon his
own ego, and sends them forth again when he
recovers. "Concentrated is his soul," says W.
Busch, of the poet sufferingfrom toothache, "in

[407a]
On Narcissism
403.
his jaw-tooth's aching hole." Here libido and
ego-interest sharethe same fate and have once
more becomeindistinguishablefrom each other.
The familiar egoism of the sick.person, covers
them both. We find it so natural because we
are certain that in the same situation we should
behave in just the same way. The way in
which the readiness to love, however great, is
banished by bodily ailments, and suddenly re
placed by complete indifference, is a theme
which has been sufficiently exploited by comic
writers.
The condition of sleep, like illness,implies a
narcissistic withdrawal of the libido away from
its attachments back to the subject's own per
son, or more precisely, to the single desire for
sleep. The egoism of dreams fits in very well in
this connection. In both states we have, if
nothing else, examples of changes in the dis
tribution of the libido which are consequent
upon a change in the ego.
Hypochondria, like organic disease, mani
fests itself in distressing and painful bodily
sensations and also concurs with organic dis
ease in its effect, upon the distribution of the
Hbido. The hypochondriac withdraws both in
terest and libido—^the latter speciallymarkedly
—from the objects of the outer world and
concentrates both upon the organ which en
gages his attention. A difference between hypo
chondria and organic disease nowbecomes evi
dent: in the latter, the distressing sensations
are based upon demonstrable organic changes;
in the former, this is not so. But it would be
entirely in keeping withour general conception
of the processes of neurosis if we decided to
say that hypochondria must be right; organic
changes cannot be, absent in it either. Now in
what could such changes consist?
Here we may fall back upon our experience,
which shows that bodily sensations of a painful
nature, comparable to those of hypochondria,
are not lacking in the other neuroses. I have
said once before that I am inclined to class
hypochondria with neurasthenia and anxietyneurosis as a third actual neurosis. Probably it
would not be going too far to put it in this
way: that in the other neuroses too there is
regularly presentsome small admixture of hy
pochondria. Perhaps wehave the best example
of this in the anxiety-neurosis and in the hys
teria superimposed upon it. Now the familiar
prototype of an organ sensitive to pain, in some
way changed and yet not diseased in the ordi
nary sense, is that of the genital organ in a
state of excitation. It becomes congested with

[407b]
blood, swollen, moist, and is the seat of mani
fold sensations. If we apply to that activity of
a given bodily area which consists in convey
ing sexually exciting stimuli to the mind the
term erotogenicity, and if we reflect that the
conclusions of our theory of sexuality have
long accustomed us to the notion that certain
other areas of the body—the erotogenic zones
—may act as substitutes for the genitals and
behave analogously to them, we then have only
one step further to venture here. We can make
up our minds to regard erotogenicity as a
property common to all organs and are then
justified in speaking of an increase or decrease
in the degree of it in any given part of the
body. It is possible that for every such change
in the erotogenicity of the organs there is a
parallel change in the libidinal cathexis in the
ego. In such factors may lie the explanation of
what is at the bottom of hypochondria and
what it is that can have upon the distribution
of the hbido the same effect as actual organic
disease.
•
We see that, if we follow out this line of
thought, we encounter the problemnot only of
hypochondria, but of the other actual neu
roses—neurasthenia, and anxiety-neurosis. Let
us therefore stop at this point. It is not within
the scope of a purely psychological inquiry to
penetrateso far behind the frontiers of physio
logical research. Let us only mentionthat from
this point of view we may surmise that the
relation of hypochondria to paraphrenia is
similar to that pf the other actual neuroses to
hysteria and the obsessional neurosis: which is
as much as to say that it is dependent on the
ego-libido as the others are on the objectlibido, and that hypochondriacal anxiety, ema
nating from the ego-libido, is the counterpart
to neurotic anxiety. Further: since we are al
ready familiar with the idea that the mecha
nism of disease and symptom-formation in the
transference neuroses, the passage from intro
version to regression, is to be connected with
a damming-up of the object-libido,1 we may
come to closer quarters with the conception of
a damming-up of the ego-libido also and may
bring this conception into relation with the
phenomena of hypochondria and paraphrenia.
Of course, curiosity will here suggest the
question why such a damming-up of libido in
the ego should be experienced as "painful."
There I shall content myself with the answer
that pain is in general the expression of in-
*Cf. Types
of
Neurotic Nosogenesis,
Collected
Papers, Vol. II.

[408a]
404
SlGMUND FREUD
creasedtension, and thus a: quantity of the ma
terial event is, here as elsewhere, transformed
into the quality of "pain" in the mind; never
theless, it may be hot the absolute amount of
the physical process which is decisive for the
developmentof painy, but rather a certain func
tion of this absolute amount; At this point we
may even venture to touch on the question:
whence does that necessity arise that urges our
mental life to pass on beyond the limits of
narcissism and to-attach the libido to objects?
The answer which-would follow from our line
of thought would once more be that we are so
impelled when the cathexis of the ego)With,
libido exceeds a certain degree. A strongrego-;
ism is a protection against disease, but, in the1
last resort, we must begin to love in order that
we may not fall ill, and must fall ill if, in con
sequence of frustration, we cannot love. Some-?
what after this fashion does Heine conceive-of
the psychogenesis of the Creation:
^
Krankheit ist wohl der letzte Grund
.
Des ganzen Schopferdrangs gewesen;
Erschaffend konnte ich genesen,
.. .. '
Erschaffend, wurde ich gesundy
We have recognized our mental apparatus
above,all as a device for mastering excitations
which would otherwise he felt as unpleasant or
would have pathogenic effects. The "working;,
oyer" of stimuli in.the mind accompiishes won
ders for the internal discharge of\excitations
which are incapable of direct discharge out
wards, oriqr which such a discharge is, for the'
moment, undesirable. Now it is in the first in-'
stance a matter of^mdifference whether the ofc
ects of this internal process of "wQrking-oyer',
,re real or imaginary. The difference' does not
pear till,later, when the turning pf-the libido
(wards unreal objects .(intrqyerVionj' has-led
a..,jd*amni^
megfalpmania of paraprire£ics'.'permits a similar internal, wbrkingovfer oiXhe ^ido which has returned to the
ego to,be made; perhaps it Is only when this
process .fails thatthe; damming-up of=;the libido
in the ego, becomes; pathogenic and starts the
process of.recovery which impresses us as feeihg.(fie disease.itself.r
VI shall try here to penetrate a littje further
jntQjthe!'^
to put
iojgether those-conceptionstwhiqh;today seem
fcq me.worthy: of cpnsideratipn.^Thedifi^ence
"*Ji Disease atbottombroughtdb'out:'
;
, .,. Creative.urgence—for^ creating,
' ' Isodn couid'fieVthe pa^iH abating,
Creating, I could work it out.
-*-'•'
:'^

[408b]
between paraphrenic affections and the trans-"
ference neuroses appears to me to lie in the cir
cumstancethat, in theformer, the libido that is:
liberatedby frustration does not remain attached
to objects in phantasy, but'returns to the ego;
the megalomania then represents the mastery
of this volume, of libido• and thus corresponds
With the introversion on to the phantasy-cre*
ations that is found in the transference neu
roses; the hypochondria ofrparaphrenia, which
is homologous to the anxiety of the transfer
ence neuroses, arises from a failure of this ef
fort in the mental apparatus. We know, that
the anxiety of the neuroses can be relieved by
further mental "working-over," e.g^, by con
version, reaction-fbrmation or defence-forma
tion (phobia): The corresponding process in
paraphrenics is the effort towards recovery, 'tor
which the striking phenomena of the disease
are due. Since frequently,.if not usually, an
only partial detachment of the libido from ob
jects accompaniesparaphrenia, we can distin
guish "in the clinical picture three groups of
phenomena: (i) those representing such re
mains as there may be of a normal state or of
neurosis (phenomena of. a residual nature);
(2) those representing the morbid process (the
detachment of the libido, from its objects and,
further, megalomania, hypochondria, affective
disturbance, andeverykindof regression); (3)
those representing an attempt at recovery. In
(3) the libido is once more attached to objects,
after the manner of an hysteria (in dementia
praecox or paraphrenia proper), or of an ob
sessional neurosis (in paranoia). This fresh
libidinal cathexis takes place from
another
level and underU)ther conditions than the pri
mary one. The difference between the transfer?
ence neurosis arising in~this way and ;ther
corresponding^formations iwhere the ego is
normal would afford us the deepest insight into
the structure of our mental apparatus.
:-h.
A third Way in which we may study narcisisism is by observing the behaviour of human
beings in love, with its manifold differentiations
in man and woman. In much the same way as
the object-libido at first concealed from us.the
ego-libidOj so in considering the object-choice
ofi'the child (and the ;adolescent) weifirst
noticed that the sources from which he takes
his^sexual objects at&his experiences of gratifb
cation. The first autb-erotie sexual gratifications
are experienced in connection with vital funetibns in the service' bf^self-preservatioh. The
sexual: instincts are^at "= the-outset supported
upon the ego-mstinct&;:ottly-later do they be-*

[409a]
On Narcissism:
405
come independent of these,,and even then we
have an-indication of that original dependence
in the fact that those persons who have to do
with the feeding, care, and protection of the
child become his earliest (sexual objects: that
is to say^in the first instance the mother* or
her substitute..Side by side With this type arid
source of object-choice, which may be called
the anaclitic type* a>secpndtype* the)existence
of which we had: not; suspected, has been re^
vealed by psycho-analytic investigation. We
have found, especially in persons whose libid
inal development, has suffered some disturb
ance, as in perverts and homosexuals, that in
the choice of their love-object they have taken
as their model not the mother but their own
selves. They are plainly seeking themselves as
a love-object and their type of objed>ehoiee
may be termed narcissistic. This observation
provides us with.our.strongest motive for re
garding the hypothesis of narcissism as a nec
essary one.
Now this does not mean that human beings
are to be divided into two sharply differentiated
groups, according as their object-choice con
forms to the anaclitic of to the narcissistic
type; we rather assume that both kinds of
object-choice are open to each individual;
though he may show a preference for one or
the other. We say that the human being has
originally two sexual objects: himself and the
Woman who tends him, and thereby we postu
late a primary narcissism in everyone, which
may in the long run manifest itself as domi
nating his object-choice.
Further, the comparison of man and woman
shows that there are fundamental differences
between the twb in respect of the type of
object-choice, although these differences are,
of course, not universal. Complete object-love
bf the anaclitic type is, properly speaking,
characteristic
of
the
man. It
displays the
marked sexual over-estimation which is doubt
less derived from the original harcissism of
the child, now transferred to the sexual object.
This sexual over-estimation is the origin of the
peculiar state of beingin love,a state suggestive
of a neurotic compulsion, which is thus traceable to an impoverishment of the ego in respect
of libido in favour of the love-object. A differ
ent course is followed in the type most fre
quently met with in women, which is probably
the purest and truest feminine type. With the
development of puberty, the maturing of the
female sexual organs, which up till then have
been in^ a condition of latency, seems tb

[409b]
bring about an intensification of- the original
narcissism, and this is unfavourable; to the
development of a true object-love with its ac
companyingsexualover-estimation; there arises
in.the woman a certain self-sufficiency '(espe
cially when there is a ripeningr1 into, beauty)
which comjpensates^her for the <social restric
tions upon-hertobject-choice. Strictly speaking,
such women] love; only themselvesuwithi an in
tensity comparable to that of the man's 1love
for them. Nor does their need lie in the direc
tion of loving, but of being loved; and that
man finds favour with them who fulfils this
condition. The importance
of this type of
woman for the -erotic life of mankind must
be recognized as very great. Such women have
the .greatest fascination for men, not only for
aesthetic reasons, since as a rule they are the
most beautiful, but also because of certain in
teresting psychological constellations^ It seems
very evident that one person's narcissism has
a great attraction for those others who have
renounced part of their.own narcissism and are
seeking after object-love; the charm of a child
lies to a great extent in his narcissism, his selfsufficiency and inaccessibility, just as does the
charm of certain animals which seem not to
concern themselves about us, such as cats and
the large, beasts of prey. In literature, indeed,
even the great criminal and the humorist
compel our interest by the narcissistic selfimportance with which they manage to keep
at arm's length everything which would di
mmish the importance of their ego. It is as if .
we envied them their power 01 retaining a
blissful state of mind—an unassailable libidoposition which we ourselves have since aban
doned. The great charm of the narcissistic
woman has, however, its reverse side; a large
part of the dissatisfaction of the lover, of his
doubts of the woman's love, of his complaints
of her enigmatic nature, have their root in this
incongruity betweenthe types of object-choice.
Perhaps it is not superfluous to give an
assurance that, in this description of the fem
inine
form
of erotic life,
no
tendency to
depreciate woman has any part. Apart from
the fact that tendentiousness is alien to me, I
also know that these different lines of develop*
ment correspond to the differentiation of
functions in a highly complicated biological
connection; further, I am ready to admit that
there are countless women who love according
to the masculine type and who develop the
over-estimation of the sexual object so char
acteristic of that type.

[410a]
4o6
SlGMUND FREUfi
: Even for women whose attitude towards the
man remains cool and narcissistic, there is a
way which leads'to complete object-love. In
the child to whom they give birth, a part of
their own body comes torthem as an object
other than themselves, upon which they, can
lavish out of-their narcissism complete objectlove. Other women again do not^ed to wait
for a childin order totakeithe stepin develop^
ment: from (secondary) narcissism to object*
love. Before puberty, they have had feelings of
a likeness to men and have developed to some
extent on masculine lines; after this tendency
has been cut short when feminine maturity is
reached, they still retain the capacity of long
ing for a masculine ideal which is really a
survival of the boyish nature that they them
selves once owned. .
We may conclude these suggestions with a
short survey of the paths leading to objectchoice.
. '"'i
A person may love:
(i) According to the narcissistic type:
(a) What heishimself (actually himself),
"(b) What he once was,
(c) What he would like to be,
(d) Someone who was once part of him
self;
(2) According to the anaclitic type:
(a) The woman who tends,
(b) The man who protects;
and those substitutes which succeed them one
after another. The justification for inserting
"case .(c) of "the first type has yet to be demon
strated later on in our discussion.
The significance of narcissistic object-choice
for homosexuality in men must be appraised in
another connection.
The primary narcissism of the child assumed
by us, which forms one of the hypotheses in
our theories of the libido, is less easy to grasp
by direct observation than to confirm by de
duction from another consideration. If we look
at the attitude of fond parents towards their
children, we cannot but perceive it as a revival
and reproduction
of their
own, long since
abandoned narcissism. Their; feeling, as is'.wellknown, is characterized by over-estimation,
that sure indication of a narcissistic feature in
object-choice which we have already appreci
ated. Thus they are impelled to ascribe to the
child all manner of perfections-which sober
observation would not confirm, to gloss over
and forget all his shortcomings—& tendency
with which, indeed, the denial of childish sex

[410b]
uality is connected. Moreover, they are inclined
to suspend in the child's favour the operation
of all those cultural acquirements which their
own narcissism has been forced to:respect, and
to renew in his person the claims for privileges
which were long ago given up by themselves;
The child shall have things better than his
parents; he shaH-riot be subject;,to the neces
sities which theyhave recognized asdominating
life. Illness, death, renunciation of enjoyment,
restrictions on his own will, are not to touch
him; the laws of nature, like those of society,
are to be abrogated in his favour; he is really
to be the centre and heart of creation, "His
Majesty the Baby," as once:We fancied our
selves to be. He is to fulfil those dreams and
wishes of his parents which they never carried
out, to become a great man and a hero in his
father's stead, or to marrya prince as a tardy
compensation to the mother. ^At the weakest
point of all in the narcissistic position, the im*
mortality of the ego, which is so relentlessly
assailed by reality, security is achieved by
fleeing to the child. Parental love, which is so
touching and at bottom so childish, is nothing
but parental narcissism born again and, trans
formed though it be into object-love, it reveals
its former character infallibly.
Ill
The disturbances to which the original nar
cissism of the child is exposed, the reactions
with which he seeks to protect himself from
them, the paths into which he is thereby forced
—these are themes which I shall leave on one
side, as an important field for work which still
awaitsexploration; the mostimportant of these
matters, however, can be isolated from the
rest, and, asthe castration complex (in the boy,
anxiety concerning the penis; in the girl, envy
of the penis), be treated in connection with
the, effect of early sexual intimidation. Elsei
where, psycho-analytic research leads us to
vicissitudes undergone by the libidinal instincts
in which they are isojatedfrom, and in opposi
tion to, the ego-instincts; but*where the castra
tion complex is in question, our researches
permit us to infer the existence of an epoch
and a mental state in which the two groups of
instincts are acting in harmony with each;pther|
inseparably blent, as narcissistic interests^ It is
from this state of things that A. Adler has
derived his conception of the masculine protest,
which he has exalted almost to the position of
the sole motive power concerned in the format

[411a]
tion of neurosis and also of character, and
which he conceives of as having its origin, not
in a narcissistic, and
therefore still libidinal,
trend, but in a social valuation. Psycho-analytic
research has, from the very beginning, recog
nized the
existence and significance of the
masculine protest, but has always regarded it,
in opposition to Adler, as narcissistic, in nature
and derived from the castration complex. It
appertains to the formation of character, into
the genesis of which it enters along with many
other factors, and it is completely inadequate
to explain the problems of the neuroses, in
which Adler will take account of nothing but
the manner in which they serve the interests
of the ego. I find it quite impossible to base
the genesis of neurosis upon so narrow a foun
dation
as
the
castration
complex,
however
pre-eminent a part this
may play
in men
amongst the resistances to the cure of a neu
rosis. Lastly, I know also of cases of neurosis
in which the masculine protest, or in our sense
the castration, complex,
plays no pathogenic
part, or does not appear at all.
Observation of
normal
adults
shows that
their former megalomania has been subdued
and that the mental characteristics from which
we inferred their infantile narcissism have van
ished. What has become of their .ego-libido?
Are we to assume that the whole of it has
passed
over
into
object-cathexes?
Such
a
possibility is plainly contrary to the
whole
trend of our argument; but in the psychology
of repression we may find a clue to another
answer to the question.
We have learnt that libidinal impulses are
fated to undergo pathogenic repression if they
come into conflict with the subject's cultural
and ethical ideas. By
this we do not ever
mean: if the individual in question has a merely
intellectual knowledge of the existence of these
ideas; we always mean: if he recognizes them
as constituting a standard for
himself and
acknowledges the claims they make on.him.
Repression, as we have said, proceeds from the
ego;
we might say
with greater precision:
from the self-respect of the ego. The very im
pressions, experiences, impulses, and
desires
that one man indulges or at least consciously
elaborates in his mind will be rejected with
the utmost indignation by another, or stifled
at once even before they enter consciousness.
The difference between the two, however—and
here we have the conditioning factor in repres
sion—can easily be expressed in terms of the
libido-theory. We may say that the one man

[411b]
On Narcissism
407
has set up an ideal in himself by which he
measures his actual ego, while the other is
without this formation of an ideal. From the
point of view of the ego, this formation of an
ideal would be the condition of repression.
To this ideal ego is now directed the self-love
which the real ego enjoyed in childhood. The
narcissism seems to be now displaced on to
this new ideal ego, which, like the infantile ego,
deems itself the <possessor of all perfections.
As always Where the: libido is concerned, here
again man has
shown himself incapable of
giving up a gratification he has once enjoyed.
He is not willing to forgo his narcissistic per
fection in his childhood; and if, as he develops,
he is disturbed by the admonitions of others
and his own critical judgment is awakened, he
seeks to
recover the early perfection, thus
wrested from him, in the new form of an egoideal. That which he projects ahead of him as
his ideal is merely his isubstitute for the lost
narcissism of his childhood—the time when he
was his own ideal.
This suggests that we should:examine the
relation between this forming of ideals and
sublimation. Sublimation is a process that con
cerns the
objectlibido and consists in
the
instinct's directing itself towards an aim other
than, and remote from, that of sexual gratifi
cation; in this process the accent falls upon the
deflection from the sexual aim. Idealization is
a process that concerns the object; by it that
object, without any alteration in its nature, is
aggrandized and exalted in the .mind. Ideali
zation is possible in the sphere of the ego-libido
as well as in that of the object-libido. For ex
ample, the sexual over-estimation of an object
is an idealization of it. In so far as sublimation
is a process that concerns the instinct and
idealization one that concerns the object, the
two concepts are to be distinguished one from
the other.
The formation of the ego-ideal is often con
founded witk sublimation, to the detriment of
clear comprehension. A man who has exchanged
his narcissism for the worship of a high egoideal has not necessarily on that account suc
ceeded in sublimating his libidinal instincts. It
is true that the ego-ideal requires such sub
limation, but it cannot enforce it; sublimation
remains
a
special
process
which
may
be
prompted by the ideal but the execution of
which is entirely independent of any such in
citement. It is just in neurotics that we find
the highest degrees of tension between the
development of their ego-ideal and the measure

[412a]
408
Sigmunit Freud
of their sublimation of primitive libidinal in
stincts, and in general it is far harder to
convince the idealist of the inexpediency of the
hiding-place found by his libido than the plain
man whose demands in this respect are only
moderate. Further, the formation of an egoideal and
sublimation are
quite
differently
related to the causation of neurosis^. As we have
learnt, the formation of the ideal increases the
demands of the ego and is the most powerful
factor favouring repression; sublimation is-a
way out, a way by which the claims of the ego
can be met without involving repression.
It would not surprise us if we were to find a
special institution in the mind which performs
the task of seeing that narcissistic gratification
is secured from the ego-ideal and that, with
this end in view, it constantly watches the real
ego and measures it by that ideal. If such an
institution does exist, it cannot possibly be
something which we have not yet discovered;
we only need to recognize it, and we may say
that what we call our conscience has the re^
quired
characteristics.
Recognition
of
this
institution enables us to understand the socalled delusions of observation or, more cor
rectly, of being watched, which are such striking
symptoms in the paranoid diseases andrmay
perhaps also occur as an isolated form of illness,
or
intercalated
in
a
transference
neurosis.
Patients of this sort complain that all their
thoughts are known and their actions watched
and
overlooked;
they are
informed of the
functioning of this mental institution by voices
which characteristically speak to them in the
third person ("Now she is thinking of that
again" . . . "now he is going out"). This com
plaint is justified-^rt describes the truth; a
power of this kind, watching, discovering and
criticizing all our intentions, does really exist;
indeed, it exists with every one of us in normal
life. The delusion of being watched presents it
in a regressive form, thereby revealing the
genesis of this function and the reason wiry the
patient is in revolt =against it.
For that which prompted the person to form
an ego-ideal, over which his conscience keeps
guard, was the influence of parental criticism
(conveyed to him by the medium of the voice)',
reinforced, as time went on, by those who
trained an& taught the child and by all the
otherpersons of his environmeht-^an indefinite
host;
too numerous to reckon
(fellow-men,
public opinion)^
Large quantities of libido which is essentially
homosexual Iare in this wayj drawn into the

[412b]
formation of the narcissistic ego^ideal and find
outlet and gratification in maintaining it. The
institution of
conscience was at bottom an
embodiment,
first of parental criticism, and
subsequently of that of society; a similar proc
ess
takes place when
a
tendency towards
•repression
develops- out of
a
command or
prohibition imposed in the first instance from
Without. The voices, as- well as the indefinite
number of speakers, are brought into the fore
ground again by the disease, and so the evolu
tion of conscience is regressively reproduced.
But the revolt against this censorial institution
springs from the person's desire (in accordance
with the fundamental character of his illness)
to liberate himself from all these influences,
beginning with that of his parents^ and from
his withdrawal of homosexual libido from those
influences. His conscience then encounters him
in a regressive form as a hostile influence from
without.
The lament of the paranoiac shows also that
at bottom the self-criticism of conscience is
identical with, and based upon, self-observation.
That activity of the mind which took over the
function of conscience has also enlisted itself
in the service of introspection, which furnishes
philosophy with the material for its intellectual
operations. This must have something to do
with the characteristic tendency of paranoiacs
to form speculative systems.1
It will certainly be of importance to us if we
can see in other fields evidence of the activity
of this critically watching faculty, which be
comes heightened into conscience and philo
sophic introspection. I would refer here to What
Herbert
Silberer has
called the "functional
phenomenon," one of
the
few indisputably
valuable additions to the theory of dreams*
Silberer, as is well known, has shown that in
the states between sleeping and waking we can
directly observe the translation of thoughts in
to visual images, but that in these circum
stances we frequently have a presentation, not
of a thought-content, but of the actual state
of the mind (readiness, fatigue, etc.) of the
person who is struggling with sleep. Similarly,
Silberer has shown that often the end of a
dream or some section of the dream-content
signifies merely the dreamer's own perception
offhis sleeping and waking. He has thus demon11 should like to .add, merely by way of suggestion,
that
the
process
of
development arid strengthening
of this watching institution might contain within it the
genesis later on of* (subjective) memory and of the
time-factor, the latter of which has no application to
unconscious processes.

[413a]
On Narcissism
strated that self-observation—-in the sense of
paranoiac's delusion of being
the paranoiac's delusion of being watched-r-<
plays a part in dream-formation. This part is
not invariable; probably I overlooked it be
cause it does:not appear in my own? dreams to
any* great extent; in .persons who are gifted
philosophically,; and; therefore accustomed to
introspectionj;it-may become very clear.
:,,:}
:We may here recall pur discoverythat dreamformation takes place under the sway, of a
censorship which compels distortion of the
dream-thpughts. We did not picture this cen
sorship as, a special force, an entity, but we
chose the term to designate a particularraspect
of the repressiyej tendencies which control the
ego;
namely^ their .attitude., towards, the
dream-thoughts. .Penetrating further into the
structure of the ego, we may recognize the
dream-censor again in the ego-ideal and in the
dynamic utterances of conscience. If this cenr
sor is to some extent on the alert even during
sleep, we can understand that the necessary
condition of its activity—self-observation and
self-criticism—should contribute,to the dreamcontent some siich thoughts as these: "Now he
is too sleepy to thinks, -now heis wakingup."1
; At this point we may enter upon a discussion
of the; self-regarding attitude in normal persons
arid in neurotics:
v
First of all, the feeling of self-regard appears,
to us a measure of the ego; what various com
ponents go to make up that measure isirrekj
vant. Everything we possess or achieye,:,.every
remnant of the primitive feeling of omnipotence
that experiencehas corroborated, helps to exalt
the-self-regard;
•
=•*-•
Applying our distinction between sexual and
ego-instincts, we must recognize] that the selfregard has a very intimate connection with
theinarcissistic libido.-Here we are supported
by two fundamental facts: thatm:paraphrenics
the sel£-rejgard is exalted, while in the transT
ference neuroses it-is.abased;, and that where
the-erotic life is. concerned; not being loved
lowers the self-regarding feelings, /while being
loved raises them. We have stated that to be
loved is the aim and the satisfaction in a nar
cissistic object-choice.
-
••..";
Further, it is easy to. observe that libidinal
object-cathexis does not praise the self-regard'.
The "effect of the .dependence upon the loved
object is to lower that feeling:
the lover is
;••*•:;* I cannot here determine whether: the,differentiation
of the -censorial, -function from the rest of. the. ego is
capable of' forming the basis bf'iJie philosophic dis
tinction! between rednsdousneis landhseif-consciousness".

[413b]
409
humble. He who. loves has, so to speak, for^
feltedapart of his narcissism, which can oriiy
be replaced by his being loved. In all these
respects the
self-regarding feelings: seem to
remain in a [relation to the narcissistic element
in the. erotic life.
The realization of impotence, of one's own
inability tot love in; consequence of mental or
physical .disorder, has an exceedingly lowering
effect upon the self-regard. Here, as I judge^
we shall find one pf the;sources of the feelings
of inferiority of which patients suffering frqm
the transference neuroses so readily complain
to us. The main source of these feelings is,
however, the impoverishment of the ego, due
to the withdrawal ;from it of extraordinarily
large libidinal cathexes^—due, that is to say,, to,
the injury sustained by the ego through the
sexual trends which are no longer subject to
control.
A. Adler is right in maintaining that a per
son's
realization
of
organic
inferiorities
in
himself acts as a spur upon an;3P:t;iye; mental
life, and produces by.way of over-compensa
tion a, higher degree pf; abHity. But.it would
be,altogetheran exaggeration if, following this
lead of Adler's, we tried to prove that every
fine-achievement wasconditionedby anoriginal
organic inferiority. Not all artists are handi
capped with bad, eyesight, nor did all orators
originally stammer. And there are plenty of
instances of excellent achievement^ springing
from superior organic,endowment. In.the aetir
ology of neurosis, organic inferiority andim?
perfect development play an insignificant part,
mu^hthe same.;as that played by actual pert
ceptual material in the .formation of. dreams.
The neurosis makes, use, of such inferiorkiesas
a pretext, just as it;does=of all either suitable,
factors. So surely, as we credit the assertion^.qi
one; neurotic patient; that it was. inevitable, that
she.should fall ill,,since she is ugly, deformed,
orlacking in charm and. so.;no onei could love
her,;the very next neurotic will convince us of
pur error; for she remains the victim of her
neurosis and heraversion to sexuality, .although
sher;seems to be desirable, and. indeed ,mbre
"desired than the average, woman. The majority
of hysterical women are among the,attractive
and., eyen beautiful representatives, of.their: jsex,
^while, on the other.hand,, the .frequencyo|
ugliness,: organic infirmities,, anddefects,jn the
lower.classes,of society does,not increase the
incjplence, of neurotic, illnessjamongst;them...;
l.rThe ^relations, existing, between.,,self-regard
and erotism jGHbi.4jna} object-cathexes) may, be

[414a]
4io
Sigmtjnd Freud
expressed in the following formula: two cases
must be distinguished—in.""the first, the erotic
cathexes are ego^syntonic, in accordance witfi
the ego-tendencies; in the second, on the con
trary, those cathexes have suffered repression?
In the former case (where the path taken by
the libido is acceptable to the ego), love takes
its place among all the other activities of the
ego. Love in itself, in the form of longing and
deprivation, lowers the self-regard; WhereasHo
be loved, to have love returned, and to possess
the beloved object, exalts it again. When the
libido is repressed, the erotic cathexis is felt as
a severe depletion of the ego, the satisfaction
of love is Impossible, and the re-enrichment of
the ego can be effected only by a withdrawal
of the libido from its objects. The return of the
libido from the object to the ego and its trans
formation into narcissism represents, as it were,
the restoration of a happy love, and, conversely,
an actual happy love corresponds to the primal
condition in which object-libido and ego-libido
cannot be distinguished.
Perhaps the importance of the subject, and
the difficulty in surveying it, may be my excuse
for addinga few remarks that are rather loosely
strung together.
The development of the ego consists in a
departure from
the
primary narcissism and
results in a vigorous attempt to recover it.
This departure is brought about by means of
the displacement of libido to an ego-ideal im
posed from without, while gratification is de
rived from the attainment of this ideal.
At the same time, the ego has put forth its
libidinal object-cathexes. It becomes impov
erished in consequence both of these cathexes
and of the formation of the ego-ideal, and it
enriches Itself again both by gratification of its
object-love and by fulfilling its ideal.
Part of the self-regard is primary—the resi
due of childish narcissism; another part arises
out of such omnipotence as experience corrobo
rates (the fulfilment of the ego-ideal); whilst
a third part proceeds from gratification of
object-libido.
The ego-ideal has imposed severe conditions
upon the gratification of libido through objects,
for, by means of its censorship, it rejects some
of them as incompatible with itself. Where no
such ideal has been formed, the sexual trend in
question makes its appearance unchanged in
the personality in the form of a perversion. As
in childhood, to be his own ideal once more,
where sexual tendencies are concerned, is the
happiness that man strives to attain.

[414b]
The state of being in love consists in a flow
ing-over of ego-libido to the object. This state
has the poWer to remove repressions and to re
store perversions. It exalts the sexuahobject to
the position of sexual ideal. Since, in cases where
the love is of the anaclitic or object type, this
state results from the fulfilment of infantile
conditions of love, We may say that whatever
fulfils this condition of love becomes idealized.
The sexual ideal may enter into an interest
ing auxiliary relation to the ego-ideal. Where
narcissistic gratification encounters actual hin-i
drances, the sexual ideal may be used as a
substitutive gratification. In such a case a per
son loves (in conformity With the narcissistic
type of object-choice) someone whom he once
Was and no longer is, or else someone who
possesses excellences which he never had at all
(cf. above, (c)). The parallel formula to that
given above runs thus: whoever possesses an
excellence which
the ego lacks for the attain
ment of its ideal, becomes loved. This expedient
is of special importance for the neurotic, whose
ego is depleted by his excessive object-cathexes
and who on that acount is"unable*tO'attain to
his ego-ideal. He then seeks, a way back to nar
cissism from his prodigal expenditure of libido
upon objects, by choosing a sexual ideal after
the narcissistic type which shall possess the
excellences to which he cannot attain. This is
the cure by love, which he generally prefers to
cure by analysis. Indeed, he cannot believe in
any
other
curative
mechanism;
he
usually
brings expectations of this sort with him to the
treatment and then directs them towards the
person of the physician. The patient's incapac
ity for love, an incapacity resulting from his
extensive repressions, naturally stands in the
way of such a method of cure. When, by means
of the treatment, he has been partially freed
from his repressions, we are frequently met by
the unintended result that he withdraws from
further treatment in order to choose a loveobject, hoping that life with the beloved person
will complete his recovery. We might be satis
fied with this result, if it did not bring with it
all the dangers of an overwhelming dependence
upon this helper in his need.
The ego-ideal is of great importance for the
understanding of group psychology. Besides its
individual side^ this ideal has a social side; it
is also, the common ideal of a family, a class,
or a nation. It not only binds the narcissistic
libido, but also a considerable amount of the
person's homosexual libido, which in this way
becomes turned back into the ego. The dis-

[415a]
On Narcissism
411
X^ctisfaction due to the non-fulfilment of this
/=! liberates
homosexual
libido,
which is
iormed into sense of guilt (dread of the
nmunity). Originally this was a fear of punhment by the parents, or more correctly, the
dread of losing their love; later the parents are
replaced by an indefinite number of fellowmen. This helps us to understand why it is that
V
>**v

[415b]
paranoia is frequently caused by a wounding
of the ego, by a.frustration.of the gratification
desired within the sphere of the ego-ideal, and
also to understand the coincidence of idealformation and sublimation in the ego-ideal, as
well as the demolition of sublimations and pos
sible transformation of ideals in paraphrenic
disorders.

[416a]
The view is often defended that sciences should
be built up on clear and sharply defined basal
concepts. In actual fact no science, not even
the most exact, begins with such definitions.
The true beginning of scientific activity con
sists rather in describing phenomena and then
in proceeding to group, classify, and correlate
them. Even at the stage of description, it is not
possible to avoidapplying certain abstract ideas
to the material in hand, ideas derived from vari
ous sources and certainly not the fruit of the
new experience only. Still more indispensable
are such ideas—which will later become the
basal concepts of the science—as the material
is further elaborated. They must at first nec
essarily possess some measure of uncertainty;
there can be no question of any clear delimita
tion of their content. So long as they remain in
this condition, we come to an understanding
about their meaning by repeated references to
the material of observation, from which we
seem to have deduced our abstract ideas, but
which is, in point of fact, subject to them.
Thus, strictly speaking, they are in the nature
of conventions; although everything depends
on their being chosen in no arbitrary manner,
but determined by the important relations they
have to the empirical material—relations that
we seem to divine before we can clearly recog
nize and demonstrate them. It is only after
more searching investigation of the
field in
question that we are able to formulate with
increased clarity the scientific concepts under
lying it, and progressively so to modify these
concepts that they become widely applicable
and at the same time consistent logically. Then,
indeed, it may be time to immure them in
definitions. The progress of science, however,
demands a certain elasticity even in these defi
nitions. The science of physics furnishes an
excellent illustration of the way in which even
those basal concepts that are firmly established
in the form of definitions are constantly being
altered in their content.
A conventional but still rather obscure basal
concept of this kind, which is nevertheless in
dispensable to us in psychology, is that of an
instinct. Let us try to ascertain what is com1 Collected Papers, IV; first published in Zeitschrift,
Vol. IH (1915); reprinted in Sammlung, 4th Series.

[416b]
-J^sfefw^'
prised,in this conception by approaching it
irojrn:.different angles.- _
Fii^ from the side of physiology. This has '
given us the concept of stimuli and the scheme/
ofthe reflex arc; according to which a stimuli^
applied from the outeTWdrid-4Q^^g^sue
(nervous substance) is discharged by action
towards the outer world. The action answers
the purpose of withdrawing the substance af
fected from the operation of the stimulus, re
moving it out of range of the simulus.
Now what is the relation between instinct
and stimulus? There is nothing to prevent our
including the concept of instinct under that of
stimulus and saying that an instinct is a stimu
lus to the mind. But we are immediately set on
our guard against treating instinct and mental
stimulus as one and the same thing. Obviously,
besides those of instinctual origin, there are
other stimuli to the mind which behave far
more like physiological stimuli. For example,
a strong light striking upon the eye is not a
stimulus of instinctual origin; it is one, how
ever,
when
the
mucous
membrane
of
the
oesophagus becomes parched or when a gnaw
ing makes itself felt in the stomach.8
We have now obtained material necessary
for discriminating between stimuli of instinc
tual origin and the other (physiological) stim
uli which operate on our minds. First, a stimu
lus of instinctual origin does not arise in the
outside world but from within the organism
itself. For this reason, it has a different mental
effect and different actions are necessary in
orderto remove it. Further,all that is essential;
in an external stimulus is contained in thej
assumption that it acts as a single impact, so
that it can be discharged by a single appropri
ate action—a typical instance being that of
motor flight from the source of stimulation. Of
course, these impacts may be repeated and
their force may be cumulative, but that makes
no difference to our notion of the process and
to the conditions necessary in order that the
stimulus may be dispelled. An instinct, on the
other hand, never acts as a momentary impact
but always as a constant force. As it makes its
2Assuming, of course, that these internal processes
constitute the organic basis of the needs described as
thirst and hunger.
412

[417a]
Instincts .and their Vicissitudes
4*3
attack not from without but from within the
organism, it follows that no flight can avail
against it. A better term for a stimulus of in
stinctual origin is a, need; that which.does away
with this need is satisfaction. This can be at
tained only by a suitable (adequate) alteration
of the inner source of stimulation.
Let us imagine ourselves in the position of
an almost entirely helpless living organism, as
yet unorientated in the world and with stimuli
impinging on its nervous tissue. This organism
will soon become capable of making a first
discrimination and a first orientation. On the
one hand, it will detect certain stimuli which
can be avoided by an action of the muscles
(flight)—these it ascribes to an outside world;
on the other hand, it will also be aware of
stimuli against which such action is of no avail
and whose urgency is in no way diminished by
it—these stimuli are. the tokens of an inner
world, the proof of instinctual needs. The ap
perceptive substance of the living organism
will thus have found in the efficacy of its mus
cular activity a means for* discriminating be*
tween outer and inner.
We thus find our first conception of the
essential nature of an instinct by considering
its main characteristics, its origin in sources of
stimulation within the organism'and its appear?
ahce as a constant force, and thence we deduce
one
of
its
further'••- distinguishing
features',
namely, that no actions of flight avail-against
it. Nowy in making these remarks, we cannot
fail to be struck by a fact which comfiels us
to a further admission. We do not merely ac
cept as basal concepts certain conventions
which we apply to the material we have ac
quired empirically, but we also make use of
various complicated postulates to guide us in
dealing with psychological phenomena. We have
already cited the most important of these pos
tulates; it remains for us expressly to lay stress
upon it. It is of a biological nature, and makes
use of the concept of purpose (one might say,
of adaptation of the-mearis to the end) and
runs as
follows:
the
nervous system is
an
apparatus having the function of abolishing
stimuli which reach it, or Of'reducing excitation
to the lowest possible^lbvel: anapparatus which
would even, if this'Were feasible,--maintain it
self in an altogether; unstimulated condition.
Let us for the present not take "exception to
-theindefiniteness of this idea and let us grant
that the task of the nervous system is—broadly
speakirig^to master stimuli. We see then how
greatly th#!simple physiologidal1 reflex scheme

[417b]
is complicated by the introduction of instincts.
External stimuli impose upon the; organism the
single task of withdrawing itself from their
action: this is accomplished by muscular movemerits, one of which reaches the goal aimed at
arid, being the most appropriate to the end in
view, is thenceforward transmitted as an he
reditary disposition. Those instinctual stimuli
which, emanate from within the organism can
not be dealt with by this mechanism. Conse
quently, they make far higher demands upon
the nervous system and compel it to complir
cated arid inter-dependent activities, which ef
fect such, changes in the outer world as enable
it to offer satisfaction to the internal source of
stimulation; above all, instinctual stimuli oblige
the nervous system to renounce its ideal inten
tion of warding off stimuli, for they maintain
an incessant and unavoidable afflux of stimula
tion, So we may probably conclude that; in
stincts and not external stimuli are the true
motive forces in the progress that has raised
the nervous system, with all its incomparable
efficiency, to its present high level of develop
ment. Of course there is nothing to prevent
our assuming that the instincts themselves are,
at least in part, the precipitates of different
forms of
external stimulation, which in the
course of phylogenesis have effected modifica
tions in the organism.
:M
-•-
Then when we find -further that the-activity
of even the most highly developed mental ap
paratus is subject to.the pleasure-principle, i.e.,
is automatically regulated by feelings belonging
to the pleasure-"pain" series* we. can hardly-ire
ject the further postulate that these feelings
-reflect the manner in which the process of
mastering,stimuli takes place. This is certainly
so in the sense that "painful" feelings are con
nected with an increase and pleasurable feelings
.with a decrease in stimulation. Let;us, however,
be. careful to preserve this assumption in its
present highlyindefinite form, until we succeed,
if that is possible, in discovering what sort of
relation ^exists between pleasure and "pain," on
the one haridparid fluctuations in the quantities
of stimuli affecting mental life, on theother.
It is certain that many kinds1 of thes^ relations
aire possible, somecof them by no meanssimple.
'iIf now -we apply, ourselves to? considering
mental life from a biological point of view, an
instinct appears to us-as a borderlandr concept
between the mental' and the physical,: being
both the mental representative of the stimuli
emanating from within the organism arid pene
trating .tb >the mind, and at the ,same>;time ?a

[418a]
414
SlGMUND
measure of the demand made upon the energy
of the latter in consequence of its connection
with the body.
We are now in a position to discuss certain
terms used in reference to the concept of an
instinct, for example, its impetus, its aim, its
object and its source.
By the impetus of an instinct we understand
its motor element, the amount of force or the
measure of the demand upon energy which it
represents. The characteristic of impulsion is
common to all instincts, is, in fact, the very
essence of them. Every instinct is a form of
activity; if we speak loosely of passive in
stincts, we can only mean those whose aim is
passive.
The aim of an instinct is in every instance
satisfaction, which can only be obtained by
abolishing the condition of stimulation in the
source of the instinct. But although this re
mains invariably the final goal of every instinct,
there may yet be different ways leading to the
same goal, so that an Instinct may be found to
have various nearer or intermediate aims, ca
pable of combination or interchange. Experience
permits us also to speak of instincts which are
inhibited in respect of their aim, in cases where
a certain advance has been permitted in the
direction of satisfaction and then an inhibition
or deflection has occurred. We may suppose
that even in such cases a partial satisfaction
is achieved.
The object of an instinct is that in or through
which it can achieve its aim. It is the most
variable thing about an instinct and is not
originally connected with it, but becomes at
tached to it only in consequence of being pe
culiarly fitted to provide satisfaction. The ob
ject is not necessarily an extraneous one: it
may be part of the subject's own body. It may
be changed any number of times in the course
of the vicissitudes the instinct undergoes dur
ing life; a highly important part is played by
this capacity for displacement in the instinct.
It may happen that the same object may serve
for theJ satisfaction of several instincts simul
taneously, a phenomenon which Adler calls a
confluence of instincts. A particularly close at
tachment of the instinct to its object is dis
tinguished by the term fixation: this frequently
occurs in very early stages of the instinct's
development and so puts an end to its mobility,
through the
vigorous
resistance
it
sets
up
against detachment.
By the source of an instinct is meant that
somatic process in an organ or part of the body

[418b]
Freud
from which there results a stimulus represented
in mental life by an instinct. We do not know
whether this process is regularly of a chemical
nature or whether it may also correspond with
the release of other, e.g., mechanical, forces.
The study of the sources of instinct is outside
the scope of psychology; although its source in
the body is what gives the instinct its distinct
and essential character, yet in mental life we
know it merely by its aims. A more exact
knowledge of the sources of instincts is not
strictly necessary for purposes of psychological
investigation; often the source may be with
certainty inferred from the aims.
Are we to suppose that the different instincts
which operate upon the mind, but of which the
origin
is somatic, are
also distinguished by
different qualities and act in the mental life in
a manner qualitatively different? This supposi
tion does not seem to be justified; we are much
more likely to find the simpler assumption suf
ficient—namely, that the instincts are all quali
tatively alike and owe the effect they produce
onlyto the quantities of excitation.accompany
ing them, or perhaps further to certain func
tions of this quantity. The difference in the
mental effects produced by the different., in
stincts may be traced to the difference in their
sources. In any event, it is only in a later con
nection that we shall be able to make plain
what the problem of the quality of instincts
signifies.
Now what instincts and how many should bfc
postulated? There is obviously a great opporr
tunity here for arbitrary choice. No objection
can be made to anyone's employing the con
cept of an instinct of play or of destruction, or
that of a social instinct, when the subject der
mands it and the limitations of psychological
analysis allow of it. Nevertheless, we should
not neglect to
ask whether such instinctual
motives, which are in one direction so highly
specialized, do not admit of further analysis hji
respect of their sources, so that only those
primal instincts which are not to be resolved
further could really lay claim to the name.
I have proposed that two groups of such
primal instincts should be distinguished: the
self-preservative or ego-instincts and the sexual
instincts. But this proposition has not the
weight of a necessary postulate, such as, for
instance, our assumption about the biological
purpose in the mental apparatus (see above);
it is merely an auxiliary construction, to be
retained only so long as it proves useful, and
it will make little difference to the results of

[419a]
Instincts and their Vicissitudes
415
our work of description and classification if
we replace it by another. The occasion for it
arose in the course of the evolution of psycho
analysis, which was first ernployed upon the
psychoneuroses, actually upon the group desig
nated transference neuroses (hysteria arid ob
sessional neurosis); through them it became
plain that at the root of all such affections
there lies a
conflict between the
claims
of
sexuality and those of the ego. It is always pos
sible that an exhaustive study of the other
neurotic affections (especially of the narcissistic
psychoneuroses, the schizophrenias) mayoblige
us to alter this formula and therewith to make
a.different classification.of the primal instincts.
But for the present we do not know what this
new formula may be, nor have we met with
any argument which seems likely to be prejudi
cial to the contrast between sexual and egoinstincts.
I am altogether doubtful whether work upon
psychological material will afford any decisive
indication for
the distinction and classification
of instincts. Rather it would seem necessary to
apply to this material certain definite assump
tions in order to work upon it, and we could
wish that these assumptions might be taken
from
some other branch of knowledge and
transferred to psychology. The contribution of
biology on this point certainly does not run
counter to the distinction between sexual and
ego-instincts. Biology teaches that sexuality is
not on a level with the other functions of the
individual, for its purposes go beyond the indi
vidual, their content being the production of
new individuals and the preservation of the
species. It shows, further, that the relation ex
isting between the ego and sexuality may be
conceived of in two ways, apparently equally
well justified: in the one, the individual is re
garded as of prime importance, sexuality as
one of his activities and sexual satisfaction as
one?of his needs; while in; the, other, *the mdP
vidual organism is looked upon as a transitory
and perishable appendage to the quasi-immortal
germ-plasm bequeathed to him by the race.
The assumption that the sexual function differs
from other bodily processes in virtue of special
chemical processes is, I understand, also a pos
tulate of the Ehrlich school of biological re
search,
Since a study of the instincts from the side
of consciousness presents almost insuperable
difficulties,
psycho-analytic
investigation
of
mental
disturbances
remains
the
principal
this line of investigation, however, has neces
sarily produced hitherto information of a more
or less definite nature only in regard to the
sexual instincts, for it is this group in particular
which can be observed in isolation, as it were,
in the psychoneuroses. With the extension of
psycho-analysis to other neurotic affections we
may be sure that we shall find a basis for our
knowledge of the ego-instincts also, though it
would be optimistic to expect equally favour
able conditions for observation in this further
field of research.
An attempt to formulate the general char
acteristics of the sexual instincts would run as
follows:
they are numerous, emanate
from
manifold organic sources, act in the- first in
stance independently of one another and only
at a late stage achieve a more or less complete
synthesis. The aim which each strives to attain
is organ-pleasure; only when the synthesis is
complete do they enter the service of the func
tion of reproduction, becoming thereby gener
ally recognizable as sexual instincts. At their
first appearance, they support themselves upon
the instincts of self-preservation, from which
they only gradually detach themselves; in their
choice of object, also, they follow paths indi
cated by the ego-instincts. Some of them re
main throughout fife associated with these lat
ter and furnish them with libidinal components,
which with, normal functioning easily escape
notice and are clearly recognizable only when
disease is present. They have this distinctive
characteristic—that they have in a high degree
the capacity to act vicariously for one another
and that they can readily change their objects.
In consequence of the last-mentioned proper
ties they are capable of activities widely re
moved from their original modes of attaining
their aims (sublimation).
Our inquiry into the various
vicissitudes
which instincts undergo in the process of de
velopment and in the course of: life must be
confined to the sexual instincts, for these are
the more familiar to us. Observation shows us
that an instinct may undergo the following
vicissitudes:
Reversal into its opposite,
Turning round upon the subject,
Repression,
Sublimation.
Since I do not intend to treat of sublimation
here, and since repression requires a special
chapter to itself, it only remains for us to
describe and discuss the two first points. Bearsource of our knowledge. The development of
ing in mind that there are tendencies which are

[419b]


[420a]
opposed to the instincts pursuing a straight
forward course, we may regard these vicissi
tudes as modes of defence against the instincts.
The reversal of an instinct into its opposite
may on closer scrutiny be resolved into two
different processes: a change from active to
passive, and a reversal of the content. The two
processes, being essentially distinct, must be
treated separately.
Examples of thefirst process aremetwith in
the two pairs of opposites: sadism-masochism
and
scoptophilia-exnibitionism.
The
reversal
here concerns only the aims of the instincts.
The passive aim (to be tortured, or looked at)
has been substituted for the active aim
(to
torture, to
look at). Reversal of content is
found in the single instance of the change of
love into hate.
The turning round of an instinct upon the
subject is suggested to us by the reflection that
masochism is actually sadism turned round
upon the subject's own ego, and that exhibi
tionism includes the love of gazing at the sub
ject's own body. Further, analytic observation
leaves us in no doubt that the masochist also
enjoys the act of torturing when this is being
applied to himself, and the exhibitionist the
exposing of someone in being exposed himself.
So the essence of the process is the change of
the object, while the aim remains unchanged.
We cannot fail to note, however, that in
these examples turning round upon the sub
ject's self and transformation from active to
passive coincide or occur in one process. To
elucidate the relation between the two proc
esses, a more thorough investigation must be
undertaken.
With the pair of opposites sadism-masoch
ism, the process may be represented as follows:
(a) Sadism consists in the exercise of viol
ence or power upon some-other person as its
object.
-'•••(b)
This object is abandoned and replaced
by the subject's self. Together with the turning
round upon the self, the change from an active
to a passive aim in the instinct is also brought
about.
(c) Again another person is sought as ob
ject; this person, in consequence of the altera
tion which has taken place in the aim of the
instinct, has to take over the original role of
the: subject.
i i:
Case (c) is the condition commonly termed
masochism. Satisfaction follows in this
case
also by way of the original sadism,: the passive
ego placing itself in phantasy back in its former

[420b]
4i6
SlGMUND FkEUD
situation, which, however^ has now been given
up to another subject outside the sell Whether
there is, besides this, a more direct masochistic
satisfaction is highly doubtful. A primary mas
ochism' not derived in the manner I have de
scribed from sadism, does not appear to be met
with.1 That it is not superfluous to make the
assumption of stage (b) is quite clear when
we observe the behaviour of the sadistic im
pulse in cases of obsessional neurosis. In these
we have the turning upon the subject's self,
without the attitude of passivity towards anf
other: the reversal has only reached the second
stage. Self-torment and self-punishment have
arisen from the desire to torture, but not mas^
ochism. The active voice is changed, not into
the passive, but into the reflexive middle voice.
The conception of sadism is made more comr
plicated by the circumstance that this instinct^
side by side with its general aim (or perhaps
rather, within it), seems to press towards a
quite special aim: the infliction of pain, in ad
dition to subjection and mastery of the object.
Now psycho-analysis would seem to show that
the
infliction of pain plays no part in the
original aims sought by the instinct: the sadis
tic child takes no notice of whether or not it
inflicts pain, nor is it part of its purpose to
do so. But when once the transformation into
masochism has taken place, the experience of
pain is very well adapted to serve as a passive
masochistic aim, for we have every reason to
believe that sensations of pain, like other un*
pleasant sensations, extend into sexual excita
tion and produce a condition which is pleasur
able, for the sake of which the subject will
even willingly experience the unpleasantness of
pain. Where once the suffering of pain has beeii
experienced as a masochistic aim, it can be
carried back into the sadistic situation and re
sult in a sadistic aim of inflicting pain, which
will then be masochistically enjoyed by the
subject while inflicting pain
upon others]
through his identification of himself with the
suffering object. Of course, in either case it
is not the pain itself which is enjoyed, but the
accompanying sexual excitement, and this is
especially easy for the sadist. The enjoyment
of pain would thus be a primary masochistic
aim, which, however, can then also become the
aim of the originally sadistic instinct
In order to complete my expositionyI would
add that pity cannot be described as a result
1 Additional Note, 1924. In later works (cf. "The
Economic -, Problem of Masochism,"
1924, Collected
Papers, II) relating to problems of instinctual life, I
have expressed the dpposite view.

[421a]
Instincts and their Vicissitudes
4i7
of the reversal of the sadistic instinct, but
necessitates the conception of a reaction-forma
tion against that instinct (for the difference*
see below),
• i
;,
Rather \different >and simpler results are af*
forded by the investigation of another pair of
opposites, namely, those instincts whose aim is
sexual gazing (scoptophilia) and
self-display
(the voyeur and exhibitionist tendencies, as
they are called-in the language of the perver
sions). Here again we may postulate the same
stages as in the previous instance: (a) scopto
philia as an activity directed towards an ex
traneous object; (b) abandonment of the ob
ject and a turning of, the scoptophilic instinct
towards a part of the subject's own person;
therewith a transformation to passivity and the
setting up of a new aim—-that of being looked
at; (c) the institution of a new subject to
whom one displays oneself in order to be
looked at. Here too, it is hardly possible to
doubt that the active aim appears before the
passive, that scoptophilia precedes exhibition^
ism. But there is an important divergence from
what happens in the case of sadism, in that we.
can recognize in the scoptophilic instinct a.yet
earlier stage than that described as (a). That
is to say^ that at the beginning of its activity
the scoptophilic instinct is auto-erotic: it has
indeed an object, but that object is the subf
ject's own body. It is only later that the in
stinct comes (by-way of comparison) to ex
change this object for the analogous one of
the body of another (stage (a) ). Now this
preliminary stage is interesting because it is
the source of both the situations represented
in the resulting pair of opposites, according to
which element in the original situation is re
versed. The following might serve as a scheme
for the scoptophilic instinct:
Subject's own sexual
organ being looked
at by. himself
a Subject's look
ing at his
own sexual organ
p Subject'slook7 Subject'sown
,
'
sexual organ
^8 at an
being looked at
extraneous object _
by another person
(active^scoptophilia)
(exhibitionism)
A preliminary stage of this kind is abserit in
sadism, which from the outset is directed upon
an extraneous object, although it might not be
altbgether unreasonable to regard as such a
stage the child's efforts to gain control of his
lirilbs.1
-'•'-
'.•••.:.
.;-:•;:
"Witfr regard to both these instincts just ex1 Cf. preceding footnote.

[421b]
amined as examples, it must be said that trans
formation of them by a reversal from active to
passive,jand:by a turning round upon-the sub
ject, never in fact concerns the whole amount
of impelling force; pertaining to the instinct*
To some extent its earlier active direction al
ways persists side by side with the later passive
direction,: even when the transformation is very
extensive. The only correct description of the
scoptophilic instinct would be that all phases
of its development, the auto-erotic, preliminary
phase as well as it final active or passive form,
co-exist alongside one another; and the truth
of this statement becomes manifest if we base
our opinion, not upon the actions which are
prompted by the instinct, but upon.the mechT
anism of its .satisfaction. Perhaps yet another
way of conceiving tand representing the matter
may be justified. We may split up the life,of
each instinct into a series of thrusts, distinct
from one another; in the time of their occurs
rence but each homogeneous within its qwn
period, whose relation to one another isrcomj
parable to that of successive eruptions of lava;
We can then perhaps picture to ourselves that
the earliest and most primitive mstinetrerupT
tion persists in an unchanged -form and^under^
goes no development at all. The next thrust
would then from the outset-have undergone a
change of form, bemg turned, for instance,
from active to passivej and it would then, with
this new characteristic, be superimposed upon
the earlier layer, and so on. So that, if we take
a survey of the instinctual tendency from its
beginning up to any given stopping-ppint> the
succession of thrusts which we have described
would present the picture of a definite develop?
ment of the instinct.
.The fact that, at that later period of devel
opment, the instinct in its; primary form may
be observed side by side with its (passive) op
posite deserves to be distinguished; by the
highly appropriate name introduced by Bleuler:
ambivalence,
v
::
;
-
,: These considerations regarding the develop
mental history of an instinct and the perma
nent character of; the intermediate stages in it
should make instinct-development more-con>
prehensible to us. Experience;shows|that the
degree
of
demonstrable
ambivalence ^ yaries
greatly
in
individuals,
-;groups,
:and races.
Marked ambivalence of an instinct in a human
being at the preserit day may be regarded as an
archaic: inheritance, for we have reasqn to sup
pose that the part played in the life of, the
instincts by theactive impulses in their^gijial

[422a]
418
SlGMUND
form was greater in primitive times than it is
on an average today.
We have become accustomed to call the early
phase of the development of the ego, during
which its sexual instincts find auto-erotic satis
faction, narcissism, without having so far en
tered into any discussion of the relation be
tween auto-erotism and narcissism. It follows
that, in considering the preliminary phase of the
scoptophilic instinct, when the subject's own
body is the object of the scoptophilia, we must
place it under the heading of narcissism; it is
a narcissistic formation. From this phase the
active scoptophilic instinct, which has left nar
cissism behind, is developed, while the passive
scoptophilic instinct, on the contrary, holds fast
to the narcissistic object. Similarly,.the trans
formation from sadism to masochism betokens
a reversion to the narcissistic object, while in
both cases the narcissistic (active) subject is
exchanged by identification for another, ex
traneous ego. Taking into consideration the
preliminary narcissistic stage of sadism con
structed by us, we approach the more general
view that those vicissitudes which consist in
the-instinct being turned round upon the sub
ject's own ego and undergoing reversal from
activity to passivity are dependent upon the
narcissistic organization of the ego and bear the
stamp of that phase. Perhaps they represent
attempts at defence which at higher stages of
the development of the
ego are effected by
other means.
At this point we may remember that so far
we have discussed only two pairs of instincts
and
their opposites:
sadism-masochism and
scoptophilia-exhibitionism. These are the bestknown sexual Instincts which appear.hx ambiv
alent forms.
The other components of
the
later sexual function are at present too inac
cessible to analysis for us to be able to discuss
them in a similar way. In general we can assert
of them that their activities are auto-erotic, i.e.,
their object becomes negligible in comparison
with the organ which is their source, and as a
rule the two coincide. The object of the scopto
philic instinct, although it also in the first in
stance is a part of the subject's own body,
nevertheless isnot the eye itself; and with sad
ism the organic source, probably the muscula
ture with its capacity for action, directly pre
supposes an
object other than itself, even
though that object be part of the subject's own
body. In the
auto-erotic instincts, the part
played by the organic sourceis so decisive that,
according to a plausible supposition of P. Fed-

[422b]
Fretjd
ern and L. Jekels,1 the form and function of
the organ determine the activity or passivity
of the instinct's aim.
The transformation of the
content of an
instinct into its opposite is observed in a single
instance only—the changing of love into hate.
It is particularly common to find both these
directed simultaneously towards the same ob
ject, and this phenomenon of their co-existence
furnishes the most important example of am
bivalence of feeling.
The case of love and hate acquires a special
interest from the circumstance that it resists
classification in our scheme of the instincts.
It is impossible to doubt the existence of a
most intimate relation between these two con
trary feelings and sexual life, but one is natu
rally unwilling to conceive, of-love as being a
kind of special component-instinct of sexuality
in the same way as are the others just discussed.
One would prefer to regard loving rather as the
expression of the whole sexual current of feel
ing, but this idea does not clear up our difficul
ties and we are at a loss how to conceive of aik
essential opposite to this striving.
Loving admits of not merely one; but of
three antitheses. First there is the antithesis of
loving—hating; secondly, there is loving—be
ing loved; and, in addition to these, loving and
hating together are the opposite of the condi
tion of neutrality or indifference. The second of
these two antitheses, loving—being loved, cor
responds exactly to the transformation from
active to passive and may be traced to a primal
situation in the same way as the scoptophilic
instinct. This situation is that of loving onerself, which for us is the characteristic of narr
cissism. Then, according to whether the self as
object or subject is^exchangedvfor an extrane
ous one, there results the active aim of loving
or the passive one of being loved, the latter re|-
maining nearly related to narcissism.
!
Perhaps we shall come to a better under--
standing of the manifold opposites of loving if
we reflect that our mental life as a whole is
governed by three polarities, namely, the fol
lowing antitheses:
Subject (ego)—Object (external world),
Pleasure—Pain,
Active—Passive.
The antithesis of ego—non-ego (outer), i.e.,
subject-—object, is, as we have already said.,
thrust upon the individual being at an early
stage, by the experience that it can abolish ex1Zeitschrift, Vol. I, (1913).

[423a]
ternal stimuli by means of muscular action but
is defenceless against those stimuli that origi
nate in instinct. This antithesis remains sover
eign above all in our intellectual activity and
provides research with a fundamental situation
which no amount of effort can alter. The po*
larity of pleasure—pain depends upon a feelingseries, the significance of which in determining
our actions (will) is paramount and has already
been emphasized. The antithesis of active and
passive must not be confounded with that of
ego-subject—external object. The relation of
the ego to the outer world is passive in so far
as it receives stimuli from it, active when it
reacts to these. Its instincts compel it to a quite
special degree of activity towards the outside
world, so that, if we wished to emphasize the
essence of the matter, we might say that the
ego-subject is passive in respect of external
stimuli, active in virtue of its own instincts.
The antithesis of active—passive coalesces later
with that of masculine—feminine, which, until
this has taken place, has no psychological sig-^
nificance. The fusion of activity with mascu-?
linity and passivity with femininity confronts
us, indeed, as a biological fact, but it is by no
means so invariably complete and exclusive
as we are inclined to assume.
The three polarities within the mind are con
nected with one another iri various highly sig
nificant ways. There is a certain primal psychic
situation in which two of them coincide. Origi
nally, at the very beginning of mental life, the
ego's instincts are directed to itself and it is to
some extent capable of deriving satisfaction for
them on itself. This condition is known as nar
cissism, and this potentiality for satisfaction is
termed auto-erotic* The outside world is at
this time, generally speaking, not cathected with
any interest and is indifferent for purposes of
satisfaction. At this period, therefore, the egosubject coincides with what is pleasurable and
the outside world with what is indifferent (or
even painful, as being a source of stimulation).
Let us for the moment define loving asthe re1 Some of the sexual instincts are, as we know, ca
pable of this auto-erotic satisfaction and so are adapted
to be
the channel
for that
development under the
sway of the pleasure-principle which we shall describe
later. The sexual instincts, which from the outset re
quire an object, and the needs of the ego-instincts,
which are
never capable of
auto-erotic satisfaction,
interfere, of course, with this condition ahd prepare
the way for progress. More, the primal narcissistic con
dition would not have been able to attain such a de
velopment
were
it not
that every individual
goes
through a period of helplessness and dependence on
fostering care, during which his urgent needs are sat
isfied by agencies outside himself and thereby withheld
from developing along their own line.

[423b]
Instincts and their Vicissitudes
419
lation of the ego to its,sources of pleasure: then
the situation in which the ego loves itself only
and is indifferent to the outside world illus
trates the first of the polarities in which loving
appeared.
In so far as it is auto-erotic, the ego has no
need of the outside world, but, in consequence
of experiences undergone by the instincts of
self-preservation, it tends to find objects there
and doubtless it cannot but for a time perceive
inner instinctual stimuli as painful. Under the
sway of the pleasure-principle, there now takes
place a further development. The objects pre
senting themselves, in so far as they are sources
of pleasure, are absorbed by the ego into itself,
introjected (according to an expression coined
by Ferenczi); while, on the other hand, the ego
thrusts forth upon the external world whatever
within itself gives rise to pain (see below: the
mechanism of projection).
Thus the original reality-ego, which distin
guished outer and inner by means of a sound
objective
criterion,
changes into
a
purified
pleasure-ego, which prizes above all else the
quality of pleasure. For this pleasure-ego, the
outside world is divided into a part that is
pleasurable, which it has incorporated into it
self, and a remainder that is alien to it. A part
of itself it has separated off, and this it projects
into the external world and regards as hostile.
Accordmg to thisKnew^aa^^
ence of the two polarities,
ego-subject with pleasure,
outside world with pain (or earlier with neu
trality), is once more established.
When the stage of primary narcissism is in
vaded by the object, the second contrary atti
tude to that of love, namely, hate, attains to
development.
As we have heard, the ego's objects are pre
sented to it from the outside world in the first
instance by the instincts of self-preservation,
and it is undeniable also that hate originally
betokens the relation of the ego to the alien
external world with its afflux of stimuli. Neu
trality may be classified as a special case of
hate or rejection, after having made its appear
ance first as the forerunner of hate. Thus at the
very beginning, the external world, objects and
that which was hated were one and the same
thing. When later on an object manifests itself
as a source of pleasure, it becomes loved, but
also incorporated into the ego, so that for the
purified pleasure-ego the object once again co
incides with what is extraneous and hated.
Now, however, we note that just as the an-

[424a]
420
Sigmund Freud
tithesis love—indifference reflects the polarity
ego—external world, so the second antithesis;
love-'—hate, reproduces the polarity pleasurepain, which is bound up with the former. When
the purely narcissistic stage gives place to the
object-stage, pleasure and pain denote the de
lations of the ego to the object. When the ob
ject becomes a source of pleasurable feelings, a
motor tendency is set up which strives to bring
the object near to and incorporate it into the
ego; we then speak of the attraction exercised
by the: pleasure-giving object, and say that we
love that object. Conversely, when the object
is the source of painful feelings, there-is a ten
dency which endeavours to increase thedistance
between object andr-ego and to irepeat in rela
tion to the former the primordial attempt at
flight from the external world with its flow of
stimuli* We feel -a repulsion from -the object,
and hate it; this hate can then be intensified
to the point of an aggressive tendency towards
the object, with the intention of destroying it.
We might at a pinch say of an instinct that
it loves the objects after which it strives for
purposes of satisfaction, but to say that it
hates an object strikes us as odd; so we become
aware that the attitudes of love and hate can
not be said to characterize the relations of in
stincts to their objects, but are reserved for
the relations'of the ego as a whole to objects.
But, if we;consider a colloquial usage which is
certainly full of meaning, we see that there is
yet another limitation to the significance of
love and hate. We do not say of those objects
which serve the interests of self^preservation
that we love them; rather we emphasize the
fact that we heed them, and perhaps add an
element of a different kind in our relation to
them by words which denote a much- lesser de?
gree of love—^for example, to be fond ofy to
like, to find agreeable.
So
the
word
love
becomes
shifted
ever
further into the sphere of the pure pleasurerelation existing between the ego and its object
and finally attaches itself to sexual objects in
the narrower sense and to those which satisfy
the needs of sublimated sexual instincts. The
discrimination of the ego^instincts from the
sexual, a discrimination which we have imposed
upon our psychology, is seen, therefore, to be
in conformity with the spirit of our speech.
Since we do not customarily say that the single
sexual component-instinct loves its object, but
see the most appropriate case in which to apply
the word love in the relation of the ego to its
sexual object, we learn from this facti that the

[424b]
applicaoility of the word in this relation begins
only with the synthesis of all the componentinstincts under the primacy of the genitals and
in the service of the function of reproduction.
-It is noteworthy that in the use of the word
hate no such intimate relation to sexual pleas
ure and the sexual function appears: on the
contrary, the painful character of the relation
seems to be the sole decisive feature. The ego
hates, abhors, and pursues with intent to de
stroy all objects which are for it a source of
painful feelings, without taking into account:
whether they mean to it frustration of sexual;
satisfaction or of gratification of the needs of
self-preservation. Indeed, it may be asserted
that- the true prototypes of the hate^-relation
are derived not from sexual life, but from the
struggle of the ego for self-preservation and
self-maintenance.
So we see that love and hate, which present
themselves to us as essentially antithetical,
stand in no simple relation to each other. They
did not originate in a cleavage of any common
primal element, but sprang from different j
sources and underwent each its own develop
ment before the influence of the pleasure-pain
relation. constituted them antitheses to each
other. At this point we are confronted with the
task of putting together what we know of the
genesis of love and hate.
Love originates in the capacity.of the ego to
satisfy some of its instincts auto-erotically
through the obtaining;-ofyorgan-pleasure. It'.-is;
primarily narcissistic, is then transferred to
those objects which have been incorporated in
the ego, now much extended, and expresses the
motor striving of the ego after these objects as
sources of pleasure. It is intimately connected!
with the activity of the later sexual instincts
and, when these have been completely synthetized, coincides with the sexual trend as a whole.
The preliminary stages of love reveal then>
selves astemporary sexual aims, while the sexual
instincts are passing through their complicated
development. First amongst these we recognize
the phase of incorporating or devouring, a type
of love which is compatible with abolition of
any ' separate
existence on
the
part of the
object, and which may therefore be designated
ambivalent. At the higher stage of the piregenital sadistic-anal organization, the, striving
after the object appears in the form of an im
pulsion to mastery, in which injury or annihila
tion of the object is a matter of indifference.
This
form and preliminary stage of love is
hardly to be distinguished from hate in its be-

[425a]
haviour towards the object. Only when the
genital organization is established does love be
come the antithesis of hate.
The relation of hate to objects is older than
that of love. It is derived from the primal re
pudiation by the narcissistic ego of the external
world whence flows the stream of stimuli. As
an expression;of the pain-reaction induced by
objects, it remains .in constant intimate rela
tion with the instincts of self-preservation, so
that sexual and ego-instincts readily develop an
ture of hate may be traced to the source of selfpreservative instincts. When a love-relationship
with a given object is broken off, it is not in
frequently succeeded by hate, so that we re
ceive the impression of a transformation of
love into hate. This descriptive characteriza
tion is amplified by the view that, wheii this
happens, the hate \vhicn is motivated by con
siderations of reality is reihfdreed by a re
gression of the love to the sadistic preliminary
stage, so that the hate acquires an erotic charantithesis which repeats that of love and hate,
acter and the continuity of a love-relation is
When the sexual function is governed by the
ensured.
ego-instincts, as at the stage of the sadisticanal organization, they impart the qualities of
hate to the instinct's aim as well.
The history of the origin and relations of
love makes us understand how it is that love
so constantly manifests itself as ambivalent,
i.e., accompanied by feelings of hate'against
the same object. This admixture of hate in love
is to be traced in part to those preliminary
stages of love which have not been wholly out
grown, and in part is based upon reactions of
aversion and repudiation on the part of the egoinstincts which, in the frequent conflicts be^
tween the interests of the ego and those of love,
can claini to be supported by real and actual
motives, In both cases, therefore, the adhiix-

[425b]
Instincts and their Vicissitudes
421
The third antithesis of love, the transforma
tion of loving into being loved, represents the
operation of the polarity of active and passive,
and is to be judged in the same way as in
scoptophilia and sadism. We may sum up by
saying that the essential feature in the vicis
situdes undergone by instincts is their subjec
tion to the influences of the three great polari
ties that govern mental life. Of these three
polarities we might describe that of activitypassivity as the biological, that of ego—exter
nal world as the real, and finally that ofpleas
ure—pain as the economic respectively. :
-.
That possible vicissitude undergone by ah
mstirict which we call repression willform the
subject of a further inquiry.

[426a]
One of the vicissitudes an instinctual impulse
may undergo is to meet with resistances the
aim of which is to make the impulse inopera
tive. Under certain conditions, which we shall
presently investigate more closely, the impulse
then passes into the state of repression. If it
were a question of the operation of an external
stimulus, obviously flight would be the appro
priate remedy; with an instinct, flight is of no
avail, for the ego cannot escape from itself.
Later on, rejection based on judgment (con
demnation) will be found to be a good weapon
against the impulse. Repression is a-.preliminaryphase of
condemnation,
something between
flight and condemnation; it is a concept which
could not have been formulated before the time
of psycho-analytic research.
It is not easy in theory to deduce the pos
sibility of such a thing as repression. Why
should an instinctual impulse suffer such a fate?
For this to happen, obviously a necessary con
dition must be that attainment of its aim by
the instinct should.produce "pain" instead of
pleasure. But we cannot well Imagine such a
contingency. There are no such instincts; satis
faction of an instinct is always pleasurable. We
should have to assume certain peculiar circum
stances, some sort of process which changes the
pleasure of satisfaction into "pain".
In order the better to define repression we
may discuss some other situations in which
instincts are concerned. It may happen that an
external stimulus becomes internal,
for
ex
ample, by eating into and destroying a bodily
organ, so that a new source of constant excita
tion and increase of tension is
formed. The
stimulus thereby acquires a far-reaching simi
larity to an instinct. We know that a case of
this sort is experienced by us as physical pain.
The aim of this pseudo-instinct, however, is
simply the cessation of the change in the organ
and of the pain accompanying it. There is no
other direct pleasure to be attained by cessation
of the pain. Further, pain is imperative; the
only things which can subdue it are the effect
of some toxic agent in removing it and the in
fluence of some mental distraction.
The case of physical pain is too obscure to
1 Collected Papers, IV; first published in Zeitschrift,
Vol. m
(1915); reprinted in Sammlung, 4th Series.

[426b]
help us much in our purpose. Let us suppose
that an instinctual stimulus such as hunger
remains unsatisfied. It then becomes imperative
and can be allayed by nothing but the appro
priate action for satisfying it; it keeps up a
constant tension of need. Anything-like a re
pression seems in this case to be utterly out
of the question.
So repression is certainly not an essential
result of the tension produced by lack of satis^
faction of an impulse being raised to an unbear
able degree. The weapons of defence of which
the
organism avails
itself to
guard against
that situation must be discussed in another
connection.
. Let us instead confine ourselves to the clinical
experience we meet with in the practice of
psycho-analysis. We then see that the satisfaej
tion of an instinct under repression is quite
possible;
further, that in every instance such
a satisfaction is pleasurable in itself, but is
irreconcilable with other claims and purposes;
it therefore causes pleasure in one part of the
mind and "pain" in another. We see then that
it is a condition of repression that the element
of avoiding "pain" shall have acquired more
strength than the
pleasure
of gratification.
Psycho-analytic experience of the transference
neuroses, moreover, forces us to the conclusion
that repression is not a defence-mechanism
present from the very beginning, and that it
cannot occur until a sharp distinction has been
established between what is conscious and what
is unconscious: that the essence of repression
lies simply in the function of rejecting and
keeping something out of consciousness. This
conception of
repression
would be
supple4
mented by assuming that, before the mental
organization
reaches
this
phase,
the
other
vicissitudes which may befall instincts, e.g.;
reversal into the opposite or turning round upon
the subject, deal with the task of mastering
the instinctual impulses.
It seems to us now that, in view of the very
great extent to which repression and the uncon
scious are correlated, we must defer probing
more deeply into the nature of repression until
we have learnt more about the structure of the
various institutions in the mind—and about
what differentiates consciousness from the un-

[427a]
Repression
conscious. Till we have done this, all we can
do is to put together in purely descriptive
fashion some characteristics of repression noted
in clinical practice, even though we run the
risk of having to repeat unchanged much that
has been said elsewhere.
Now we have reason for assuming a primal
repression, a first phase of repression, which
consists in a denial of entry into consciousness
to the mental (ideational) presentation of the
instinct. This is accompanied by a fixation; the
ideational presentation in question persists un^
altered from then onwards, and the instinct
remains attached to it This is due to certain
properties of unconscious processes of which
we shall speak later.
The second phase of repression, repression
proper, concerns mental derivatives of the re
pressed instinct-presentation, or such trains of
thought as, originating elsewhere, have come
into associative connection with it. On account
of this association, these ideas experience the
same fate as that which underwent primal re
pression. Repression proper, therefore, is ac
tually an after-expulsion. Moreover, it is a
mistake to emphasize only the rejection which
operates from the side of consciousness upon
what is to be repressed. We have to consider
just as much the attraction exercised by what
was originally repressed upon everything with
which it can establish a connection. Probably
the tendency to repression would fail of its
purpose if these forces did not co-operate, if
there were.not something previously repressed
ready to assimilate that which is rejected from
consciousness.
Under the influence of study of the psycho
neuroses, which brings before, us the important
effects of repression, we are inclined to over
estimate their
psychological content and to
forget
too readily that repression does not
hinder the instinct-presentation from continu
ing to exist in the unconscious and from
organizing itself further, putting forth deriv
atives and instituting connections.: Really, re
pression interferes only with the relation of the
instinct-presentation to one system of the mind,
namely, to consciousness.
Psycho-analysis is able to show us something
else which is important for understanding the
effects of repression in the psychoneuroses. It
shows us, for instance,, that the instinct-pres
entation develops in a more unchecked, and,
luxuriant fashion if it is withdrawn by repres
sion from conscious influence. It ramifies like
a fungus, so to speak, in the dark, and takes on

[427b]
423
extreme forms of expression, which when trans^-
lated and revealed to the neurotic are bound
not merely to seem alien to him, but to terrify
him by the way in which they reflect an extraorr
dinary
and
dangerous strength of instinct.
This illusory}strength of instinct is the result
of an uninhibited development ofit in phantasy
and of the dammingrup consequent on lack of
real satisfaction. The fact that this last.result
is bound up with repression-points the direction
in which we have to look for the true signifi
cance of the latter..
In reverting to the contrary aspect,however,
let us state definitely that it is not even correct
to suppose that repression withholds from con*
sciousness
all
the
derivatives
of
what was
primally repressed. If these derivatives are
sufficiently far removed from the repressed
instinct-presentation, whether owing to the
process of distortion or by reason of the number
of intermediate associations, they have free
access to consciousness. It is as though the re
sistance of consciousness, against them was in
inverse proportion to their remoteness from
what was originally repressed. During the
practice of the psycho-analytic method, we
continually require the patient to produce such
derivatives of what has been repressed as, in
consequence either of their remoteness or of
distortion, can pass the censorshipof conscious
ness. Indeed, the associations which werequire
him to give, while refraining from any con
sciously directed train
of thought
or any
criticism,. and from which we reconstruct a
conscious interpretation of the repressed instinct^presentation, are precisely derivatives of
this kind. We then observe that the patient
can
go on spinning a whole chain of such
associations, till he is brought up in the midst
of .them against some thought-formation, the^
relation of which to what is repressed acts so
intensely that he is compelled to repeat his
attempt at repression. Neurotic symptoms, too,
must have fulfilled the condition referred to,
for they are derivatives-of-the repressed, which
has
finally
by
means
of
these
formations
wrested from consciousness the right of way
previously denied it.
We can lay down no general rule concerning
the degree of distortion and remoteness nec
essary before the resistance of consciousness
is abrogated.In this matter a delicate balancing
takes; place, the play of which is hidden from,
us; its .mode of operation, however, leads us to
infer that it is a question of a definite degree
of intensity in the cathexis of the unconscious1-—

[428a]
424
Sigmund Freud
beyond which it would break through, for satis
faction; Repression acts, therefore, in a highfy
specific,manner.in each instance; every single
derivative.of the repressed may have its pecu
liar fate-^a little more or a little less distortion
alters the iffhole issue. In this connection, it
becomes comprehensible that those objects to
which -men give their preference, that is, their
ideals, originate in the^same perceptions and
experiences as those objects of which they have
most abhorrencej and that the two originally
differed from one another only by slight modi
fications. Indeed, as we found in the origin of
the fetish, it is possible for the original instinctpresentation to be split into two, one part
undergoing repression while
the
remainder,
just on account of its Intimate association with
the other, undergoes idealization.
The same result as ensues from an increase
or a decrease in the degree of distortion may
also be achieved at the other end of the appara
tus, so to speak, by a modification in the con
ditions producing pleasure and "pain." Special
devices have been evolved, with the object of
bringing about such changes in the play of
mental forces that what usually gives rise to
"pain" may on this occasion result in pleasure,
and whenever such a device comes into opera
tion the repression of an instinct-presentation
that is ordinarily repudiated is abrogated. The
only one of these^ devices which has till now
been studied in any detail is that of joking.
Generally the lifting of the repression is only
transitory; the repression is immediately re
established.
Observations of this sort, however, suffice
to draw our attention to some further charac
teristics of repression. Not only is it, as we
have just explained, variable and specific, but
it-is. also exceedingly mobile. The process of
repression is not to be regarded as something
which takes place once for all, the results of
which, are permanent, as when some living
thing has been killed and from that time onward
is dead; on the contrary, repression demands
a constant expenditure of energy, and if this
were discontinued the success of the repression
would be jeopardized, so that a fresh act of
repression would be necessary. We may imagine
that what is repressed exercises a continuous
straining; in the direction of consciousness, so
that the balance has
to be kept by means;
of a steady counter-pressure. A7constant ex-'
penditure of energy, therefore, is entailed in
maintaining:'^..repression, and economically its
abrogation denotes a saving. The mobility of

[428b]
the 'repression, incidentally, finds expression
also in the mental characteristics of the con
dition of sleep, which alone renders dreamformation possible. With a return to waking
life, the repressive cathexes which have been
called in are once more put forth;
Finally^ we must not forget that after all
we have said very little about an instinctual
impulse when
we State it to be
repressed.
Without prejudice to the repression, such an
impulse may find itself in widely different con
ditions; it may be inactive, i.e., cathected with
only a low degree of mental energy, or its
degree of cathexis (and consequently its capac
ity for activity) may vary. True, its activity
will not result in a direct abrogation of the
repression, but it will certainly set in motion
all the processes which terminate in a breaking
through into consciousness by circuitous routes.
With undepressed derivatives of the uncon
scious, the fate of a particular idea is often
decided by the degree of its activity or cathexis.
It is an everyday occurrence that such a derivjative can remain undepressed so long as it
represents only a small amount of energy,
although its content is of such a nature as to
give rise to a conflict with conscious control.
But the quantitative factor is manifestly deci
sive for this conflict; as soon as an idea which
is fundamentally offensive exceeds a certain
degree of strength, the conflict takes on actu
ality, and it is precisely activation of the idea
that leads to its repression. So that, where
repression is concerned, an increase in energifc
cathexis operates in the same way as an ar>-
proach to the unconscious, while a decrease in
that energy operates Hke distance from the
unconscious or Hke distortion. We understand
that the repressing tendencies can find a substi
tute for repression in a weakening or lessening
of whatever is distasteful to them.
|
In our discussion hitherto we have dealt with
the repression of an instinct-presentation, and
by that we understood an idea or group of ideas
which is cathected with a definite amount of
the mental energy (libido, interest) pertaining
to an instinct. Now clinical observation forces
us further to dissect something that hitherto
we have conceived of as a single entity, for it
shows us that beside the idea there is something
else, another presentation of the instinct to be
considered, and that this other element under
goes a repression which may be quite different
from that of theidea. We have adopted the
term charge of affect-for'"this other element in
the mental presentation; it represents that part

[429a]
Repression
of the instinct which has become detached from
the idea, and finds proportionate expression,
according to its quantity;in processes which be
come observable to perception as affects. From
this pointson, in describing a case of repress
sion, we must follow up the fate of the idea
which
undergoes repression separately from
that of the instinctual energy attached to the
idea. •;...
•:••..
We should be glad enough to be able to give
some general account of the outcome of both
of these, and when we have taken our bearings
a little we shall actually be able to do so. In
general, repression of the ideational presenta
tion of an instinct can surely only have the
effect of causing it to vanish from conscious
ness, if it had previously been in consciousness,
or of holding it back, if it is about to enter it.
The difference, after all, is not important; it
amounts to much the same thing as the differ
ence between ordering an undesirable guest out
of my drawing-room or out of my front hall,
and'refusing to let him cross my threshold once
I, have recognized him/
The
fate
of
the
quantitative factor in the instinct-presentation
may be one of three, as we see by a cursory
survey of the observations made through psy--
cho-analysis: either the instinct is altogether
suppressed,, so that no trace of it is found, or
it appears in the guise of an affect of a partic
ular qualitative tone, or it is transformed into
anxiety^ With the two last possibilities we are
obliged to focus our attention upon the trans
formation
into
affects,
and
especially
into
anxiety, of the mental energy belonging to the
instincts,, this being; a new possible vicissitude
undergone by Ian: instinct.
:: . :
We recall the fact that the motive and pur
pose of repression was simply the avoidance of
"pain." It; follows that-the fate of the charge
of affect belonging to the presentation is far
more important than that of the Ideational
content of it and is decisive .for the opinion
we form of the jprocess of repression.; If a repressiondoes not succeed in preventing feelings
of "pain"^or anxiety from-arising, we may say
that•it has ~failed, even though it may have
achieved its aim as far as the:ideationalelement
is concerned: Naturally, the xase of unsuccess
ful repression will have more claim on our
interest than that of repression:which.isi even*
^This metaphor, applicable to the process of repres
sion, inay also be extended to include oiie'ttf tlie; char
acteristics of repression mentioned, earlier.. I need only
add that "I have to,olaqe, a^, sentinel40,keep iconstant
guard over the door which I have forbidden this .guest
idCpass, lest lie should biirM it open (see #bove;)i:>
r

[429b]
42S
tually successful; the latter will, for the most
part, elude our study.
We now wish to gain some insight into the
mechanism of the process of repression, and
especially we want to know whether it has a
single mechanism only, or more than one, and
whether perhaps each of the psychoneuroses
may.be distinguished by a characteristic repres
sion-mechanism peculiar to itself.At the outset
of this inquiry, however, we encounter compli
cations. The mechanism of a repression be
comes accessible to us only when we deduce
it from its final results. If we confine our
observations to the results of its effect on the
ideational part of the instinct-presentation, we
discover that as a rule repression creates a
substitute-formation. What, then, is the; mech
anism of such a substitute-formation,:br 'must
•we distinguish several mechanisms here /also?
Further,
we
know
that
repression
leaves
symptoms in its train. May we then regard
substitute-formation and symptom-formation
as coincident processes, and, if this is on :the
whole;possible, does the mechanism of substi
tute-formation coincidewith that of repression?
So far as we know at present, it seemsprobable
that the two are widely divergent, that it is
not the repression itself which produces sub
stitute-formations
and
symptoms,, but
that
these latter constitute indicationsi of a return
of the repressed and owe their existence to
quite other processes. It would also seem
advisable to examine the mechanisms of sub
stitute- and symptom-formation before those
of repression.
Obviously there is no ground:here for spec
ulation to explore: on the contrary;:the solution
of the problem must be found by careful
analysis of the results of repression observable
in the individual neuroses. I must, however,
suggest that we should postpone this task, too,
until we have formed reliable conceptions of
the relation of consciousness to the unconscious.
Only, in-order that the. present discussion may
not be quite unfruitful, I will anticipate by
saying: (1) that.the mechanism of repression
does not in fact coincide with the mechanism
or mechanisms of substitute-formation, (2)
that there are many: different mechanisms. of
substitute-formation, and (3) that the different
"mechanisms of repression-have atcleast thisone
thing in common: a withdrawal of energtc
cathexis (or of libido, if it isr a question .of
sexual instincts),-.-'.yy:--;-»-rr :?;ov-j. :
v
-.. Further, confining myself to the three best^
known forms of psychoneurosis,; I willrshow

[430a]
426
Sigmtjnd Freud
by means of some examples how the concep
tions here introduced find application to the
study of repression. From anxiety-hysteria, I
will choose an instance which has been sub
jected to thorough analysis—that of an animalphobia. The instinctual impulse subjected to
repression here is a libidinal attitude towards
the father, coupled with dread of him. After
repression, this impulse vanishes out of con
sciousness:
the
father
does
not appear in
consciousness as an object for the Hbido. As a
substitute for him we find in a corresponding
situation some animal which is more or less
suited to be an object of dread. The substituteformation of the ideational element has estab
lished itself by way of a displacement along
the line of a series of associated ideas which is
determined in some particular way. The quanti
tative element has not vanished, but has been
transformed into anxiety. The result is a fear
of a wolf, instead of a claim for love from the
father. Of course the categories here employed
are not enough to supply a complete expla
nation even of the simplest case of psychoneurosis: there are always other points of view to
be taken into account.
Such a repression as that which takes place
in an animal-phobia
must be
described as
radically unsuccessful. All that it has done is
to remove the idea and set another in its place;
it has not succeeded at all in its aim of avoid
ing "pain." On this account, too, the work of
the neurosis, far from ceasing, proceeds into a
second
movement,
so to
speak,
which
is
designed
to attain its immediate and more
important aim. There: follows an attempt at
flight, the formation of the phobia proper—a
number of things have to be avoided in order
to prevent an outbreak of anxiety. A more
particular investigation would
enable us to
understand the mechanism by which the phobia
achieves its aim.
We are led to quite another view of the
process of repression when we consider the pic
ture of a true conversion-hysteria. Here the
salient point is that it is possible to bring about
a total disappearance of the charge of affect.
The patient then displays towards his symp
toms what Charcot called "la belle indiffSrence
des hystSriques." At other times, this suppres
sion is not so completely successful: a part of
the sensation of distress attaches to the symp
toms themselves, or it has proved impossible
entirely to prevent outbreaks of anxiety, and
this in its turn sets the mechanism of phobiaformation working. The ideational content of

[430b]
the instinct-presentation is completely with
drawn,from consciousness; as a substitute-for
mation—and concurrently, as a symptom—we
have an excessive innervation (in typical cases,
a somatic innervation), sometimes of a sensory,
sometimes of a motor character, either as an
excitation or as
an inhibition. The
area of
over-innervation proves on closer observation
to belong to the repressed instinct-presentation
itself, and, as if by a process of condensation,
to have absorbed the whole cathexis. Of course,
these remarks do not cover the whole mechaf
nism of a conversion-hysteria; the element of
regression especially, which will be appraised
in another connection, has to be taken into
account.
In so far as it is rendered possible only by
means of extensive substitute-formations, the
repressionwhich takes place in hysteria may be
pronounced entirely unsuccessful; with refer
ence to mastering the charge of affect however,
which is the real task of repression, it generally
betokens a complete success. Again, in convert
sion-hysteria the process of repression termi
nates with the formation of the symptom and
does not, as in anxiety-hysteria, need to proceed
to a second-movement—or, strictly speaking,
an unlimited number of movements.
A totally different aspect of repression is
shown in the third affection to which we are
referring for purposes of this comparison: in
the obsessional neurosis. Here we are at first in
doubt what it is that we have to regard as the
repressed instinct-presentation—a libidinal or
a hostile trend. This uncertainty arises because
the obsessional neurosis rests on the premise
of a regression by means of which a sadistic
trend has been substituted for a tender one. It
is this hostile impulse against a loved person
which has undergone repression. The effect at
an early phase of the work of repression is
quite different from that produced later. At
first the repression is completely successful, the
ideational content is rejected, and the affect
made to disappear. As a substitute-formation,
there arises an alteration in the ego, an in
creased sensitiveness of conscience, which can
hardly be called a symptom. Substitute- and
symptom-formation do not coincide here. Here,
too, we learn something about the mechanism
of repression. Repression, as it invariably does,
has brought about a withdrawal of hbido, but
for this purpose it has made use of a reactionformation, by intensifying an antithesis. So
here the
substitute-formation has the same
mechanism as the repression and at bottom

[431a]
coincides with it, while yet chronologically, as
well as in its content, it is distinct from the
symptom-formation. It is very probable that the
whole process is made possible by the ambiv
alent relation into which the sadistic impulse
destined for repression has been introduced.
But the repression, at first successful, does
not hold; in the further course of things its
failure becomes increasingly obvious. The am
bivalence'which has allowed' repression to come
into being by means of reaction-formation also
constitutes the point at which the repressed
succeeds in breaking through again. The van
ished affect is transformed, without any dim
inution, into dread of the community, pangs of
conscience, or
self-reproaches;
the
rejected
idea is replaced by a displacement-substitute,
often by displacement on to something utterly
trivial or indifferent. For the most part, there
is an unmistakable tendency to complete reestablishment of the repressed idea. Failure of
repression of.the quantitative.factor brings into
play, by means of various taboos and prohibi
tions, the same mechanismof flight as we have
seen at work in the formation of hysterical

[431b]
Repression
427
phobias. The rejection of the idea from con
sciousness is, however, obstinately maintained,
because it ensures abstention from action, pre
clusion of the motor expression of an impulse.
So the final form of the work of repression in
the obsessional neurosis is a sterile and neverending struggle.
The short series of comparisons which have
been presented here may easily convince us
that
more comprehensive investigations are
necessary before we can hope to understand
thoroughly theprocesses connected with repres
sion and the formation of neurotic symptoms.
The extraordinary intricacy of all the factors
to be taken into consideration leaves us only
one way open by which to present them. We
must select first one and then another point of
view, and follow it up through the material at
our disposal, as long as application of it seems
to prove fruitful. Each separate point so treated
wiU be incomplete in itself and there cannot
fail to be. obscurities where we touch upon
material not previously dealt with; but we may
hope that the final synthesis of them all will
lead to a good understanding of the subject.

[432a]
Psycho-analysis has taught us that the es
sence of the process of repression lies, not in
abrogating or annihilating the ideational pres
entation Of an instinct, but in withholding it
from becoming conscious. We then say of the
idea that it is in a state of unconsciousness, of
being not apprehended by the conscious mind,
and we can produce convincing proofs to show
that unconsciously it can also produce effects,
even of a kind that finally penetrate to con
sciousness. Everything that is repressed must
remain unconscious, but at the very outset let
us state that the repressed does not comprise
the whole unconscious. The unconscious has the
greater compass: the repressed is a part of the
unconscious.
How are we to arrive at a knowledge of the
unconscious? It is, of course, only as something
conscious that we know anything of it, after it
has undergone
transformation or translation
into something conscious. The possibility of
such translation is a matter of everyday ex
perience in psycho-analytic work. In order to
achieve this, it is necessary that the person
analysed should overcome certain resistances,
the very same as those which at some earlier
time placed the material in question under re
pression by rejecting it from consciousness.
I. Justification for the Conception of the
Unconscious
In many quarters our justification is disputed
for assuming the existence of an unconscious
system in the mind and for employing such an
assumption for purposes of scientific work. To
this we can reply that our assumption of the
existence of the unconscious is necessary and
legitimate, and that we possess manifold proofs
of the existence of the unconscious. It is nec
essary because the data of consciousness are
exceedingly defective; both in healthy and in
sick persons, mental acts are often in process
which can be explained only by presupposing
other acts, of which consciousness yields no
evidence. These include not only the
parapraxes2 and dreams of healthy persons, and
1 Collected Papers, IV; first published in Zeitschrift,
Vol. m (1915); reprinted in Sammlung, 4th Series.
2 E.g., slips of the tongue, mislaying of objects, etc.
—TR.

[432b]
The Unconscious1
everything designated a mental symptom or an
obsession in the sick"; our most intimate-daily
experience introduces us to sudden ideas of the
source of which we are ignorant, and to results
of mentation arrived at we know not how. All
these conscious acts remain disconnected and
unintelligible if we are determined to hold fajst
to the claim that every single mental act per
formed within us must be consciously experi
enced; on the other hand, they fall into a
demonstrable connection if we interpolate the
unconscious acts that we infer. A gain in mean
ing and
connection, however, is a perfectly
justifiable motive, one which may well carry us
beyond the
limitations of direct experience.
When, after this, it appears that the assump
tion of the unconscious helps us to construct
a highly successful practical method, by which
we are enabled to exert a useful influence upon
the course of conscious processes, this success
will have won us an incontrovertible proof of
the existence of that which we assumed. We
become obliged, then, to take up the position
that it is both untenable and presumptuous to
claim that whatever goes on in the mind must
be known to consciousness.
We can go further and in support of an un
conscious mental state allege that only a small
content is embraced by consciousness at any
given moment, so that the greater part of what
we call conscious knowledge must in any case
exist for very considerable periods of time in
a condition of latency, that is to say, of uncon
sciousness, of not being apprehended by the
mind. When all our latent memories are taken
into consideration, it becomes totally incom
prehensible how the existence of the uncon
scious can be gainsaid. We then encounter the
objection that these latent recollections can no
longer be described as mental processes, but
that they correspond to residues of somatic
processes
from which something mental can
once more proceed. The obvious answer to this
should be that a latent memory is, on the con
trary, indubitably a residuum of a mental proc
ess. But it is more important to make clear to
our own minds that this objection is based on
the identification—not, it is true, explicitly
stated, but regarded as axiomatic—of conscious
and mental. This identificationis either a petitio
428

[433a]
The Unconscious
4*9
principM and begs the question whether all that
is mental is also necessarily conscious, or else
it is a matter of convention, of nomenclature.
In this latter case, it is, of course, no more
open to refutation than any other convention.
The only question that remains is whether it
proves so useful that we must needs adopt it.
To this we may reply that the conventional
identification of the mental with the conscious
is thoroughly unpractical. It breaks up all men
tal continuity, plunges us into the insoluble
difficulties of psychophysical parallelism, is open
to the reproach that without any manifest
grounds it overestimates the part played by
consciousness, and finally it forces us prema
turely to retire from the territory of psycho
logical research without being able to offer us
any compensation elsewhere.
At any rate, it is clear that the question—
whether the latent states of mental life, whose
existence is undeniable, are to be conceived of
as unconscious mental: states or as physical
ones—threatens to resolve itself into a war of
words. We shall, therefore, be better advised to
give prominence to what we know with cer
tainty of the nature of these debatable states.
Now, as far as their physical characteristics are
concerned, they are totally inaccessible to us:
no physiological conception nor chemical proc
ess can give us any notion of their nature. On
the other hatidi we know for certain that they
have abundant points ofrcontact with conscious
mental processes; on being submitted to a cer
tain method of operation they may be trans
formed into or replaced by conscious processes,
and all the categories which we employ to
describe conscious mental acts, such as ideas;
purposes, resolutions, and so forth, can be ap
plied to them. Indeed, of many of these latent
states we have to assert that the only point in
which they differ from states which are con
scious is just in the lack of consciousness of
them. So we shall not hesitate to treat them
as objects of psychological research, arid that
in the most intimate connection with conscious
mental acts.
The stubborn denial of a mental quality to
latent mental processes may be accounted for
by the circumstance that most of the phenom
ena in question have not been objects bf1study
outside psycho-analysis. Anyone who. is igno
rant of the facts of pathology, who regards the
blunders of normal persons as accidental, and
who is content with the old saw that dreams
are froth need only ignore a few more problems
of the psychology of consciousness in order to

[433b]
dispense with the assumption of an unconscious
mental activity. As ifr happens, hypnotic ex--
periments, and especially post-hypnotic sugges
tion, had demonstrated tangibly, even before
the time of psycho-analysis, the existence and.
mode of operation of the unconscious in the
mind.
The assumption of an unconscious is, more
over, in a further respect a perfectly legitimate
one, inasmuch as in postulating it we do not
depart a single step from our customary and
accepted mode of thinking. By the medium of
consciousness, each one of us becomes aware
only of his own states of mind; that another
man possesses consciousness is a conclusion
drawn by analogy from the
utterances and
actions we perceive him to make, and it is
drawn in order that this behaviour.of his may
become intelligible to us. (It would probably
be psychologically more correct to put it thus:
that without any special reflection we impute:
to
everyone
else
our own constitution and
therefore also our consciousness, and that this
identification is a necessary condition of under
standing in us.) This conclusion—or identifica
tion—was formerly extended by the ego to
other human beings, to animals, plants, inani*
mate matter, and to the world at large, and
proved useful as long as the correspondence
with the individual ego was overwhelmingly
great; but it became more untrustworthy in
proportion as the gulf between the 'ego and'they
non-ego widened. Today, our judgment is al~
ready in doubt on the question of consciousness'
in animals; we refuse to admit it in plants and
we relegate to mysticism the assumption of itsexistence in inanimate matter. But even where
the original tendency to identification has with
stood criticism—-that is, when the non-ego is
our
fellow-man—the assumption
of
a
con
sciousness in him rests upon an inference and
cannot share the direct certainty we have of
our own consciousness.
Now psycho-analysis demands nothing more
than that we should apply this method of in-'
ference
to
ourselves
also-—a proceeding
to
which, it is true,-we are not constitutionally
disposed. If we do this, wemust say that all>
the acts and manifestations- which I notice in'
myself and do not know how to link up with
the rest of my mental life must be judged as1
if they belonged to someone else and are to be
explained by the mental-'life ascribed tb that
person. Further, experience shows that we un
derstand very well how to interpret in others
(i;e.i how to fit into their mental context)-'those1

[434a]
430
SlGMUND
same acts which we refuse to acknowledge as
mentally conditioned in ourselves. Some special
hindrance evidently deflects our investigations
from ourselves and interferes with our obtain
ing true knowledge of ourselves.
Now this method of inference, applied to
oneself in spite of inner opposition, does not
lead to the discovery of an unconscious, but
leads logically to the assumption of another,
second consciousness which is united in myself
with the consciousness I
know. But at this
point criticism may fairly make certain com
ments. In the first place, a consciousness of
which its own possessor knows nothing is some
thing very different from
that of another
person, and it is questionable whether such a
consciousness, lacking, as it does, its most im
portant characteristic, is worthy of any further
discussion at all. Those who have contested the
assumption of an unconscious system in the
mind will not be content to accept in its place
an unconscious consciousness. Secondly, analy
sis
shows that the individual latent mental
processesinferred by us enjoy a high degree of
independence, as though each had no connec
tion with another, and knew nothing about any
other. We must be prepared, it would appear,
to assume the existence not only of a second
consciousness*in us, but of a third and fourth
also, perhaps of an infinite series of states of
consciousness, each and all unknown to us and
to one another. In the third placer—and this is
the most weighty argument of all—we have to
take into account that analytic investigation
reveals some of these latent processes as having
characteristics and peculiarities which
seem
alien to us, or even incredible, and running
directly counter to the well-known attributes
of consciousness. This justifies us in modifying
our inference about ourselves and saying that
What is proved is not a second consciousness in
us, but the existence of certain mental opera
tions lacking in the quality of consciousness. We
shall also, moreover^ be right in rejecting the
term subconsciousness as incorrect and mislead
ing. The knowneases ofdouble conscience (split
ting of consciousness) prove nothing against
our view. They may most accurately be de
scribed as cases of a splitting of the mental
activities into, two. groups, whereby a single
consciousness takes up its position alternately
with either the one or the other of these groups.
In psycho-analysis there is no choice for us
but to declare mental processes to be in them
selves unconscious, and to compare the percep
tion of them by consciousness with the per-

[434b]
Freud
ception
of
the
outside
world
through the
sense-organs; we even hope to extract some
fresh
knowledge from
the
comparison.
The
psycho-analytic
assumption
of
unconscious
mental activity appears to us, on the one hand,
a further development of that primitive ani
mism which caused our own consciousness to
be reflected in all around us; and, on the other
hand, it seems to be an extension of the cor
rections begun by Kant in regard to our views
on external perception. Just as Kant warned us
not to overlook the fact that our perception is
subjectively conditioned and must not be re
garded as identical with the phenomena perr
ceived but never really discerned, so psycho
analysis bids us not to set conscious perception
in the place of the unconscious mental process
which is its object. The mental, like the phys
ical, is not necessarily in reality just what it
appears to us to be. It is, however, satisfactory
to find that the correction of inner perception
does not present difficulties so great as that of
outer perception—that the inner object is less
hard to discern truly than is the outside world.
II. Different Significance of the Term Uncon
scious ; the Topographical Aspect
Before going any further, let us note the im
portant, though inconvenient, fact that.unconsciousness is only one attribute of the mental
and by no means suffices to describe its char
acter. There are mental acts of very varying
values which yet have in common the character
istic of being
unconscious. The unconscious
comprises^ on the one hand, processes which
are merely latent, temporarily unconscious, but
which differ in no other respect from conscious
ones and, on the other hand, processes such as
those which have undergone repression, which
if they came into consciousness must stand out
in the crudest contrast to the rest of the con
scious mind. It would put an end to all mis
understandings if, from now on, in describing
the various kinds of mental acts we were to
pay no attention to whether they were con
scious or unconscious, but, when classifying
and correlating them, inquired only to which
instincts and aims they were related, how they
were composed and to which of the systems in
the mind that are superimposed one upon an
other they belonged. This, however, is for vari
ous reasons impracticable, and it follows that
we cannot escape the imputation of ambiguity
in that we use the words conscious and uncon
scious sometimes in a descriptive and some
times in a systematic sense, in which latter they

[435a]
The Unconscious
431
signify inclusion in some particular system and
possession of certain characteristics. We might
still attempt to avoid confusion by employing
for the recognized mental systems certain arbi
trarily chosen names which have no reference
to consciousness. Only we should first have to
justify the principles on which we distinguish
the systems, and we should not be able to
ignore the question of consciousness, seeing that
it forms the point of departure for all our in
vestigations. Perhaps we may look for some
assistance from the proposal to employ, at any
rate in writing, the abbreviation Cs for con
sciousness and the
Ucs for the unconscious
when we are using the two words in the sys
tematic sense.
To deal with the positive aspects, we now
assert on the findings of psycho-analysis that a
mental act commonly goes through two phases,
between which is interposed a kind of testing
process
(censorship). In the first phase, the
mental act is unconscious and belongs to the
system Ucs; if upon the scrutiny of the censor
ship it is rejected, it is not allowed to pass into
the second phase; it is then said to be repressed
and must remain unconscious. If, however, it
passes this scrutiny, it enters upon the second
phase and thenceforth belongs to the second
system, which we will call the Cs. But the fact
that it -so belongs does not unequivocally de
termine its relation to-consciousness. It is-not
yet conscious, but it is certainly capable of
entering consciousness, according to J. Breuer's
expression; that is, it can now, without any
special resistance and given certain conditions,
become the object of consciousness. In consid
eration of this capacity to become conscious,
we also call the system Cs the preconscious. If
it should turn out that a certain censorship
also determines whether the preconscious be
comes conscious, we shall discriminate more
sharply between the systems Pes and Cs. For
the present let it suffice us to bear in mind that
the system Pes shares the characteristics of the
Cs, and that the rigorous censorship, exercises
its office at the point of transition from the
Ucs to the Pes (or Cs).
By accepting the existence of these (two or
three) mental systems, psycho-analysis has de
parted a step further from the descriptive psy
chology of consciousness and has taken to it
self a new problem and a new content. Up till
now, it differed from academic (descriptive)
psychology mainly by reason of its dynamic
conception of mental processes; now we have
to add that it professes to consider mental

[435b]
topography also, and to indicate in respect of
any given mental operation within what system
or between what systems it runs its course.
This attempt, too, has won it the name of
depth-psychology. We shall hear that it may be
further amplified by yet another aspect of the
subject.
If we wish to treat seriously the notion of a
topography of mental acts, we must direct our
interest to a doubt which arises at this point.
When a mental act (let us confine ourselves
here to an act of ideation) is transferred from
the system Ucs into the system Cs (or Pes),
are we to suppose that this transposition in
volves a.iresh. registration .comparable to a
second record of the idea in question, situated,
moreover, in a fresh locality in the mind and
side by side with which the original unconscious
record continues to exist? Or are we rather to
believe that the transformation consists in a
change in the state of the idea, involving the
same material and occurring in the same local
ity? This question may appear abstruse, but it
must beputif we wish to form a more definite
conception of mental topography, of the depthdimension in the mind. It is a difficult one be
cause it goes beyond pure
psychology
and
touches on the relations of the mental appara
tus to anatomy. We know that a rough corre
lation of this sort exists. Research has afforded
irrefutable proof that mental activity is bound
up with the function of the brain as with that
of no other organ. The discovery of the unequal
importance of the different parts of the brain
and their individual relations to particular parts
of the body and to intellectual activities takes
us a step further—we do not know how big a
step. But every attempt to deduce from these
facts a localization of mental processes, every
endeavour to think of ideas as stored up in
nerve-cells and of excitations as passing along
nerve-fibres, has completely miscarried. The
same fate would await any doctrine which at
tempted to recognize, let us say, the anatomical
position of the system C*—conscious mental
activity—in the cortex and to localize the un
conscious processes in the subcortical parts of
the brain. Here there is an hiatus which at
present cannot be filled, nor is it one of the
tasks of psychology to fill it. Our mental topog
raphy has for the present nothing to do with
anatomy; it is concerned not with anatomical
locations, but with regions in the mental ap
paratus, irrespective of their possible situation
in the body.
In this respect, then, our work is untram-

[436a]
432
Sigmund Freud
melled and may proceed according to its own
requirements. It will, moreover, be useful for
us to remind ourselves that our hypotheses can
in the first instance lay claim only to the value
of illustrations.The former of the two possibil
ities which we considered—namely, that the
conscious phase of an idea implies a fresh rec
ord of it, whichmust be Idealized elsewhere-—is
doubtless the cruder but also the more con
venient. The
second assumption—that of a
merely functional change of state—is a priori
more probable, but it is less plastic, less easy
to handle. With the first, or topographical, as
sumption is bound up that of a topographical
separation of the systems Cs and Ucs and also
the possibility that an idea may exist simulta
neously in two parts of the mental apparatus—
indeed, that if it isnotinhibited by thecensor
ship, it regularly advances from the one posi
tion to the other, possibly without its first
location or record being abandoned. This-may
seem odd, but it can be supported by observa
tions from psycho-analytic practise.
If we communicate to a patient some idea
which he has at one time repressed but which
we have discovered in him, our telling him
makes at first no change in his mental condi
tion. Above all, it does not remove the repres
sion nor undo its effects, as might perhaps be
expected from the fact that the previously un
conscious idea has now become conscious. On
the contrary, all that we shall achieve at first
will be a fresh rejection of the repressed idea;
At this point, however, the patient has in actual
fact the same idea in two forms in two separate
localities in his mental apparatus: first, he has
the conscious memory of the auditory impres
sion of the idea conveyed in what we told him,
and, secondly and side by side with this, he
has—as we know for certain-—the unconscious
memory of his actual experience existing in
him in its earlier form. Now in reality there is
no lifting of the repression until the conscious
idea,
after overcoming
the
resistances,
has
united with the
unconscious
memory-trace.
Only through bringing the latter itself into
consciousness is the effect achieved. On super
ficial consideration this would seem to show
that conscious and unconscious ideas are dif
ferent and topographically^separated records of
the same content. But a moment's reflection
shows that;-the identity of the information
given-to the1patient with his own repressed
memory is'only apparent. To have listened to
something and to have experienced something
are psychologicallytwo different things, even

[436b]
though the content of each be the same. ;.v~
So, for the moment,'we are not able to de?
cide between the two possibilities that we have
discussed. Perhaps later on we shall come upon
certain factors which may turn the balance in
favour of one or the other. Perhaps we shall
discover that our question, as we formulated
it; was not sufficiently comprehensive and that
the difference between a conscious and an unconscience idea has to be defined quite other
wise.
III. Unconscious Emotions
•....••
.
-
'' i
We limited the foregoing discussion to ideas
and may now raise a new question, the answer
to which must contribute to the elucidation of
our theoretical position. We said that there
were conscious and unconscious ideas; but are
there also unconscious; instinctual impulses,
emotions, and feelings, or are such construc
tions in this instance devoid of any meaning?
•!'I am indeed of opinion that the antithesis of
conscious and unconscious does not hold for
instincts. An instinct caii never be an objeit
of consciousness—only the idea that represents
the instinct. Even in the unconscious^ more
over, it can only be represented by the idea. If
the instinct did not attach itself to an idea or
manifest itself as an affective state, we could
know nothingabout it. Thoughwe do speak of
an unconscious or a repressed instinctual im
pulse, this is a looseness of phraseology which
is quite harmless. We can only mean an instinc
tual
impulse the ideational presentation of
which is unconscious, for nothing else comes
into consideration.
|
We should expect the answer to the question
about unconscious feelings, emotions, and af
fects to be just as easily given. It is surely of
the essence of an emotion that we should feel
it, i.e., that it should enter consciousness. So
for emotions, feelings, and affects to be uncon
scious would be quite out of the question. Bit
in psycho-analytic practise we are accustomed
to speak of unconscious love, hate, anger, etc.,
and find it impossible to avoid even the strange
conjunction, unconscious consciousness of guilt,
or a paradoxical unconscious anxiety. Is there
more meaning in the use'of these terms than
there is in speaking of unconscioiis instincts?
The two cases are really not on all fours. To
begin with, it may happen that an affect or an
emotion is perceived, but misconstrued. By the
repression of its proper presentation, it is forced
to become connected with another idea, and is
now interpreted by consciousness as the ex-

[437a]
pression of this other idea. If we restore the
true connection, we call the original affect un
conscious, although the affect was never unconr
conscious, but its ideational presentation had
undergone repression. In any event, the use of
such terms as unconscious affect and emotion
has reference to the fate undergone, in conse
quence of repression, by the quantitative factor
in the instinctual impulse.1 We know that an
affect may be subjected to three different vicis
situdes: either it remains, wholly or in part, as
it is; or it is transformed into a qualitatively
different charge of affect, above all into anxi
ety; or it is suppressed, i.e., its development
is hindered altogether. (These possibilities may
perhaps be studied even more easily in the
technique of the dream-work than in the neu
roses.) We know, too, that to suppress the
development of affect is the true aim of repres
sion and that its work does not terminate if
this aim is not achieved. In every instance
where repression has succeeded in inhibiting
the development of an affect we apply the term
unconscioiis to those affects that are restored
when we undo the work of repression. So it
cannot be denied that the use of the terms in
question is logical; but a comparison of the un
conscious affect with the unconscious idea re
veals the significant difference that the uncon
scious idea continues, after repression, as an
actual formation in the system Ucs, whilst to
the unconscious affect there corresponds in the
same system only a potential disposition which
is prevented from developing further. So that,
strictly speaking, although no fault be found
with the mode of expression in question, there
are no unconscious affects in the sense in which
there are unconscious ideas. But there may very
well be in the system Ucs affect-formations
which, like others, come
into consciousness.
The whole difference arises from the fact that
ideas
are
cathexes^-ultimately of
memorytraces^—whilst affects and emotions correspond
with processes of discharge, the final expression
of which is perceived as feeling. In the present
state of our knowledge of affects and emotions,
we cannot express this difference more clearly.
It is of especial interest to us to have estab
lished the fact that repression can succeed in
inhibiting the transformation of an instinctual
impulse into affective expression. This shows us
that the system Cs normally controls affectivity as well as access to motility; and this en
hances the importance of repression, since it
shows us that the latter is responsible* not
1 Cf. the preceding paper on Repression, p; 422.

[437b]
The Unconscious
433
merely when something is withheld from con
sciousness, but also when affective development
and the inauguration of muscular activity is
prevented. Conversely, too, we may say that as
long as the system Cs controls activity and
motility, the mental condition of the person in
question may be called normal. Nevertheless,
there is an unmistakable difference in the re
lation of the controlling,system to the tw.o
allied
processes of discharge.2 Whereas the
control of the system Cs over voluntary motilr
ity is firmly rooted, regularly withstands the
onslaught of neurosis, and only breaks down in
psychosis, the control of the Cs over affective
development is less firmly established. Even in
normal life we can recognize that a constant
struggle for primacy over affectivity goes on
between the two systems Cs and Pes, that cer
tain spheres, of influence are marked off one
from another, and that the forces at work tend
to mingle.
The importance of the system Cs (Pes) fox
the avenues of affective and motor. discharge
enables us to understand also the role which
falls to substitutive ideas in determining the
form of a disease. It is possible for affective
development to proceed directly from the sys
tem Ucs; in this case it always has the charac
ter of anxiety, the substitute for all repressed
affects. Often, however, the instinctual impulse
has to wait until it has found a substitutive
idea in the system Cs. Affective development
can then proceed from this conscious substi
tute, the nature of which determines the quali
tative character of the affect. We have asserted
that, under repression, a severance takes place
between the affect and the idea ,-to which it
belongs, and that each then fulfils its separate
destiny. For purposes of description this is in
controvertible; in actuality, however, the affect
does not as a rule arise until it has succeeded
in penetrating into the Cs in attachment to
some new substitutive idea.
IV. Topography and Dynamics of Repression
. So far we have gathered from our discussion
that repression is essentially a process affect
ing ideas, on the border between the systems
Ucs and Pes (Cs), and we can now make a
fresh attempt to describe this process more
minutely. It must be a matter of withdrawal
of cathexis; but the question is': in what system
''"Affectivity manifests itself essentially in
motor
(i.e., secretory and circulatory) discharge resulting in
an
(internal)
alteration
of
the
subject's own
body
without reference
to
the
outer world;
motility, in
actions designed to effect changes in the outer world.

[438a]
434
Sigmund Freud
does the withdrawal take place and to which
system, does the cathexis withdrawn belong?
In the Ucs the repressed idea remains capa
ble of action and must therefore have retained
its cathexis. So it must be something else which
has been withdrawn. Let us take the case of
repression proper (after-expulsion), asit affects
an idea which is preconscious or even has al
ready entered consciousness. Repression can
consist here only in the withdrawal from the
idea of the (pre)conscious cathexis which be
longs to the system Pes. The ideathen remains
without cathexis, or receives cathexis from the
Ucs, or retains the unconscious cathexis which
it previously had. We have, therefore, with
drawal of the preconscious, retention of the
unconscious, or substitution of an unconscious
for a preconscious, cathexis. We notice, more
over, that we have unintentionally, as it were,
based these reflections upon the assumption
that the transition from the system Ucs to the
system nearest to it is not effected through
the making of a new record but through a
change in its state, an alteration in its cathexis.
The functionalhypothesishas here easilyrouted
the topographical.
But this process of withdrawalof libidodoes
not suffice to make comprehensible to us an
other characteristic of repression. It is not clear
why the idea which has retained its cathexis, or
has received cathexis from the Ucs, should not,
in virtue of its cathexis, renew the attempt to
penetrate into the system Pes. The withdrawal
of libido would then have to be repeated, and
the same performance would recur intermina
bly, but the result would not be repression. In
the same way?the- mechanism just discussed of
withdrawal of preconsGious cathexis-would-fail
to explain the processof primal repression; for
here we have to consider an unconscious idea
which as yet has receivedno cathexis from the
Pes and therefore cannot be deprived of it.
What we are looking for, therefore, is an
other process which maintains the repression
in the first case and, in the second, ensures its
being established and continued; and this other
process we can only find in the assumption of
an anti-cathexis, by means of which the system
Pes guards itself against the intrusion of the
unconscious idea. We shall see from clinical ex
amples how such an anti-cathexis established
in the system Pes manifests itself. This it is
which represents the continuous effort demand
ed by a primal repression but also guarantees
its persistence. The anti-cathexis is the sole
mechanismof primal repression; in the case of

[438b]
repression proper (after-expulsion) there is in
addition withdrawal of the preconscious ca
thexis. It is quite possible that the cathexis
withdrawn from the idea is the very one used
for anti-cathexis.
We see how we have gradually been led to
introduce a third point of view into the scheme
of mental phenomena—besidethe dynamic and
the topographical, we take the economic stand
point, one from which we try to follow out the
fate of given volumes of excitation and to
achieve, at least relatively, some assessment of
it. It will be only right to give a special name
to the way of regarding things which is the
final result of psycho-analytic, research. I pro
pose that, when we succeed in describing a
mental process in all its aspects, dynamic, topo
graphic, and economic,we shall call this a metapsychological presentation. We must say be
forehand that in
the present state of
our
knowledge we shall succeed in this only at
isolated points.
Let us make a tentative effort to give a
metapsychological description of the process of
repression in the three transference neuroses,
which are familiar to us. Here we may substi
tute for the term cathexis that of libido, be
cause, as we know, in this case it is the fates
of sexual impulses with ..which we are dealing.
In anxiety-hysteria a preliminary phase of
the process is frequently overlooked, perhaps
indeed is really omitted; on careful observation,
however, it can be clearly discerned. It consists
in anxiety appearing without the subject know
ing what he is afraid of. We must suppose that
there was present in the Ucs some love-impulse
which demanded to be translated into the sys*
tern Pes; the-preconscious.cathexisr.-however,
recoiled from it in the manner of an attempt
at flight, and the unconscious libidinal cathexis
of the rejected idea was discharged in the form
of anxiety. Then, at some repetition of this
process, a first step was taken in the direction
of mastering this distressing development pf
anxiety. The fugitive cathexis atteeheo^dtself,to
a substitutive idea which, on the one hand, was
connected by association with the rejected idea,
and, on the other, escaped repression by reason
of its remoteness from that idea (displacementsubstitute), and which permitted of a rationali
zation of the still uncontrollable outbreak of
anxiety. The substitutive idea now plays the
part of an anti-cathexis for the system Cs(Pes)
by securing that system against an emergence
into consciousness of the repressed idea; on the
other hand, it is, or acts as if it were, the point

[439a]
The Unconscious
43S
at which the anxiety-affect, which is now all the
more uncontrollable, may break out and be
discharged. Clinical observation shows, for in?
stance, that when a child suffers from an ani
mal-phobia he experiences anxiety under two
kinds of conditions: in the first place, when
the repressed love-impulse becomes intensified,
and,.in the second, when the child perceives the
animal it is afraid of. The substitutive idea acts
in the one instance as a conductor from the
system Ucs to the system Cs; in the other in
stance, as an independent source for the release
of anxiety. The extending control on the part
of the system Cs usually manifests itself by a
tendency for the substitutive idea to be aroused
more easily as -tm^^gee&'Oiidir^lhe-seGond^iaiiier
than the first way. Perhaps the child ends by
behaving as though he had no liking at all for
his father but had become quite free from him,
and as though the fear of the animal were the
real fear. Only that this fear of the animal, fed
as sucha fear is from the springs of unconscious
instinct, proves obdurate and extravagant in
the face of all influences brought to bear from
the system Cs, and thereby betrays its origin
in the system Ucs.
In the second phase of anxiety-hysteria, there
fore, the anti-cathexis from the system Cs has
led to
substitute-formation.
Soon
the
same
mechanism is applied in a fresh direction. The
process of repression, as we knowi is not yet
terminated, and finds a further aim in the task
of inhibiting the outbreak of anxiety started by
the substitute. This happens in the following
manner: all the associations in the neighbour
hood of the substitutive idea become endowed
with a peculiar intensity of cathexis, so that
they may display a high degree of sensibility
to excitation. Excitation at any point of this
protective structure must, on account of its
connection with the substitutive idea, give rise
to a slight degree of development of anxiety,
which is then used as a signal to inhibit, by
means of a fresh flight on the part of the
cathexis, any further development of anxiety.
The
further the sensitive and vigilant anticathexis becomes extended round the substi
tute which is feared, the more exactly can the
mechanism function which is designed to isolate
the substitutive idea and to protect it from
fresh excitation. Naturally these precautions
guard only against excitations approaching the
substitutive idea from without through percep
tion, never against instinctual excitation which
encounters the substitutive idea from the direc
tion of its connection with the repressed idea.

[439b]
So they begin to operate only when the substi
tute has successfully taken over representation
of what has been repressed, and they can never
operate with complete security. With each in*
crease of instinctual excitation, the protecting
rampart round the substitutive idea must be
shifted
a little further outwards; The whole
construction, which is produced in analogous
fashion in the other neuroses, is termed a pho
bia. The avoidances, renunciations, and prohi
bitions by which we recognize anxiety-hysteria
are the manifestations of flight from conscious
cathexis of the substitutive idea. Surveying the
whole process, we may say that the third phase
has repeated and amplified the work of the
second. The-:system Cs now protects itself by
an anti-cathexis of its surrounding associations
against the activation of the substitutive idea,
just as previously that system secured itself by
cathexis of the substitutive idea against the
emergence of the repressed idea. Substituteformation by the way of displacement has thus
proceeded in its course. We must also add that
the system Cs had formerly only one httle point
at which the repressed instinctual impulse could
break through, namely, the substitutive idea;
but that ultimately the whole protective struc
ture of the phobia corresponds to a salient of
unconscious influence of this kind. Further, we
may lay stress on the interesting point of view
that, by the whole defence-mechanism thus set
in action, a projection outwards of the menace
from the instinct has been achieved. The ego
behaves as if the danger of an outbreak of
anxiety threatened it not from the direction of
an instinct but from the direction of percep
tion: this enables the ego to react against this
external danger with the attempts at flight con
sisting of the avoidances characteristic of a
phobia. In this process, repression succeeds in
one particular: the discharge of anxiety may
be to some extent dammed up, but only at a
heavy sacrifice of personal freedom. Attempts
at flight from the claims of instinct are, how
ever, in general useless, and the result of the
flight by means of a phobia remains still un
satisfactory.
A great deal of what we have recognized as
true of anxiety-hysteria holds good for the two
other neuroses also, so that we can confine our
discussion to the points of difference and the
part played by the anti-cathexis. In conversionhysteria the instinctual cathexis of the repressed
idea is transformed into the innervation neces
sary for the symptom. How far and in what
circumstances the unconscious idea discharges

[440a]
436
SlGMUND
its cathexis through this outlet towards inner
vation, so that it can relinquish its pressure
towards the system Cs—these and similarques
tions had better be reserved for a special in
vestigation of hysteria. In conversion-hysteria,
the part playedby the anti-cathexis proceeding
from the system Cs (Pes) is clear and becomes
manifest in the symptom-formation. It is the
anti-cathexis that decides upon what part of the
instinct-presentation the whole cathexis may
be concentrated. The part thus selected to form
a symptom fulfils the condition of expressing
the aim of the instinctual impulse ho less than
the defensive or punishing' endeavour of the
system (2s; soit achieves hyper-cathexis andis
maintained from both directions hke the sub
stitutive idea in anxiety-hysteria. From this
circumstance we may conclude without much
more ado that the degree of expenditure in re-^
pression put forth by the system Cs need not
be commensurate with the energic cathexis of
the symptom; forthe^strength of the repression
is measuredby the anti-cathexisput forth, and
the symptom is supported not only by thisanticathexis, but also by the instinctual cathexis
fromi the system Ucs which is interwoven
with it.
With reference to the obsessional neurosis,
we need only add to-the observations brought
forward in the preceding paper1-that here the
anti-cathexis of the system Cs< comes most no
ticeably into the foreground. It ds this that
brings about the first repression, in the shape
of a reaction-formation, and later it is the point
at which the repressed idea breaks through. We
may find room for the supposition that, if the
work of repression seems far less successful in
anxiety-hysteria and in the obsessional neurosis
than in conversion-hysteria, it is because the
anti-cathexis is so prominent, and all outlet
is lacking.
V, Special Characteristics of the System Ucs
The differentiation we.have drawn between
the two systems within the mind receives fresh
significance when we observe that processes in
the one system, Ucs,show characteristics which
are not again met with in the system immedi
ately;above it.
The kernel of the system Ucs consists of in-?
stlnct^presentatibns whose aim is to discharge
their cathexis; that is to say, they are wishimpulses. These instinctual impulses are co
ordinate,with one another, exist independently
side by side, and are exempt from mutual con?
: ^P. 426, ...-'.

[440b]
Freud
tradiction. When two wishes whose aims must
appear to us incompatible become simultane
ously active, the two impulses do not detract
one from the other or cancel each other, but
combine to form an intermediate aim, a com
promise.
There is in this
system no negation, no
dubiety, no varying degree of certainty: all
this is only imported by the work of the cen
sorship which exists between the Ucs and the
Pes. Negation is, at a higher level, a substitute
for repression. In the Ucs there are only con
tents more or less stronjgly cathected.
Intensity of cathexis is mobile in a far greater
degree in this than in: the other systems. By
the process of displacement, one idea may sur
render to
another the whole volume of its
cathexis; by that of condensation it may ap
propriate the whole cathexis of several other
ideas. I have proposed to regard these two
processes as distinguishing marks of. the socalled primary process in the mind. In the sysr
tern Pes the secondary process2 holds sway;
where a primary process is .allowed to take its
course in connection with elements belonging
to the system Pes, it appears comic and excites
laughter.
The processes of the system Ucs axe time-?
less; i.e., they are not ordered temporally, are
not altered by thepassage of time, in fact bear
no relation to time at all. The time-relation also
ishourid up-with the work of the system Cs.
The processes of the Ucs are just as httle
related to reality. They are
subject to
the
pleasure-principle; their fate depends only upon
the degree of their strength and upon their con
formity to regulation by pleasure and pain.
Let us sum up: exemption from mutual con
tradiction, primary process (motility of ca
thexis), timelessness, and substitution of psy
chic for external reality—these are the charac
teristics which we may expect to find in proc
esses belonging to the system Z7c$,8
Unconscious processes can only be observed
by us under the conditions of dreaming and of
neurosis; that is to say, when the processes of
the higher system Pes revert to an earlier level
by a certain process of degradation (regres
sion). Independently they are-unrecognizable,
indeed.cannot exist, for the system Ucs is at a
very early stage overlaid by the system Pm
which has captured the means of access to con*
2Cf. Section VII of The Interpretation of Dreams,
which is based upon ideas developed by J. Breuer in
Studien iiber Hysterip.
">
' 3We are reserving for a different cbntekt the men
tion of :another notable privilege :oi the system Ucs.•',

[441a]
sciousness and to motility. The means of dis^
charge for the system Ucs is by means of
physical innervation leading to development of
affect, but even this outlet is, as we have seen,
contested by the system Pes. Left to itself, the
system Ucs would not in normal conditionsbe
able to bring about any purposive muscular
acts, with the exception of those already or
ganized as reflexes.
In order to grasp the full significance of the
characteristics of the system Ucs described
above, we should have to contrast and compare
them with those of the system Pes. But this
would take us so far afield that I propose that
we should once more call a halt and not under
take the comparison of the two till we can do
so in connection with our discussion of the
higher system: only the most pressing points
of all shall be mentioned at this stage.
The processes of the system Pes display, no
matter whether they are already conscious or
only capable of becoming conscious, an inhibi
tion of the tendency of cathected ideas towards
discharge. When a processmoves over from one
idea to another, the first retains a part of its
cathexis, and only a small part undergoes dis
placement. Displacementandcondensation after
the mode of the primary process are excluded
or very much restricted. This circumstance
caused Breuer to assume the existence of two
different stages of cathectic energy in mental
life: one in which
that energy is tonically
bound, and the other in which it moves freely
andpresses towards discharge. I think that this
discrimination represents the deepest insight
we have gained up to the present into the na
ture of nervous energy, and I do not see how
we are to evade such a conclusion. A metapsychological presentation most urgently calls
for further discussion at this point, though per
haps that would still be too daring an under
taking.
•' -
•
Further, it devolves upon the system Pes to
make communication possible between the dif
ferent ideational contents so that they can in
fluence one another, to give them a relation to
time, to set up the censorship or censorships,
and to establish the institution of testing re
ality andthe reality^principle. Conscious mem
ory, too, seems to depend wholly on the Pes
and should be clearly distinguished from the
memory-traces in which the experiences'of the
Ucs become fixed; it probably corresponds with
the making of a special record—a conception
which we tried to employ as explaining the
relation of conscious to tmebnscious ideas, but

[441b]
The Unconscious
437,
which we have already discarded.;In this con
nection, also, we shall find the means to put
an end to our uncertainty regarding the name
of the higher system which at present we vague
ly call sometimes the Pes and sometimes the Cs.
Here, too, it will be as well to utter a warn*
ing against over-hasty generalizations about
what we have brought to light in regard to
apportioning the various mental activities to
one or other of the two systems. We are der
scribing the state of affairs as it appears in
the adult human being, in whom the system
Ucs in the strict sense functions only as a stage
preliminary to the higher organization. The
content and connections of this system as the
individual develops, the significance it possesses
in the case of animals—-these are points on
which no conclusion can be deduced from our
description: they must be investigated inde
pendently. Moreover, in the human being we
must be prepared to find possible pathological
conditions under which the two systems alter,
or even exchange, both their content and their
characteristics.
VI. Communication between the Two Systems,
It would certainly be wrong to imagine that
the'Ucs remains at rest while the whole work
of the mind is performed by the Pes, that the
Ucs is something finished with, a vestigial or
gan, a residuum from the process of evolution;
wrong also to assume that communication be
tween the two systems is confined to the act of
repression, the Pes easting everything which
disturbs it into the abyss of the Ucs. On the
contrary, the Ucs is living and capable of de
velopment and maintains a number of other
relations to the Pes, amongst them that of co
operation. To sum up, we must say that the Ucs
is continued into its so-called derivatives, is ac
cessible to the influence of life,- perpetually acts
upon the Pes, and even is, on its part, capable
of influence by the latter system.
Study of the derivatives of the Ucs will alto
gether disappoint our expectations of a sche
matically clear division of
the one mental
system from the other. This circumstance will
certainly give rise to dissatisfaction with our
results and will probably be used to cast doubts
uponthe valueof burway of distinguishing the
two groups of mental processes. Our answer is,
however, that we have no other aim but that
of translating into theory the results of ob
servation, and we shall deny that there is any
obligation on us to achieve, at Our very first
attempt, a theory that commends itself by its

[442a]
438
:Sigmund Freud
simplicity, in which all is plain sailing. We
defend its complexities so long as we find that
they fit in with the results of observation, and
we do not abandon our expectation of being
guided in the end by those very complexities
to recognition of a state of affairs that is at
once simple in itself and at the same time
answers to all the complications of reality.
Amongst the derivatives of the unconscious
instinctual impulses, the character of which
we have just described, there are some which
unite in themselves opposite features. On the
one hand, they are highly organized, exempt
from self-contradictoriness, have made use of
every acquisition of the system Cs, and would
hardly be distinguishedi>y our ordinary judg
ment from the formations of that system. On
the other hand, they are unconscious and are
incapable of becoming conscious. Thus they
belong according to their qualities to the sys
tem Pes, but in actual fact to the Ucs. Their
origin remains decisive for the fate they will
undergo. We may compare them with those
human half-breeds who, taken all round, re
semble white men, but betray their coloured
descent by some striking feature or other, oh
account of which they are excluded from so
ciety and enjoy none of the privileges of white
people. Of such a nature are the phantasy-for
mations of normal persons as well as of neurot
ics, which we have recognized as prehminary
phases in the formation both of dreams and of
symptoms, and which, in spite of their high
degree of organization, remain repressed and
therefore cannot become conscious. They draw
near to consciousness and remain undisturbed
so long as they do not become strongly ca
thected, but.as soon as a certain degree of this
is exceeded, they are thrust back: Substituteformations are similar, more highly organized
derivatives of the Ucs; but these succeed in
breaking through into consciousness, thanks to
some favourable relation, as, for example, when
they coincide with a preconscious anti-cathexis.
When, on another occasion, we examine more
closely the way in which entry into conscious
ness is conditioned, we shall be able to find a
solution for
some of. the difficulties arising
here. At this point, it seems a good plan to con
trast with the foregoing points of view, which
take their rise in consideration of the Ucs, one
which presents itself from the direction of
consciousness. Consciousness regards the whole
sum of mental processes as belonging to the
realm of the preconscious. A very great part of
thisjpreconscious material originatesin the un

[442b]
conscious, has the characteristics of derivatives
of the unconscious, and is subject to a censor
ship before it
can pass
into
consciousness.
Another part of the Pes can become conscious
without any censorship. Here we light upon a
contradiction of an earlier assumption: from
the point of view of repression, we were obliged
to place the censorship which is decisive for
consciousness between the systems Ucs and
Pes. Now it becomes probable to us that there
is a censorship between the Pes and the Cs.
But we shall do well not to regard this compli
cation as a difficulty, but to assume that to
every transition from one system to that im
mediately above it (that is, every advance to
a higher stage of mental organization) there
corresponds a new censorship. As a corollary,
we shall have, it is true, to discard the assump
tion of
a
continuous laying down
of
new
records.
The reason for all these difficulties is that
consciousness, the only characteristic of mental
processes directly available to us, is in no wise
suited to serve as a criterion for the erection
of systems. Apart from the circumstance that
what belongs to consciousness is not always in
consciousness but
can
also
be
temporarily
latent, observation has shown that much which
shares the attributes of the system Pes does not
become conscious; and, further, we shall find
that the entry into consciousness is circum
scribed by certain dispositions of attention.
Hence consciousness stands in no simple rela
tion either to the different systems or to the
process of repression. The truth is that it is not
only what is repressed that remains alien to
consciousness, but also some of the,;impulses
which dominate our ego and which therefore
form the strongest functional antithesis to what
is repressed. In proportion as we try to win our
way to a metapsychplogical view of mental life,
we must learn to emancipate ourselves hop.
our sense of the importance of that symptom
which consists in being conscious.
So long as we still cling to this, we see our
generalizations regularly invaded by exceptions.
We see that derivatives of the Pes enter con
sciousness
as
substitute-formations
and
as
symptoms, generally after undergoing great dis
tortion in contrast to the Ucs, although often
many characteristics inviting repression have
been retained. We find,that many preconscious
formations
remain
unconscious,
though,
to
judge by their nature^ we should suppose that
they might very well become conscious. Prob
ably in their case;.the stronger attraction of

[443a]
The Unconscious
the Ucs asserts itself. We are led to look for
the more important difference,not between the
conscious and the preconscious, but between
the preconscious and the unconscious. On the
border of the Pes, the censorship thrusts back
the Ucs, but its derivatives can circumvent
this censorship, achieve a high degree of or
ganization, and in the Pes reach a certain in
tensity of cathexis; when, however, this is ex
ceeded, and they try to force themselves into
consciousness, they are recognized as deriva
tives of the Ucs,and are repressedafresh at the
new frontier by the censorship between the Cs
and the Pes. Thus the former censorship is ex
ercised against the Ucs itself, and the latter
against its preconscious derivatives. We might
suppose that in the course of individual de
velopment the censorship had been advanced
a step.
In psycho-analytic treatment the existence
of the second censorship, located between the
systems Pes and Cs, is proved beyond ques
tion. We require the patient to produce freely
derivatives of the Ucs, we pledge him to over
come the objections of the censorship against
these preconscious formations becoming con
scious, and, by overthrowing this censorship,
we open up the way to abrogating the repres
sion accomplished by the earlier one. To this
let us add that the existence of the censorship
between the Pes and the Cs teaches us that
becoming conscious is no mere act of percep
tion, but is probably also a hyper-cathexis, a
further advance in the mental organization.
Let us turn our attention to the communica
tions existing between the unconscious and the
other systems, not so much with a view to
establishing any fresh fact as in order to avoid
omitting the most prominent features. At the
roots of instinctual activity, the systems com
municate with one another in the freest possi
ble way: some of the processes here set in
motion pass through the Ucs, as through a pre
paratory stage, and reach the highest mental
development in the Cs,whilst someare retained
as the Ucs. But the Ucs is also affected by ex
periences originating in outer perception. Nor
mally all the paths from perception to the Ucs
remain open; only those leading out from the
Ucs are barred by repression.
It is very remarkable that the Ucs of one
human being can react upon that of another,
without the Cs being implicated at all. This
deserves closer investigation, especially with"a
view to finding put whether preconscious ac
tivity can be excluded as a factor in bringing

[443b]
439
this about; but for purposes of description the
fact is incontestable.
The content of the system Pes (or Cs) is
derived partly from the instinctual life (through
the medium of the Ucs), and partly from per
ception. It is doubtful how far the processes of
this system can exert a direct influence on the
Ucs; examination of pathological cases often re~
veals an almost incredible independence and lack
of susceptibility to influence On the part of the
Ucs. A complete divergence of their tendencies,
a total dissociation of the two systems, is a
general characteristic of disease. Yet psycho
analytic treatment is based upon influence by
the Cs on the Ucs, and shows at any rate that,
though laborious, this is not impossible^ The
derivatives of the Ucs which act as intermediar
ies between the two systems'openthe^way,as we
have already said, towards accomplishing this.
But we may well suppose that a spontaneously
effected alteration in the Ucs from the side of
the Cs is a difficult and slow process.
Co-operation between a preconscious and an
unconscious impulse, even when the latter is
subject to very strong repression, may be es
tablished, if the situation permits of the un
conscious impulse operating in harmony with
one bf the controlling tendencies. The repres
sion is removed for the occasion, the repressed
activity being admitted as a reinforcement of
the one intended by the ego. In respect of this
single constellation, the unconscious becomes
ego-syntonic, falls into line with the ego,with
out any change taking place in the repression
otherwise. The effect of the Ucs in this co-op^
eration is unmistakable; the reinforced tenden
cies reveal themselves as, in spite of all, differ*
ent
from
the
normal—they make possible
achievements of special perfection, and they
manifest a resistance iri the face of opposition
similar to that of obsessional symptoms.
The content of the Ucs may be compared
with a primitive population in the mental king--
dbm. If inherited mental formations exist in
the human being—something analogous to in*
stinct in animals—these constitute the nucleus
of the Ucs. Later there is added all that is
discarded as useless during childhood develop?
ment, and this need not differ in its nature
from what is inherited. A sharp and;fihalrdi
vision between the content of the two-systems,
as a rule, takes place only at puberty.
VII. Recognition of the UnconsciousSo long as we derive our ideas of the Ucs
only from our knowledgeof dream-life and the

[444a]
44P
SigmunftFreud
transference neuroses, all that we can predicate
of that system is probably represented in the
foregoing remarks. It is certainly not much,
and at some points it gives an impression of
obscurity and confusion; especially do we look
in vain forthe possibility ofbringing the Ucs
into any connection, or classifying it under any
heading, with which we are already familiar.
Analysis of one of those affections called nar
cissistic psychoneuroses alone promises to; fur
nish us with conceptions through which the
enigmatic Ucs will be brought within our reach
in a tangible fashion.
Since the publication of a work by Abraham
(1908)—attributed by its conscientious author
to my instigation—we have been trying to de
fine Kraepefin's dementia praecox (Bleuler's
schizophrenia) on the basis of its relation to
that pair of opposites consisting of the ego and
its object. In the transference neuroses (anxi
ety- and conversion-hysteria and the obses
sional neurosis)
there was nothing to give
special prominence
to
these
opposites.
We
knew, indeed, that frustration from the side of
the object occasioned the outbreak of neurosis
and that
neurosis involved abandonment of
the real object; also that the libido withdrawn
from the real object reverted first to an object
in phantasy and then to one that had been
repressed (introversion). But object-cathexis
in general is in such cases retained with great
energy, and more minute examination of the
processes of repression has forced us to as
sume that object-cathexis persists in the sys
tem Ucs in spite of—or rather in consequence
of—the
repression. Indeed the capacity for
transference, of which we make use for thera
peutic purposes in these affections, presupposes
unimpaired object-cathexis.
In schizophrenia, on the other hand, we have
been obliged to assume that after the process of
tepression the withdrawn Hbido does not seek
a new object, but retreats into the ego; that is
to say, that here the object-cathexes are given
up,
and a primitive objectless condition of
narcissism is re-established. The incapacity of
these patients for transference-^so far as the
process of disease extends—their consequent
inaccessibility toi therapeutic efforts, the repudiatidnhof the Outer world characteristic of
them, thevmanifestations of hyper-cathexis of
their ego, the final outcomes in complete apa
thy—all these clinical features seem to accord
excellently with the assumption that objectcathexes are relinquished* As regards, the re
lation of the two ^psychical systems, to each

[444b]
other, all observers have been struck by the
fact that in schizophrenia a great deal is con
sciously expressed which in the transference
neuroses can be demonstrated to exist in the
Ucs only by means of psycho-analysis. But at
the beginning we were not able to establish any
intelligible connection between the ego-object
relation and the relationships of consciousness.
In the following unexpected way, we seem to
arrive at what we are seeking.In schizophrenics
we sobserve—especially in the
earlier stagejs
which are so instructive—a number of changes
in speech, some of which deserve to be re
garded from a particular point of view. The
patient often devotes peculiar care to his way
of expressing himself, which becomes "precious"
and "elaborate." The construction of the sen
tences undergoes a peculiar disorganization,
making them so
incomprehensible to us that
the patient's remarks seem nonsensical. Often
some relation to bodily organs or innervations
is prominent in the content of these utterances.
This may be correlated with another observa
tion, ;namely, that, in such symptoms of schizo
phrenia as are comparable with the substituteformations
of
hysteria
or
the
obsessional
neurosis, the relation between the substitute
and the repressed material nevertheless dis
plays peculiarities which would surprise us in
these two forms of neurosis.
Dr. Viktor Tausk of Vienna has placed at my
disposal some observations that he has made
in the initial stages of schizophrenia, which
are particularly valuable in that the patient
herself was anxious to explain her utterances
further. I will take two of his examples to il
lustrate the thesis I wish to defend, and I have
no doubt that every observer could easily pro
duce plenty of such material.
J
One of Tausk's patients, ra. girl who. was
brought to the clinic after a quarrel with her
lover, complained that her eyes were not right,
they were twisted. This she herself explained
by uttering in properly constructed sentences a.
series of reproaches against her -lover. "She
could not understand him at all, he looked dif*
ferent every time; he was a shammer, an_eyeT
twister,1: he .had. twisted :her eyes;. now .they
were not her eyes any more; now;ShesawjtJb^e
world with different.eyes."
!.<
The; patient's remarks about her first in
comprehensible utterance have the value of an
analysis, for they contain the equivalent of the
original words expressed in a generaUy cprn-
* Augenverdreher,
deceiver,—T&
^
used
in 'German
to
mean 'a

[445a]
The Unconscious
441
prehensible^form; at the same time, they ex
plain the meaning and the genesis of speechformation in schizophrenia. In agreement with
Tausk; I would here lay stress on the point
that the relation to the bodily organ (the eye)
has usurped the place of the wholecontent of
the thought. The schizophrenic speech displays
a hypochondriac trait: it has become organspeech.
--A second remark of the same patient's runs::
"She was standing in church, suddenly she felt
a jerkj she had to change hef position, as
though somebody put her into a position, as
though she were placed in a certain position."
There follows the analysis by means of a
fresh series of reproaches against her lover:
"he was common, he had made her common,
too, though she was naturally refined; he;had
made her ,-like himself by leading her to think
that:he was:superior to her; now she had be
come hke him, because she thought she would
be better if she were like him; he had given a
falseimpression of his own position;* now she
was just Hke him (identification!), he had.
changed her position."*
-;
The movement by which she changed her:
position, Tausk,remarks, stood foriIthe idea-of
misrepresenting herposition and for,the identi
fication, with the lover. Again.jl would call at
tention to the manner in which the whole train
of thought is dominated by that element which;
has for its, content a bodilyinnervation (or,,:
rather, the sensationof it). An hysteric jwould,
in the first case, have convulsively rolled her
eyes, and, in the second, have given actual
jerks^ instead of having the impulse to jerk or
the sensation of being jerked; and in neither,
case would this have been accompanied by any
conscious thoughts, nor would she afterwards
have been able to express any such thoughts.;
So far these two observations illustrate what
we have
called hypochrondriac language or
Organ-speech. But they:also point to something
which seems to us more important,.; namely,, to.
another state of things of which we have in
numerable instances (for example, in the cases
quoted in Bleuler'smonograph) and whichrriiay
be reduced to a definite formula. In schizo
phrenia- words are subject-to the same process
as' that which makes dream-images out of
dream-thoughts, the one we have called the
primary mental process. They;nndergo conderi1 Sich verstellen=to feign, disgiiise oneself.—Tr.
.« 2Verstellen=to change the place of. As with Augenverdreher, there is again a,play on words, the concrete
meaning *of
the
word
replacing
its
metaphorical
sense.—Tk.
•[
1 /H ".
'•""-•

[445b]
sation, and, by means of displacement, transfer
their cathexes tb one another without remain
der; the process may extend so far that a single
word, which on account of its manifold rela
tions is especially suitable, can come to repre
sent: a whole train of thought. The works of
Bleuler, Jung, and their pupils have: yielded
abundant material precisely in support of this
very proposition.3
Before we drawany conclusion from impres
sions such as these, -let us consider further the
distinctions between:• the substitutive idea in
schizophrenia and in hysteria and the .obses
sional neurosis-^nice distinctions, it is true, yet
producing a very strange effect. A patient whoin
I have at present under observation has let
himself withdraw from all the interests of-life
on account of the unhealthy condition of the
skin of his face. He declares that he has black
heads and that there are deep.holes in his face
which everyone notices: Analysis shows that he
is working out.his castration complex upon his
skin. At first he busied
himself with these
blackheads -without any misgivings; and it gave
him great pleasure to squeeze them out,:be-v
cause,:as he said, something spurted out when*
hexdid so. Then.he^began to think that there
was a deep cavity wherever he had got rid of
a blackhead and he reproached himself most
vehemently with having ruined his skin forever
by "constantly fiddling at it with his hand."
Pressing out the content of the blackheads is
clearly to him a substitute for onanism. The
cavity; which then ^appears in consequence of
his guilty act is the female genital, i.e., standsfor: the fulfilment of the threat of castration
(or the phantasy representing it) called forth
by onanism. This substitute-formation has, in
spite of its hypochondriacal character, considk
erable: resemblance to an hysterical conversion;
arid yet we have the feeling.that there must be
something different in.it, that we cannot beheve
such a substitute-formation possible in a case of
hysteria, even before we can say in what the
difference consists. A tiny httle hole such as a
pore of the skin will hardly be used by an hys
teric as a symbol for the vagina, which.other
wise he willcompare with every imaginable ob
ject capable of enclosing a space. Besides, we
should think that the multiplicity ofithese ht
tle cavities would prevent him from using
them as a substitute for the female genital. The
same applies to the casecof a young patient re8The
dream-work, too, occasionally treats
words
like things, and then creates very similar schizophrenic
utterances or neologisms.
-

[446a]
442
Sigmund Freud

[446b]
conscious and an unconscious idea. The; two are
not, as we supposed, different records of the
ported by Tausk some years ago to the Vienna
Psycho-Analytical
Society.
This
patient be
haved in other respects exactly as though suf
fering
from an obsessional neurosis; he took
hours to dress, and so on. The striking feature
of the case, however, was that he was able to
tell the meaning of his inhibitions without any
resistance. For example, in pulling on his stock
ings
he was
disturbed by the idea that he
must draw apart the.?knitted stitches, i.e., the
holes, and every hole was: for him a symbol of
the female genital aperture. This again is a
thing.with which we cannot credit a patient
suffering from obsessional neurosis; a patient
of this kind observed by R. Reitler (one who
suffered from the same lingering over putting
on his stockings), after overcoming the resist
ances, found the explanation that his foot sym
bolised the penis, putting on the stocking stood
for an onanistic act, and that he had constantly
to pull the stocking off and on, partly in order
to complete the representation of onanism, and
partly in order to undo the act.
If we ask ourselves what it is that gives the
character of strangeness to the substitute-for
mation and the symptom in schizophrenia* we
come at last to understand that it is the pre
dominance of the word-relation over that of
the thing. There is only a very slight similarity
between the squeezing out of a blackhead arid
an ejaculation from the penis, still less simi
larity between the countless' httle pores of the
skin and the vagina; but in the former case
there is, in both instances, a spurting but,
while in the latter the cynical saying, "a hole is
a hole," is literally true. The identity of the
two when expressed in words, not the resem
blance of the objects designated, has dictated
the substitution. Where the two—word and
thing—do not coincide, the .substitute-forma
tion in schizophrenia deviates from that in
the transference neuroses.
Let us bring these considerations into con
nection with the
conclusion that in
schizo
phrenia the object-cathexes are relinquished.
We must then modify this assumption and say:
The cathexis of the ideas of the words corre
sponding to the objects is retained. What we
could permissibly call the conscious idea of the
object can now be split up into the idea of the
word (verbal idea) and the idea of the thing
(concrete
idea);
the latter consists in the
cathexis, if not of the direct memory-images
of the thing, at least of remoter memory-traces
derived from these. It strikes us all at once that
how we know what is the difference between a
same content situated in different parts of the
mind, nor yet different functional states of
cathexis in the same part; but the conscious
idea comprises the concrete idea plus the verbal
idea corresponding to it,
whilst the uncon
scious idea is that of the thing alone. The sys
tem Ucs contains the thing-cathexes of the ob
jects, the first and true object-cathexes; the sys
tem Pes originates in a hyper-cathexis of this
concrete idea by a linking up of it with the ver
bal ideas of the words corresponding to it. Itiis
such hyper-cathexes, we may suppose, that
bring about higher organization.in the mind and
make it possible for the primary process to be
succeeded by the
secondary process which
dominates Pes. Now, too, we are in a position
to state precisely what it is that repression
denies to the rejected idea in the transference
neuroses—namely, translation of the idea into
words which are to remain
attached to the
object. The idea which is not put into words,
or the mental act which has not received hypercathexis, then remains in the unconscious in a
state of repression.
I may call attention to the fact that already
very early we possessed the insight which today
enables us to understand one of the most
striking characteristics of schizophrenia. The
last pages of The Interpretation of Dreams,
published in 1900, expound the
thesis that
thought-processes, i.e., those cathected mental
acts which are more remote from perception,
are in themselves devoid of quality and are
unconscious, deriving their capacity to enter
consciousness only from association with tne
residues of word-perceptions. The verbal ideas,
for their part, are derived from sense-percep
tions in the same way as concreteideas are; so
that the question might be raised why ideas of
objects cannot become conscious through tne
agency of their own residues of perceptions.
But possibly thought proceeds in. systems that
are so far remote from the original residues of
perception that they have no longer retained
anything of the qualities of these residues, so
that in order to become conscious the content
of the thought-systems needs to be reinforced
by new qualities. Besides,linking them up with
words may impart quality even to cathexes to
which, representing as they do only relations
between the ideas of objects, no quality could
accrue from the perceptions themselves. Such
relations, comprehensible only through words,
form one of the most important parts of our

[447a]
The Unconscious
443
thought-processes. We understand that linking
them up with-verbal ideas is,still not identical
withactually becoming conscious, but only with
the potentiality of this; it is therefore char
acteristic of the system Pes and of that only.
Now, however, we note that with these dis
cussionswe have departed from our real theme
and find ourselves in the midst of problems
concerning the preconscious and the conscious,
which for good reasons we are reserving for
separate treatment.
In considering schizophrenia, which, to be
sure, we only touch on here so far as seems
indispensable forgeneral knowledge of the Ucs,
the doubt must occur to us whether the process
here termed repression has anything at all in
common with the repression which takes place
in the transference neuroses. The formula that
repression is a process which occurs between
the systems Ucs and Pes (or Cs), and results
in withholding the repressedmaterial from con
sciousness, must in any event be modified, in
order to embrace the case of dementia praecox
and other narcissistic affections. But the ego's
attemptat flight, expressing itself in withdrawal
of conscious cathexis, nevertheless remains
a common factor. The most superficial reflec
tion shows us how much more radically and
thoroughly this attempt at flight, this flight
of the ego, is carried out in the narcissistic
neuroses.
If, in schizophrenia, this flight consists in
withdrawal of instinctual cathexis from those
points which represent the unconscious idea of
the object, it may seem strange that that part
of the same idea which belongs to the system
Pes—the verbal ideas corresponding to it—
should, on the contrary,,undergo a moreintense
cathexis. We might rather expect that the ver
bal idea, being the preconscious part, would
have to sustain the first impact of the repres
sion, and that it would be wholly insusceptible

[447b]
of cathexis after the repression had proceeded
as far as the .unconscious concrete ideas. -This
is certainly difficult to understand. The solution
suggests itself that the cathexis of the verbal
idea is not part of the act of repression, but
represents the first of the attempts at recovery
or cure which so conspicuously dominate the
clinical picture of schizophrenia. These en
deavours are directed towards regaining the
lost objects, and it may wellbe that to achieve
this purpose their path to the object must be
by way of the word belonging to it; they then
have,,however, to content.themselves with
words in the place of things. Our mental
activity moves, generally speaking, in one of
two opposite directions:- either-it starts from
the instincts and passes through the system
Ucs to conscious mentation, or, on excitation
from without, it passes through the systems
Cs and Pes till it
reaches the unconscious
cathexes of the ego and of its objects. This
second way must, in spite of the repression
which has taken place, have remained clear,
and for some distance there is nothing to block
the endeavours of the neurosis to regain its
objects. When we think in abstractions, there
-is a danger that we may neglect the relations
of words to unconscious concrete ideas, and it
must be confessed that the expression and
content of our philosophizing begins to acquire
an
unwelcome
resemblance
to
the
schizo
phrenic's way of thinking. We may, on the
other hand, attempt a characterization of the
schizophrenic's mode of thought by sayingthat
he treats concrete things as though they were
abstract.
If we have really recognized the nature of
the Ucs and have correctly defined the differ
ence between an unconscious and a preconscious
idea, then researches starting from many other
points may be expected to bring us back to
the same conclusions.

[448a]
.r

[448b]
."3f;T
c-z&d) \r .1"ido rcoi> :-.-..;-.•..---£ ovr;-! oyr -Jnoidcob
•.•••7
--sir, ^r^jwh^b
!:-:;n-j'.nMJj
er-j;pL»a.bJ ?.sbvJ ^Qi'sLn.-(••••-.r::r.
j/jo ":v jn^jnoo
-;u—
-'*-•
tJ
'- y--<^
-
s»-3
_c:;-c07U9ij[
^.-..•.7 v3.Ij .'i«..uoiij>fi c-v«ii'i: . ^a^iio'j az:r*7j *-S.
SiLq Vzd: :t.& ou::.:ij> rn?.y-: "^m 7I .!>ih:o-. ^n.:
:c::>>i:.y-ji/rKl '—•. :.»ijoi^fl--;:•::.[ -f; r? -v?o(i o;rrrs ..-«-t sri? Midi i?o>- • -r .:j. .lY ^?;- -77 #..jr^jKr
j'lr'i1-^;
ft's"! '
f*"i- -i
•"•fili'.A'"
•••t---»
.• .. .'
. •....:
<- .T,^
f,,
"""."-
" i2:ioi??ji?jfiea frcrs i>Ki
5Janaod?/jc^-y!lo}^ ^d i?<r:ow'Ji^5rtl i^ tnoh

[449a]
[página ilustrada]

[449b]
[página ilustrada]

[450a]
Contents: A General Introduction to
Psycho-Analysis
PARTI
LECTURE
i. Introduction
449
2. The Psychology of Errors
453
3. The Psychology of Errors (Continued)
459
4. The Psychology of Errors (Conclusion)
467
PART II. Dreams
5. Difficulties and Preliminary Approach to the Subject
476
6. Preliminary Hypotheses and Technique of Interpretation
483
7. Manifest Content and Latent Thoughts
489
8. Children's Dreams
495
9. The Dream-Censorship
499
10. Symbolism in Dreams
5<H
11. The Dream-Work
5*3
12. Examples of Dreams and Analysis of Them
519
13. Archaic and Infantile Features in Dreams
526
14. Wish-Fulfilment
532
15. Doubtful Points and Critical Observations
539
PART III.
General Theory op the Neuroses
16. Psycho-Analysis and Psychiatry
545
17. The Meaning of Symptoms
55©
18. Fixation upon Traumas: The Unconscious
557
19. Resistance andRepression
563
20. The Sexual Life of Man
569
21. Development of the Libido and Sexual Organizations
577
22. Aspects of Development and Regression. Aetiology
585
23. The Paths of Symptom-Formation
593
24. Ordinary Nervousness
601
25. Anxiety
6o7
26. The Theory of the Libido: Narcissism
615
27. Transference
623
28. The Analytic Therapy
631

[450b]


[451a]


[451b]
- C5"
1 TJLvI
~b±.
vvV/y.V r.':• Vsr:..2£ jlo v.-, --vzl -IT 4
*l±
"-rC7 .3
rS^
=*. y;o:?? 3r.^i^J < .-
• .-
J~C
2/iXlU IXf SSkTjj'"*.<"
-il
\\i ~5Q~i *i\,d,'
,:r
\11
£U3b«fno:v.<j -J3" . -j •- >;. T j">-ij sc !* :'.f-7- .-31
935
-I" T .": ;-• * *--cy
^-%
t~?
c.r,oit2\mfmO Irrreer hn^ otic .J s;l* 5otoftr'yovj . .12
c* C
i::-:. •:riu"-r-frrott 7r/.: lo *>£»•:
-,l?
:
c-3
iU2:<i2ijri-»l :o'*.\j --iIj ?o *:---'_'.; vl ......

[452a]
A General Introduetion
to Psycho-Analysis
PART I
FIR$T LECTURE
Introduction
I do not know what knowledge any of you may
already have of psycho-analysis, either from
reading or fronvhearsay. But having regardtb
the title of my lectures—Introductory Lectures
onPsycho-Analysis—-I am bound to proceed as
though you knew nothing of the subject and
needed instruction, even in its first elements:.
One thing, at least, I may pre-suppose that
you know—namely^ that psycho-analysis is a
method of medical treatment for those suffer
ing fromnervous disorders; and I can give you
at once an illustration of the way in which psy
cho-analytic procedure differs from, and often
reverses, what is customary iri pthef branches
of medicine. Usually, when we Introduce a pa
tient to a new form of treatment we minimize
it's* difficulties and give him confident assurances
of its success. This is, in myopinionrperfectly
justifiable, for we thereby increase, the prob
ability of success. But when we undertake to
treat a neurotic psycho-analytically we proceed
otherwise. Werexplain to him the diflSculties of
the method,its longduration, the"trials andsac
rifices which will be required'W him; and, as
to the result, we tell him that we can make no
definite promises, that success depends upon
his endeavours, upon his understanding, his
adaptability and his perseverance. We have, of
course, good reasons, into which you will pei>
haps gain some insight later on, for adopting
this apparently perverse attitude.
Now forgive me if I beginby treating you in
the same way as I do my neurotic patients, for
I shall positively advise you against coming to
hear me a second time. And with this intention
I shall explain to youhow of necessity yoii can
NOTE: A series of lectures delivered at the Vienna
Psychiatrical Clinic, the first fifteen in 1915-16,
the
next
thirteen
in
1916-17,
first
published
in
German in 1917; edition here used translated by
Joan Riviere for the 2nd English edition published
in London in 1922. (First
English edition had
appeared in r92o;)
;
'

[452b]
obtain from me Onlyan incomplete knowledge
of psycho-analysis and also what difficulties
istandin the way of your forming an independ
ent:judgment on the subject. For I shall show
you how the whole trend of your training and
your accustomed modes of-thought must in
evitably have made you hostile to psycho-anal
ysis,and also how much youwouhihave to over
come in your ownmindsin order to rnaster this
instinctive opposition.I naturally, cannot fore
tell what degree of understanding, of.psycho
analysis you may gain from my lectures* but I
can at least assure you that by attending them
you will not have learnt how to conduct a psy
cho-analytic investigation, nor how to carry out
a psycho-analytictreatment. And-furtheryif ariy
one of you should feel dissatisfied with: a
merely: cursory
acquaintance with
psycho
analysis and should wish to form a permanent
connection with it, I shall not merely dis
courage him, but I shall actually warn him
againstit. For, as thingsare at the present time,
not only would the choice of,such a career put
an end to all chances of academic success, but,
upon taking up work as a practitioner, such a
man would find himself in a community which
misunderstood his aims and intentions, regarded
him •.with suspicion and hostility, and let loose
upon.him all the latent evilimpulses-harboured
within it. Perhaps you can infer from the ac
companiments of the war now, raging in
Europe what a countless host that is to reckon
With;-i.;
;
.
However, there are always some people to
whom the possibility of a new addition to
knowledge will prove an attraction stfiong
enough to survive all such inconveniences; -If
there are any such among you who will appear
at my second lecture; in spite of my words of
warning they will be welcome/ But all of you
have a right to know what these inherent difr
ficulties of psycho-analysis are to which I have
alluded.
;
First of all, there is the problem of the teach*

[453a]
456
Sigmund Freud
ing andexposition of the subject. In yourmed
ical studies you have been accustomed to use
your eyes. You see the anatomical specimen,
the precipitate of the chemical reaction, the
contraction of the muscle as the result of the
stimulation of its nerves. Later, you come into
contact with the patients; you learn the symp
toms of disease by the evidence of your senses;
the resultsof pathological processes canbedem
onstrated to you, and in many cases even the
exciting cause of them in an isolated form. On
the surgical side, you are witnesses of the meas
ures by which'the patient is helped, and are
permitted to attempt them yourselves. Even in
psychiatry, demonstration of patients, of their
altered expression, speech and behaviour, yields
a series of observations whichleave a deep im
pression on your minds. Thus a teacher of med
icine acts for the most part as an exponent and
guide, leading you as it were through a mu
seum, while you gain in this way a direct rela
tionshipto what is displayed to you and believe
yourselvesto have beenconvinced by your own
experience of the existence of the new facts.
But in psycho-analysis, unfortunately, all this
is different In psycho-analytic treatment noth
ing happens but an exchange of words between
the patient and the physician. The patient talks,
tellsof his past experiences and presentimpres
sions, complains, and expresses his wishes and
hisemotions. The physician listens, attemptsto
direct the patient's thought-processes, reminds
him, forces his attention in certain directions,
gives him explanations and observes the reac
tions of understanding or denial thus evoked.
The patient's unenlightened relatives—people
of a kind to be impressed only by something
visible and tangible, preferably by the sort of
action that may be seen at a cinema—-never
omit to express their doubts of how "mere
talk can possibly cure anybody." Their reason
ing is of course as illogical as it is inconsistent.
For they are the same people who are always
convinced that the sufferings of neurotics are
purely "in their own imagination." Words and
magic were in the beginning one and the same
thing, and even today words retain muck of
their magical power. By words one of us can
give to another the greatest happiness or bring
about utter despair; by words the teacher im
parts his knowledge to the student; by words
the orator sweeps his audience with him and
determines its judgments and decisions. Words
call forth emotions and are universally the
means by which we influence our fellow-crea
tures. Therefore let us not despise the use of

[453b]
words in psycho-therapy and let us be content if we may overhear the words which pass
between the analyst and the patient.
But even that is impossible. The dialogue
which constitutes the analysis will admit of no
audience; the process cannot be demonstrated.
One could, of course, exhibit a neurasthenic or
hysterical patient to students at a psychiatric
lecture. Hewould relate his case and his symp
toms, but nothing more. He will make the
communications necessary to the analysis only
under the conditions of a special affective rela
tionship to tie physician; in the presence of a
single person to whom he was indifferent he
would becomemute. For these communications
relate to all his most private thoughts andfeel
ings, all that which as a socially independent
person hemust hide from others, allthatwhich,
being foreign to his own conception ofhimselfi
he tries to conceal even from himself.
It is impossible, therefore, for you to be ac
tually present during a psycho-analytic treat
ment; you can only be told about it, and can
learn psycho-analysis, in the strictest sense of
the word, onlyby hearsay. This tuition at sec
ond hand, soto say, puts you ina veryunusual
ahd difficult position as regards forming your
own judgment on the subject, which will there
fore largely depend on the reliance you can!
place on your informant.
Now imagine for a moment that you were
present at a lecture in history instead of in
psychiatry, and that the lecturer was dealing
with the life and conquests of Alexander the
Great. What reason would you haveto believe
what he told you? The situation would appear
at first sight even more unsatisfactory thanin
thecase ofpsycho-analysis, fortheprofessor of
history had no more part in Alexander's, cam
paigns than you yourselves; thepsycho-analyst
at least informs you of matters in which hei
himself has played apart. But then we come to|
the question ofwhat evidence there is to sup-^
port the historian. He can refer you to the ac
counts of early writers who were either contem
poraries or wholived not long after the events
in question, such as Diodorus, Plutarch, Arrian, and others; he can laybefore you repro
ductions of the preserved coins and statues of
the king, and pass round a photograph of the
mosaic at Pompeii representing the battle at
Issiis. Yet, strictly speaking, all these docu
ments only prove that the existence of Alex
ander andthe reality ofhis deeds were already
believed in by former generations of men, and
your criticism might begin anew at this point.

[454a]
General Introduction
Andthenyouwould find that noteverything re
ported of Alexander is worthy of belief orsuf
ficiently authenticated in detail, but I can
hardly suppose that you would leave the lec
ture Toom in doubt altogether as to the. reality
of Alexander the Great. Your conclusions would
be principally determined by two considera
tions: first, that the lecturer could have no
conceivable motive for attempting to persuade
you of something which he did not himself be
lieve to be true, and secondly, that all the
available authorities agree more or less in their
accounts of the facts. In questioning the ac
curacy of the early writers you would apply
these tests again, the possible motives of the
authors and the agreement to be found be
tween them. The result of such tests would cer
tainly be convincing'in the case of Alexander,
probably less soin regard to figures like Moses
and Nimrod. Later on you will perceive clearly
enough what doubts can be raised against the
credibility of an exponent of psycho-analysis.
Now you will have a right to ask the ques
tion: "If no objective evidence for psycho
analysis existsandno possibility of demonstrat
ingthe process, howis it possible to studyitat
all or to convince oneself of its truth?" The
study of it is indeed not an easy matter, nor are
theremany people whohavethoroughly learned
it; still,thereis, of course, some way of learn
ing it. Psycho-analysis is leamt first of all on
oneself, through the study of one's own per
sonality. This is not exactly what is meantby
introspection, but it may be so described for
want of a better word. There is a whole series
of very common and well-known mental phe
nomena which can be taken as material for selfanalysis whenonehasacquired some knowledge
of the method. In this way one may obtain the
required conviction of the reality of the proc
esses which psycho-analysis describes, and of
the truth of its conceptions, although progress
on these lines is not without its limitations. One
gets much further by submitting oneself to
analysis by a skilled analyst, undergoing the
working of the analysis in one's own person
andusing the opportunity to observe the finer
details of the technique which the analyst em
ploys. This, eminently thebestway, isof course
onlypracticable for individuals and cannot be
used in a class of students.
.
The second difficulty you will find in con
nectionwith psycho-analysis is not, on the other
hand, inherent in it, but is one for which I
must hold you yourselves responsible, at least
inso far asyour medical studies have influenced

[454b]
to Psycho-Analysis
451
you. Your training will have induced in yoti
an attitude of mind very far removed from the
psycho-analytical one. You have been trained
to establish the functions and disturbances of
the organism on ananatomical basis, to explain
them in terms of chemistry and physics, and
to regard them from abiological pointof view;
but no part of your interest has ever been
directed to the mental aspects of life, in which,
after all, the development of the marvellously
complicated organism culminates. For this rea
son a psychological attitude of mind is still
foreign to you, and you areaccustomed to re
gard it with suspicion, to deny it a scientific
status, and to leave it to the general public,
poets, mystics, and philosophers. Now thislimi
tation in you is undoubtedly detrimental to
your medical efficiency; for on meeting a pa
tient it is the mental aspects with which one
first comes into contact, as in most human re
lationships, and I am afraid you will pay the
penalty of having to yield a part of the cura
tive influence at which you aim to the quacks,
mystics,and faith-healers whom you despise.
I quite.acknowledge that there is an excuse
for this defect in your previous training.There
is no auxiliary philosophical science that might
be of service to you in your profession. Neither
speculative philosophy nor descriptive psychol
ogy, nor even the so-called experimental psy
chology whichis studied in connection with the
physiology of the sense-organs, as they are
taught in the schools, can tell you anything
useful of the relations existing between mind
and body, or cangive you a key to comprehen
sion of a possible disorder of the mental func
tions. It is true that the psychiatric branch of
medicine occupies itself with describing the
different forms of recognizable mental disturb
ances and grouping themin clinical pictures,but
in their best moments psychiatrists themselves
are doubtful whether their purely descriptive
formulations deserve to be called science. The
origin, mechanism, and interrelation of the
symptoms which make up these clinical pic
tures are undiscovered: either they cannot be
correlated with any demonstrable changes in
the brain, or only with such changes as in no
way explain them. These mental disturbances
are open to therapeutic influence only when
they can be identified as secondary effects bf
some organic disease.
This is the lacuna which psycho-analysis is
striving to fill. It hopes to provide psychiatry
with the missing psychological foundation, to
discover the common ground on which a corre-

[455a]
?4$*
Sigmund: Freud
lation! of bodily and mental disorder becomes
comprehensible. To this end it must dissociate
itself:jfrom every foreign preconception/wheth
er anatomical^ chemical, or physiological, and
must work throughout with conceptions-of a
purely psychological order, iand-for this very
reason.I.fear that itwill appear-strange to you
at first. ..
,.-:
-
•
; y
.-•-
il For the next difficulty I-shall not hold you,
your training or your mental attitude, respon
sible. There are two tenets of psycho-analysis
which offend the whole,world>and excite its re
sentment; the one conflicts with intellectual,
;the other with mbral and aesthetic prejudices.
Let us not underestimate theseprejudices; they
-are powerful things, residues of valuable, even
necessary, stages in human evolution. They are
maintained by emotional forces, and the fight
against them is a hard one;
The first of these displeasingpropositionsof
psycho-analysis is this: that mental processes
are essentially unconscious, and that those
which are conscious are merely isolated acts
and parts of the whole psychic entity, Now I
must ask you to remember that, on the con
trary, .we are accustomed to identify the mental
with the conscious. Consciousness appears to
us as positively the characteristic that defines
mental life, and we regard psychology as the
study of the content of
consciousness. This
even appears so evident that any contradiction
of itseems obvious nonsense to us, and yet it is
impossible for psycho-analysis to avoid this con
tradiction, or to accept the identity between
the conscious and the psychic; ;The psycho-an
alytical definition of tie mind is that it com
prises processes of the nature of feeling, think
ing, and wishing, and. it maintains that there
are such things as unconscious thinking and un
conscious wishing. But in doing so psycho
analysis has forfeited at the outset the sympa
thy.of the sober and:scientifically minded, and
incurred the suspicionof beinga phantastic cult
occupied withndark and unfathomable mys
teries; You yourselves must find it difficult to
understand why I should stigmatize an abstract
^proposition, such as "The; psychic is the con
scious," as'a prejudice; nor can you guess yet
what evolutionary process could have led to;the
denial of the unconscious, if it does indeed ex
ist,, nor
what
advantage
could -have
been
achieved by this denial. It seems likean empty
wrangle over: words to argue whether mental
life is to be regarded as co-extensive with con
sciousness orwhether it may be-said to stretch
beyond this limit,and yet I canassureyouthat

[455b]
the acceptance ofunconscious mental'processes
represents a decisive step towards a hew orien
tation in the world and in science.
Aslittle canyou suspecthowcloseis the connectionMbetween thisfirst bold stepon thepart
of psycho-analysis and the second to which I
am how coming. For this next proposition,
which we: put forward asorie of the discoveries
of psycho-analysis, consists in the assertionthat
impulses; which canonly! be described as sexual
in both the narrower and the wider sense, play
a peculiarly large part, never before sufficiently
appreciated* in the causation of nervous and
mental disorders. Nay, more, that these sexual
impulses have contributed invaluably to the
highest cultural, artistic; and social achieve
ments of the human mind.
In my opinion^ it is the aversion from this
conclusion of psychoanalytic;investigation that
is; the most significant source of the opposition
it has encountered. Are you curious to know
how we ourselves account for this? We believe
that civilization has been built up, under the
pressure of the struggle for existence, by sac
rifices ingratification of theprimitive impulses,
and that it is to a great extent forever being
re-created, as eachindividual, successively join
ing the community, repeats the sacrifice of his
instinctive pleasures for the common good. The
sexual are amongst the most important of the
instinctive forces thus utilized: they are in this
way sublimated, that is to say, their energy is
turned aside from its sexual goal and diverted
towards other ends, no longer sexual and so
cially more valuable. But the structure thus
built up is insecure, for thesexual Impulses are
with difficulty controlled; in each-individual
who takes up his part in the worklof ^civilizaition there is a danger that a'rebellion of the
sexual impulses may occur, against this diver
sion of their energy. Society can conceive of
no more powerful menace to its culture tha^
would arise from the liberation of the sexual
impulses and a return of themto theirs original
goal. Therefore, society dislikes this sensitive
place in its development being touched-upon;
that the power of the sexual instinct:should be
recognized,; and the significance of the'indi
vidual's sexual fife revealed, is very far from its
interests;witha view to discipline, it hasgather
taken the course of diverting attention away
froni.this whole field. For this reason,'the reve
lations'of psycho-analysis are not tolerated by
it, and it would greatly prefer to brand them
as aesthetically offensive^ morally reprehensi
ble, or'dangerousJBut since such'objections are

[456a]
General Introduction
not valid arguments against conclusions which
claim to represent the objective results of sci
entific investigation, the opposition must be
translated into intellectual terms before it can
be expressed. It is a characteristic of human
nature to be inclined to regard anything which
is disagreeable as untrue, and then without
much difficulty to find arguments against it.
So society pronounces the unacceptable to be
untrue, disputes the results of psycho-analysis
with logical: and concrete arguments, arising,
however, in affective sources, and clings to
them with all the strength of prejudice against
every attempt at refutation.
But we, on the other hand, claim to have
yielded to no tendency in propounding this ob
jectionable theory. Our intention has been
solely to give recognition to the facts as we
found them in the course of painstaking re
searches. And we now claim the right to reject
unconditionally any such introduction of prac
tical considerations into the field of scientific
investigation, even before we have determined
whether the apprehension which attempts to
force these considerations upon us is justified
or not.
These, now, are some of the difficulties which
confront you at the outset when you begin to
take an interest in psycho-analysis. It is proba
bly more than enough for a beginning. If you
can overcome their discouraging effect, we will
proceed further.
SECOND LECTURE
The Psychology of Errors
We shall now begin, not with postulates, but
with an investigation. For this purposewe shall
select certain phenomena which are very fre
quent, veryfamiliar andmuch overlooked, and
which have nothing to do with illness, since
they may be observedin every healthy person.
I refer to the errors that everyone commits:
as when anyone wishes to say a certain thing
but uses the wrong word (slip of the tongue);
or when the same sort of mistake is made in
writing (slip of the pen), in which case one may
or may not notice it; or when anyone reads
in print or writing something other than what
is actually before him (misreading); or when
anyone mis-hears what is said to him, naturally
when there is no question of any disease of the
auditory sense-organ. Another series of such
phenomena are those based on forgetting some
thing temporarily, though not permanently; as,
for instance, when anyone cannot think of a

[456b]
to Psycho-Analysis
453
name which he knows quite well and is always
ableto recognize' whenever he seesit; or when
anyone forgets to carry out some intention,
which he afterwards remembers, and has there
fore forgotten only for a certain time.This ele
ment of transitoriness is lacking in a third class,
of which mislaying things so that they cannot
be found is an example. This is a kind of for
getfulness%hich we regard differentlyfrom the
usual kind; one is amazed or annoyed at it, in
stead of findingit comprehensible. Alliedto this
are certain mistakes, in which the temporary
element is again noticeable, as when one be
lieves something for a time which both before
and afterwards one knows to be untrue, and a
number of
similar manifestations which we
know under various names.
Some inner relation between all these kinds
of occurrences is indicated in German, by the
use of the prefix verwhichis common to all the
words designating them.Thesewords almostall
refer to acts of an unimportant kind, generally
temporary and without much significance in
life. It is only rarely that anything of the kind,
such as the loss of some object, attains any
practical importance. For this reason little at
tention is paid to such happenings and they
arouse little feeling.
I am now going to ask you to consider these
phenomena. But you will object, with annoy
ance: "There are so many tremendous puzzles
both in the wide world and in the narrower life
of the soul, so many mysteries in the field of
mental disorder which demand and deserve ex
planation, that it reallyseems frivolous to waste
labour and interest on these trifles. If you
could explain to us how it is possible for any
one with sound sight and hearing, in broad day
light, to see and hear things whichdo not exist,
Or how anyone can suddenly believe that his
nearest and dearest are persecuting him, or can
justify with the most ingenious arguments a
delusion which would seem nonsensical to any
child,then we might be willing to take psycho
analysis seriously. But if psycho-analysis can
not occupy us with anything more interesting
than the question why a speaker uses a wrong
word or why a Hausfrau mislays her keys and
similar trivialities, then we shall find something
better to do with our time and our interest." ;
Myreply is: Patience! Your'criticism is not
on the righttrack.It is true that psycho-analy
sis cannot boast that it has never occupied it
self with trifles. On the contrary, the material
of its observations is usually those common
place occurrences which havebeen cast iaside1as

[457a]
454
Sigmund Freud
all top insignificant by other sciences, the
refuse, so to speak, of the phenomenal world.
But in your criticism are you not confounding
the magnitude of a problem with the conspicu
ous nature of its manifestations? Is it not pos
sible/under certain conditions and at certain
times, for very important things to betray
themselves in very flight indications? I could
easily cite many instances of this.,AVhat: slight
signs, for instance^ convey to the young men
in rmy audience that they have gained a lady's
favour? Do they expectan explicit declaration,
a passionate embrace, or are they not content
with a glancewhich is almost imperceptible to
others,a fleeting gesture,a handshake prolonged
by a second? Or suppose you are a detective
engaged in the investigation of a murder, do
you actually expect to find that the murderer
will leave his photograph with name and ad
dress on the scene of the crime? Are you not
perforce content with slighter and less certain
traces of the person you seek? So let us not
under-value small signs: perhaps from them
it may be possible to come upon the tracks Of
greater things. Besides,. I think as you do that
the larger problems of the world and of science
have the first claim on our interest. But on the
whole it avails little to form a definite resolu
tion to devote oneself to the investigation of
this or that great problem. One is then often at
a loss howto set about the next step. In scien
tific work it is moreprofitable to take up what
ever lies before one whenever a path towards
its exploration presents itself. And then, if one
carries it through thoroughly, without prejudice
or pre-conceptions, one may, with good for
tune and by virtue of the interrelationshiplink
ing each thing to every other (hence, also, the
small to the great), find, even in the course of
such humble labour, a road to the study of the
great problems.
It is from this point of view that I hope to
enlist your interest in considering the appar
ently trivial errors made by normal people. I
propose now thatwe question someone who has
no -knowledge of psycho-analysis as to how he
explains these occurrences.
His first answer is sure to be: "Oh, they are
not worth any explanation; they are little acci
dents." What doesthe man mean by this? Does
he mean to maintain that there are any occur
rences so small that they fail to come within
the causal sequence of things, that they might
as well be other than they are? Anyone thus
breaking away from the determination of natu
ralphenomena, at any single point, has thrown

[457b]
over the whole scientific outlook on the world
(Weltanschauung): One may point out to him
how much more .consistent is the religious out
look on the world, which emphatically assures
us that "not one sparrow' shall fall to the
ground" except God wills it. I think our frienrj
would not be willing to follow his first answer
toits logical conclusion; hewould give wayand
say that if he were to study these things he
would soon.find some explanation of them. It
must be a matter of slight functional disturb
ances, of inaccuracies of mental performance,
the conditions of which could be discovered. A
manwho otherwise speaks correctly may make
a slip of the tongue, (i) when he is tired or
unwell, (2) when he is excited, or (3) when
his attention is concentrated onsomething else.
It is easy to confirm this. Slips of thetongue do
indeed occur most frequently when one istired,
orhasa headache, or feels anattackof migraine
coming on- Forgetting propernames veryoften
occurs in these circumstances; many people
are habitually warned of the onset of an attack
of migraine by the inability to recall proper
names. In excitement^ too, onemixes up words
or even things, one performs actions errone
ously; and the forgetting of intentions, as well
as a numberof other undesigned acts, comes to
the fore when one is distracted, in other words,
when the attention is concentrated on other
things. A familiar instance of such distraction
is the professor in Fliegende Blatter who for
gets his umbrella and takes the wrong hat,
because he is thinking of the problems which
are to be the subject of his next book. We all
know from our own experience how one can
forget to carryout intentions or promises when
something has happened in the interval that
absorbs onevery deeply.
This seems so entirely comprehensible and
also irrefutable. It isperhaps not very interest^
ing or not so much so as we expected. Let us[
look at this explanation of errors more closelyj
The various conditions which have been cited;
as necessary for the occurrence of these phe
nomena are not all similar in kind. Illness and
disorders of the circulation afford a physiologi
cal basis for an affection of the normal func
tions; excitement, tiredness, and distraction are
conditions of a different kind which could be
described as psycho-physiological. These last
could easily be converted into a theory., Fa
tigue, as well as distraction, and perhaps also
general excitement, cause a dissipation of the
attention from which it may follow that the
act in question has insufficient attention de*

[458a]
General Introduction
voted to it. It can then very easily be disturbed
and inexactly performed. Slight illness or a
change in the distribution of blood in the
central organ of the nervous system can have
the same effect, by these conditions affecting
the determining factor, the distribution of atr
tention, in a similar way. In all cases it would
be a question of the effects of a disturbance of
the attention from organic or psychical causes.
But all this doesn't seem to promise much of
interest for a psycho-analytic investigation. We
might feel tempted to give up the topic. To be
sure, a closer inspection of the facts showsthat
they are not all in accord with the attention
theory of errors of this sort, or at least that not
everything can be directly deduced from it. We
find that such errors and such forgetfulness
also take place when people are not fatigued
or excited, but are in every way in their nor
mal condition; unless,
just because of the
errors, we were subsequently to attribute to
them a condition of
excitement which they
themselves did not acknowledge. Nor can the
matter be quite so simple as that the successful
performance of an act will be ensured by an
intensification of attention, or endangered by
a diminution of it. For a great number of ac
tions may be carried out in a purely automatic
way with very little attention and yet quite
successfully. In walking, a man may perhaps
scarcely know where he is going but keep to
the right road and stop at his destination with-*
out having gone astray. At least, this is what
usually happens. A practised pianist strikes
the right notes, without thinking of them. He
may of course also make an occasional mis
take, but if automatic playing increased the
danger of errors the virtuoso, whose constant
practice has made his playing entirely autor
matic, would be the most exposed to this dan
ger. Yet we see, on the contrary, that many
acts
are most successfully carried out when
they are not the objects of particularly concen
trated attention, and that mistakes may occur
just on occasions when one is most eager to be
accurate, that is, when a. distraction of the
necessary attention is most certainly not pres^
ent. One could then say that this is the effect
of the excitement, but we do not understand
why the excitement does not rather intensify
the concentration on the end so much desired.
So that if in an important speech anyone says
the opposite of what he intends, it can hardly
be explained according to the psycho-physio
logical or the attention theory.
There are also many other minor features in

[458b]
to Psycho-Analysis
455
connection with these errors which we do not
understand and which are not rendered more
comprehensible by these explanations, For in
stance, when one has temporarily forgotten a
name one is annoyed, one is determined to re
call it and cannot desist from the attempt. Why
is it that despite this annoyance the person so
often cannot succeed, as he wishes, in directing
his attention to the word which, as he says, is
"on the tip of his tongue," and which he in
stantly recognizes when it is supplied to him?
Or, to take another example, there are cases in
which the errots multiply, link themselves to
gether or act as substitutes for one another.
The first time, one forgets an appointment; the
next time, after having made a special resolu
tion not to forget it, one discovers that one has
made a mistake in the day or hour. Or one tries
by devious ways to remember a forgotten word,
and in the course of so doing loses track of a
second name which would have been of use in
finding the first. If one then pursues the second
name, a third gets lost, and so on. It is notori
ous that the same thing happens with misprints,
which are of course errors on the part of the
compositor. A stubborn error of this sort is said
once to have crept into a Social-Democratic
newspaper, where, in the account of a festivity,
the following words were printed: "Amongst
those present was His Highness, the Clown
Prince." The next day a correction was atr
tempted. The paper apologized and said: "The
sentence should of course have read; 'the CrowPrince.' " Again, in a war-correspondent's ac*
count of meeting a famous general whose in
firmities were pretty well known, a reference to
the general was printed as "this battle-scared
veteran." Next day an apology appeared which
read "the words of course should have been
'the bottle-scarred veteran!'"1 We like to atr
tribute these occurrences to a devil in the type
setting machine or to some malevolent goblin
^—figurative expressions which at least imply
something more than a psycho-physiological
theory of the misprint.
I do not know if you are aware of the fact
that slips of the tongue can be provoked, called
forth by suggestion, as it were. An anecdote
will serve to illustrate this. Once when a novice
on the stage was entrusted with the important
part in The Maid of Orleans of announcing to
the King:
"The Constable sends back his
sword," the principal player, during the re
hearsal, played the joke of several times re
peating to the timid beginner, instead of the
1 English example.—TR.

[459a]
450
text, the following
back his steed."1 At the: performance the un
fortunate actor actually made his debut with
this perverse announcement, though he had
been amply warned against so doing, or per
haps just because he had been.
All these: little characteristics of errors are
not much illuminated by the theory of diverted
attention. But that does not necessarily prove
the theory wrong. There may be
something
missing, a link, by the addition of which the
theory, might be made .completely satisfactory.
But many of the errors themselves can be con
sidered from another, aspect.
Let us select slips of the tongue, as the type
of error best suited to our purpose. We might
equally well choose slips of the pen or of read
ing. Now we must first remind ourselves that,
so, far,.we have only enquired when and.under
what conditions the"wrong- word is said, and
have received an answer on that point only.
Interest may be directed elsewhere, though, and
the question raised why just this particular
slip is made and no other: one can consider the
nature of the mistake. You will see that so long
as this question remains unanswered, and, the
eject of the mistake is not explained, the
phenomenon remains a pure accident on the
psychological side, even if a physiological ex
planation has been
found
for
it. When
it
happens that I make a mistake in a word I
could obviously do this in an infinite number
of ways, in place of the right word substitute
any one of a thousand others, or make in
numerable distortions of the right word. Now,
is there anything which forces upon me in a
specific instance just this one special slip, out
of all those which are possible^ or does that
remain
accidental
and
arbitrary,
and
can
nothing rational be found in answer to this
question?
Two authors, Meringer and Mayer (a phil
ologist and a psychiatrist) did indeed in 1895
make an attempt to approach the problem of
slips of the tongue from this side. They col
lected examples and first treated them from a
purely descriptive standpoint. This of course
does;,not yet furnish any explanation, but it
may lead the way to one. They differentiated
the
distortions
which
the
intended
phrase
suffered through the slip into: interchanges (in
the positions of words, syllables or letters),
anticipations,
perseverations,
compoundings
(contaminations), and substitutions. I will give
1 Komfortabel is a slang Viennese expression for a
one-horse cab.—TR.
-
-:

[459b]
•-.=
•-.:;>
Sigmund Freud
,
T :.
.-;
The Komfortabel sends
you examples of these authors•main.categories;
As an instance
of
an interchange
(in the
position of words) someone might say "The
Milo of Venus'' instead of "The Venus
of
Milo." The well-known slip of the hotel-boy
whoj knocking at the bishop's door, nervously
repliedto the question "Who is it?" "The Lord,
my boy!" is another example of such an inter
change in the position of words.2 In the typical
Spoonerism, the position of certain letters is
interchanged, as when the preacher said: "How
often do
we
feel
a half-warmed fish within
us!"2 It is a case of anticipation if any one
says: "The thought lies heartily ..i." instead
of: "The thought lies heavily on my heart."
A perseveration is illustrated by the well-known
ill-fated toast, "Gentlemen, I call upon (auf)
you to
hiccough (=aufzustossen)
(auf)
to the health of
our Chief."
(drink) (== awzustossen)
And when a member of the House of Com
mons referred to another as the "honourable
member for Central Hell," instead of "Hull,"
it was a case of perseveration; as also when a
soldier said to a friend "I wish there were a
thousand of our men mortified on that hill,
. Bill," instead of "fortified." In one case the
ell sound has perseverated from the previous
words "member for Centra//' and in the other
thkm sound in"men"has perseverated to form
"mortified."2 These three types of slip are not
very common. You will find those cases much
more frequent in which the slip happens by a
compounding or contraction, as for example
when a gentleman asks a lady if he may insert
her on her. way (begleit-digen); this contrac?
tion is made up of begleiteri=to escort, and
beleidigen=to insult. (And
by the way, a
young man addressing a lady in this way will
not have much successwith her.) A substitution
takes place when a poor woman says she has
an "incurable infernal disease,"2 or in Mrsl
Malaprop's mind when she says, for instance^
"few gentlemen know how to value the ineffectual qualities in a, woman."a
i
The -explanation
which
the
two
authors
attempt to
formulate
as
the basis of their
collection of examples is peculiarly inadequate.
They hold; that the sounds- and syllables of a
word have different values and that the inner
vation
of
the
sounds of higher Value
can
interfere with those of lower,value. They ofc
viously base this conclusion on the cases of
aEnglish exairipiesv—TR.
;v

[460a]
General Introduction
anticipation and perseveration which are not
at all frequent; in other forms of slips of the
tongue the question of such sound priorities,
even if they exist, does not enter at all; for the
most frequent type of slip is that in which in
stead of a certain word one says another which
resembles it, and this resemblance is considered
by many people sufficient explanation of it.
For instance, a professor may say in his open
ing lecture, "I am not inclined (geneigt instead
of geeignet=&tted) to estimate the merits of
my predecessor."Or another professor says, "In
the case of the female genital, in spite of the
tempting ... I mean, the attempted ..."
(Versuchungen instead;of Versuche).
The commonest,and also the most noticeable
form of slip of:the tongue, however, is that of
saying the exact opposite of what one meant
to say, These cases; are quite outside the effect
of any relations between sounds or confusion
due to similarity, and in default one may there
fore turn to the fact that opposites have a
strong conceptual connection with one another
and are psychologically very closelyassociated;
There are well-known examples of this sort.
For instance, the President of our Parliament
once opened the. session with
the
words
"Gentlemen, I declare a quorum present and
herewith declare the session. closed."
Any other common association may work in
a way as insidious as the, association of oppoh
sites and may on occasion lead to results as
inopportune. So there is a story :to the effect
that, at a festivity in honour of the marriage
of a child of H. Helmholtz with a child of the
well-known inventor and captain of industry,
W. Siemensj "the famous physiologist DuboisReymond was asked to speak. He concluded
his doubtless brilliant speech with the toast
"Success to the new partnership, Siemens and
Halske!" which was of course the name of the
old firm. The association of the two -names
must have been as familiar to a resident in:
Berlin as "Cross & Blackwell" to a Londoner.'
So the effect of word-associations must be
taken into account, as well as that of soundvalues and similarities between words.
But
even that is not enough; In one type: of case,
before we can arrive at an adequate explanation
of the slip we must consider some phrase which
had been said, Or perhaps only thought, pre
viously. Again, that is, a case pf perseveration,
as Merihger insists, but arising in a more dis
tant source.—I must confess that altogether
I have the impression that we are further than
ever from comprehension of slips of the tongue.

[460b]
to Psycho-Analysis
45 7
:• However, I hope-1 am not mistaken In think
ing that in the course of our examination of
the above examples an impression has formed
itself in us which may be of a kind to repay
further attention. We
were considering the
general conditions under which slips of the
tongue occur and then the influences which
determine the kind of distortion effected in the
slip, but so far we have not examined at all the
result of the slip itself, as an object of interest,
without regard to its origin. If we bring our
selves to do this we' shall in the end have to.
assert courageously, that in some of the ex
amples the slip itself makes sense. Now what
does it mean when we say "it makes sense"?
Well, it means that the result of the slip may
perhaps •have a right to. be regarded in- itself
as a valid mental process following out its own
purpose, and as an expression having content
and meaning. Hitherto we have only spoken of
errors, but now it appears as if the error could
sometimes be quite a proper act, except that
it; has intruded itself in the place of one more
expected or intended.
.
In certain cases the sense belonging to the
slip itself appears obvious and unmistakable.
When the President in his opening speech closes
the session of Parliament, a knowledge of the
circumstances under which the slip was made,
inclines us to see a meaning; in it He expects
no good result from the session and would be
glad to be able to disperse-forthwith; there is
no difficulty in discovering the
meaning, or
interpreting the sense, of this slip. Or when a
lady, appearing to compliment another, says
"I am sure you must have thrown this delight-,
ful hat together" instead of "sewn it together"
(aufgepatztinsteadof aufgeputzt), no scientific
theories in the world can prevent us from seeing:
in her slip the thought that the hat is an
amateur production. Or when a lady who is
well known for her determined character says:
"My husband asked his doctor what sort of
diet ought to be provided for him. But the
doctor said he needed no special diet, he could
eat and drink whatever ./ choose," the slip
appears clearly as the unmistakable expression
of a consistent scheme;.
Now supposing it should turn out that not
only a few cases of slips of the tongue and
errors in general, but the great majority of
them, have a meaning, then the meahingrof the
error, to which we have hitherto paid no at
tention, would become the point of greatest
interest to us an&; would justifiably drive all
other points of view into the background. AU

[461a]
45*
physiological and
psycho-physiological con
ditions could then be ignored and attention
could be devoted to the purely psychological
investigation of the sense, that is, the meaning,
the intention, in the errors. With this in view,
therefore,we shall soon consider further material.
Before undertaking this, however, I should
like to invite you to follow up another clue
with me. It often happens that a poet makes
use of a slip of the tongue or some other error
as a means of artistic expression. This fact in
itself proves that he thinks the error, for in
stance, a slip of the tongue, has a meaning; for
he constructs it intentionally. It could hardly
happen that a poet accidentally made a slip of
the pen and then allowed his slip of the pen
to stand as a slip of the tongue of the character.
He wishes to reveal something by means of
the slip and we may well enquire what that
may be—whether perhaps he wishes to indicate
that the person in question is distracted or over
tired, or is expecting a headache. Of course we
should not exaggerate the importance of it if
poets do make use of slips to express their
meaning. Slips might be in reality without
meaning, accidents in the mental world, or only
occasionally have a meaning, and poets would
still be entitled to
refine them by infusing
sense into them for their own purposes. How
ever, it would not be surprising if more were
to be learned from poets about slips of the
tongue-than from philologists and psychiatrists.
There is an example of a slip of this kind in
Schiller's Wallenstein
(Piccolomini,
Act
i,
Scene 5). In the foregoing scene, young Max
Piccolomini had taken up Duke Wallenstein's
cause ardently, and had been passionately de
scribing the blessings of peace, which he had
become aware of in the course of a journey
accompanying Wallenstein's beautiful daughter
to the camp. As he leaves the stage, his father
(Octavio)
and the courtier Questenberg are
plunged in consternation. The fifth scene con
tinues:
Questenberg. Alas1 and stands it so?
Friend, do we let him go
In this delusion? let him go from us?
Not call him back at once, not
Open his eyes here and now?
Octavio (recovering himself out of deep thought).
He has now opened mine
And I see more than pleases me.
Questenberg. What is it?
Octavio. A curse upon this journey!
Questenberg. But why so? What is it?
Octavio. Come, come, friend! I must up

[461b]
Sigmund Freud
And follow the ill-omened clue at once
And see with mine own eyes—come with me
now I
Questenberg. What now? Where go you then?
Octavio (hastily). To her, herselfI
Questenberg. To . . .
Octavio (corrects himself). To the Duke J Come,
let us go.
Octavio meant to say: "To him, to the Duke,"
but his tongue slips and he betrays (to us, at
least) by the words uto her"that he has clearly
recognized the influence at work behind the
famous young warrior's rhapsodies in favour
of peace.
A still more impressive example was found
by O. Rank in Shakespeare. It occurs in the
Merchant of Venice, in the famous scene in
which the fortunate suitor makes his choice
among the three caskets; and I can perhaps
not do better than read to you now Rank's
short account of it.
"A slip of the tongue which occurs in Shake
speare's Merchant of Venice (Act m, Sc. 2)
is exceedingly fine in the poetic feeling it shows
and in the brilliant way in which it is applied
technically. Like the slip in Wallenstein quoted
by Freud in his Psycho-pathology of Everyday
Life, it shows that the poets well understand
the mechanism and meaning of such slips and
assume that the audience will also understand
them.
Portia, who by her father's wish has
been bound to the choice of a husband by lot,
has so far escaped all the unwelcome suitors
by the luck of fortune. Having at last found in
Bassanio the suitor to whom she is inclined,
she fears that he too will choose the wrong
casket. She would like to tell him that even
so he may rest assured of her love, but she is
prevented by her oath. In this inner conflict
the poet makes her say to her chosen suitor:
I pray you tarry; pause a day or two,
|
Before you hazard: for, in choosing wrong,
I lose your company; therefore, forbear awhile:
There's something tellsme (but it is not love)
I would not lose you ...
... I could teach you
How to choose right, but then I am forsworn;
So will I never be; so may you miss me;
But if you do you'll make me wish a sin,
That I had been forsworn. Beshrew your eyes,
They have o'erlooked me, and divided me;
One half of me is yours, the other half yours,-^
Mine own, I would say; but if mine, then yours,
And so all yours.
Just that which she only meant to indicate
subtly to him because she should really have

[462a]
General Introduction
concealed it from him altogether, namely, that
even before the lot she was his and loved him,
this the poet with exquisite fineness of psycho
logical feeling causes to come to expression in
her slip; and is able, by this artistic device, to
relieve the unbearable uncertainty of the lover
as well as the suspense of the audience as to
the issue of the choice."
And notice, at the end, how subtly Portia
reconciles the two declarations which are con
tained in the slip, how she resolves the con
tradiction between them, and finally even jus
tifies the slip.
... but if mine, then yours,
And so all yours.
It has happened that other thinkers outside
the field of medicine have disclosed by an ob
servation the meaning of some error and so
anticipated our efforts in this direction. You
all know the witty satirist Lichtenberg (17421799) of whom Goethe said: "Where he makes
a joke, a problem lies concealed." And occa
sionally the solution of the problem is revealed
in the joke. Lichtenberg writes in his witty and
satirical Notes, "He always read
Agamemnon
for
angenommen (verb meaning to take for
granted), so deeply versed was he in Homer."
This really contains the whole theory of slips
in reading.
At the next lecture we will see whether we
can agree with the poets in their conception of
the meaning of psychological errors.
THIRD LECTURE
The Psychology op Errors (Continued)
At the last lecture it occurred to us to con
sider the error by itself alone, apart from its
relation to the intended act with which it had
interfered, and we perceived that in certain
cases it seemed to betray a meaning of its own.
We said to ourselves that if this conclusion,
that the error has its own meaning, could be
established on
a larger scale, that meaning
would soon prove more interesting to us than
the investigation of the conditions under which
errors arise.
Let us once more agree upon what we under
stand by the meaning of a mental process. This
is nothing else but the intention which it serves
and its place in a mental sequence. In most of
the cases we examined we could substitute for
the word meaning the words intention and
tendency. Now was it only a deceptive appear
ance, or a poetic glorification of the error, that
led. us to believe that we could see an intention
in it?

[462b]
to Psycho-Analysis
459
Let us still keep to the examples of slips of
the tongue and review a larger number of such
manifestations. We then find whole categories
of cases in which the intention, the meaning, of
the slip is quite obvious, particularly so in those
instances in which the opposite of what was
intended is said. The President says in his open
ing speech: "I declare the session closed" That
is surely not ambiguous. The meaning and in
tention of this slip is that he wants to close
the session. One might well say; "he said so
himself"; we only take him at his word. Please
do not interrupt me with the objection that this
is impossible, that we know quite well that he
wished to open the session, not to close it, and
that he himself whom we have just recognized
as the best judge of his intention will affirm
that he meant to open it. In doing so you forget
that we agreed to consider the error by itself;
its relation to the intention which it disturbs
will be discussed later. You would be guilty of
an error in logic, by which you would conven
iently dispose of the problem under discussion,
which in English is called begging the question.
In other cases, where the form of the slip is
not exactly the opposite of what is intended,
a contradictory sense may still often come to
expression. "I am not inclined (geneigt) to ap
preciate my predecessor's merits." Inclined is
not the opposite of in a position to (geeignet)y
but it is an open confession of a thought in
sharpest contradiction to the speaker's duty to
meet the situation gracefully.
In still other cases, the slip simply adds a sec
ond meaning to the intended. The sentence then
sounds like a contraction, an abbreviation, a
condensation of several sentences into one: Thus
the determined lady who said: "He may eat'
and drink whatever I choose.""That is as if she
had said: "He can eat and drink what he
chooses, but what does it matter what he
chooses? It is for me to do the choosing!" Slips
of the tongue often give this impression of ab
breviation; for instance, when a professor of
anatomy at the end of his lecture on the nasal
cavities asks Whether his class has thoroughly
understood it and, after a general reply in the
affirmative, goes on to say: "I can hardly be
lieve that that is so, since persons who can
thoroughly understand the nasal cavities can be
counted, even in a city of millions, on one
finger... I mean, on the fingers of one hand."
The abbreviated sentence has its own meaning;
it says that there is only one person who un
derstands the subject.
In contrast to these types^in which the slip

[463a]
4^6
Sigmunt* Freud
plainly discloses its meaningare others in which
the slip of the tongue conveys nothing intelli
gible, and therefore directly controverts our ex
pectations. The mis-pronunciation by mistake
of proper names, or the enunciation of mean
ingless sounds) is such a frequent occurrence
that this alone would appear to dispose at once
of the'question whether all errors have a mean
ing. Yet closer inspection of such examples dis
closes the fact that it is easily possible to under
stand such distortions; indeed, that the differ
ence between these unintelligible cases and the
previous more comprehensible ones is not so
very great
The owner of a horse, on being asked how it
was, replied: "O, it may stad—it may take
another month." Asked what he really meant
to say, he answered that he was thinking it was
a sad,business,, and the words sad and take to
gether gave rise to stad. (Meringer and Mayer.)
Another man was relating some objection
able incidents and went on: "and then certain
facts were refilled." He explained that he meant
to say these facts were filthy.
Revealed and
filthy together combine to form refilled. (Mer
inger and Mayer.)
You -.will recall the case of the young man
who offered to "insort" an unknown lady. We
took the-liberty of resolving this word into
insult and escort, and were quite convinced of
this interpretation without requiring proof of;
it. From these examples you can see that even
these more obscure cases can be explained as
the concurrence, or interference, of two dif
ferent intentions of speech with one another;
the differences-arise only in that in the first
type of slip the one intention has entirely ex
cluded the other• as when the opposite is said;
while in the second type the one Intention only
succeeds in distorting or modifying the other,
from which arise combinations of a more or
less senseless appearance.
We believe that we have now discovered the
secret of a large number of slips of the tongue.
If we keep this clear in mind we shall be able to
comprehend still further groups hitherto entire
ly mysterious. Although, for instance, in a case
of distortion of a name we cannot suppose that
it is always a matter of a contest between two
similar but. different names, yet the second h>
tention is easily perceived. Distortions of names
are common enough apart from slips of the
tongue; they are attempts to liken the name
to something derogatory or degrading, a com
mon form of abuse, which educated persons
soon leam to avoid but nevertheless dp not

[463b]
willingly give up. It may be dressed up as a
joke, although one of a very low order. To
quote one gross and ugly example of such a
distortion of a name, the name of the Presi
dent of the French Republic, Pbvncari, has
lately been transformed'into Schweinskarre. It
is'not going much further to assume that some
such abusive intention may also.be behind dis
tortions of names produced by a slip of the
tongue. In pursuing out idea, similar explana
tions suggest themselves for- cases
of slips
where the effect is comic or absurd. In the case
of the member of parliament who referred, to
the "honourable member for Central Hell,"
the sober atmosphere of the House is unex
pectedly disturbed by the intrusion of a word
that calls up a ludicrous and unflattering im
age; we are bound to conclude from the anal
bgy with certain offensive and abusive expres
sions that an impulse has interposed here, to
this effect: "You needn't be taken in. I don't
mean a word of this. To hell with the fellow V?
The same applies to slips of the tongue which
transform quite harmless words into Obscene
and indecent ones.1
-i
We are familiar with this tendency in cer
tain people intentionally to convert harmless
words into indecent ones for the sake of the
amusement obtained; it passes for wit^ and in
fact wheii one hears of a case one at once asks
whether it was intended as a joke or occurred
unintentionally as a slip of the tongue.
-
J;
Well, we seem to have solved the riddle of
errors with comparativelylittle trouble! They
are not accidents; they are seriousimental acts;
they have their meaning; they arise; through
the concurrence—perhaps better, the ^mutual
interference—of two different intentions. But
now I can well understand that you want to.
overwhelm, me with a flood of questions and.
doubts, which must be answered and resolved
before we can enjoy this first result of our ef|
forts. I certainly do not want to press any hasty
conclusions upon you. Let us coolly consider
everything in turn.
••.,
:
What would you like to say? Whether I think
that this explanation accounts for all cases of
slips of the tongue or only for a certain num
ber? Whether this conception can be extended
to the many other types of errors, to misread
ing, slips pf the pen, forgetting, wrongly per
formed actions,, mislaying things and so on?.
What part the factors of fatigue,^excitement,
.* Two untranslatable examples are given in tie.text,
apopos iot a propos arid Eischeissweibchenidi Eiibeisscheibchen. (Meringer and Mayer.)—TR.
••'.

[464a]
General Introduction
absent-mindedness and distraction of attention
play in regard to the mental nature of errors?
Besides this, it is clearly seen that rof the two
competing meanings in the slip one is always
manifest, but not always the other. How is one
to arrive at the latter? And if one believes that
one has guessed it, how is one to find proof
that this is not merely a probability but the only
true meaning? Is there anything else you wish
to ask? If not, then I myself will continue. I
will remind you that we are not really greatly
concerned with errors in themselves, but that
we wished to learn from a study of them some
thing of value from the point of view of psycho
analysis. Therefore I will put this question:
"What sort of purposes or tendencies are these
which thus interfere with other intentions, and
what is the relation between the interfering
tendency and the other?" Thus, as soon as we
have found the answer to the riddle, our efforts
begin again.
Very well then; is this the explanation of all
cases of slips of the tongue? I am very much
inclined to think so, and for this reason, be
cause whenever one examines an instance of it
this type of solution may be found. Still, one
cannot prove that a slip of the tongue cannot
come to pass without the agency of this mech
anism. It may be so: for our purposes it is a
matter of indifference, theoretically; for the
conclusions which we wish to draw by way of
an introduction to psycho-analysis remain val
id, even if only a small proportion of the total
incidence of slips of the tongue comes under
our explanation, and this is certainly not so.
The next question, whether this explanation ex
tends to other forms of errors, may be an
swered by way of anticipation In the affirmative.
You can convince yourselves of it when we
turn to consider examples of slips of the pen,
of wrongly performed acts, and so on. I pro
pose, however, for technical reasons that we
should postpone doing this until we have in
vestigated the slip of the tongue itself more
thoroughly.
The question what significance those factors,
which some writers have placed in the fore
ground, can now have for us-—such factors as
disturbances of the circulation, fatigue, excite
ment, distraction, disturbances of attention—
demands a more exhaustive reply if we assume
the mental mechanism of slips described above.
You will notice that we do not deny these fac
tors. Indeed^ in general it doesn't often happen
that psychb-artalysis contests anything which
is maintained in other quarters; as a rule, psy-

[464b]
T0 Psycho-Analysis
2j.6j/
cho-analysis only adds something new to what
has been said; and it does certainly happen on
occasion that
what has hitherto been over
looked, and is now supplied by psycho-analysis,
is the most essential part of the matter. The
influence of such physiological predispositions
as arise in slight illness, circulatory disturb
ances and conditions of fatigue, upon the occur
rence of slips of the tongue is to be admitted
without more ado; everyday personal experir
ence may convince you of it. But how little is
explained by this admission! Above all, these
are not necessary conditions of errors. Slips
of the tongue may just as well occur in perfect
health and normal conditions. These bodily fact
tors, therefore, are merely contributory; they
only favour and facilitate the peculiar mental
mechanism which produces slips of the tongue.
I
once used an illustration for this state of
things which I will repeat here, as I know of no
better. Just suppose that on some dark night
I am walking in a lonely neighbourhood and am
assaulted by a rogue who seizes my watch and
money, whereupon since I could not see the
robber's face clearly, I make my complaint
at the police-station in these words: "Loneli
ness and darkness have just robbed me of my
valuables." The police officer might reply tb
me: "You seem to carry your support of the
extreme mechanistic point of view too far for
the facts. Suppose we put the case thus: Under
cover of darkness and encouraged by the loneli
ness of the spot, some unknown thief has made
away with your valuables. It appears to me
that the essential thing to be done is to look
about for the thief. Perhaps we shall then be
able to take the plunder from him again."
Psycho-physiological factors such as excite
ment, absent-mindedness, distraction of atten
tion, obviously provide very little in the way
of explanation. They are mere phrases; they
are screens, and we should not be deterred from
looking behind them. The question is rather
what has here called forth the excitement or
the particular diversion of attention. The in
fluence of sound-values, resemblances between
words, and common associations connecting
certain words, must also be recognized as im
portant. They facilitate the slip by pointing
but a path for it to take. But if there is;a path
before me, does it necessarily follow that I
must go along it? I also require a motive to
determine my choice and, further, some force
to propel me forward. These sound-values and
word associations are, therefore, just like the
bodily conditions, the facilitating causes of

[465a]
462
Sigmund Freud
slips of the tongue, and cannot provide the real
explanation of them. Consider for a moment
the enormous majority of cases in which the
words I am using in my speech are not de
ranged On account of
sound-resemblance to
other words, intimate associations with opposite
meanings, or with expressions in common use,
It yet remains to suppose, with the philosopher
Wundt, that a slip of the tongue arises when
the tendency to associations gains an ascend
ance over the original,intention owing:to.bodily
fatigue. This would be quite plausible if ex
perience did not controvert it by the fact that
in a number of cases the bodily, and in another
large group-the associative, predisposing causes
are absent.
Particularly interesting to me, however, is
your next question, namely, by what means the
two mutually disturbing tendencies may be
ascertained. You probably do not suspect how
portentous this question is. You will agree
that one of these tendencies, the one which is
interfered with, is always unmistakable; the
person who commits the slip knows it and ac
knowledges it. Doubt and hesitation only arise
in regard to the other, what we have called the
interfering tendency. Now
we have already
heard, and you will certainly not have forgot
ten, that in a certain number of cases this other
tendency is equally plain. It is evident in the
result of the slip if only we have the courage
to let the slip speak for itself. The President
who said the opposite of what he meant—it is
clear that he wishes to open the session, but
equally clear that he would also like to close
it. That is so plain that it needs no interpret
ing. But in the other cases, in which the inter
fering tendency merely distorts the original
without itself coming to full expression, how
can the interfering tendency be detected in the
distortion?
In one group of cases by a very safe and sim
ple method, by the same method, that is, by
which, we establish the tendency that is inter
fered with. We enquire of the speaker, who tells
us then and there; after making the slip he re
stores the word he originally intended. "O, it
may stad—no, it may take another month."
Well, the interfering tendency may be like
wise supplied by him. We say, "Now why did
you first say stad?" He replies, "I meant to
say it was a sad business"; and in the other
case in which "refilled" was said, the speaker
informs you that he first meant to say it was
a filthy business, but controlled himself and
substituted another expression. The discovery

[465b]
of the disturbing tendency is here as definitely
established as that of the disturbed tendency.
It is not without intention that I have selected
as examples cases which owe neither their origin
nor their explanation to me or to any supporter
of mine. Still, in both these cases, a certain in
tervention was necessary in order to produce
the explanation. One had to ask the speaker
why he made the slip, what explanation he
could give. Without that he might have passed
it by without seeking to explain it. Being asked,
however, he gave as his answer the first idea
that occurred to him. And see now, this little
intervention and the result of it constitute al
ready a psycho-analysis, a prototype of every
psycho-analytic investigation that we may un
dertake further.
Now, should I be too suspicious if I were to
surmise that, at the very moment at which
psycho-analysis begins to dawn upon you, a
resistance to it instantly raises itself within
your mind? Are you not eager to object that
information supplied by the person enquired
of, who committed the slip, is not completely
reliable
evidence. He naturally wishes, you
think, to meet your request to explain his slip,
and so he says the first thing that he can think
of, if it will do at all. There is no proof that
that is actually how the slip arose. It may have
been so, but it may just as well have been
otherwise. Something else also might have oc
curred to him that would have met the case as
well or even better.
It is remarkable how Httle respect you have,
in your hearts, for a mental fact! Imagine that
someone had undertaken a chemical analysis
of a certain substance and had ascertained that
one ingredient of it is of a certain weight, so
and so many milligrams. From this weight,
thus arrived at, certain conclusions may be
drawn. Do you think now it would ever occur
to a chemist to discredit these conclusions on
the ground that the isolated substance might as
well have had some other weight? Everyone
recognizes the fact that it actually had this
weight and no other, and builds further conclu
sions confidently on that fact. But when it is
a question of mental fact, that it was such an
idea and no other that occurred to the person
when questioned, you will not accept that as
valid, but say that something else might as
well have occurred to him! The truth is that
you have an illusion of a psychic freedom with
in you which you do not want to give up. I
regret to say that on this point I find myself
in sharpest opposition to your views/

[466a]
General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis
463
Now you will break off here only to take up
your resistance at another point. You will con
tinue: "We understand that it lies in the pe
culiar technique of psycho-analysis to bring the
personanalysed to givethe solution of its prob
lems. Let us take another example, that in
which the after-dinner speaker calls upon the
company to hiccough to the health of their
guest. The interfering tendency is, you say, in
this case to ridicule; this it is which opposes
the intention to do honour. But this is a mere
interpretation on your part, based on observa
tions made independently of the slip. If in this
case you were to question the perpetrator of
the slip he would not confirm your view that
he intended an insult; on the contrary, he
would vehemently deny it. Why do you not
abandonyour undemonstrable interpretation in
the face of this flat denial?"
Yes, this time you have lighted upon some
thing formidable. I can picture to myself that
unknown speaker; he is probably an assistant
of the guest of honour, perhaps already a
junior lecturer himself, a young man with the
brightest prospects. I will press him and ask
whether he is sure he did not perceive some
feeling in himself antagonistic to the demand
that he should pay honour to his chief. A nice
fuss there is! He becomes impatient and sud
denly bursts out at me: "Look here, enoughof
this cross-examination, or I'll make myself dis
agreeable! You will ruin my career with your
suspicions. I simply said aufstossen instead of
anstossen, because I'd already said auf twice
before it. It's the thing that Meringer calls a
perseveration, and there's nothing else to be
read into it. Do you understand me? That's
enough." H'm, this is a startling reaction, a
truly energetic repudiation. I see that there is
nothing more to be done with the young man,
but I think to myself that he betrays a strong
personal interest in making out that his slip
has no meaning. You will perhaps agree too
that he has no right to become so uncivil over
a purely theoretical investigation, but after all,
you will think, he must know what he wanted:
to say and what not.
0, so he must? That is perhaps still open
to question.
Now you think you have me in a trap. "So
that is your technique," I hear you say. "When
the person who commits a slip gives an ex
planation which fits your views then you de
clare him to be-the final authority on the sub
ject. He says so himself! But if what he says
does not suit your book, then you suddenly

[466b]
assert that what he says does not count, one
need not believe it."
Certainly that is so. But I can give you
another instance of a similarly monstrous pro
cedure. When an accused man confesses to a
deed the judge believes him, but when he de
nies it the judge does not believe him. Were it
otherwise the law could not be administered,
and in spite of occasionalmiscarriages you will
admit that the system, on the whole, works
well.
"Well, but are you a judge, and is the person
who commits a slip to be accused before you?
Is a slip of the tongue a crime?"
Perhaps we need not reject even this com
parison. But see now to what deep-seated dif
ferences our attempt to investigate the appar-.
ently harmless problems of errors has brought
us, differences which at this stage we do not
know in the least how to reconcile. I suggest
that we should make a temporary compromise
on the basis of the analogy with the judge and
the prisoner. You shall grant me that the mean
ing of an error admits of no doubt when the
subject of the analysis acknowledges it him
self. I, in turn, will admit that a direct proof
for the suspected meaning cannot be obtained
if the subject refuses us the information, and,
of course, this applies also when the subject Is
not present to give us the information. As also
in legal proceedings, we are then thrown back
upon indications in order to form a dedsiony
the truth of which is sometimes more and some
times less probable. At law, for practical rea
sons, guilt has to be declared also on .circum
stantial evidence. There is no. such necessity
here; but neither are we bound to refrain from
considering such evidence. It is a mistake to,
believe that a science consists in nothing but
conclusively proved propositions, and it is un
just to demand that it should. It is a demand
only made by those who feel a craving for
authority in some form and a need to replace
the religious catechism by something else, even
if it be a scientific one. Science in its catechism
has but few apodictic precepts; it consists
mainly of statements which it has developed
to varying degrees of probability. The capacity
to
be content with these approximations to
certainty and the ability to carry on construc
tive work despite the lack of final confirmation
are actually a mark of the scientific habit of
mind.
U
•
But where shall we find a starting-point for
our interpretations, and the indications;for our
proof, in cases where the subject under anal-

[467a]
4$4
Sigmund Freud
ysis says nothing to explain the meaning of the
error? From various sources. First; by analogy
with similar phenomena not produced by error,
as when we maintain that the distortion of a
name by mistake has the same intention to
ridicule behind it as intentional distortion of
names. And then, from the mental situation in
which the error arose, from our knowledge of
the character of the person who commits it,
and of the feelings active in him before the
error, to which it may be a response. As a rule,
what happens is that we find the meaning of
the error according to general principles; and
this, to begin with, is only a conjecture, a ten
tative solution, proof being discovered later by
an examination of the mental situation. Some
times it is necessary to await further develop
ments, which have been so to speak, foreshad
owed by the error, before we can find confirma
tion of our conjecture.
I cannot easily give you evidence of this if
I have to limit myself to the field of slips of the
tongue, although even here I have a few good
examples. The young man who offered to "insort" the lady is in fact very shy; the lady
whose husband may eat and drink what she
likes I know to be one of those managing
women who rule the household with a rod of
iron. Of take the following case: At a general
meeting of a club a young member made a
violent attack in a speech, in the course of which'
he spoke of the officersof the society as "Lend
ers of the Committee," which appears to be a
substitute for Members of the Committee.1 We
should conjecture that against his attack some
interfering tendency was active.which was it
self in some way connected with the idea of
lending. As a matter of fact, an informant tells
us that the speaker is in constant money dif
ficulties and was actually attempting to raise
money at the time. So the interfering tendency^
really is to be translated into the thought: "Bemore moderate in your opposition: these are
the people whom you want to lend you money."
If T diverge into the field of other kinds of
errors I can give you a wide selection of ex
amples of such circumstantial evidence.
If anyone forgets an otherwise familiar; prop
er name and has difficulty in retaining it in his
memory—even with an effort-^it is not hard to
guess that he has something against the owner
o£the name -and does not like to think of him;,
consider in the light of this the following notes
on the mental situation in which an error of this
kind was made.:
1YoxschussmitgUeder instead of kvdschussmitglieder.

[467b]
A Mr. Y fell in love with a lady, who;did not
return the feeling and shortly after married a
Mr. X, Although Mr. Y had already known
Mr: X for some time, and even had business
relations with him, he forgets his name over
and over again, so that he frequently has to
ask someone the man's name when it is neces
sary to write to him.2 Obviously. Mr. Y wants
to obliterate all knowledge of his fortunate
rival. "Never thought of shall he be."
Another example: a lady inquires of a doctor
about a common acquaintance, calling her by
her maiden name. She has forgotten the mar
ried name. She admits that she strongly ob*
jected to the marriage and dislikes the husband
intensely.8
Later we shall have much to say in other
connections in regard to
the
forgetting
of
names; at the moment we are chiefly inter
ested in the mental situationin which the lapse
of memory occurs.
The forgetting of resolutions can in general
be referred to an opposing current of feeling
which is against carrying out the intention. Itl
is not only we psycho-analysts who hold this
view, however; it is the ordinary attitude of
everyone in their daily affairs, which they only
deny in theory. The protege whose patron apol
ogizes for having forgotten his request is not!
pacified by such an apology. He thinks im
mediately: "It's-evidently nothing to him; he!
promised, but he doesn't mean to do it." For
getting is therefore criticized even in life^ in
certain connections, and the difference between
the popular andthe psycho-analytic conception!
of these errors seems to be dispelled. Imagine;
a hostess receiving a guest with the words: \
"What, is it today you were coming? I "quite!
forgot that I had asked you for to-rday"; or.a
young man confessing to his beloved that hehad forgotten all about the appointment they!
had arranged on thelast occasion. He will never;
admit it; he will rather invent on the spur of;
the moment the most wildly improbable hin-'
drances which prevented his coming and^ made
it impossible for him to communicate with her
from that day to this. We all know that in
military servicethe excuse of having forgotten
is worthless and saves no one from punish
ment; the system is recognized.as justifiable.
Here everyone is suddenly agreed that a certtain mistake has a meaning and what that
meaningis. Why are they not consistent enough
to extend their insight to other errors and then
2 From C. G. Jung.
8 From A. A!. JBrill.

[468a]
General Introduction
openly acknowledge it? There is naturally also
an answer to this.
•••.'• If the meaning of forgetting resolutions is
so little open to doubt in the minds of people
in general you will be the less surprised to find
that writers employ such mistakes in a similar
sense. Those-iof you who have seen or read
Shaw's Ccesar and Cleopatra will recall that
Caesar, when departing in the last scene, is
pursued by the feeling that there was some
thing else he intended to do which he had now
forgotten. At last it turns out what it is: to
say farewell to.Cleopatra. By this small device
the author attempts to ascribe to the great
Caesar a feeling of superiority which he did;not
possess and to which he did not at all aspire.
You can learn from historical sources that
Caesar arranged for Cleopatra to follow him
to Rome and that she was living there with her
little Caesarion when Caesar was
murdered,
whereupon she fled the city.
The cases of forgetting resolutions are as a
rule so clear that they are of little use for our
purpose, which is to discover in the mental
situation indications of the meaning of the er
ror. Let us turn, therefore, to a particularly
ambiguous and obscure form ofterror, that of
losing and mislaying objects. It will certainly
seem-incredible*to you,that the person himself
could havevahy.purpose in losing things, which
is often sjieh a painful accident. But there are
innumerable instances of this kind: A young
man loses a pencil to which he was much at
tached. A few days/before heihad had a letter
from his brother-in-law which concluded with
these-words: "I have neither time nor inclina
tion at present to encourageyou in your frivol
ity and idleness."1 Now the pencil was a pres
ent from this brother-in-law. Had it not been
for this coincidence we could not of course have
maintained that the loss involved any intention
to get rid of the gift. Similar cases are.very
numerous. One loses
objects when one
has
quarrelled with the giver and no longer wants
to be reminded of him, or again, when one has
tired of them and wants an excuse to provide
oneself with something different and better.
Dropping, breaking, and destroying things of
course serve a similar purpose in regard to the
object. Can it be considered accidental when,
just before his birthday, a child loses and dam^
ages his possessions, for instance, his watch
and his schoolbag?
- Anyone who has experienced often enough
the annoyance of. not being able to find some1 From B. Dattner.

[468b]
to Psycho-Analysis
4&5
thing which he has himself put away will cer
tainly be unwilling to believe that he could have
had any intention1in so doing. And yet cases
are not at all rare in which the circumstances
attendant on the act of mislaying point to a
tendency to put the object aside temporarily or
permanently. Perhaps the best example of this
kind is the following.
. A young man told me this story:,"A few
years ago there were misunderstandings be
tween me and my wife; I thought her too cold,
and, though I willingly acknowledged her ex
cellent qualities, we lived together without at-*
fection. One day, on coming in from a walk,
she brought me a book which she had bought
me because she thought it would interest me.
I thanked her for her little attention^ promised
to read the book, put it among my #dngs and
never could find it again. Months passed by and
occasionally I thoughtof this derelict book and
tried in vain to find it. About six months later
my dear mother, wholiyed some distance away,
fell ill. My wife left our house to go and nurse
her mother-in-law, who became seriously ill,
giving my wife an opportunity of showing her
best qualities. One evening I came home full
of enthusiasm and gratitude towards my wife.
I walked up to my writing desk and opened a
certain drawer in it, without a, definite inten
tion but with a kind of somnambulistic sureness, and there before, me lay! tb&riast book
which I had so often looked for;-' ::
With the disappearance of-the motive/the inr
ability to find the mislaid object: also,came to
an end.
-
-.-.•'
I could multiply this collection of examples
indefinitely; but I will not do so nqw.yln my
Psycho-pathologyof EverydayLife (first pubt
lished in iooi) you will find plenty of examples
for the study of errors.2All these examples dem
onstrate the same thing over and over again;
they make it probable to your,that; mistakes
have a meaning and they show you how the
meaning can be guessed-or confirmed from the
attendant circumstances, I restrict myself rath
er to-day, because our intention here was lim
ited to studying these phenomena with a view
to obtaining an introduction to psycho-analysis..
There are only two groups of occurrences:into
which I must still go,-the accumulated and
combined errors, and confirmation of out-in
terpretations by subsequent events.
Accumulated and combined errors are cer-
.
a Also in the writings of A. Maeder (French), A. A.
Brill arid Ernest Jones {English),
and J. Starcke
{Dutch) and others.
^ •
<

[469a]
466
Sigmund Freud
tainly the finest flowers of the species. If we
were only concerned to prove that errors had
a meaning, we should have Hmited ourselves to
them at the outset, for the meaning in them is
unmistakable, even to the dullest intelligence,
and strong enough to impress the most critical
judgment. The repetition of the occurrences
betrays a persistence which is hardly ever an
attribute of chance, but which fits well with
the idea of design. Further, the exchanging of
one kind of mistake for another shows us what
is the most important and essential element in
the error; and that is, not its form, or the means
of which it makes use, but the tendency which
makes use of it and can achieve its end in the
most various ways. Thus I will give you a case
of repeated forgetting: Ernest Jones relates
that he once allowed a letter to lie on his writ
ing desk for several days for some unknown
reason. At last he decided to post it, but re
ceived it back from the dead-letter office, for
he had forgotten to address it. After he had ad
dressed it he took it to post but this time with
out a stamp. At this point he finally had to ad
mit to himself his objection to sending the
letter at all.
In another case, taking up a thing by mistake
is combined with mislaying it. A lady travelled
to Rome with her brother-in-law, a famous
artist. The visitor was much feted by the Ger
mans living hi Rome and received, among other
things, a present of an antique gold medal. The
lady was vexed because her brother-in-law did
not appreciate the fine specimen highly enough.
After her sister had arrived she returned home
and discovered, upon unpacking, that she had
brought the medal with her—how, she did not
know. She wrote at once to her brother-in-law
telling him that she would send the stolen prop
erty back to him the next day. But the next
day the medal was so cleverly mislaid that it
could not be discovered and could not be re
turned, and then it began to dawn upon the
lady what her absent-mindedness had meant,
namely, that she wanted to keep the work of
art for herself.*
I have already given you an example of a
combination of forgetfulness with an error, in
the case in which someone forgets an appoint
ment, and a second time, with the firm inten
tion bf not forgetting it again, appears at an
hour which is not the appointed one. A quite
analogous case was told me from his own ex
perience by a friend who pursues literary aswell
as scientific interests. He said: "Some years
1 From R. Reitier.

[469b]
ago I accepted election to the Council of a cer
tain literary society because I hoped that the
society might at some time be useful to me in
getting a play of mine produced; and, although
not much interested, I attended the meetings
regularly every Friday. A few months ago I
received an assurance that my play would be
produced at a theatre in F and since then it has
invariably happened that I forget to attend the
meetings of the society. When I read your writ
ings on this subject, I reproached myself with
my meanness in staving away now that these
people can no longer be of use to me and de
termined on no account to forget on the fol
lowing Friday. I kept reminding myself of my
resolution until I carried it out and stood at the
door of the meeting-room. To my amazement
it was closed and the meeting was already over!
I had made a mistake in the day of the week
and it was then Saturday!"
It would be tempting to collect more of these
examples, but I will pass on and, instead, let
you glance at those cases in which interpreta
tion has to wait for confirmation in the future.
The main condition in these cases is, as we
might expect, that the mental situation at the
time is unknown or cannot be ascertained. At
the moment, therefore, our interpretation is
no more than a supposition to which we our
selves would not ascribe too much weight. Lat
er, however, something happens which shows
us how well justified our previous interpreta
tion was. I was once the guest of a young mar
ried couple and heard the young wife laughing
ly describe her latest experience, how the day
after the return from the honeymoon she had
called for her sister and gone shopping with
her as in former times, while her husband went
to his business. Suddenly she noticed a man
on the other side of the street and, nudgingher
sister, said, "Look, there goes Mr. K." She hadj
forgotten that this man had been her husband;
for some weeks. A shudder went over me as I
heard the story, but I dared not draw the in
ference. Several years later the little incident
came back to my mind after this marriage had
come to a most unhappy end.
Maeder tells a story of a lady who had for
gotten to try on her wedding-dress the day be
fore the wedding, to the despair of the dress
maker, and remembered it only late in the evening.He connects it with the fact that soon after
the marriage she was divorced by her husband.
I know a woman now divorced from her hus
band who, in managing her money-affairs, fre
quently signed documents with her maiden

[470a]
General Introduction
name, many years before she really resumed it.
I know of other women who lost their weddingrings on the honeymoon and I know, too, that
the course of the marriage lent meaning to this
accident. And now one striking example more,
with a better ending. It is told of a famous
German chemist that his marriage never took
place because he forgot the hour of the cere
mony andwent to the laboratory instead of to
the church. He was wise enough to let the
matter rest with one attempt, and died unmar
ried at a ripe age.
Perhaps the idea has also come to you that
in these examples mistakes seem to have re
placed the omens or portents of the ancients.
And indeed, certain kinds of portents were
nothing but errors, for instance, when anyone
stumbled or fell down. It is true that another
group of omens bore the character of objective
events rather than of subjective acts. But you
would not believe how difficult it is sometimes
to decide whether a specific instance belongsto
the first category or to the second. The act
knows so often how to disguise itself as a pas
sive experience.
Every one of us who can look back over a
fairly long experience of life would probably
say that he might have spared himself many
disappointments and painful surprises, if he
had had the courage and resolution to inter
pret as omens the little mistakes which he
noticed in his intercourse with others, and to
regard them as signs of tendencies still in the
background. For the most part one does not
dare to do this; one has an impression that one
would become superstitious again by a cir
cuitous scientific path. And then, not all omens
come true, and our theories will show you how
it is that they need not all come true.
FOURTH LECTURE
The Psychology of Errors (Conclusion)
That errors have a meaning we may certainly
set down as established by our efforts up to
this pointj and may take this conclusion as a
basis for our further investigations. Let me
once more emphasize the fact that we do not
maintain—and for our purposes do not need
to maintain—that every single mistake which
occurs has a meaning, although I think that
probable. It is enough for us to prove that such
a meaning is relatively frequent in the various
forms of errors. In this respect, by the way, the
various forms show certain differences. Some
Cases of slips of the tongue, slips of the pen,

[470b]
to Psycho-Analysis
467
and so on, may be the effect of a purelyphys
iological cause, though I cannot believe this
pos$ible of those errors which depend upon
forgetfulness (forgetting of names or inten
tions, mislaying, and so on); losing possessions
is in all probability to be recognized as unin
tentional in some cases; altogether our con
ceptions are only to a certain extent applicable
to the mistakes which occur in daily life. These
limitations should be borne in mind by you
when we proceed on the assumption that errors
are mental acts arising from the mutual inter
ference of two intentions.
This is the first result of our psycho-analysis.
Hitherto psychology has knownnothing of such
interferences or of the possibility that they
could occasion manifestations of this kind. We
have widened the domain of mental phenomena
to a very considerable extent and have won for
psychology phenomena whichwereneverbefore
accredited to it.
Let us dwell for a moment on the proposi
tion that errors are mental acts. Does this mean
any more than our former statement, that they
have a meaning? I do not think so; on the con
trary, it is a more indefinite statement and one
more open to misunderstanding. Everything
that can be observed in mental life will be des
ignated at one time or another as a mental
phenomenon. It depends, however, whether the
particular mental phenomenon is directly due
to bodily,organicor material agencies, in which
case it does not fail to psychology for investi
gation; or whether it arose directly from other
mental processes, behind which at some point
the succession of organic agencies then begins.
We have in mind the latter state of things when
we describe a phenomenon as a mental process,
and it is therefore more expedient to put our
statement in this form: The phenomenon has
meaning; and by meaning we understand sig
nificance, intention, tendency and a position in
a sequence of mental concatenations.
There is another group of occurrenceswhich
is very closely related to errors but for which
this name is not suitable. We call them acci
dentaland symptomatic acts. They also appear
to be unmotivated, insignificant and unimpor-.
tant but, in addition to this, they have very
clearly the feature of superfluity. They are, on
the one hand, distinguishable from errors by
the absence of any second intention to which
they are opposed and which they disturb; on
the other hand* they mergewithout any definite
line of demarcation into the gestures and move
ments which we regard as expressions of the

[471a]
468
Sigmund Freud
emotions. To this class of accidental perform
ances -belong: all those apparently purposeless
acts which we carry out, as though in playr
with clothing, parts of the body, objects with
in reach; also the omission of such acts; and
again the tunes which we hum to ourselves. I
maintain that all such performances have mean
ing and are explicable in the same way as are
errors, that they are slight indications of other
more important mental processes, and are genu
ine mental acts. I propose, however, not to
linger over this further extension of the field
of mental phenomena, but to return to the er
rors; for by a consideration of them problems
of importance in the enquiry into psycho-anal
ysis can be worked out much more clearly.
Undoubtedly, the most interesting questions
which we formulated while considering errors,
and have not yet answered, are the following:
We said that errors result from the mutual in
terference of two different intentions, of which
one may be called the intention interfered with,
and the other the interfering tendency. The in
tentions interfered with give rise to no further
questions, but concerning the others we wish to
know, first, what kind of intentions these.are
that arise as disturbers of others, and secondly;
what are the relations between the interfering
tendencies and those which suffer the interfer
ence?
'Allow me to take slips of the tongue again
as representative of the whole series, and to
answer the second question before the first
The interfering tendency in the slip of the
tongue may be connected in meaning with the
intention interfered with, in which case the for
mer contains a contradiction of the latter, or
corrects, or supplements it. Or, in other more
obscure and more Interesting cases, the inter
fering tendency may have no connection what
ever in meaning with the intention interfered
with.'
Evidence for the first of these two relation
ships can be found without difficulty in the ex
amples already studied and in others similar to
them. In almost all cases of slips of the tongue
where the oppdsite of what is meant is said the
interfering tendency
expresses the
opposite
meaning to that of
the intention interfered
with, and the slip is the expression of the con
flict between two incompatible impulses. "I
declare the meeting open, but would prefer to
have clos€5drit'' is the meaning of the President's
slip.1 A political £aper: which had been accused
of corruption defends itself in ah article meant
to culminate with the words: "Our readers will

[471b]
testify that we have always laboured for the
public benefit in the most disinterested man
ner." But the editor entrusted with the com
position of the defence wrote "in the most in
terested manner." That is to say, he thinks, "I
have to write this stuff, but I know better." A
representative of the people, urging that the
Kaiser should be told the truth ruckhaltslos
(unreservedly) hears an inner voice terrified
at his boldness, and by a slip of the tongue
transforms ruckhaltslos intoruckgratslos (with
out backbone, ineffectually).
!
In the examples alreadygiven, which produce
an impression of contraction and abbreviation,
the process represents a correction, addition,
or continuation, in which a second tendency
manifests itself alongside the first. "Things
were then revealed, but better say it straight
out, they were filthy, therefore—things were
then refilled." "The people who understand
this subject may be counted on the fingers
of one hand, but no, there is really only one
person who understands it, very well then—cari
be counted on one finger." Or, "my husband
can eat and drink what he likes, but you know,'
/ don't permit him to like this and that; so
then-—he may eat and drink what / like." In
all these' cases the slip arises from the content
of the intention interfered with, or is directlyi
connected with it.
\
The other kind of relationship between the
two interfering tendenciesseemsstrange. If the
interfering tendency has nothing to do with
the content of the one interfered with, whence
comes it then, and how does ithappen to make
itself manifest just at that point? Observation,
which alone can supply the answer to this,
shows that the interfering tendency, proceeds!
from a train of thought which has occupied
the person shortly before and then reveals it
self in this way as an after-effect, irrespective!
ofwhether ornot it has already been expressedj
in speech. It is really therefore to be described
as a perseveration, though not necessarily a
perseveration of spoken words. An associa-j
tive connection between the interfering tend
ency and that interfered with is hot lacking here
either, though it is not found in the content
but is artificially establishedj sometimes with
considerable forcing of the connections.
Here is a simple example of this'which I
observed myself. Once in^the beautiful Dolo-:
mites I met two Viennese ladies who were start
ing for a walking-tour. T accompanied them
rjart of the way and wediscussed the pleasures;
but also the trials, of this way of life. One of

[472a]
General Introduction
the ladies admitted that spending the day like
this entailed much discomfort. "It certainly
is very unpleasant to tramp all day in the sun
till one's blouse ... and things are soaked
through." In this sentence she had to overcome
a slight hesitation at one point. Then she con
tinued: "But then, when one gets nach Hose
and can change .
•<. ." (Hose means drawers:
the lady meant to say nachHouse which means
home). We did not analyse this slip, but I am
sure you will easily understand it The lady's
intention had been to enumerate a more com
plete list of her clothes, "blouse,'chemise and
drawers." From motives of propriety, mention
of the drawers (Hose) was omitted; but in the
next sentence, the content of which is quite in
dependent, the unuttered word came to light
as a distortion of the word it resembled in
sound, home (Hause).
Now we can turn at last to the main ques
tion which has been so long postponed, namely,
what kind of tendencies these are which bring
themselves to expression in this unusual way
by interfering with other intentions. They are
evidently very various, yet our aim is to find
some element common to them all. If we ex
amine a series of examples for this purpose
we shall soon find that they fall into three
groups. To the first group belong the cases in
which the interfering tendency is known to the
speaker and, moreover, was felt by him before
the slip. Thus, in the case of the slip "refilled,"
the speaker not only admitted that he had crit
icized the events in question as "filthy," but
further, that he had had the intention, which
he subsequently reversed, of expressing this
opinion in words.A second group is formed by
other cases in which the interfering tendency
is likewise recognized by the speaker as his
own, but he is not aware that it was active in
him before the slip. He therefore accepts our
interpretation, but remains to some extent sur
prised by it. Examplesof this attitude are prob
ably more easily found in other errors than
in slips of the tongue. In the third group the
interpretationof the interferingtendencyis en
ergetically repudiatedby the speaker; not only
does he dispute that it was active in him before
the slip, but he will maintain that it is alto
gether entirely alien to him. Recall the case
about hiccoughing and the positively discourte
ous rebuff which I brought upon myself by
detecting the interfering tendency. You know
that in our attitude towards these cases you
and I are still far from an agreement. I should
make nothing of the after-dinner speaker's de-

[472b]
to Psycho-Analysis
469
nial and hold fast to my interpretation un
waveringly, while you, I imagine, are still im
pressed by his vehemence and are wondering
whether one should not forego the interpreta
tion of such errors and let them pass for purely
physiological acts, as in the days before anal
ysis. I can imagine what it is that alarms you.
My interpretation includes the assumption that
tendencies of which a speaker knows nothing
can express themselves through him and that
I
can deduce them from various indications.
You hesitate before a conclusion so novel and
so pregnant with consequences. I understand
that, and admit that up to a point you are
justified. But let one thing be clear: if you in
tend to carry to its logical conclusion the con
ception of errors which has been confirmed
by so many examples, you must decideto make
this startling assumption. If you cannot do
this, you will have to abandon again the under
standing of errors which you had only just be
gun to obtain.
Let us pause a moment on that which unites
the three groups and is common to the three
mechanisms of a slip of the tongue. Fortunate
ly this common element is unmistakable. In the
first two groups the interfering tendency is
admitted by the speaker; in the first, there is
the additional fact that it showed itself immedi
ately before the slip. But in both cases it has
been forced back. The speaker had determined
not to convert the idea into speech and then it
happens that he makes a slip of the tongue;
that is to say, the tendency whichis debarred
from expression asserts itself against his will
and gains utterance, either by altering the ex
pression of the intention permitted by him, or
by mingling withit, or actually by settingitself
in place of it. This then is the mechanism of a
slip of the tongue.
For my own part I can bring the process in
the third group also into perfect harmony with
the mechanism here described. I need only as
sume that these three groups, are differentiated
by the varying degrees to which the forcing
back of an intention is effective. In the first
group, the intention is present and makes itself
perceptible before the words are spoken; not
until then does it suffer the rejection for which
it indemnifies itself in the slip. In the second
group the rejection reaches further back; the
intention is no longer perceptible even before
the speech. It is remarkable that this does not
hinder it in the least from being the active
cause of the slip. But this state of things simp
lifies thejexplanation of the processin the third

[473a]
470
Sigmund Freud
group. I shall be bold enough to assume that
a tendency can still express itself by an error
though it has been debarred from expression
for a long time, perhaps for a very long time,
has not made itself, perceptible at all, and can
thereforebe directly repudiatedby the speaker.
But leaving aside the problem of the third
group, you must conclude from the other cases
that a suppression (UnterdrUckuhg) of a pre
vious intention to say something is the indis
pensable condition for the occurrence of a slip
of the tongue.
We may now claim to have made further
progress in the understanding of errors. We not
only know them to be mental phenomena in
which meaning and purpose are recognizable,
not only know that they arise from the mutual
interference of two different intentions, but in
addition we know that, for one of these inten
tions to be able to express itselfby interfering
with another, it must itself have been subject
to some hindrance against its operation. It must
first be itself interfered with, before it can
interfere with others. Naturally this does not
give us a complete explanation of the phe
nomena which we call errors. We see at once
further questions arising, and in general we
suspect that as we progress towards compre
hension the more numerous will be the occa
sions for new questions. We might ask, for
instance,whythe matter doesnot proceed much
more simply. If the intention to restrain a cer
tain tendency instead of carrying it into effect
is presentin the mind, then this restraint ought
to succeed, so that nothing whatever of the
tendency gains expression, or else it might fail
so that the restrained tendency achieves full
expression. But errors are compromise-forma
tions; they express part-success and part-fail
ure for each of the two intentions; the threat
ened intention is neither entirely suppressed
nor, apart from some instances, does it force
itself through intact.We can imagine that spe
cial conditions must be present for the occur
rence of such interference (or compromise)-
formations, but we cannot even conjecture of
what kind they may be. Nor do I think that we
could discover these unknown circumstances
by penetrating further into the study of errors.
It willbe necessary first to examine thoroughly
yet other obscure fields of mental life: only the
analogies to be met with there can give us
courage to form those assumptions which are
requisite for a more searching elucidation of
errors. And one other point! To work from
slight indications, as we constantly do in this

[473b]
field, is not without its dangers. There is a
mental disorder called combinatory paranoia in
which the practice of utilizing such small indi
cations is carried beyond all limits, and I natu
rally do not contend that the conclusions which
are built up onsucha basisare throughout cor
rect. Only by the breadth of our observations,
by the accumulation of similar impressions
from the most varied forms of mental life, can
we guard against this danger.
So now we will leave the analysis of errors.
But thereis one thing more which I might im
press upon you: to keep in mind, as a model,
the method by which we haVe studied these
phenomena. You can perceive from these ex
amples what the aim of our psychology is. Our
purpose is not merely to describe and classify
thephenomena, but to conceive them asbrought
aboutby the play of forces iii the mind, as ex
pressions of tendencies striving towards a goal,
which work together or against one another.
We are endeavouring to attain a dynamic con
ception of mental phenomena. In this concep
tion, the trends we merely infer are more
prominent than the phenomena we perceive.
So we will probe no further into errors; but
we may still take a fleeting glimpse over the
breadth of this whole field, in the course of
which we shall both meet with things already
known and come upon the tracks of others that
are new. In so doing, we will keep to the di
vision into three groups made at the beginning
of our study: slips of the tongue, with the co
ordinate forms of slips of the pen, misreading,
mis-hearing; of forgetting with its subdivisions
according to the object forgotten
(proper
names, foreign words, resolutions, impressions);
and of mislaying, mistaking, and losing objectsJ
Mistakes, in so far as they concern us, are to
begrouped partly under thehead of forgetting,
partly underacts erroneously performed (pick
ing up the wrong objects, etc.).
j
j We have already treated slips of the tongue'
in great detail yet there is still something to
add. There are certain small affective manifes
tations related to slips of the tonguewhich are
not entirely without interest. No one likes to
think he has made a slip of the tongue; one
often fails to hear it when made by oneself,
but never when made by someone else. Slips
of the tongue are in a certain sense infectious;
it is not at all easy to speak of them without
making them oneself. It is not hard to detect
the motivation of even the most trifling forms
of them, although these donot throw anyparticular lightonhidden mental processes. If, for

[474a]
instance, anyone pronounces a long vowel as a
short one,in consequence of a disturbance over
theword, no matter how motivated, hewill asa
result soon after lengthen a short vowel and
commit a newslipin compensation for the first.
The same thing occurs if anyone pronounces a
diphthong indistinctly and carelessly, for in
stance, "ew" or "oy" as "i"; he tries to correct
it by changing a subsequent "i" into "ew" or
"oy." Some consideration relating to the hearer
seems to be behind this behaviour, as though
he were not to be allowed to think that the
speaker is indifferent how hetreats hismothertongue. The second, compensating distortion
actually has the purpose of drawing the hear
er's attention to the first and assuring him that
it has not escaped the speaker either. The most
frequent, insignificant, and simple forms of
slips consist in contractions and anticipations
in inconspicuous parts of the speech. In a long
sentence, for instance, slips of the tongue would
be of the kind in which the last word intended
influences the sound of an earlier word. This
gives an impression of a certain impatience to
be done with the sentence, and in general it
points to a certain resistance against the com
munication of this sentence, or the speech alto
gether. Fromthiswe come to border-line cases,
in which the differences between the psycho
analytical and the ordinary physiological con
ception of slips of the tongue become merged.
We assume that in these cases a disturbing
tendency is opposing the intended speech; but
it can onlybetray its presence and not whatits
own purpose is.Theinterference which it causes
follows some sound-influence or associative
connection and may be regarded as a distrac
tion of attention away from the intended
speech. But neither in this distraction of atten
tion, norin theassociative tendency which has
been activated, lies the essence of the occur
rence; the essence lies rather in the hint the
occurrence gives of the presence of some other
intention interfering with the intended speech,
the nature of which cannot in this case be dis
covered from its effects, as is possible in all the
more pronounced cases of slips of the tongue.
Slips of the pen, to which I now turn, are so
likeslips of the tongue in their mechanism that
no newpoints of view are to be expected from
them. Perhaps a small addition to our knowl
edge from this group will content us. Those
very common little slips of the pen, contrac
tions, anticipations of later words, particularly
of the last words, point to a general distaste
for writing and to an impatience to be done;

[474b]
471
General Introduction to: Bsycho-Analysis
more pronounced effects in slips of tne pen
allow the nature and intention of the. interferr
ence to be recognized. In general, if one finds
a slipof the pen in a letter oneknows that the
writer's mind was not working smoothly at the
moment; what was the matter one cannot al
ways establish. Slips of the pen are frequently
as little noticed by those who make them as
slips of the tongue. The following, observation
is striking in this connection. There are, of
course, some persons who have the habit of
always re-reading every letter they write be
fore sending it. Others do hot do this; but, if
the latter make an exception and re-read a let
ter, they then always, have an opportunity of
finding and correcting a strikingslipof the pen.
Howls this to be explained? It almost looks as
if such people knew that they had made a slip
in writing the letter. Are we really to believe
that this is so?
There is an interesting problem connected
with the practical significance of slips of the
pen. You may recall the case of the murderer
H who managed, by asserting himself to be a
bacteriologist, to obtain cultures of highly dan
gerous disease-germs from scientific institu
tions, but used them for the purpose of doing
away in this most modern fashion with people
connected with him. This man once complained
to the authorities of one of these institutions
about the ineffectiveness of the cultures sent
him, but committed a slip of the pen and, in
stead of the words "in my experiments on mice
and guinea-pigs (M'dusen und Meerschweinchen)" the words "in my experiments on peo
ple (Menschen)" were plainly legible. Thisslip
even attracted the attention of the doctors at
the institute but, so far as I know,they drewno
conclusion from it. Now, what do you think?
Would it not have been better if the doctors
had taken the slip of the pen as a confession
and started an investigation so that the mur
derer'sproceedings might havebeenarrested in
time? In this case, does not ignorance of our
conception of errors result in neglect which, in
actuality, may be very important? Well, I
know that such a slip of the pen would cer
tainlyrouse greatsuspicion in me; but there is
an important objection against regarding it as
a confession. The matter is not so simple. The
slip of the pen is certainly an indication but,
alone, it would not have justified an enquiry.
It does indeed betray that the man is occupied
with the thought of infecting human beings;
but it does not show with certainty whether
this thought is a definite plan to do harm or a

[475a]
47*
Sigmund Freud
mere phantasy of no practical importance. It is
evenpossible that a person making such a slip
will deny, with the soundest subjective justifi
cation, the existence of such a phantasy in
himself,; and will reject the idea as a thing ut
terly alien to him. Later, when we come to
consider the difference between psychical re
ality and material reality you will be better
able to appreciate these possibilities. But this
again is a case in which an error was found
subsequently to have unsuspected significance.
Misreading brings us to a mental situation
which is clearly different from that of slips of
the tongue or the pen. One of the two conflict
ing tendencies is here replaced by a sensory
excitation and is perhaps therefore less tena
cious. What one is reading is not a product of
one's own mind, as is that which one is going to
write. In the large majority of cases, therefore,
misreading consists in complete substitution.
A different word is substituted for the word to
be read, without there necessarily being any
connection in the content between the text and
the effect of the mistake, and usually by means
of a resemblance between the words. Lichtenberg's example of this, Agamemnon instead of
angenommen, is the best of this group. To dis
cover
the interfering tendency which causes
the mistake one may put aside the original
text altogether; the analytic investigation may
begin with two questions: What is the first idea
occurring in free association to the effect of the
misreading (the substitute), and in what cir
cumstances did the misreading occur? Occa
sionally a knowledge of the latter is sufficient
in itself to explain the misreading, as, for in
stance,
when
someone wandering about
a
strange town, driven by urgent needs, reads the
word Closethaus on a large sign on the first
storey. He has just time to wonder that the
board has been fixed at that height when he
discovers that
the word on it is actually
Corsethaus. In other cases where there is a
lack of connection in content between the text
and the slip' a thorough analysis: is necessary,
which cannot be accomplished without prac
tice in psycho-analytic technique and confi
dence in it. But it is not usually so difficult to
come by the explanation of a case of misread
ing. In the example Agamemnon, the substir
tuted word betrays without further difficulty
the line of thought from which the disturbance
arose. In this time of war, for instance, it is
very common for one to read everywhere names
of towns, generals, and military expressions,
which are continually in one's ears, wherever

[475b]
one sees a word at all resembling them. What
ever interests and occupies the mind takes tie
place of what is alien andas yet uninteresting.
The shadows of thoughts in the mind dim the
new perceptions.
Another kind of misreading is possible, in
which the text itself arouses the disturbing
tendency, whereupon it is usuallychanged into
its opposite.Someone is required to read some
thing which he dislikes, and analysis convinces
him that a strong wishto reject what is read is
responsible for the alteration.
In the first-mentioned, more frequent cases
of misreading two factors to which we ascribed
great importance in the mechanism of errors
are inconspicuous; these are the conflict be
tween two tendencies and the forcing back of
one of them which compensates itself by pro
ducing the error. Not that anything contradic
tory of this occurs in misreading, but never
theless the importunity of the train of thought
tending tb the mistake is far more conspicuous
thanthe restraintwhich it may have previously
undergone.
Just these two factors are most
clearly observable in the different situations hi
which errors occur through forgetfulness.
The forgetting of resolutions has positively
but one meaning; the interpretation of it, as
we have heard, is not denied even by the lay
man. The tendency interfering with the resolu
tion is always an opposing one, an unwilling
ness, concerning which it only remains to
enquire whyit doesnot come to expression in a
different and less disguised form; for the exist
enceof this opposing tendency is beyonddoubt.
Sometimes it is possible, too, to infer some
thing of the motives which necessitate the con
cealment of this antipathy; one sees that.it
would certainly have been condemned if it
declared its opposition openly, whereas bycraft,
in the error, it always achieves its end. When
an important change in the mental situation
occurs between the formation of the resolution
and its execution, in consequence of which the
execution would no longer be required, then if
it were
forgotten the occurrence could
no
longer comewithinthe category of errors.There
would be nothing to wonder at in the error,for
one recognizes that it wouldhave been superflu
ous to remember the resolution; it had been
either permanently or temporarily cancelled.
Forgetting to carryout a resolution can onlybe
called an error when there is no reason^to be
lieve that any such cancellation has occurred.
Cases of forgetting to carry out resolutions
are usually so uniform and transparent, that

[476a]
they are of no interest for our researches.
There are two points, nevertheless, at which
something new can be learnt by studying this
type of error.Wehavesaidthat forgetting and
not executing a resolution indicate an antago
nistic tendency in opposition to it. This is cer
tainly true, but our own investigations show
that this counter-will may be of two kinds,
either immediate or mediate. What is meant by
the latter is best explained by one or two ex--
amples. Whenthe patron forgets to say a good
word for his protege to some third person, it
may happen because he is actually not much
interested in the protege and therefore has no
greatinclination to do it. This, in any case, will
be the protege'sview of the patron's omission.
But the matter may be more complicated. The
antipathy against executing the resolution may
come from some other source in the patron
and be directed to some other point. It need
have nothing at all to do with the protege, but
is perhaps directed against the third person to
whom the recommendation was to be made.
Here again, you see, what objections there are
against applying our interpretations practical
ly. In spite of having correctly interpreted the
error, the protege is in danger of becoming too
suspicious and of doing his patron a grave in
justice. Again, if someone forgets an appoint
ment which he had promised ahd was resolved
tp attend, the commonest cause is certainly a
direct disinclination to meet the other person.
But analysis might produce evidence that the
interfering tendency was concerned, not with
the person, but with the place of meeting,
which was avoided on account of some painful
memory associated with it. Or if one forgets
to post a letter the opposing tendency may be
concerned with the contents of the letter; but
this does not exclude the; possibility that the
letter in itself is harmless and becomes the sub
ject of a counter-tendency only because some
thing in it reminds the writerof anotherletter]
written previously, which did in fact afford a
direct basis for antipathy. It may then be said
that the antipathy has been transferred from
the earlier letter, where it was justified, to the
presentone where it actuallyhas no object.So
you see that restraint and caution must be ex
ercised in applying our quite well-founded
interpretations; that which is psychologically
equivalent may in actuality have many mean
ings.
T
That such things should be must seem very
strange to you. Perhaps you will be inclined to
assume; that the indirect counter:will is enough

[476b]
General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis
473
to characterize the incident as pathological. But
I can assure you that it is also found within
the boundaries of health aridrnormality. And
further, do not misunderstand me; this is in no
sense a confession on my part that our analytic
interpretations are not to be relied on. I have
said that forgetting to execute a plan may bear
many meanings, but this is. so only in those
cases whereno analysis is undertaken and which
we have to interpret according to our general
principles. If an analysis of the person in the
case is carried out it can always be established
with sufficient certainty whether the antipathy
is a direct one, or what its source is otherwise.
The following is a second point: when we
find proof in a large majority of cases that the
forgetting of an intention proceeds from a
counter-will, we gain courage to extend this
solution to another group of cases in which the
person analysed does not cbnfirmy but denies,
the presenceof the counter-will inferred by us:
Take as an example of this such exceedingly
frequent occurrences as forgetting •td return
borrowed books or to pay bills or debts. We
will be so bold as to suggest, to the person in
question, that there is an intention in his mind
of keepingthe books and not paying the debts^
whereupon he will deny this intention but will
not be able to give us any other explanation of
his conduct. We then insist that he has this
intention but is not aware of it; it is enough
for us, though, that it betrays itself by the
effect of the forgetting. He may then repeat
that he had merely forgotten about it. You will
recognize the situation as one in which we have
already been placed once before. If ^we intend
to carry through, to their logical conclusions,
the interpretations of errors which have been
proved justified in so many cases, we shall be
unavoidably impelled to the assumption that
tendencies exist in human beings which can
effect results without their knowing of them;
With this; however, we place Ourselves in op
position td all views prevailing ixi life and iri
psychology.
Forgettingproper names, and foreign names
and words, can be traced in the same way to a
counter-tendency aiming either directly or in
directly against the name in question. I have
already givenyou severalexamples of such di
rect antipathy.Indirect causation is particularly
freiquent here and careful analysis is generally
required to elucidate it. Thus, for instance, in
the present time of war which forces us to
forego so many of our former pleasures, our
ability to recall proper names suffers seve

[477a]
474
Sigmund Freud
by connections of the most far-fetched kind.
It happened to me lately to be unable to re
member the name of the harmless Moravian
town of Bisenz;
and analysis showed that I
was guilty of no direct antagonism in the mat
ter, but that the resemblance to the name of
the Palazzo Bisenzi in Orvieto, where I had
spent many happy times in the past, was re
sponsible. As a motiveof the tendency oppos
ing the recollection of this name, we here for
the first time encounter a principle which will
later on reveal itself to be of quite prodigious
importance in the causation of neurotic symp
toms: namely, the aversion on the part of
memory against recalling anything connected
with painful feelings that would revive the pain
if it were recalled. In this tendency towards
avoidance of pain from recollection or other
mental processes, this flight of the mind from
that which is unpleasant, we may perceive the
ultimate purpose at work behind not merely
the forgetting of names, but also many other
errors, omissions, and mistakes.
The forgetting of names seems, however, to
be especially facilitated psycho-physiologically,
and therefore does occur on occasions where
the intervention of an unpleasantness-motive
cannot be established. When anyone has a tend
ency to forget names, it can be confirmed by
analytic investigation that names escape, not
merely because he does not like them or be
cause they remind him of something disagree
able, but also because the particular name
belongs to some other chain of associations of
a more intimate nature. The name is anchored
there, as it were, and is refused to the other
associations activated at the moment. If you
recall the devices of memory systems you will
realize with some surprise that the same asso
ciations which are there artificially introduced,
in order to save names from being forgotten,
are also responsible for their being forgotten.
The most conspicuous example of this is af
forded by proper names of persons, which nat
urally possess quite different values for different
people. For instance, take a first name, such as
Theodore. For some of you it will have no par
ticular significance; for others it will be the
name of father, brother, friend, or your own
name. Analytic experience will show you that
the former among you will be in no danger of
forgetting that some stranger bears this name;
whereas the latter will be continually inclined
to grudge to strangers a name which to them
seems reserved for an intimate relationship.
Now let us assume that this inhibition due to

[477b]
associations may coincide with the operation
of the "pain"-principle, -and in addition with
an indirect mechanism; you will then be able
to form a commensurate idea of the complex
ity, in causation, of such temporary forgetting
of names. An adequate analysis that does jus
tice to the facts will, however, completely dis
close all these complications.
The forgetting of impressions and experi
ences shows the working of the tendency to
ward off from memory that which is unpleas
ant much more clearly and invariably than the
forgetting of names. It does not of course be^
long in its entirety to the category of errors,
but only in so far as it appears to us remarkable
and unjustified, judged by the standard of gen
eral experience; as, for instance, where recent
or important impressions
are
forgotten, or
where one memory is forgotten out of an other
wise well-remembered sequence. How and why
we have the capacity of forgetting in general,
particularly how we are able to forget experi
ences which have certainly left the deepest im
pression on us, such as the events of ou^
childhood, is quite a different problem, in
which the defence against painful associations
plays a certain part but is far from explaining
everything. That unwelcome impressions are
easily forgotten is an indubitable fact Various
psychologists have remarked it; and the great
Darwin was so well aware of it that he made|
a golden rule for himself of writing down with
particular care observations which seemed un
favourable to his theory, having become con
vinced that just these would be inclined to
slip out of recollection.
Those who hear for the first time of this
principle of defence against unpleasant mem
ory by forgetfulness seldom fail to raise the
objection that, on the contrary, in their experi
ence it is just that which is painful which it is
hard to forget, since it always comes back to'
mind to torture the person against his will-*-
as, for example, the recollection of grievances
or humiliations. This fact is quite correct, but
the objection is not sound. It is important to
begin early to reckon with the fact that the
mind is an arena, a sort of tumbling-ground,
for the struggles of antagonistic impulses; or,
to express it in non-dynamic terms, that the
mind is made up of contradictions and pairs of
opposites. Evidence of one particular tendency
does not in the least preclude its opposite;
there is room for both of them. The material
questions are: How do these opposites stand to
one another and what effects proceed from

[478a]
General Introduction
one of them and what from the other?
Losing and mislaying objects is of especial
interest on account of the numerous meanings
it may have, and the multiplicity of the tend
encies in the service of which these errors
maybe employed. What is common to all the7
cases is the wish to lose something; what varies
in them is the reason for the wish and the aim
of it. One loses something if it has become
damaged j if one has an impulse to replace it
with a better; if one has ceased to care for it;
if it came from someone with whom unpleas
antness has arisen; or if it was acquired in cir
cumstances that one no longer wishes to think
of. Letting things fall, spoiling, or breaking
things, serves the same tendency. In social life
it is said that unwelcome and illegitimate chil
dren are found to be far more often weakly
than those conceived in happier circumstances.
This result does not imply that the crude meth
ods of the so-called baby-farmers have been
employed; some degree of carelessness in the
supervision of the child should be quite
enough. The preservation, or otherwise, of ob
jects may well folldw the same lines as that of
children.
Then too it may happen that a thing will
become destined to be lost without its having
shed any of its value—that is, when there is
an impulse to sacrifice something to fate in
order to avert some other dreaded loss. Accord
ing to thefindings of analysis, such conjurings
of fate are still very common among us, so
that our losses are often voluntary sacrifices.
Losing may equally well serve the impulses of
spite or of self-punishment; in short, the more
remote forms of motivation behind the impulse
to do away with something by losing cannot
easily be exhausted.
Mistaking of objects, or erroneous perform
ance of actions, like other errors, is often made
use of to fulfil a wish which should be denied;
the intention masquerades as a lucky chance.
Thus, as once happened to a friend, one has to
take a train, most unwillingly, in order to pay
a visit in the suburbs and then, in changing
trains at a connection, gets by mistake into
one which is returning to town; or, on a jour
ney someone might greatly like to make a halt
at some stopping-place, which cannot be done
owing to fixed engagements elsewhere, where
upon he mistakes or misses the connection, so
that the desired delay is forced upon him. Or,
as happened to one of mypatients whom I had
forbidden to telephone to the lady he was in
lovewith,he bymistake and thoughtlessly gave

[478b]
to Psycho-Analysis
475
the wrong number when he meant to telephone
to me, so that he was suddenly connected with
her, The following account by an engineer is
a pretty example of the conditions under which
damage to material objects may be done, and
also demonstrates the practical significance of
directly faulty actions.
"Some time ago I worked with several col
leagues in the laboratory of a High School on a
series of complicated experiments in elasticity,
a piece of work we had undertaken voluntarily;
it was beginning to take up more time, however,
than we had anticipated. One day, as I went in
to the laboratory with my friend F, he re
marked how annoying it was to him to lose so
much time today as he had so much to do at
home; I could not help agreeing with him and
said half-jokingly, referring to an occasion the
week before: 'Let us hope the machine will
break down again so that we can stop work and
go home early.' In arranging the work it hap
pened that F was given the regulation of the
valve of the press; that is to- say^ he was, by
cautiously opening the valve, to let the liquid
pressure out of the accumulator slowly into the
cylinder of the hydraulic;press.; The.man who
was conducting the experiment stood by the
pressure gauge, and, when the right pressure
was reached, called out loudly, 'Stop.' At this
command F seized the valve and turned with
all his might—to the left! (All valves without
exception close to the right.) Thereby the whole
pressure in the accumulator suddenly came into
the press, a strain for which the connectingpipes are not designed, so that one of them
instantly burst—quite a harmless accident, but
one which forced us, nevertheless, to
cease
work for. the day and go home. It is character^
istic, by the way, that not long after, when
we were discussing the affair, my friend Fhad
no recollection whatever of my rernar^, which
I recalled with certainty."
So with this in mind you may begin to sus
pect that it Is not always a mere chance which
makes the hands of your servants such danger*
ous enemies to your household effects. And you
may also raise the question whether it is always
an accident when one injures oneself or exposes
oneself to danger—ideas which you may put to
the test by analysis when you have an oppor
tunity.
This is far from being all that could be said
about errors. There is still much to be enquired
into and discussed. But I shall be satisfied if
you have been shaken somewhat in your pre*
vious beliefs by our investigations, so far as

[479a]
Sigmund Freud
;they have gone, and if you have gained a cer
tain readiness to accept new ones. For theTest^
?I must .be content to leave you with, certain
problems still unsolved. We cannot prove all
our principles:by the study of errors, nor are
we indeed by any means solely dependent on
this material. The great value of errors for our
purpose lies in this, that they are such common
occurrences, may easily be observed' in oneselfj
and are not at all' contingent upon Illness.
I
should like to mention one more of your un
answered questions before concluding: *"If,
^ Fifth lecture
Difficulties.: mv>^cPreliminary iApproach
[
r
,TO.T/HE: subject
One day the discovery was made' that the
symptomsof -disease in certain"nervous patients
have meaning.•• It was upon this discovery that
the psychd-analytic method of treatment was
based:- Inr this treatment it happened that
patients hi speaking of their symptoms also
Meritidnedvtheir;;_dreams, whereupon the sus
picion-arose that thesS dreams too had mean*
• •
- ' •• •
•
- However, we will not pursue "this historical
path, but will strike off in the opposite direc
tion. Ou^aim is to demonstrate the meaning
of dreams, iri preparation for the stiidy of the
neuroses. There are good grounds for this re
versal of procedure, since the study of dreams
is not merely the best preparation for that of
the neuroses, but a dream is itself a: neurotic
symptom and, moreover, one which possesses
f/oflis5 the incalculable advantage of dccutting
ih 'all healthy people. Indeed, if all human
Beings were healthy and would only dream, we
could gather almost all the knowledge from
their'dreams which wehavegained fromstudy
ing the neuroses.
So dreams become the object of psycho
analytic research—another of these ordinary,
under-rated
occurrences,
apparently
of
no
practical value, like errors, and sharing with
them the characteristic of occurring in healthy
,.* By Joseph Breuer, in the years 18801882. Cf. my
letttires on Psycho-Analysis, delivered in .the United
Stated urii-1900: [^Ae Origin',and. Development' of
Psycho-Analysis, see p. 1 abovel.

[479b]
as weseefromso many examples, peoplecome
so close to understanding errors and so often
act as if they perceived their meaning, how is
it possible that they should so generally
consider them accidental, senseless, and mean
ingless, andsoenergetically oppose the psycho
analytic explanation of them?"
* ^You are right:^this is indeed striking land
requires an explanation. But I will not give it
to you; I will rather guideyou slowly towards
the connections by which the explanation will
be forced upon you without any aid from me.
PART IX.
BREAMS
persons. But in other respects the conditions
of work are/rather less favourable. Errors had
only been neglected by science, people had not
troubled their heads much about them, but at
least it was no disgrace to occupy oneself with
them. True, people said, there are things more
important but still something may possibly
come of it. To occupy oneself with dreams;
however, is notmerely unpractical and super
fluous,, but positively
scandalous: it
carries
wl& it the taintofthe tihscientifid and arouses!
the suspicion of personal l&mings' towards
mysticism: TheideW of
a
inedicaf student
troubling himself about dreams when there is^
sbmuch in neuropathology andpsychiatryItself
that is more serious—tumoursaslargeas apples
compressing the organ of the mind, haemor
rhages, chronic inflammatory
conditions in
which the alterations in the tissues can be
demonstrated
under the microscope!" No?
dreams are far too uhworthy and trivial to be
objects of sciientific research.
There is yet .another factor involved which,
in itself, sets at defiance all the requirements
of exact investigation. In investigating dreams
even the object of research, the dream itself,
is indefinite. A delusion, for example, presents
clear and definite outlines. "I am the Emperor
of China," says your' patient plainly. But a
dream? For,the most part it cannot be related
at all. When a man tells a dream, has he any
guarantee that he has t9id.it correctly, and not
perhaps altered it in the telling or been forced
to invent part of it on account of the vagueness
of his recollection? Most dreams cannot be
remembered at all and are fdrgdtten except for

[480a]
General Introduction
some tiny fragments. And is a scientific psy
chology or a method of treatment for the sick
to be founded upon material such as this?
A certain element of exaggeration in a criti
cism may arouse our suspicions. The arguments
brought against the dream as an object of
scientific research are clearly extreme. We have
met with the objection of triviality already in
"errors," and have told ourselves that great
things may be revealed even by small indica
tions. As to the indistinctness of dreams, that
is a characteristic Hke any other—-we cannot
dictate to things their characteristics; besides,
there are also dreams which are clear and welldefined. Further, there are other objects of
psychiatric investigation which suffer in the
same way from the quality of indefiniteness,
e.g. the obsessive ideas of many cases, with
which nevertheless many psychiatrists of re
pute and standing have occupied themselves.
I will recall the last case of the kind Which
came before me in medical practice. The pa
tient, a woman, presented her case in these
words: "I have a certain feeling, as if I had
injured, or had meant to injure, some living
creature—perhaps
a
child—no, no, a
dog
rather, as if perhaps I had pushed it off a
bridge—or done something else." Any disad
vantage resulting from the uncertain recollec
tion of dreams may be remedied by deciding
that exactly what the dreamer tells is to count
as the dream, and by ignoring all that he may
have forgotten or altered in the process of
recollection. Finally, one cannot maintain in so
sweeping a fashion that dreams>are unimpor
tant things. We knowfrom our own experience
that the mood in which we awake from a dream
may last throughout the day, and cases have
been observed by medical men in which mental
disorder began with a dream, the delusion
which had its source in this dream persisting;
further, it is told of historical persons that
impulses to momentous deeds sprang from
their dreams. We may therefore ask: What is
the real cause of the disdain in which dreams
are held in scientific circles? In my opinion it
is the reaction from the over-estimation of
them in earlier times. It is well known that it
is no easy matter to reconstruct the past, "but
we may assume with certainty (you will forgive
my jest) thatas early as three thousand years
ago and more our ancestors dreamt in the same
Way as we do. So far as we know, all ancient
peoples attached great significance to dreams
arid regarded them as of practical value; they
obtained from them auguries of the future and

[480b]
to Psycho-Analysis
477
looked for portents in them. For the Greeks
and other Orientals^ it was at times as un
thinkable to undertake a campaign without a
dream-interpreter as it would be today without
air-scouts for intelligence. When Alexander the
Great set out on his campaign of conquest the
most famous interpreters of dreams were in his
following. The city of Tyre, still at that time
on an island, offered so stout a resistance to
the king that he entertained the idea of aban
doning the siege; then one night he dreamed
of a satyr dancing in triumph, and when he
related this dream to his interpreters they in
formed him that it foretold his victory over
the city; he gave the order to attack and took
Tyre by storm. Among the Etruscans and
Romans other methods of foretelling the future
were employed, but during the whole of the
Graeco-Roman
period
the
interpretation
of
dreams was practiced and held in high esteem.
Of the literature on this subject the principal
work at any rate has come down to us, namely,
the book of Artemidorus of Daldis, who is said
to
have lived at the time of the Emperor
Hadrian. How it happened that the art of
dream-interpretation declined later and dreams
fell into disreputey I cannot tell you. The pro
gress of learning cannot have had very much to
do with it, for in the darkness of the middle
ages things far more absurd than the ancient
practice of the interpretation of dreams were
faithfully retained. The fact remains that the
interest in dreams gradually sank to the level
of superstitionand could hold its own only
amongst the uneducated, itioiir day, there
survive, as a final degradation' of the art of
dream-interpretation, the attempts to find out
from dreams numbers destined to draw prizes
in games of-chance. On the other band,rexict
science of the present day has repeatedly con
cerned itself with the dream, but always with
the sole object of illustrating physiological
theories. By medical men, naturally, a dream
was never regarded as a mental process but as
the mental expression of physical stimuli. Binz
in 1876 pronounced the dream to be "a physi
cal process, always useless and in many cases
actually morbid, a process above which the
conception of the world-soul and of immortal
ity stands as high as does the blue sky above
the most low-lying, weed-grown stretch of
sand." Maury compares dreams with the spas
modic jerkings of St. Vitus' dance, contrasted
with the co-ordinated movements of the normal
human being; in an old comparison a parallel
is drawn between the content of a dream/and

[481a]
478
Sigmund Freud
the sounds which would be produced if "some
one ignorant of music let his ten fingers wander
over the keys of an instrument."
Interpretation means discovering a hidden
meaning, but there can be no question of at
tempting this while such an attitude is main
tained towards the dream-performance. Look
up the
description of dreams given in the
writings
of
Wundt,
Jodl
and
other
recent
philosophers: they are content with the bare
enumeration of the divergences of the dreamlife from waking thought with a view to depre
ciating the dreams: they emphasize the lack of
connection in the associations, the suspended
exercise of the critical faculty, the elimination
of
all knowledge,
and
other indications of
diminished functioning. The single valuable
contribution to our knowledge about dreams
for which we are indebted to exact science re
lates to the influence upon the dream-content
of physical stimuli operating during sleep. We
have the work of a Norwegian author who died
recently—J. Mourly Void—two large volumes
on experimental investigation of dreams (trans
lated into German in ioio and 1912), which
are concerned almost entirely with the results
obtained by change in the position of the limbs.
These investigations have been held up to us
as models of exact research in the subject of
dreams. Now can you imagine what would be
the comment of exact science on learning that
we intend to try to find out the meaning of
dreams? The comment that has perhaps been
made already! However, we will not allow our
selves to be appalled;at the thought. If it was
possible for errors to have an underlying mean
ing, it is possible that dreams have one too;
and errors have, in very many cases, a meaning
which
has
eluded
the
researches
of
exact
science. Let us adopt the assumption of the
ancients and of simple folk, and follow in the
footsteps of the dream-interpreters of old.
First of all, we must take our bearings in
this enterprise and make a survey of the field
of dreams. What exactly is a dream? It is
difficult to defineit in a single phrase. Yet we
need not seek after a definition, when all we
need is to refer to something familiar to every
one. Still we ought to pick out the, essential
features in dreams. How are we to discover
these features? The boundaries of the region
we are entering comprise such vast differences,
differences whichever way we turn. That which
we can show to be common to all dreams is
probably what is essential.
• Well then—the first common characteristic

[481b]
of all dreams would be that we are asleep at
the time. Obviously, the dream is the life of
the mind during sleep, a life bearing certain
resemblances to our waking life and, at the
same time, differing from it widely. That, in
deed, was Aristotle's definition. Perhaps dream
and sleep stand in yet closer relationship to
each other. We can be waked by a dream; we
often have a dream when we wake spontaneous
ly or when we are forcibly roused from sleep.
Dreams seem thus to be an intermediate con
dition between sleeping and waking. Hence, our
attention is directed to sleep itself: what then is
sleep?
That is a physiological or biological problem
concerning which much is still in dispute. We
can come to no decisive answer, but I think we
may attempt to define one psychological char
acteristic of sleep. Sleep is a condition in which
I refuse to have anything to do with the outer
world and have withdrawn my interest from it.
I go to sleep by retreating from the Outside
world and warding off the stimuli proceeding
from it. Again, when I am tired by that world
I go to sleep. I say to it as I fall asleep: "Leave
me in peace, for I want to sleep." The child
says just the opposite: "I won't go to sleepyet;
I'm not tired, I want more things to happen to
me!" Thus the biological object of sleep seems
to be recuperation, its psychological character
istic the suspension of interest in the outer
world. Our relationship with the world which
we entered so unwillingly seems to be endurable
only with intermission; hence we withdraw
again periodically into the condition prior to
our entrance into the world: that is to say, intp
intra-uterine existence. At any rate, we try tp
bring about quite similar conditions—warmthi
darkness and absence of stimulus—character*
istic of that state. Some of us still roll ourselves
tightly up into a ball resembling the intra}
uterine position. It looks as if we grown-ups
do not belong wholly to the world, but only by
two-thirds; one-third of us has never yet been
born at all. Every time we wake in the mornr
ing it is as if we were newly born. We do, in
fact, speak of the condition pf waking from
sleep in these very words: we feel "as if we
were newly born,"—and in this we are probably
quite mistaken in our idea of the general sen
sations of the new-born infant; it may be
assumed on the contrary that it feels extremely
uncomfortable. Again, in speaking of birth we
speak of "seeing the light of day."
- If this is the nature of sleep, then dreams do
not come into its scheme at all, but seem rather

[482a]
General Introduction
to be an unwelcome supplement to it; and we
do indeed believe that dreamless sleep is the
best, the only proper sleep. There should be
no mental activity during sleep; if any such
activity bestirs itself, then in so far have we
failed to reach the true pre-natal condition of
peace; we have not been able to avoid alto
gether some remnants of mental activity, and
the act of dreaming would represent these
remnants. In that event it really does seem
that dreams do,not need to have meaning. With
errors it was different, for they were at least
activities manifested in waking life; but if I
sleep and have altogether suspended mental
activity, with the exception of certain remnants
which I have not been able to suppress, there
is no necessity whatever that they should have
any meaning. In fact, I cannot even make Use
of any such meaning, seeing that the rest of
my mind is asleep. It can really then be a
matter of spasmodic reactions only, of such
mental phenomena only as have their origin in
physical stimulation. Hence, dreams must be
remnants of the mental activity of waking life
disturbing sleep, and we might as well make
tip our minds forthwith to abandon a theme
so unsuited to the purposes of psycho-analysis.
Superfluous as dreams may be, however,
they do exist nevertheless, and we can try to
account for their existence to ourselves. Why
does not mental life go off to sleep? Probably
because there is something that will not leave
the mind in peace; stimuli are acting upon it
and to these it is bound to react. Dreams there
fore are the mode of reaction of the mind to
stimuli acting upon it during sleep. We note
here a possibility of access to comprehension
of dreams. We can now endeavour to find out,
in various dreams, what are the stimuli seeking
to disturb sleep, the reaction to which takes the
form of dreams. By doing this we should have
worked out the first characteristic common to
all dreams.
Is there any other common characteristic?
Yes, there is another, unmistakable, and yet
much harder to lay hold of and describe. The
character of mental processes during sleep is
quite different from that of waking processes.
In dreams we go through many experiences,
Which we fully believe in, whereas in reality
we are perhaps only experiencing the single
disturbing stimulus. For the most part our ex
periencestake the form of visual images; there
may be feeling as well, thoughts, too, mixed
up with them, and the other senses may be
town in; but for the most part dreams consist

[482b]
to Psycho-Analysis
479
of visual images. Part of the difficulty of re
citing a dream comes from the fact that we
have to translate these images into words. "I
could draw it," the dreamer often says to us,
"but I do not know how to put it into words."
Now this is not exactly a diminution in the
mental capacity, as seen in a contrast between
a feeble-minded person and a man of genius.
The difference is rather a qualitative one, but
it is difficult to say precisely wherein it lies.
Gt T. Fechner- once suggested that the stage
Whereon the drama of the dream (within the
mind) Is played out is other than that of the
life of waking ideas. That is a saying which we
really do not understand, nor do we know what
it is meant to convey to us, but it does actually
reproduce the impression of strangeness which
most dreams make upon us. Again, the com
parison of the act of dreaming with the pefiormances of an unskilled hand in music breaks
down here, for the piano will certainly respond
with the same notes, though not With melodies,
to a chance touch on its keys. We will keep
this second common characteristic of dreams
carefully in view, even though we may not
understand it;
Are there any other qualities common to all
dreams? I can think of none, but can see differ
ences only, whichever way I look, differences
too
in every respect—in apparent duration,
definiteness, the part played by affects, persist
ence in the mind, and so forth. This is really
not what we should naturally expect in the case
of a compulsive attempt, at once meagre and
spasmodic, to ward off a stimulus. As regards
the length of dreams, some are Veryshort, con
taining only one image, or Veryfew, or a single
thought, possibly even a single word; others
are peculiarly rich in content, enact entire
romances and seem to last a very long time.
There are dreams as distinct as actual experi
ences, so distinct that for some time after
Waking we do not realize that they were dreams
at
all;
others,
which
are
ineffably faint,
shadowy and blurred; in one and the same
dream, even, there may be some parts of extra
ordinary vividness alternating with others so
indistinct as to be almost wholly elusive. Again,
dreams may be quite consistent or at any rate
coherent, or even witty or fantastically beauti
ful;
others again are confused, apparently
imbecile, absurd or often absolutely mad. There
are dreams which leave us quite cold, others
in which every affect makes itself felt—pain
to the point of tears, terror so intense as to
wake us, amazement, delight, and so on. Most

[483a]
486
Sigmund Freud
dreams are forgotten soon after waking; or
they persist throughout, the day, the recollec
tion becoming fainter and more imperfect as
the day goes on; others remain so vivid (as,
for example, the dreams of .childhood) that
thirty years later we remember them as clearly
as though they were part of a recent experience.
Dreams, like people, may make their appear
ance once and never come back; or the same
person may dream the same thing repeatedly,
either in the same form or with slight alter
ations. In short, these scraps of mental activity
at night-time have at command an immense
repertory, can in fact create everything that by
day the mind is capable of—only, it is never
the same.
One
might attempt to
account for these
diversities in dream by assuming that they cor
respond
to different intermediate states be
tween sleeping and waking, different levels of
imperfect sleep. Very well; but then in pro
portion as the mind approached the waking
state there should be not merely an increase
in the value, content, and distinctness of the
dream-performance, but also a growing per
ception that it is a dream; and it ought not to
happen that side by side with a clear and sen
sible element in the dream there is one which
is nonsensical or indistinct, followed again by
a good piece of work. It is certain that the mind
could not vary its depth of sleep so rapidly as
that. This explanation therefore does not help;
there is in fact no short cut to an answer.
For the present we will leave the meaning
of the dream out of question, and try instead,
by
starting
from
the
common
element
in
dreams, to clear a path to a better understand
ing of their nature. From the relationship pf
dreams to sleep we have drawn the conclusion
that dreams are the reaction to a stimulus dis
turbing sleep. As we have heard, this is also
the single point at which exact experimental
psychology can come to our aid; it affords
proof of the fact that stimuli brought to bear
during sleep make their appearance in dreams.
Many investigations have been made on these
lines, culminating in those of Mourly Void
whom I mentioned earlier; we have all, too,
been in a position to confirm their results by
occasional observations of
our
own.
I
will
choose some of the earlier experiments to tell
you. Maury had tests of this kind carried out
on himself. Whilst dreaming, he was made to
smell some eau de Cologne, whereupon he
dreamt he was in Cairo, in the shop of Johann
Maria Farina, and this was followed by some

[483b]
crazy adventures. Again, someone
gave his
neck a gentle pinch, and he dreamt of the ap
plication of a blister and of a doctor who had
treated him when he was a child. Again, they
let a drop of water fall on his forehead and
he was immediately in Italy, perspiring freely
and drinking the white wine of Orvieto.
The striking
feature
about
these dreams
produced under experimental conditions will
perhaps become still clearer to us in another
series of stimulus
dreams.
These
are three
dreams of which we have an account by a
clever observer, Hildebrandt, and all three are
reactions to the sound of an alarm-clock:
"I am going for a walk on a springmorning,
and I saunter through fields just beginning to
grow green, till I come to a neighbouring vil
lage, where I see the inhabitants in holiday
attire making their way in large numbers tp
the church, their hymn-books in their hands.
Of course! it is Sunday and the morning service
is just about to begin. I decide to take part in
it, but first as I am rather overheated I think
I will cool down in the churchyard which sur
rounds the church. Whilst reading some of the
epitaphs there I hear the bell-ringer go up into
the tower, where I now notice, high up, the
little village bell which will give the signal for
the beginning of the service. For some time
yet it remains motionless, then it begins tp
swing, and suddenly the strokes ring out, clear
and piercing—so clear and piercing that they
put an end to my sleep. But the sound of the
bell comes from the alarm-clock."
Here is another combination of images. "It
is a bright winter day, and the roads are deep
in snow. I have promised to take part in a
sleighing expedition, but I have to wait a long
time before I am told that the sleigh is at the
door. Now follow the preparations for getting
in, the fur rug is spread out and the foot-muff
fetched and finally I am in my place. But there
is still a delay while the horses wait for the
signal to start. Then the reins are jerked and
the little bells, shaken violently, begin their
familiar janizary music, so loudly that in a
moment the web of the dream is rent. Again
it is nothing but the shrill of the alarm-dock,"
Now for the third example I "I see a kitchenmaid with dozens of piled-upplates goingalong
the passage to the dining-room.- It seems to
me that the pyramid of china in her arms is
in danger of overbalancing. I call out a warn
ing: 'Take care, your whole load will fall to
the
ground.' Of
course I
receive the usual
answer: that they are accustomed to carrying

[484a]
General Introduction
china in that wa'y,-;and soi'on; meanwhile I
follow; her; as she goes with anxious looks. I
thought so^—the next thingis a stumble on the
threshold; the crockery falls, crashing^ and
clattering In a hundred pieces on the ground.
But—I soon become aware that that intermix
ably prolonged sound is no real crash, but a
regular ringing—and this ringing is due merely
to the alarm-clock, as I realize at last on
awakening."
These dreams are very pretty, perfectly
sensible, and by no means so incoherent as
dreams usually are. We have no quarrel with
them on those grounds. The thing common to
them all is that in each case the situation arises
from a noise, which the dreamer on waking
recognizes as that of the alarm-clock. Hence
we see here how a dream is produced, but we
find out something more. In the dream there
is no recognition of the clock, which does not
even appear in it, but for the noise of the clock
another noiseis substituted; the stimulus which
disturbs sleep is interpreted, but interpreted
differently in each instance. Now why is this?
There is no answer; it appears to be mere
caprice. But to understand the dream weshould
be able to account for its choice of just this
noise and no other to interpret the stimulus
given by the alarm-clock. In analogous fashion
we must object to Maury's experiments that*
although it is clear that the stimulus brought
to bear on the sleeper does appear in the dream,
yet his experiments don't explain why it ap
pears exactly in that form, which is one that
does not seem explicable by the nature of the
stimulus disturbing sleep. And further,
in
Maury's experiments there was mostly a mass
of other dream-material attached to the direct
result of the stimulus, for example, the crazy
adventures in the eau de Cologne dream, for
which we are at a loss to account.
Now will you reflectthat the classof dreams
which wake one up affords the best opportunity
for establishing the influence of external dis
turbing stimuli. In most other cases 'it will be
more difficult. We do not wake up out of all
dreams, and if in the morning we remember
a dream of the night before, how are we to
assign it to a disturbing stimulus operating
perhaps during the night? I once succeeded in
subsequently establishing the occurrence of a
sound-stimulus of this sort, but only, of course,
because of peculiar circumstances. I woke up
one morning at a place in the Tyrolese moun
tains knowing that I had dreamt that the Pope
was dead. Io could hot explain the: dream to

[484b]
to Psycho-Analysis
48k
myself, but later my wife asked^mel: "Did you
hear quite early this morning the dreadful
noise of bells breaking out in all the churches
and ichapels?" No, I had heard nothing, my
sleep is too soundj but thanks to her telling
me this I understood my dream. How Soften
may such causes of stimulus as this induce
dreams in the sleeper without his ever hearing
of them afterwards? Possibly very often: and
possibly not. If we can get no information of
any stimulus we cannot be convinced on the
point. And apart from this we have given up
trying to arrive at an estimation of the sleepdisturbing external stimuli, since we know that
they only explain a fragment of the dream and
not the whole dream-reaction.
We need not on that account give up this
theory altogether; there is still another possible
way of following it out. Obviously it is a
matter of indifference what disturbs sleep and
causes the mind to dream. If it cannot always
be something external acting as a stimulus to,
one of the senses, it is possible that, instead, a'
stimulus operates from the internal organs—a
so-called somatic stimulus. This supposition
lies very close, and moreover it corresponds to
the view popularly held with regard to the
origin of dreams, for it is a common saying
that
they come from the stomach. Unfor
tunately, here again we must suppose that in
very many cases information respecting a so
matic stimulus operating during the night
would no longer be forthcoming after waking,
so that it would be incapable of proof. But wo
will not overlook the fact that many trustr
worthy
experiences
support the idea that
dreams may be derived from somatic stimuli;
on the whole it is indubitable that the condition
of the internal organs can Influence dreams. The
relation of the content of many dreams to dis
tention of the bladder or to a condition of
excitation of the sex-organs is so plain that it
cannot be mistaken. From these obvious cases
we pass to others, in which, to judge by the
content of the dream, we;are at least justified
in suspecting that some such somatic stimuli
have been at work, since there is something in
this content which can be regarded as elabora
tion, representation, or interpretation of these
stimuli. Schemer, the investigator of dreams
(1861), emphatically supported the view which
traces the origin of dreams to organic stimuli,
and contributed some excellent examples to
wards it. For instance, he sees in a dream "two
rows of beautiful boys, with fair hair and del
icate
complexions,
confronting
each
othear

[485a]
482
Sigmund Freud
pugnaciously, joining in combat, seizing hold
Of one another, and again letting go their hold,
only to take up the former position and go
through the whole process again"; his inter*
pretation of the two rows of boys as the teeth
is in itself plausible and seems to receive full
confirmation when after this scene the dreamer
"pulls a long tooth from his jaw." Again, the
interpretation of "long, narrow, winding pas
sages" as being suggested by a stimulus orig
inating in the intestine seems sound and cor
roborates
Schemer's
assertion
that
dreams
primarily endeavour to represent, by like ob
jects, the organ from which the stimulus pro
ceeds.
We must therefore be prepared to admit that
internal stimuli can play the
same role in
dreams as external ones. Unfortunately, evalua
tion of this factor is open to the same objec
tions. In a great number of instances the at
tribution of dreams to somatic stimuli must
remain uncertain or incapable of proof; not
all dreams, but only a certain number of them,
rouse the suspicion that stimuli from internal
organs have something to do with their ori
gin; and lastly, the internal somatic stimulus
will suffice no more than the external sensory
stimulus to explain any other part of the dream
than the direct reaction to it. The origin of
all the rest of the dream remains obscure.
Now, however, let us direct our attention to
a certain peculiarity of the dream-life which
appears when we study the operation of these
stimuli. The dream does not merely reproduce
the stimulus, but elaborates it, plays upon it,
fits it into a context, or replaces it by some
thing else. This is a side of the dream-work
which is bound to be of interest to us because
possibly it may lead us nearer to the true na
ture of dreams. The scope of a man's produc
tion is not necessarily limited to the circum
stance which immediately gives rise to it. For
instance, Shakespeare's Macbeth was written
as an occasional drama on the accession of the
king who first united in his person the crowns
of the three kingdoms. But does this historical
occasion cover the whole- content of the dra
ma, or explain its grandeur and its mystery?
Perhaps in the same way the external and in
ternal stimuli operating upon the sleeper are
merely the occasion of the dream and afford
us no insight into its true nature.
The other element common to all dreams,
their peculiarity in mental life, is on the one
hand very difficult to grasp and on the other
seems to afford no clue for further inquiry.

[485b]
Our experiences in dreams for the most part
take the form of visual images. Can these be
explained by the stimuli? Is it really the stim
ulus that we experience? If so, why is the ex
perience visual, when it can only be in the very
rarest instance that any stimulus has operated
upon our eyesight? Or, can it be shown that
when we dream of speech any conversation or
sounds
resembling conversation reached our
ears during sleep? I venture to discard such a
possibility.without any hesitation whatever.
If we cannot get any further with the com
mon characteristics of dreams as a startingpoint, let us try beginning with their differ
ences. Dreams are often meaningless, confused,
and absurd, yet there are some which are sen
sible, sober, and reasonable. Letus see whether
these latter sensible dreams can help to eluci
date those which are meaningless. I will tell
you the latest reasonable dream which was told
to me, the dream of a young man: "I went for
a walk in the Karntnerstrasse and there I met
Mr. X; after accompanying him for a short
time I went into a restaurant. Two ladies and
a gentleman came and sat down at my table.
At first I was annoyed and refused to look at
them, but presently I glanced across at them
and found that they were quite nice." The
dreamer's comment on this was that the even
ing before he had actually been walking in the
Karntnerstrasse, which is the way he usually
goes, and that he had met Mr. X there. The
other part of the dream was not a direct remi*
niscence, but only bore a certain resemblance
to an occurrence of some time previously. Or
here we have another prosaic dream, that of a
lady. Her husband says to her: "Don't yo$
think we ought to have the piano tuned?" and
she replies: "It is not worth it, for the ham
mers need fresh leather anyhow." This dream
repeats a conversation which took place in al
most the same words between herself and her
husband the day before the dream. What then
do we learn from these two prosaic dreams?
Merely that there occur in them recollections
of daily life or of matters connected with it
Even that would be something if it could be
asserted of all dreams without exception. But
that is out of the question; this characteristic
too belongs only to a minority of dreams. In
most dreams we find no connection with the
day before, and no light is thrown from this
quarter upon meaningless and absurd dreams.
All we know is that we have met with a new
problem. Not only do we want to know what
a dream is saying, but, if, as in our examples,

[486a]
General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis
483
that is quite plain, we want to know further
from what cause and to what end we repeat in
dreams this which is known to us
and has
recently happened to us,.
I think you would be as tired as I of con
tinuing the kind of attempts we have made up
to this point. It only shows that all the interest
in the world will not help us with a problem
unless we have also an idea of some path to
a<Jopt in order to arrive at a solution. Till now
we have not found this path. Experimental psy
chology has contributed nothing but some (cer
tainly very valuable) information about the
significance of stimuli hi the production of
•dreams. Of philosophy we have nothing to ex
pect, unless it be a lofty repetition of the re
proach that our object is intellectually con
temptible; while from the occult sciences we
surely do not choose to borrow. History and
the verdict of the people tell us that dreams
are full of meaning and importance, and of
prophetic significance; but that is hard to ac
cept and certainly does not lend itself to proof.
So then our first endeavours are completely
baffled.
But unexpectedly there comes a hint from a
direction in which we have not hitherto looked.
Colloquial speech, which is certainly no mat
ter of chance but the deposit, as it were, of
ancient knowledge—a thing which must not in
deed be made too much of—our speech, I say,
recognizes the existence of something to which,
strangely enough, it gives the name of day
dreams. Day-dreams are phantasies (products
of phantasy); they are very common phenom
ena, are observable in healthy as well as in
sick persons, and they also can easily be studied
by the subject himself. The most striking thing
about these "phantastic" creations is that they
have received the name of day-dreams, for they
have nothing in common with the two universal
characteristics of dreams. Their name contra
dicts any relationship to the condition of sleep
and, as regards the second universal character
istic, no experience or hallucination takes place
in them, we simply imagine something; we rec
ognize that they are the work of phantasy, that
we are not seeing but thinking. These day
dreams appear before puberty, often indeed in
late childhood, and
persist until maturity is
reached when they are either given up or re
tained as long as life lasts. The content of these
phantasies is dictated by a very transparent
motivation. They are scenes and events which
gratify either the egoistic cravings of ambition
or thirst for power, or the erotic desires of

[486b]
the subject. In young men, ambitious phan
tasies predominate; in women, whose ambition
centres on success in love, erotic phantasies;
hut the erotic requirement can often enough
in men too be detected in the background, all
their heroic deeds and successes are really only
intended to win the admiration and favour of
women. In other respects these day-dreams
show great diversity and their fate varies. All
of them are either given up after a short time
and replaced by a new one, or retained, spun
out into long stories, and adapted to changing
circumstances in life. They march with the
times; and they receive as it were "datestamps" upon them which show the influence
of new situations. They form the raw material
of poetic production; for the writer by trans
forming, disguising, or curtailing them creates
out of his day-dreams the situations which he
embodies in his stories, novels, and dramas.
The hero of a day-dream is, however, always
the subject himself, either directly imagined
in the part or transparently identified with
someone else.
Perhaps day-dreams are so called on account
of their similar relation to reality, as an indica
tion that their content is no more to be ac
cepted as real than is that of dreams. But it is
possible that they share the name of dreams
because of some mental characteristic of the
dream which we do not yet know but after
which we are seeking. On the other hand, it is
possible that we are altogether wrong in re
garding this similarity of name as significant.
That is a question which can only be answered
later.
SIXTH LECTURE
Preliminary Hypotheses and Technique
of Interpretation
We thus realize our need of a new way of ap
proach, a definite method, if we are to make
any advance in our researches into dreams. I
will now offer an obvious suggestion: let us ac
cept as the basis of the whole of our further
enquiry the following hypothesis—that dreams
are not a somatic, but a mental, phenomenon.
You know what this means; but what is our
justification in making this assumption? We
have none, but on the other hand there is noth
ing to prevent us. The position is this: if the
dream is a somatic phenomenon, it does not
concern us; it can only be of interest to us on
the hypothesis that it is a mental phenomenon.
So we will assume that this hypothesis is true,
in order to see what happens if we do so* The

[487a]
484
Sigmund Fretjd
results of our work will determine whether we
may adhere to the assumption,; and uphold it
in its turn as an inference fairly drawn. Now
what exactly is the object of this enquiryudf
ours, or to what are we directing our efforts?
Our object is that of all scientific endeavour-f^
namely, to achieve an understanding of the
phenomena, to establish a connection between
them, and, in the last resort, whereverit is pos
sible to increase our power over them.
So we continue our work on the assumption
that dreams are a mental phenomenon; In that
events they are a performance and an utterance
on the part of the dreamer, but of a kind that
conveys nothing to us, and which we do not
understand. Now supposing that I give utter
ance to something that you do not understand,
what do you do? You ask me to explain, do you
not? Why may not we do the same-—ask the
dreamer the meaning of the dream?
Remember, we have already found ourselves
in a similar position. It was when we were en
quiring into certain errors,, and the instance
we took was a slip of the tongue. Someone had
said:"Then certain things were re-filled," and
thereupon we asked—-no, fortunately it was not
we who asked, but other people who had noth
ing to do with psycho-analysis—they asked
what he meant by this enigmatic expression.
He answered at once that what he had. intended
to say was: "That was a filthy business/' but
had checked himself and substituted the milder
words: "Things were revealed there." I ex
plained to you then that this enquiry was the
model for every psycho-analytic investigation,
and you understand now that psycho-analytic
technique endeavours as far as possible to let
the persons being analysed give the answer to
their own problems. The dreamer himself then
should interpret his dream for us.
That is not so simple with dreams, however,
as we all know. Where errors were concerned,
this method proved possible in many cases;
there were others where the person questioned
refused to say anything and even indignantly
repudiated the answer suggested to him. With
dreams* instances of the first type are entirely
lacking; the dreamer always says he knows
nothing about it. He cannot very well repudiate
our interpretation, since we have none to offer
him. Shall we have to give up our attempt
then? Since he knows nothing, and we know
nothing, and a third person can surely know
nothing either, there cannot be any prospect of
finding the answer. Well, if youlike,give upthe
attempt But if you are not so minded,.you can;

[487b]
accompany me. For I assure you that it is not
only quite
possible, but highly probable,
that the dreamer really does know the mean
ing of his dream; only he does not know that
he
knows, and therefore thinks that he does
not.
At this point you will probably call my at
tention to thefact that I amagain introducing
an assumption, the second in quite a short con
text, and that by so doing I greatly detract
from the force of my claim to a trustworthy
method of procedure. Given the hypothesis
that dreams are a mental phenomenon, and
given further: the hypothesis that there are in
the minds of men certain things which they
know withoutknowing that they know them—
and so forth! You have only to keep in view
the intrinsic improbability of both these hyi
potheses, and youmaywithan easymindabani
don all interest in the conclusions to be drawri
from them.
Well, I have not brought you here either to
delude you or to conceal anything from youi
True, I announced that I would give a course
of lectures entitled "Introductory Lectures ori
Psycho-analysis"; but it was no part of my
purpose to play the oracle, professingto show
you an easy sequence of facts, whilst carefully
concealing all difficulties, filling up gaps, and
glossing overdoubtful points, so that youmight
comfortably enjoy the belief that you have
learnt something new. No, it is the very fact
that you are beginners that makes me anxious
to showyou:our scienceas it is, with alUitsex
crescences and. crudities, the claims that it
makes and the criticism to which it may give
rise. I know, indeed, that it is the same in every
science and that, especially in the beginnings,
it cannot be otherwise. I know too that, in
teaching other sciences, an effort is made at
first to hide thesedifficulties and imperfections
from the learner. But that cannot be done in
psycho-analysis. So I really have set up two
hypotheses, the one within the other; and any
one who finds it all too laborious- or too uncer
tain, or who is used to higherdegrees of cer
tainty, or to more refined deductions, need go
no further with me. Only I should advise him
to leave psychological problems altogether
alone, for it is to be feared that this is a field
in which he will find no access to such exact and
sure paths as he is prepared to tread. And fur
ther, it is quite superfluous for any science
which can offer a real contribution to knowl
edge to strive to make itself heard and to win
adherents^ Its reception must depend upon its

[488a]
General Introduction
results, and it can afford to wait until these
have compelled attention.
But I may warn those of you who are not
to be deterred in this way that my two assump*
tidns are not of equal importance. The first,
that dreams are a mental phenomenon, is the
hypothesis which we hope to prove by the re
sults of our work. The second has already been
proved in a different field, and I am merely
taking the liberty of transferring it thence to
our problems.
Where,and in what connection, is it supposed
to have been proved that a man can possess
knowledge without knowing that he does so,
which is the assumption we are making of the
dreamer? Surely that would be a remarkable
and surprising fact, which would change our
conception of mental life and would have no
need of concealment. Incidentally, it would be
a fact belied in the very statement of it, which
yet intends to be literally true—a contradiction
in terms. There is not, however, any attempt
at concealment. We cannot blame the fact for
people's ignorance of it, or lack of interest in
it, any more than we ourselves are to blame
because all these psychological problems have
been passed in judgment by persons who have
held aloof from all the observations and experi
ments which alone can be conclusive.
The proof to which I refer was found in the
sphere of hypnotic phenomena. In the year
1889 I was present at the remarkably impres
sive demonstrations by Liebault and Bernheim,
in Nancy, and there I witnessed the following
experiment. A man was placed in a condition
of somnambulism, and then made to go through
all sorts of hallucinatory experiences. On being
wakened, he seemed at first to knownothingat
all of what had taken place during his hypnotic
sleep. Bernheim then asked him in so many
words to tell him what had happened while
he was under hypnosis. The man declared that
he could not remember anything. Bernheim,
however, insisted upon it, pressed him, and as
sured him that he did know arid that he must
remember, and lo and behold! the man wav
ered, began to reflect, and remembered in a
shadowy fashion first one of the occurrences
which has been suggested to him, then some
thing else, hisrecollection growing increasingly
clearand complete until finally it was brought
to light without a single gap. Now, since in the
end he had the knowledgewithout having learnt
anything from any other quarter in the mean
time, we are justified in concluding that these
recollections were in his mind fran* the outset.

[488b]
to Psycho-Analysis
485
They were merely inaccessible to him; he did
not know that he knew them but; believed that
he did not know. In fact, his case was exactly
similar to what we assume the dreamer's to be,
I hope you are duly surprised,that this fact
is already established and that you will ask
me.-: "Why did you not refer to this proof be
fore, when we were considering errors and
came to the point of ascribing to a man who
had made a slip of the tongue intentions be
hind his speech, of which he knew nothing,
and which he denied? If it is possible for a
man to believe that he knows nothing of experi
ences of which nevertheless he does possess the
recollection, it seems no longer improbable that
there should be other mental processes going
on within him about which also he knows noth
ing. We should certainly have been impressed
by this argument and should have been in a
better position to understand about errors."
Certainly, I might have brought forward this
proof then, but I reserved it for a later occa
sion when there would be more need for it.
Some of the errors explained themselves, others
suggested to us that, in order to understand
the
connection between the
phenomena, it
would be advisable to postulate the existence
of mental processes of which the person is en
tirely ignorant. With dreams we are compelled
to seek our explanations elsewhere, and besides,
I am counting on your being more ready to
accept in this connection a proof from the
field of hypnosis. The condition in which we
perform errors must seem to you normal and,
as such, to bear no similarity to that of hyp
nosis, On the other hand, there exists a clear
relationship between the hypnotic state and
sleep, the essential condition of dreaming. Hyp
nosis is actually called artificial sleep; we say
to the people whom we hypnotize: "Sleep*"
and the suggestions made to them are com
parable to the dreams of natural sleep. The
mental situation is really analogous in the two
cases. In natural sleep we withdraw our inter
est from the whole outer world; so also in hyp
notic sleep, with the exception of the one per
son who has hypnotized us and with whom we
remain in rapport. Again, the so-called "nurse's
sleep" in which the nurse remains in rapport
with the child and can be awakened only by
him is a normal counterpart of hypnotic sleep*
So it does not seem so very audacious to carry
over to natural sleep something which is a con
dition in hypnosis. The assumption that some
knowledge about his dream exists in the dream
er and that this knowledge is merely inaqqes^

[489a]
486
Sigmund Freud
sible to him, so that he himself does not be
lieve he has it; is not a wild invention. Inci
dentally, we observe here that a third way of
approaching the study of dreams is thus opened
out for us; we may approach it by the avenue
of sleep-disturbing stimuli, by that of day
dreams, and now by that of the dreams sug
gested during hypnosis.
Now perhaps we shall return to our task
with greater confidence. We see it is very prob
able that the dreamer knows something about
his dream; the problem is how to make it pos
sible for him to get at his knowledge and impart
it to us. We do not expect him immediately to
tell us what his dream means, but we do think
he will be able to discover its source, from
what circle of thoughts and interests it is de
rived. With errors, you will remember the man
was asked how the slip of the tongue "re-filled"
had come about, and his first association gave
us the explanation. The technique we employ
in the case of dreams is very simple and is mod
elled on this example. Here again we shall ask
the dreamer how he came to have the dream,
and his next words must be regarded as giv
ing the explanation in this case also. It makes
no difference to us, therefore, whether he thinks
that he does or does not know anything about
it, and we treat both cases alike.
This technique is certainly very simple,
nevertheless I am afraid it will provoke most
strenuous opposition in you. You will say: "An
other assumption, the third! And the most im
probable of all! When I ask the dreamer what
ideas come to him about the dream, do you
mean to say that his very first association will
give the desired explanation? But surely he
might have no association at all, or heaven only
knows what the association might be. We can
not imagine upon what grounds such an ex
pectation is based. It really implies too much
trust in Providence, and this at a point where
rather more exercise of the critical faculty
would better meet the case. Besides, a dream
is not like a single slip of the tongue but is
made up of many elements. That being sdj upon
which association is one to rely?"
You are right in all the unessentials. It is true
that a dreain differs from a slip of the tongue
in the matter of its many elements as well
as in other points. We must take account Of
that in our technique. So I suggest to you that
we divide the dream up into its various ele
ments, and examine each element separately;
then we shall have re-established the analogy
with a slip of the tongue. Again, ydu are right

[489b]
in saying that the dreamer, when questioned
on the single elements of the dream, may reply
that he has no ideas about them. There are
cases in which we accept this answer, and later
I
will tell you which these are;
curiously
enough, they are cases about which we our
selves may have certain definite ideas. But in
general, when the dreamer declares that he has
no ideas, we shall contradict him, press him to
answer, assure him that he must have some idea
and—shall find we are right. He will produce
an association, any one, it does not matter to
us what it is. He will be especially ready with
information which we may term historical. He
will say: "That is something which happened
yesterday" (as in the instance of the two pro
saic dreams quoted above) or: "That reminds
me of something which happened-recently;"
and in this way we shall come to notice that
dreams are much more often connected with
impressions of the day before than we thought
at first. Finally,with the dream as his startingpoint, he will recall events whichhappened less
recently, and at last even some which lie very
far back in the past.
In regard to the main issue, however, you
are wrong. When you think it arbitrary to as*
sume that the first association of the dreamer
must give us just what we are looking for, pr
at any rate lead to it, and further, that the as
sociation is much more likely to be quite
capricious and to have no connection with what
we are looking for, and that it only shows my
blind trust in Providence if I expect anything
else—then you make a very great mistake. 11
have already taken the liberty of pointing-oit
to you that there is within you a deeply rooted
belief in psychic freedom and choice, that this
belief is quite unscientific, and that it must
give ground before the claims of a determinism
which governs even mental life. I ask you to
have some respect for the fact that that one
association, and nothing else, occurs to the
dreamer when he is questioned. Nor am I set
ting up one belief against another. It can be
proved that the association thus given is not a
matter of choice, nor indeterminate, and that
it is not unconnected withwhat we are looking
for. Indeed, I have recently learnt—not that I
attach too much importance to the fact—^that
experimental psychology itself has brought for^
ward similar proofs.
Because of the importance of the matter I
ask you to pay speciaL attention to this. When
I ask a man to say what comes to his mind
about any given elementin a dream, I require

[490a]
General Introduction to PsVcho-Analysis
487
him to give himself up to the process of free
association which follows when he keeps in
mind the original idea. This necessitates a pe
culiar attitude of the attention, something quite
different from reflection, indeed, precluding it.
Many people adopt this attitude without any
difficulty, but others when they attempt to do
so display an incredible inaptitude. There is a
still higher degree of freedom in association
which appears when I dispense with any par
ticular stimulus-idea and perhaps only describe
the kind and species of association that I want;
for example, ask someone to let a proper name
or a number occur to him. An association of
this sort should, one would say, be even more
subject to choice and unaccountable than the
kind used in our technique. Nevertheless, it can
be shown that in every instance it will be
strictly determined by important inner -atti
tudes of mind, which are unknown to us at the
moment when they operate, just as much un
known as are the disturbing tendencies which
cause errors, and those tendencies which bring
about so-called "chance" actions.
I myself and many after me have repeated
ly made an examination of names and numbers
called up without any particular idea as a start
ing-point; some of these experiments have been
published. The method is this: a train of as
sociations is stirred up by the name which oc
curred, and these associations, as you see, are
no longer quite free, but are attached just so
far as the associations to the different elements
of the dream are attached; this train of associ
ations is then kept up until the thoughts aris
ing from the impulse have been exhausted. By
that time, however, you will have explained
the motivation and significance of the free
association with a name. The experiments yield
the same result again and again; the informa
tion they give us often includes a wealth of ma
terial and necessitates going far afield into its
ramifications. The associations to numbers that
arise spontaneously are perhaps the most de
monstrative; they follow upon one another so
swiftly and make for a hidden goal with such
astounding certainty that one is really quite
taken aback. I will give you just One example
of a name-analysis of this sort, because it hap
pens to be one which does not involve the han
dling of a great mass of material.
Once, when I was treating a young man, I
happened to say something on this subject and
to assert that, in spite of our apparent freedom
of choice in such matters, we cannot, in point
of fact, think of any name which cannot be

[490b]
shown to be narrowly determined by the.im*
mediate circumstances, the idiosyncrasies, of
the person experimented with and his situation
at
the moment.
As
he
was
inclined to be
sceptical, I proposed that he should make the
experiment himself then and there. I knew that
he had usually numerous relationships of
all
sorts with women and girls, so I told him that
I thought he would have an exceptionally large
number to choose from if he were to let the
name of a woman occur to him; He agreed; To
my surprise, or rather perhaps to his own, he
did not overwhelm me with.an avalanche of
women's names, but remained silent for a time,
and then confessed that the only name which
came into his mind at all was "Albine." "How
curious! What do you connect with this name?
How many Albines do ydu know?" Strangely
enough, he knew ho one of the name of Albine^
and he found no associations to the name. One
might infer that the analysis had failed; but no,
it was already complete, and no further associa
tion was required. The man himself was un
usually fair in colouring, and whilst talking to
him in analysis I had often jokingly called him
an albino; moreover, we were just in the midst
of tracing the feminine element in his nature.
So it was he himself who was this female al
bino, the woman who interested him most at
the moment.
In the same way, the tunes which suddenly
come into a man's head can be shown to be
conditioned by some train of thought tp which
they belong, and which for some reason is oc
cupying his mind without his knowing any
thing about it. It is easy to show that the con
nection with the tune is to be sought either in
the words which belong to it or in the source
from which it comes: I must, however, make
this reservation, that I do not maintain this
in the case of really musical people of whom
I happen to have had no experience; in them
the musical value of the tune may account for
its suddenly emerging into consciousness. The
first case is certainly much more common; I
know of a young man who for some time was
absolutely haunted by the tune (a charming
one, I admit) of the song of Paris in Helen of
Troy, until his attention was drawn in analysis
to the fact that at that time an "Ida" and a
"Helen" were rivals in his interest.
If, then, the associations which arise quite
freely are determinedin this way and belongto
some definite context, we are surely justified
in concluding that associations attached to one
single stimulus-idea must be equally narrow-

[491a]
488
Sigmund Freud
ly conditioned; Examination shows as a fact
that they are not only attached in the first place
to: the' stimulus-idea which we have provided
for them, but that they are also dependent, in
the second place, on circles of thoughts and
interests of strong affective value (complexes,
as we call them) of whose influence at the time
nothing is known, that is to say, on uncon
scious activities.
Associations attached in this way have been
made the subject of very instructive experi
ments, which have played a notable part in
the history of psycho-analysis. Wundt's school
originated the so-called association-experiment,
in which the subject of the experiment is bid
den to reply to a given stimulus-word as quick
ly as possible with whatever reaction-word oc
curs to him. The following points may then be
noted: the interval which elapses between the
utterance of the stimulus-word and of the re
action-word, the nature of the latter, and pos
sibly any mistake which comes in when the
same experiment is repeated later, and so on;
The Zurich School, under the leadership of
Bleuler and Jung, arrived at the explanation of
the reactions to the association-experiment by
asking the person experimented upon to throw
light upon any associations which seemed at all
remarkable, by means of subsequent associa^
tions. In this way it became clear that these
unusual reactions were most strictly deter
mined by the complexes of the person con
cerned. By this discovery Bleuler and Jung
built the
first
bridge between experimental
psychology and psycho-analysis.
Having heard this you may possibly say:
"We admit now that free associations are sub
ject to
determination and not a matter of
choice, as we thought at first, and we admit
this also in the case of associations to the ele
ments of dreams. But it is not this that we
are bothering about. You maintain that the
association to each element in the dream is de
termined by some mental background to this
particular element, a background of which we
know nothing. We cannot see that there is any
proof of this: Naturally we expect that the as
sociation to the dream-element will be shown
to be conditioned by one of the complexes of
the dreamer, but what good is that to us? That
does not help us to understand the dream; it
merely leads to some knowledge of these socalled 'complexes,' as did the association-ex
periment; but what have these to do with the
dream?"
You are right, but you are overlooking an

[491b]
important point, the very thing whichdeterred
me from choosing. the association-experiment
as-a starting-point for this discussion. In this
experiment, the stimulus-word, the single thing
which determines the reaction, is chosen by
us at will, and the reaction stands as interme
diary between this stimulus-word and the con>
plex aroused in the person experimented upon.
In the dream, the stimulus-word is replaced by
something derived from the mental life of the
dreamer, from sources unknown to him, and
hence may very probably be itself a derivative
of a complex. It is not, therefore, altogether
fantastic to suppose that the further associa
tions connected with elements of the dream
are determined by no other complex than that
which has produced the particular element it
self, and-that they will lead to the discovery
of that complex.
Let me give you another instance which may
serve to show that, in the case of dreams, the
facts bear out our expectations. The forgets
ting of proper names is really an excellent pro
totype of what happens in dream-analysis, only
that in the former case one person alone is con
cerned, while in the interpretation of dreams
there are two. When I forget a name temporari
ly, I am still certain that I know it, and by
way of a detour through Bernheim's experi
ment, we are now in a position to achieve a
similar certainty in the case of the dreamer.
Now this name which I have forgotten, and yet
really know, eludes me. Experience soon teaches
me that no amount of thinking about it, even
with effort, is any use. I can, however, always
think of another or of several other names in
stead of the forgotten one. When such a sub
stitute name occurs to me spontaneously, only
then is the similarity between this situation
and that of dream-analysis evident. The dreamelement also is not what I am really looking
for; it is Only a substitute for something else,
for the real thing which I do not know and am
trying to discover by means of dream-anal
ysis. Again the difference is that when I forget
a name I know perfectly well that the substi
tute is not the right one, whereas we only ar
rived at this conception of the dream-element
by a laborious process of investigation. Now
there also is a way in which, when we forget
a name, we can by starting from the substi
tute, arrive at the real thing eluding our con
sciousness at the moment, i.e., the forgotten
name. If I turn my attention to these substi
tute names and let further associations to them
come into my mind, I arrive after a short or

[492a]
General iNTRODucTioN to Psycho-Analysis
a long way around at the name I have forgot
ten, and in so doing I discover that the sub
stitutes I have spontaneously produced had a
definite connection with, and were determined
by, the forgotten name.
I will give you an instance of an analysis of
this sort: One day I found that I could not
call to mind the name of the small country on
the Riviera, of which Monte Carlo is the cap
ital. It was most annoying, but so it was. I
delved into all my knowledge about the coun
try; I thought of Prince Albert of the House
of Lusignan, of his marriages, of his passion
for deep-sea exploration—in fact of everything
I could summon up, but all to no purpose. So
I gave up trying to think and, instead of the
name I had lost, let substitute names come in
to my mind. They came quickly: Monte Carlo
itself, then Piedmont, Albania, Montevideo^
Colieo. Albania was the first to attract my at
tention; it was immediately replacedby Monte
negro, probably because of the contrast be
tween black and white. Then I noticed that
four of the substitute names have the same
syllable "mon," and immediately I recalled the
forgotten word and cried out "Monaco:" You
see the substitutes really originated in the for
gotten name; the four first came from the first
syllable and the last gave the sequence of the
syllables and the whole of the final syllable:
incidentally, I could quite easily find out what
had made tne forget the name for the time
being. Monaco is the Italian name for Munich;
and it was some thoughts connected with this
town which had acted as an inhibition.
".
"Now that is a very pretty example, but it is
too simple. In other cases you might have to
take a longer succession of associations to
the substitute name, and then the analogy to
dream-analysis would be clearer. I have had
experiences of that sort, too. A stranger once
invited me to drink some Italian wine with
him, and in the inn he found he had forgotten
the name of the wine which he had meant to
order on account of his very pleasant recollec
tions of1 it. A number of dissimilar substitute
names occurred to him, and from these 1 was
able to infer that
the thought of someone
called Hedwig had made him forget the name
of the wine. Sure enough, not only did he tell
me that there had been a fifedwig with him
on the occasion when he first tasted the- wine;
but this discovery brought back to him the
name-he wanted. He was now happily married]
and HecTwig belonged to earlier days whith he
did not care to recall.
•""'•
!
^^> ;••
• ^

[492b]
What"is possible in the case- of forgotten
names must be also possible iri the interprets
tion of dreams: starting from the substitute,
we must be able to arrive at the real object
of our search by means of a train of associa
tions; and further, arguing from what happens
with forgotten names, we may assume that the
associations to
the dream-element' will have
been determined not only by that element but
also by the real thought which is not in con
sciousness. If we could do this, weshould have
gone some way towards justifying our tech
nique.
SEVENTH LECTURE
Manifest Content and Latent Thoughts
You see that our study of errorshas not been
fruitless. Thanks to our exertions in that direc
tionj we have—reasoning from the hypotheses
with which you are familiar—-secured two re
sults: a conception of the nature of the dreamelement and a technique of dream-interpreta^
tion. The conception of the dream-element is
as follows: it is not in itself a primary and es
sential thing, a thought proper, but a substi
tute for something else unknown to the per
son concerned, just as is the underlying inten
tion of the error, a substitute for something the
knowledge of whichis indeed possessed by the
dreamer but is inaccessible to him. We hopeto
be able to carryoverthe sameconception on td
the dream as a whole, which consists of a num
ber of such elements. Our method is to allow
other substitute-ideas, from which we are able
to divine that which lies hidden, to emergeinto
consciousness by means of free association to
the said elements.
'":-
I am now going to propose that we introduce
an alteration in our nomenclature in order '£6
make our terminology more flexiBle. Instead of
using the words hidden, inaccessible or prop
er, let us give a more precise* description and
say inaccessible to the[ cdnsciousneks of the
driedmer Or unconscious. By that we mean
nothing more tharrwas implied in the case of
the forgotten word; or the underlying intention
responsible for the error; that is to Say, un
conscious at the moment. It follows that in
contradistinction we may call the difearn-elements themselves, and those substituteyde&s
arrived at by the process^ of association, con
scious. No theoretical ini^licatidn1is so far con
tained in these terms; ho/exceptidn.can be tak
en to the use of the wdrcl unconsiidiis as a de
scription at onceapplicable' andeasy tp Hinder-^
Standi
'•'
'' '
'
.r^rr-^j-ny- --. c-:;
..

[493a]
490
SiGmund Freud
Now, transferring our conception from the
single element to the dream as a whole, it fol
lows that the latter is the distorted substitute
for something else, something unconscious, and
that the task of dream-interpretation is to dis
cover these unconscious thoughts. Hence are
derived three important rules which should be
observed in the work of dream-interpretation:
i. We are not to trouble about the surface
meaning of the dream, whether it be reasonable
or absurd, clearor confused; in no case does it
constitute the unconscious thoughts we
are
seeking. (Anobvious limitation of thisrule will
force itself upon us later.)
2. We are to confine our work to calling up
substitute-ideas for every element and not to
ponder over them and try to see whether they
contain something whichfits in, nor to trouble
ourselves about how far they are taking us
from the dream-element.
3. We must wait until the hidden uncon
scious thoughts which we are seeking appear
of their own accord, just as in the case of the
missing word "Monaco" in the experiment
which I described.
Now we understand also how entirely indif
ferent it is whether we remember much or ht
tle of our dreams, above all whether we re
member them accurately or not. The dream as
remembered is not the real thing at all, but a
distorted substitute which, by callingup other
substitute-ideas, provides us with a means of
approaching the thought proper, of bringing
into consciousness the unconscious thoughts
underlying the dream. If our recollection was at
fault, all that has happened is that a further
distortion of the substitute has taken place,
and this distortion itself cannot be without
motivation.
We can interpret our own dreams as well as
those of others; indeed, we learn more from
our own and the process carries more convic
tion. Now if we experiment in this direction,
we notice that something is working against
us. Associations come, it is true, but we do not
admit them all; we are moved to criticize and
to select. We say to ourselves of one associa
tion: "No, that does not fit in—it is irrelevant,"
and of another: "That is too absurd," and of a
third: "That is quite beside the point"; and
then we can observe further that in making
such objections we stifle, and in the end actu
ally banish, the associations before they have
become quite clear. So on.the one hand we
tend to hold too closely to the initial idea, that
is, the dream-element itself, and on the other,

[493b]
by allowing ourselves to select, we vitiate the
results of the process of free association. If
we are not attempting the interpretation by
ourselves, but are allowing someone else to
interpret, we shall clearly perceive another
motive impelling us to this selection, forbid
den as we know it to be. We find ourselves
thinking at times: "No, this association is too
unpleasant; I cannot, or will not, tell it to
him."
Clearly these objections threaten to spoil the
success of our work. We must guard against
them when we are interpreting our own dreams
t>y resolving firmly not to yield to them, and, in
interpreting those of someone else, by laying
down the hard and fast rule that he must not
withhold any association, even if one of the
four objections I have named rises up against
it, namely, that it is too unimportant, too ab
surd, too irrelevant or too unpleasant to speak
of. He promises to keep this rule, and we may
well feel annoyed when we find how badly he
fulfils his promise later on. At first we account
for this by imagining that, in spite of our
authoritative assurance, he is not convinced
that the process of free association will be
justified by its results; and perhaps our next
idea will be to win him over first to our theory,
by giving him books tp read or sending him
to lectures so that he may be converted to
our views on the subject. But we shall be savecl
from any such false steps by observing that
the same critical objections against certain as--
sociations arise even in ourselves, whom we
surely cannot suspect of doubt, and can only
subsequently, on second thoughts as it were,
be overcome.
Instead of being annoyed at the dreamer's
disobedience, we can turn this experience to
good account as a means of learning something
new, something which is the more important
the more unprepared we were for it. We realize
that the work of dream-interpretation is en
countering opposition by a resistance which
expresses itself in this very form of critical
objections. This resistance is independent qf
the theoretical conviction of the.,dreamer. Wje
learn even more than this. Experience shows
that a critical objection of this nature is never
justified.
On the
contrary, the
associations
which people wish to suppress in this way prove
without exception to be the mostimportant, to
be decisive for the discovery of the unconscious
thpught, When an association is accompanied
by anrrpbjectipn of this sort it positively calls
for special notice.

[494a]
General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis
491
This resistance is something entirely new; a
phenomenon which we have found by follow
ing out our hypotheses, although it was not in
cluded in them. We are not altogether agree-
•
ably surprised by this new factor which we
have to reckon with, for we suspect already
that it will not make our work any easier: it
might almost tempt us to give up the effort
with dreams altogether. To take such a trivial
subject and then to have so much trouble, in
stead of spinning along smoothly with our tech
nique! But we might, on the other hand, find
these difficulties fascinating and be led to sus
pect that the work will be worth the trouble.
Resistances invariably confront us when we try
to penetrate to the hidden unconscious thought
from the substitute offered by the dream-ele
ment. We may suppose, therefore, that some
thing very significant must be concealed be
hind the substitute; for, if not, why should we
meet with such difficulties, the purpose of which
is to keep up the concealment? When a child
will not open his clenched fist to show what is
in it, we may be quite certain that it is some
thing which he ought not to have.
As soon as we introduce into our subject the
dynamic conception of resistance, we must
bear in mind that this
factor is something
quantitatively variable. There are greater and
lesser resistances, and we are prepared to find
these differences showing themselves in the
course of our work. Perhaps we can connect
with this another experience also met with in
the process of dream-interpretation. I mean
that sometimes only a few associations—per
haps not more than one—suffice to lead us from
the dream-element to the unconscious thought
behind it, whilst on other occasions long chains
of associations are necessary and many critical
objections have to be overcome. We shall prob
ably think that the number of associations nec
essary varies with the varying strength of the
resistances, and very likely we shall be right.
If there is only a slight resistance, the substi
tute is not far removed from the unconscious
thought; a strong resistance on the other hand
causes great distortions of the latter, and there
by entails a long journey back from the sub
stitute to the unconscious thought itself.
Perhaps this would be a good moment to se
lect a dream and try our technique upon it, to
see whether the expectations we have enter
tained are realized. Very well, but what dream
shall we choose? You do not know how difficult
it is for me to decide, nor can I make it clear
to you yet what the difficulties are. Obviously

[494b]
there must be dreams in which on the whole
there is very little distortion, and one would
think it would be best to begin with these.
But which are
the least
distorted
dreams?
Those which make good sense and are not con*
fused, of which I have already given you two
examples? In assuming this, we should make a
great mistake, for examination shows that these
dreams have undergone an exceptionally high
degree of distortion. Supposing, then, that I
make no special condition but take any dream
at random, you would probably be very much
disappointed. We might have to observe and
record such a vast number of associations to
the
single dream-elements that it would be
quite impossible to gain any clear view of the
work as a whole. If we write the dream down
and compare with it all the associations which
it produces, we are likely to find that they have
multiplied the length of the text of the dream
many times. So the most practical method
would seem to be that of selecting for analysis
several short dreams, each of which can at least
convey some idea to us or confirm some sup
position. This will be the course we shall de
cide to take, unless experience gives us a hint
where we ought really to look for slightly dis
torted dreams.
But I can suggest andther means of simpli
fying matters, one which lies right before us.
Instead of attempting the interpretation of
whole dreams, let us confine ourselves to single
dream-elements and find out by taking;a series
of examples how the application of our tech
nique explains them:
(a) A lady related that as a child she very
often dreamt that God had a pointed paper cap
on his head. How are you going to understand
that without the help of the dreamer? It sounds
quite nonsensical; but the absurdity disappears
when the lady says that as a little girl she used
to have a cap like that put on her head at table,
because she wouldn't give up looking at the
plates of her brothers and sisters to see wheth
er any of them had been given more than she.
Evidently the cap was meant to serve the pur
pose of blinkers; this piece of historical infor
mation was given, by the way, without any dif
ficulty. The interpretation of this element and,
with it, of the whole short dream becomes easy
enough with the help of a further association
of the dreamer's: "As I had been told that God
knew everything and saw everything, the dream
could only mean that I knew and saw every
thing as God did, even when they tried to pre
vent me." This example is perhaps too simple.

[495a]
492
Sigmund Freud
(b) A sceptical patient had a longer dream,
in which certain people were telling her about
my book on Wit and praising it very highly.?
Then'something else came in about a •canal;
it might have been another book in which"the
word canal occurred, or something else to >do:
with a canal . . . she did not know . ... it was
quite vague.
! Now you will certainly be inclined'to sup
pose that the canal in the dream willdefy inter
pretation on account of its vagueness. You are
right in expecting' difficulty, but the difficulty,
is^riot caused by the vagueness; on the con
trary, the difficulty in interpretation is caused
by something else, by the same thing that
makes the;"elementvague;The dreamer had no
association to the word canal; naturally I did
not know what to say either.; Shortly after
wards, to be accurate, oh the next day, she
told me thatan association had occurred to her
which perhaps had-something to do with it.
It was in fact a witty remark which some one
had told her. Oh board ship between Dover and
Calais a well-known author was talking to an
Englishman who in some particular context
quoted the words: "Du sublime au ridicule il
n'y a qtfun pas." The authoranswered: "Qui;
le Pas-de-Calais," meaning that he regarded
France as sublime arid England as ridiculous.
Of course, the Pas-de--Galais is a canal-^that
fe to say; the Canal la Manche~the English
Channel- Now, you ask, do I think, that this
association'had anything to do with,the dream?
Certainly I think so-; it gives the true mean
ing of the puzzling dreamfelement.Or.areyou
inclined to; doubt thatthe' joke already existed
before the dream and was the unconscious
thought behindthe elementcanal, and to main
tain that it was a subsequent invention? The
association
reveals
the
scepticism
disguised
under the obtrusive admiration, and resistance
was no doubt; the cause both of the association
being .so;long in occurring td-.her, and of the
corresponding dream-element being so vague.
Observe here?the.relation between the dreamelement and the unconscious thought underly-r
ing it: it is, as it were, a: fragment of the
thought, an allusion to it; by being isolated in
that way it became quite incomprehensible.
'••(c)
A patient had a fairly long dream, part
of 1which was as follows: Several members of
hisfamily wereseatedat a table of a particular:
shape . .r. etc. This table reminded the dreamer
that he had seen one of the same sort when he
was visiting a certain family. From that his
thoughts ran on thus: in this family the rela*

[495b]
tion between father and son was a peculiar
one, and the patient presently added that his
own relations with his father were, as a matter;
of fact, of the same nature. So the*table was
introduced into the dream to indicate this par
allelism.
;It happened that this dreamer had long been
familiar with the demands of dream-interpreta
tion; otherwise he might have taken exception
to the idea of investigating so trivial a detail
as the. shape of a table. We do literally, deny
that anything in the
dream is a matter of
chance or of indifference^ and it is,precisely
by enquiring into such trivial and (apparently)
unmotivated details that we expect to arrive
at our conclusion.: You may perhaps still be
surprised that the dream-work should happen
to choose the table, in order to express: the
thought "Our relationship is just like theirs."
But even this is explicable when, youJearn that
the; •family in. question was' named TischUr.>
(Tisch — table.) In making his relations -sit at
this table the dreamer's meaning:was that they
too were Tischler. And notice another things
that in relating dreams-interpretations of thifc
sort one is forced into indiscretion. There you
have one of the difficulties I alluded to in the
matter of choosing; examples. I could ieasily
have given you another example instead.of this
one, but probably I should have avoided this
indiscretion only :to, commit another in :it|s
place.
.
:>:;:'
:
.••>
:•
"This seems to me a good point at which to
introduce two new terms which we might have
used ahready. Let us call the dream as related
the manifest dreamrcontentj and the hidden:
meaning, which we should come by inr follow
ing ; out
the associations, the latent 'dreartithoughts..Then we must consider the relatipjn
between the /manifest content and the latent
thoughtsj as
shown in
ther rabove examples.
There are many varieties of these relations. In
examples (a) and (b) the manifest dream-ele
ment is also an integral .part of the latent
thoughts, hut-only a fragmentof them. A small
piece of a great, composite, mental structure
in the unconscious dream-thoughts,has made its
way into the manifest dream also, in the form
of a fragment or in other cases as an allusion,
like a catch-word or an abbreviation in a tele
graphic code. The interpretation has to com-;
plete the whole to which this scrap or, allusion
belongs, which it did most successfully in ex-*
ample: (b). One method, of the distorting pro^
cess in which the dream-work consists is, there-j
fore, that of substituting for something else a

[496a]
General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis
493
fragment or an allusion;; In example (c) we no
tice, moreover, another possible relation be
tween manifest content and latent thought, a
relation which is even more plainly and dis
tinctly expressed in the following examples:
(d) The dreamer was pulling a certain lady
of his acquaintance out of a ditch. He himself
found the meaning of this dream-element by
means of the first association. It meant: he
picked her out, preferred her.1
i:-
(e) Another man dreamt that his brother
was digging up his garden all over again. The
first association was to deep^trenching for veg
etables, the second gave
the meaning. The
brother was retrenching. (Retrenching his ex
penses).3
(f) The dreamer was climbing a mountain
from which he had a remarkably wide view.
This sounds most reasonable; perhaps no in
terpretation is called for and we have only to
find out what recollection is referred to in the
dream, and what had aroused it. No, you are
mistaken; it comes out that this dream needed
interpretation just as much as any other, more
confused. For the dreamer remembers nothing
about mountain-climbing himself; instead, it
occurs to him that an acquaintance is pub
lishing a Rundschau (Review), on the sub
ject of our relations with the most distant
parts of the earth: hence, the latent thought is
one in which the dreamer identifies hiinself
with
the reviewer
(lit.
one
who
takes a
survey).
Here you come across a new type of relation
between the manifest and the latent element
in dreams. The former is not so much a distor
tion of the latter as a representation—a plastic,
concrete piece of imagery, originating in the
sound of a word. It is true that this amounts
in effect to a distortion, for we have long for
gotten from what concrete image the word
sprang, and hence fail to recognize it when that
image is substituted for it. When you consider
that the manifest dream consists of visual images in by far the greatest number of cases,
and less frequently of thoughts and words, you
will easily realize that this kind of relation be
tween the manifest and the latent has a special
significance in the structure of dreams. You see
too that in this way it becomes possible for a
long series of abstract thoughts to create sub
stitute-images in the manifest dream which dp
indeed serve the purpose of concealment. This
1 This example has been, altered in
translation to,
bring in the play upon words in English.—TR.
2See note on preceding example.—T.

[496b]
is how our picture-puzzles are made up. The
source of the semblance of wit whichgoes with
this type of representation is a special ques
tion which we need not touch on here.
There is a fourth kind of relation between the
manifest and the latent elements-which I will
say nothing about until the time comes for it in
my account of our technique. Even then I shall
not have given you a full fist of these possible
relations, but we shall have sufficient for oue
purpose.
Now do you think you can summon up cour
age to venture on the interpretation of a whole
dream? Let us see whether we are adequately
equipped for the task. I shall not, of course,
choose one of the most obscure, but all the
same it shall be one which shows the character
istics of dreams in a well-marked form.
A young woman who had already been mar
ried for a number of years dreamt as follows:
She was at the theatre with her husband^
and one side of the stalls was quite empty.
Her
husband told her that Elise L and her
fianci also wanted to come, but could only get
bad seats, three for a florin and a half, and of
course they could not take those. She replied
that in her opinion they did not lose much by
that.
The first thing stated by the dreamer is that
the occasion giving rise to the dream is alluded
to in the manifest content: her husband had
really told her that Elise L, an acquaintance of
about her own age, had become engaged^ and
the dream is the reaction to this piece of news.
We know already that in many:dreams it is
easy to point to some such occasion occurring
on the day before, and that this is often traced
by the dreamer without any difficulty. This
dreamer supplies us with further information
of the same sort about other elements in themanifest dream. To what did she trace the de
tail of one side of the stalls being empty? It
was an allusion to a real occurrence of the, week
before, when she had meant to go to a certain
play and had therefore booked seats early, so
early, that she had to pay extra for the tickets.
On entering;the theatre it was evident that her
anxiety had been quite superfluous, for one side
of the stalls was almost empty. It would haye
been time enough if she had bought the tick
ets on the actual day of the performance and7
her husband did not fail to tease her about hav
ing been in too great a hurry. Next, what about
the one florin-and a half (i fl. so)? This was
traced to quite another context which had noth
ing to dp with the former, but it again refers

[497a]
494
Sigmtjnd Freud
to some news received on the previous day.
Her sister-in-law had had a present of 150
florins from her husband and had rushed off
in a hurry, like a silly goose, to jeweller's shop
and spent it all on a piece of jewellery. What
about the number three? She knew nothing
about that unless this idea could be counted
an association, that the engaged girl, Elise L,
was only three months younger than she her
self who had been married ten years. And the
absurdity of taking three tickets for two peo
ple? She had nothing to say to this and refused
to give any more associations or information
whatever.
Nevertheless, her few associations have pro
vided us with so much material that it is pos
sible to discover the latent dream-thoughts. We
are struck by the fact that in her statements
references to timerare noticeable at several
points, which form a common basis for the
different parts of this material. She had got
the theatre tickets too soon, taken them in too
great a hurry, so that she had to pay extra for
them; in the same way her sister-in-law had
hurried off to the jeweller's with her money to
buy an ornament with it, as though she might
miss something. If the strongly emphasized
points: too early, too great a hurry, are con
nected with the occasion for the dream (name
ly, the news that her friend, only three months
younger than herself, had now found a good
husband after all) and with the criticism ex
pressedin her asperity about her sister-in-law,
that it was folly to be so precipitate, there oc
curs to us almost spontaneously the following
construction of the latent dream-thoughts, for
which the manifest dream is a highly distorted
substitute:
-
"It was really foolish of me to be in such a
hurry to marry! Elise's example shows me that
I too could have found a husband later on."
(The over-haste is represented by her own con
duct in buying the tickets and that of her sisterin-law in buying the jewellery. Going to the
theatre is substituted for
getting
married.)
This would be the main thought; perhaps we
may go on, though with less certainty because
the analysis in these passages ought not to be
unsupported by statements of the dreamer:
"And I might have had one a hundred times
better for the money!" (150 florins is 100 times
more than one florin and a half.) If we may
substitute the dowry for the money, it would
mean that the husband is bought with the
dowry: both the jewellery and the bad seats
would stand for the husband. It would be still

[497b]
more desirable if we could see some connection
between the element three tickets and a hus
band; but our knowledge does not as yet ex
tend to this. We have only found out that the
dream expresses depreciation of her own hus
band and regret at having married so early.
In my opinion we shall be more .surprised
and confused by the result of this our first at
tempt at dream-interpretation than satisfied
with it. Too many ideas force themselves upon
us at once, more than as yet we can master. We
see already that we shall not come to the end
of what the interpretation of this dream can
teach us. Let us immediately single out those
points in which we can definitely see some new
knowledge.
In the first place: we note that in the latent
thoughts the chief emphasis falls upon the ele
ment of hurry; in the manifest dream that is
exactly a feature about which we find nothing.
Without analysis we could have had no sus
picion that this thought entered in at all. It
seems
possible, therefore, that precisely the
main
point
round
which
the
unconscious
thoughts centre does not appear in the mani
fest
dream at all. This fact must radically
change the impression made upon us by the
whole dream. In the second place: in the dream
there is
a
nonsensical combination of ideas
(three for one florin and a half); in the dreamithoughts we detect the opinion: "It was folly
(to marry so early)." Can one reject the con
clusion that this thought, "It was folly," is
represented by the introduction into the mani
fest dream of an absurd element? In the third
place: comparison shows us that the relation
between
manifest and latent elements is
nP
simple one, certainly not of such a kind that a
manifest always replaces a latent element. The
relation between the two is of the nature of a
relation between two different groups, so that
a manifest element can represent several latent
thoughts or a latent thought be replaced by
several manifest elements.
|
As regards the meaning of the dream and
the dreamer's attitude towards it, here again
we might find many surprising things to say;
The lady certainly admitted the interpretation,
but she wondered at it; she had not been aware
that she had such disparaging thoughts of her
husband; she did not even know why she should
so disparage him. So there is still much that is
incomprehensible about it. I really think that
as yet we are not properly equipped for inter
preting a dream and that we need further in
struction and preparation first.

[498a]
EIGHTH LECTURE
Children's Dreams
We had the impression that we had advanced
too rapidly; let us therefore retrace our steps a
little. Before we made our last experiment in
which we tried to overcome the difficulty of
dream-distortion by means of our technique,
we said that it would be best to circumvent it
by confining our attention to dreams in which
distortion is absent or occurs only to a very
slight extent, if there are any such dreams. In
doing this, we are again departing from the
actual course of development of our knowledge;
vfor,in reality it was only..afterxonsistently ap
plying our=.methodof interpretation, and after
exhaustive analysis of dreams in which distor
tion occurred, that we became aware of the
existence of those in which it is lacking.
The dreams we are looking for are met with
in children: short, clear, coherent, and easy to
understand, they are free from ambiguity and
yet are unmistakable dreams. You must not
think, however, that all dreams in children are
of this type. Distortion in dreams begins to
appear very early in childhood, and there are
on record dreams of children between five and
eight years old which already show all the char
acteristics of the dreams of later life. But, if
you confine yourselves to those occurring in
the period between the dawn of recognizable
mental activity and the fourth or fifth year of
life, you will discover a series which we should
characterize as infantile, and, in the later years
of childhood, you may find single dreams of
the same type; indeed, even in grown-up people
under certain conditions dreams appear which
in no way differ from the typically infantile.
Now from these children's dreams it is pos
sible to obtain without any difficulty trust
worthy information about the essential nature
of dreams, which we hope will prove to be de
cisive and universally valid.
1. In order to understand these dreams there
is no need for any analysis nor for the employ
ment of any technique. It is not necessary to
question the child who relates his dream. But
we must know something about his life; in
every instance there is some experience from
the previous day which explains the dream.
The dream is the mind's reaction in sleep to the
experience of the previous day.
Let us consider some examples in order to
base our further conclusions upon them:
(a) A boy of a year and ten months old had
to present someone with a basket of cherries ss

[498b]
General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis
495
a birthday gift. He plainly did it very unwill
ingly, although he had been promised some of
them for himself. The next morning he told his
dream: "Hermann eaten all the cherries."
'(b) A little girl of three and a quarter years
went for the first time for a trip on the lake.
When they came to land, she did not wish to
leave the boat and cried bitterly; the time on
the water had evidently gone too quickly for
her. Next morning she said: "Last night I was
sailing on the lake." We may probably infer
that this trip lasted longer.
(c) A boy five and a quarter years old was
taken on an excursion to the Escherntal near
.... Hallstatt. He.had- heard.-that^Hallstatt lay at
the foot of the Dachstein and had shown.great
interest in that mountain. From the lodgings
in Aussee there was a fine view of the Dach
stein, and with a telescope it was possible to
make out the Simony Hut on top. The child
had repeatedly endeavoured to
see the hut
through the telescope, but nobody knew whether
he had succeeded. The excursion began in a
mood of joyful expectation. Whenever a new
mountain came into sight, the little boy asked:
"Is that the Dachstein?" Every time his ques
tion was answered in
the negative he grew
more out of spirits and presently became silent
and refused to climb a little way up to the
waterfall with the others. He was thought to be
overtired, but the next morning he said quite
happily: "Last night I dreamt that we were in
the Simony Hut" So it was with this expecta
tion that he had taken part in the excursion.
The only detail he gave was one he had heard
before: "You have to climb up steps for six
hours."
These three dreams will be enough to give
us all the information we need at this point.
2. We see that these childhood dreams are
not meaningless; they are complete, compre
hensible mental acts. Remember the medical
verdict about dreams, which I told you, and
the comparison with unskilled fingers wander
ing over the keys of the piano. You cannot fail
to notice how sharply this conception is con
tradicted by the children's dreams I have quot
ed. Now/ it would surely be most extraordinary
if a child were able to achieve the performance
of complete mental acts during sleep, and the
grown-up person in the same situation con
tented himself with spasmodic reactions. Be
sides, we have every reason for attributing bet
ter and deeper sleep to a child.
3. In these dreams there is no distortion and
therefore they need no
interpretation:
the

[499a]
496
Sigmund
manifest and the latent content is here identi
cal. From this we conclude that distortion is
not essential, to the nature of the dream. I ex
pect that this statement will take a weight off
your minds. Nevertheless, closer consideration
forces us to admit that even in these dreams
distortion is present, though in a very slight
degree, that there is a certain difference ber
tween the
manifest
content and
the latent
dream-thought.
4. The child's dream is a reaction to an ex
perience of the previous day, which has left
behind a-regret, a longing, or an unsatisfied
wish. In the dream we have the direct, undis
guised fulfilment of this wish. Now consider
our discussion as to the part played by the ex
ternal or internal somatic stimuli as disturbers
of sleep and begetters of dreams. We learnt
certain quite definite facts on this point j but
this explanation only held good in a small num
ber of dreams. In these children's dreams there
is nothing to indicate the influence of such
somatic stimuli; we can make no mistake about
it, for the dreams are perfectly comprehensi
ble and each can easily be grasped as a whole.
But we need not on that account give up our
notion of the stimulus as causing the dream.
We can only ask why we forget from the out
set that there are mental as well as bodily
sleep-disturbing stimuli; surely we know that
it is these which are mainly responsible for
disturbing the sleep of the grown-up person,
in that they hinder him from bringing about in
himself the mental condition essential for sleep,
i.e., the withdrawal of interest from the outside
world. He wishes not to have any interruption
in his life; he would prefer to continue work
ing at whatever occupies him, and that is the
reason why he does not sleep. The mental stim
ulus which disturbs sleep is therefore for
a
child the unsatisfied wish, and his reaction to
this is a dream.
5. This takes us by a very short step to a
conclusion about the function of dreams. If
dreams are the reaction to a mental stimulus
their value must lie in effecting a discharge of
the excitation so that the stimulus is removed
and sleep can continue. We do not yet know
how this discharge through the dream is effected
dynamically, butwe notice already that dreams
are not disturbers of sleep (the accusation com
monly brought against them), but are guardi
ans and deliverers of it from disturbing influ
ences. True, we are apt to think, we should
have slept better if we had not dreamed, but
there we are wrong: the truth is that without

[499b]
Freud
the help of the dream we should not have slept
at all, and we owe itto the dream that we slept
as well as we did. It could hot help disturbing
us a little, just as a policeman often cannot
avoid making a noise wheii driving off disturb
ers of the peace who would wake us.
6. That dreams are brought about by a wish
and that the content of the dream expresses
this wish is one main characteristic of dreams.
The other equally constant feature is that the
dream does not merely give expression to a
thought, but represents this wish as fulfilled, in
the form of an hallucinatory experience. "I
should like to sail on the lake," runs the wish
which gives rise to the dream; the content of
the dream itself is: "I am sailing on the lake."
So that even in these simple dreams belonging
to childhood there is still a difference between
the latent and the manifest dream, and still
a distortion of the latent dream-thought, in the
translation of the thought into an experience.
In interpreting a dream, we must first of all
undo this process of alteration. If this is to be
regarded as one of the most universal charac^
teristics of all dreams, we then know how to
translate the dream-fragment I quoted before:
"I see my brother digging" does not mean "my
brother is retrenching," but "I wish my brother
would retrench, he is-to retrench." Ofthe two
universal characteristics here
mentioned the
second is obviously more likely to be acknowl
edged without opposition than the first.
It is only by extensive investigations that
we can make sure that what produces the dream
must always be a wish and cannot sometimes
be a preoccupation, a purpose, or reproach; but
the
other characteristic remains unaffected,
namely, that the dream does not merely re
produce this stimulus, but, by a kind of living
it through, removes it, sets it aside, relieves it.
7. In connection with these characteristics
of dreams we may take up again our compari
son between dreams and errors. In the latter
we distinguished between a disturbing tend
ency and one which is disturbed, the error be
ing a compromise between the two. Dreams fall
into the same category; the disturbed tendency
can only, of course, be the tendency to sleep,
while the disturbing tendency resolves itself
into the mental stimulus which we may call the
wish (clamouring for gratification), since alt
present we know of no other mental stimulus
disturbing sleep. Here again the dream is the
result of a compromise; we sleep, and yet we
experience the satisfaction of a wish; we grat
ify a wish and at the same time contmue to

[500a]
General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis
497
sleep. Each achieves part-success7 and partfailure.
8. You will remember that at one point we
hoped to find a path to ah understanding of
the problems presented by dreams in the fact
that certain very transparent phantasy-forma
tions arer called day-dreams. Now these day
dreams are literally wish-fulfilments, fulfilments
of ambitious or erotic wishes, which we recog
nize as such; they are, however, carried but in
thought, and, however vividly imagined, they
never take the form of hallucinatory experi
ences. Here, therefore, the less certain of the
two main characteristics of the dream is re
tained, whereas the other, to which the condi
tion of sleep is essential and which cannot be
realized in waking life, is entirely lacking. So
in language we find a hint that a wish-fulfil
ment is a main characteristic of dreams. And
further, if the experience we have in dreams is
only another form of imaginative representa
tion, a form which becomes possible under the
peculiar conditions of the sleeping state—a noc
turnal day-dream, as we might call it—-we un
derstand at once how it is that the process of
dream-formation can
abrogate
the
stimulus
operating at night and can bring gratification;
for day-dreaming also is a mdde of activity
closelyfinked up with gratification, which is in
fact the only reason why people practise it.
Again, there are other linguistic expressions,
besides this, which imply the same thing/• We
are
familiar
with
the
proverbs:
"The
pig
dreams of acorns and the goose of maize."
"What do chickens dream of? Of millet." The
proverb, you see, goes even lower in the scale
than we do, beyond the child to the animal,
and asserts that the content of dreams is the
satisfaction of a want. And there are many
phrases which seem to point to the same thing:
we say "as beautiful- as a dream." eT'should
never have dreamt of Such a thing." "I never
imagined that in my wildest dreams." Here col
loquial speech is clearly partial in its"judg
ment. Of course there are also anxiety-dreams
and dreams the content"of which is painful or
indifferent, but these have hot given rise-to
any special phrases. We do indeed speak of
bad dreams, but by a dream pure and simple
common usage always understands some sort of
exquisite wish^fulfilment.
Nor is
there any
proverb which attempts to assert that pigs or
geese dream of being slaughtered!
It is, of course, inconceivable that this wishfulfilling character of dreams should have es
caped the notice of writers on the subject. On

[500b]
the contrary, they have very often remarked
upon it; but it has not occurred to any ofdhem
to recognize this characteristic as universal,and
to take it as the key to the; explanation of
dreams. We can easily imagine what may have
deterred them, arid later we 'will discuss the
question:
Now see how much information we have
gainedj and that with hardly any trouble, from
our study of children's dreams! We have learnt
that the function of dreams is to protect sleep;
that they arise out of two conflicting tenden
cies, of which the one, the desire for sleep, re^
mains constant, whilst the other endeavours to
satisfy some mental stimulus; that dreams are
proved to be mental acts, rich in meaning; that
they have two main characteristics; i.e., they
are wish-fulfilments and hallucinatory experi
ences. And meanwhile we could almost have
forgotten that we were studying psycho-analy
sis. Apart frOm the connection we have made
between dreams and errors our work has not
borne any specific stamp. Any psychologist
knowing nothing of the assumptions of psycho
analysis could have given this explanation of
children's dreams. Why has no one done so?
If only all dreams were of the infantile type
the problem would be solved and our task al
ready achieved, and that without questioning
the dreamer, referring to the unconscious or
having recourse to the process Pf free associa
tion. Clearly it-is in this direction that we must
continue our work. We have already repeatedly
found that characteristics alleged1 to be uni
versally valid have afterwards proved to hold
good only for a certain kind and 'a limited num
ber of dreams. So the cjuestion we now have
to decide is whether the common character
istics revealed by children's dreams are any
more stable than these, and whether they hold
also for those dreams whose meaning is not ob-r
vious and in whose manifest content we can
recognize no reference to a wish remaining from
the day before. Our idea is that these other
dreams have undergone a good deal of distor
tion and oh that account we must refrain from
immediate judgment. We suspect too that to
unravel this distortion we shall need the help of
psycho-analytic technique, which we could dis
pense with while learning, as we have just now
done, the meaning of children's dreams.
There is yet one other class of dreams at
least in which no distortion is present and
which; like children's dreams, we easily recog
nize to be wish-fulfilments. These are dreams
which are occasioned all through life by ini-

[501a]
49»
Sigmund Freud
perative physical needs—hunger, thirst, sexual
desire1—and are wish-fulfilments in the senseof
being reactions to internal somatic stimuli.
Thus I have on record the dream of a Httle girl,
one year and seven months old, which con
sisted of a kind of menu, together with her
name (Anna F . . . , strawberries, bilberries,
egg, pap), the dream beinga reaction to a. day
of fasting, enforced on account of indigestion
due to eating the fruit which appeared twice in
the dream. At the same time her grandmother
—their combined ages totalled seventy—was
obliged, owing to a floating kidney, to go with
out food for a day and dreamt that night that
she had been invited out and had had the most
temptingdelicacies set beforeher. Observations
on prisoners who are left to go hungry, and on
people who suffer privations whilsttravelingor
on expeditions, show that in these circum
stances they regularly dream about the satisfac
tion of their wants. Thus Otto Nordenskjold in
his book on the Antarctic (1904) tells us of
the band of men in whose company he spent
the winter (Vol. I, p.
336): "Our dreams
showed very clearly the direction our thoughts
were taking. Never had we dreamt so fre
quently and so vividly as at that time. Even
those of our comrades who usually dreamt but
rarely had now long stories to tell in the morn
ings when we exchanged our latest experiences
in this realm of phantasy. All the dreams were
about that outside world now so far away, but
often they included a reference to our condi
tion at the time . . . eating and drinking were,
incidentally, the pivot on which our dreams
most often turned. One of us, who was particu-.
larly good at going out to large dinners in his
sleep, was delighted when he could tell us in
the morning that he had had a three-course
dinner.
Another
dreamt
of .tobacco,
whole
mountains of tobacco; another of a ship which
came full sail over the water, at last clear of
ice. Yet another dream deserves mention: the
postman came with the letters and gave a long
explanation of why they were so late; he said
he had made a mistake in delivering them, and
had had great trouble in getting them back
again. Of course, things even more impossible
occupied our minds in sleep, but the lack of
imagination in almost all the dreams which I
dreamt myself or heard the others tell was
quite striking. It would certainly be of great
psychological interest if we had a record of all
these dreams. You can imagine how we longed
for sleep, when it offered each one of us all
that he most eagerly desired." Another quota

[501b]
tion, this time from Du Prel: "Mungo Park,
when nearly dying of thirst on a journey in
Africa, dreamt continually of the well-watered
hills and valleys of his home. So Trenck, tor
mented with hunger in the redoubt at Magdebourg, saw himself in his dream surrounded by
sumptuous meals; and George Back, who took
part in Franklin's first expedition, when on the
point of dying of hunger owing to their terrible
privations, dreamt regularly of abundant food
to eat."
Anyone who has.made himself thirsty at
night by eating highly seasoned dishes at supper
is likely to dream of drinking. Of course it is
not possible to relieve acute hunger or thirst
by dreaming; in that case we awake thirsty and
are obliged to drink real water. The service of
the dream is here of little practical account,
but it is none the less clear that it was called
up for the purpose of protecting sleep from the
stimulus impelling us to wake up and
act.
Where the intensity of the desire is less, satis
faction-dreams do often answer the purpose.
In the same way, when the stimulus is that
of sexual desire, the dream provides satisfac
tion, but of a kind which shows peculiarities
worthy of mention. .Since it is a characteristic
of the sexual impulse that it is a degree less de
pendent on its object than are hunger and
thirst, the satisfaction in a pollution-dream can
be real; and, in consequence of certain diffi
culties in the relation to the object (which will
be discussed later), it particularly often hap
pens that the real satisfaction is yet connected
with a vague or distorted dream-content. This
peculiarity of pollution-dreams makes- them,
as 0. Rank has observed, suitable objects for
the study of dream-distortion. Moreover, with
adults, dreams of desire usually contain besides
the satisfaction something else, springing from
a purely mental source and requiring interpre
tation if it is to be understood.
We do not maintain, by the way, that wishfulfilment dreams of the infantile, type occiiir
in adults solely as reactions to the imperative
desires I
have mentioned. We
are equally
familiar with short clear dreams of this type,
occasioned
by
certain dominating situations
and unquestionably produced.by mental stimuli.
For example, there are impatience-dreams in
which someone making preparations for a jour
ney, for a theatrical performance in which he
is specially interested, or for a lecture or a
visit, has his expectations prematurely realized
in a dream, and finds himself the night before
the actual experience already at his journey's

[502a]
General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis
499
end, at the theatre, or talking to the friend he
is going to visit. Or.again, there is the comfortdream, rightly so-called, in which someone who
wants to go on. sleeping dreams that he has
already got up, that he is washing, or is at
school, while all the time he is really continuing
his sleep, meaning that he would rather dream
of getting up than do so in reality. In these
dreams the desire for sleep, which we have
recognized as regularly participating in dreamformation, expresses itself plainly and appears
as their actual originator. The need for sleep
ranks itself quite rightly with the other great
physical needs.
I would refer you at this point to ... a pic
ture by
Schwind in the Schack Gallery at
Munich and would ask you to notice how cor
rectly the artist has realized the way in which
a dream arises out of a dominating situation.
The picture is called The Prisoner's Dream,
and the subject of the dream must undoubtedly
be his escape. It is a happy thought that the
prisoner is to escape by the window, for it is
through the window that the ray of light has
entered and roused him from sleep. The gnomes
standing one above the other no doubt repre
sent the successive positions he would have to
assume in climbing up to the window; and, if
I
am not mistaken and do not attribute too
much intentional design to the artist, the fea
tures of the gnome at the top, who is filing the
grating through (the very thing the prisoner
himself would like to do), resemble the man's
own.
I have said that in all dreams, other than
those of children and such as conform to the
infantile type, we encounter the obstacle of
distortion. We cannot immediately say whether
they too are wish-fulfilments, as we are in
clined to suppose, nor can we guess,from their
manifest content in what mental stimulus they
originate, or prove that they, like the others,
endeavour to remove or relieve the stimulus.
They must, in fact, be interpreted, i.e., trans
lated; the process of distortion must be re
versed, and the manifest content replaced by
the latent thought, before we can make any
definite pronouncement whether what we have
found out about infantile dreams may claim
to hold good for all dreams alike.
NINTH LECTURE
The Dream-Censorship
Our study of children's dreams has taught
us how dreams originate, what their essential

[502b]
character is, and what their function. Dreams
are the means of removing, by hallucinatory
satisfaction, mental stimuli that disturb sleep.
It is true that with the dreams of adults we
have been able to explain one group only, those
which we termed dreams of the infantile type.
Wedo not yet knowhowit may be with others,
neither do we understand them. The result we
have arrived at already is one, however, of
which the significance is not to be under-esti
mated. Every time that we fully understand
a dream it proves to be a wish-fulfilment; and
this coincidence cannot be accidental or un
important.
Dreams of another type' are assumed by us
to be distorted
substitutes for an unknown
content, which first of all has to be traced; we
have various
grounds for
this
assumption,
amongst others the analogy to our conception
of errors. Our next task is to investigate and
understand this dream-distortion.
It is dream-distortion which makes dreams
seem strange and incomprehensible. There are
several things we want to know about it: first,
whence it comes (its dynamics), secondly, what
it does, and finally, how it does it. Further, we
can say that distortion is the production of the
dream-work. Let us describe the dream-work
and trace out the forces in it.
Now let me tell you a dream recorded by a
lady well-known in psycho-analytical circles,1
who said that the dreamer was an elderly
woman, highly cultivated and held in great
esteem. The dream was not analysed and our
informant observed that for psycho-analysts
it needed no interpreting. Nor did the dreamer
herself interpret it, but she criticized it and
condemned it in such a way as though she knew
what it meant. "Imagine," she said, "such
abominable nonsense being dreamt by a woman
of fifty, whose only thought day and night is
concern for her child."
I will now tell you the dream, which is about
"love service in war-time,"8 "She went to the
First Military Hospital and said to the sentinel
at the gate that she must speak to the physi
cian-in-chief (giving a name which she did not
know),
as she
wished
to
offer herself for
service in
the hospital. In saying this, she
emphasized the word service in such a way
that the sergeant at once perceived that she
was speaking of 'love service.' As she was an
old lady, he let her pass after some hesitation,
1 Frau Dr. von Hug-Hellmuth.
2 Liebesdienst — "love service," a popular expres
sion adapted from "military service."—TR.

[503a]
500
SiGMUND Freud
but instead of finding the chief physician, she
came to a large gloomy room, where a number
of officers and.army: doctors were standing or
sitting around a long table. She turned to a
staff doctor and told him her proposal; he soon
understood her meaning. The words she said
in her dream were:
T
and
countless other
women and girls of Vienna are ready for the
soldiers, officers or men, to . . .' This ended in
a murmur; She saw, however, by the half-em
barrassed, •half-malicious expressions of
the
Officers that-all of them grasped her meaning.
The lady continued:
T know
our. decision
sounds odd, but we are in bitter earnest. The
soldier on the battlefield is not asked whether
he wishes to die or not.' There
followed
a
minute of painful silence;..then the staff doctor
put his arm round her waist and said: 'Madam,
supposing it really came to this, that... (mur
mur).' She withdrew herself
from his arm,
thinking: They, are all alike,' and replied:
'Good heavens, I am an old woman and perhaps
it won't happen to me. And one condition must
be observed: age must be taken into account,
so that an old woman and a young lad may
not . v . (murmur); that would be horrible,'
The staff doctor said: 'I quite understand'; but
some of the officers, amongst them one who as
a young man had made.love to her, laughed
loudly, and tbe lady asked to be taken to the
physician-in-chief,. whom she knew,
so that
everything might beput straight. It then struck
her, to her great consternation, that she did not
know his name. The staff doctor, however, with
the utmost respect and courtesyj showed her the
way to the second floor, up a very narrow iron
spiral staircase leading direct from the room
where they were to the upper storeys. As she
went up, she heard an officer say: 'That is a
tremendous decision, no matter whether she is
young or old; all honour to her!' With the
feeling that she was simply doing her duty,,
she went up an endless staircase."
This dream was repeated twice within a few
weeks, with alterations here and there"which,
as the lady remarked, were quite unimportant
and entirely meaningless.
The way in
which this dream progresses
corresponds to
the" course of
a day-dream;
there are only a few places where an inter
ruption occurs, and many individual points in
its content might have been
cleared up by
enquiry: this, however, as you know, was not,
undertaken. But the most striking and tp us
the most interestingthing about it is the occur
rence of many gaps, not in the recollection, but

[503b]
in the content. In three places the latter is; as
it were, blotted out; where these gaps occur the
speeches are interrupted by a. murmur. As we
did not analyse the dream, we havej strictly
speaking, no right to say anything about its
meaning; but there are certain indications from
which we may draw conclusions, e.g., the words
love
service;
and,
above
all,
the
broken
speeches immediately preceding the murmurs
require completion* of a kind which admits of
only one construction. If we do so complete
them a phantasy results, in which the content
is that the dreamer is ready at the call of duty
to offer herself to gratify the sexual, needs of
the troops, irrespective of rank. This is cer
tainly shocking, a model of
a shamelessly
libidinous
phantasy,
but—the
dream
says
nothing about this. Just where the context de
mands this confession, there is in the manifest
dream an indistinct murmur: something has'
been lost or suppressed.
I hope you recognize
how obvious is the
inferencethat it is just the shockingnature ofj
these passages which has led to: their suppres-!
sion.: Now where will you find a parallel to:
what has taken place here? In these times you
have not far to i seek. Take up any political
paper and you will find that, here and there in
the text something is omitted and In its place!
the blank white of the paper meets your eye:
you know that this is the work of the press
censor. Where these blank spaces occur, there
originally stood something of which the official
censors disapproved and which has been deleted
on that account. You probably think it a pity,
for that must have been the most interesting
part, the cream of the news.
- On other occasions the official censor has
not dealt with the sentence in its completed
form; for the writer, foreseeing which passages
were likely to be objected to by the censor,
has forestalled him by softening them down>
making some slight modification or contenting
himself with hints and allusions to what he
really wants to write. In this case there are no
blanks, but from the roundabout and obscure
mode of expression you can detect the fact
that, at the time of writing, the author had the
censorship in mind.
Now keeping to this parallel we say that
those speeches in the dream which were omitted
or disguised by a murmur have also been sacri
ficed to some form of censorship. We actually
use the term dream-censorship, and ascribe
part of the distortion to its agency! Wherever
there are gaps in the manifestdrearn we know

[504a]
General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis
50t
that the censorship is responsible; and indeed
we
should
go
further
and
recognize
that
wherever, amongst other more clearly defined
elements, one appears which is fainter, more
indefinite or more dubious in recollection, it is
evidence of the work of the censorship. Tt is;
however, seldom that it takes a form so undis?
guised, so naive, as we might sayjvas it does
in the case of the dream about love service;
far more often the censorship makes itself felt
in the second way I mentioned: by effecting
modifications, hints, and allusions in place of
the true meaning.
There is a third way in which the dreamcensorship works, to which the ordinances of
the press censorship supply no parallel; but it
happens that I can demonstrate to you this
particular mode of activity on the part of the
dream-censorship in the only dream hitherto
analysed by us. You will remember the dream
of the "three bad theatre-tickets, costing one
florin and a half." In the latent thoughts under
lying this dream, the element too great a.hurry,
too early was in the foreground; the meaning
was: "It was folly to marry so early, it was
foolish also to take the tickets so early, it was
ridiculous of the sister-in-law to
spend her
money so hurriedly on a piece of jewellery."
Nothing of this central element of the dreamthoughts appeared in the manifest content,
where everything was focussed on going to the
theatre and taking tickets. By this displacement
of the accent and regrouping of the dreamelements, the manifest content was made so
unlike the latent thoughts that nobody would
suspect the presence of the latter behind the
former. This displacement of accent is one of
the principalmeans employed in distortion, and
it is this which gives the dream that character
of strangeness which makes the dreamer hm>
self reluctant to recognize it as the product of
his own mind.
Omission, modification, regrouping of ma
terial-—these then are the modes of the dreamcensorship's activity and the means employed
in
distortion.
The
censorship
itself
is
the
originator, or one of the originators, of distor
tion,
the
subject
of
our
present, enquiry.
Modification and alteration in arrangement are
commonly included under the term displace
ment.
After these remarks on the activities of the
dreamrcensorship, let us turn our attention to
its dynamics. I hope you: are> not taking the
expression censorship in too anthropomorphic
a:senses picturing to yourselves the censor as ar

[504b]
stern little manikin or a spirit, who lives in a
little chamber of the brain and there discharges
the duties of his office; and neither must you
localize it too exactly, so that you imagine a
brain-centre whence there emanates a censorial
influence, liable to ceasewith the injury or dis
appearance of that centre. For the present we
may regard it merely as a useful term by which
to express a dynamic relationship. This need
not hinder us from asking what sort of tend
encies exercise this influence and is it exercised
upon; and further, we must not be surprised to
discover that we have already come across the
censorship, perhaps without recognizing it.
Indeed this has actually happened. Remem
ber a surprising experience we had when we
began to apply our method of free association:
we discovered that our efforts to penetrate
from the dream-element to
the
unconscious
thought proper for which the former is a sub
stitute encountered a certain resistance. The
strength of this resistance, we said, varies, be
ing sometimes enormous and at other times
very slight. In the latter case we need only a
few connecting-links for the work of interpreta
tion; but where there is great resistance we are
compelled to go through long chains of associ
ations, which carry us far from the initial idea,
and on the way we have to overcome all the
difficulties of professedly critical objections to
associations arising. That which we encoun
tered as resistance in the work of interpretation
we now meet again as the censorship in the
dream-work: the resistance is simply the cen
sorship objectified; it proves to us that the
power of the censorship is not exhausted in
effecting distortion, being thereby extinguished,
but that the censorship remains as a permanent
institution, the object of which is to maintain
the distortion when once it has been achieved.
Moreover, just as the strength of the resist
ance encountered during interpretation varies
with each element, so too the degree of distor
tion effected by the censorship is different for
each element of a whole dream. A comparison
of the manifest and the latent dream shows
that
certain latent elements are completely
eliminated, others more or less modified, and
others again appear in the manifest dreamcontent unaltered or perhaps even intensified.
Our purpose, however, was to find out which
are the tendencies exercising the censorship and
upon which tendencies it is exercised. Now this
question, which is fundamental for the under
standing of dreams and perhaps of human life
altogether; is easy to answer when we.survey

[505a]
502
SlGMUND
the series of dreams which we have succeeded
in interpreting. The tendencies which exercise
the censorship are those which are acknowl
edged by the waking judgment of the dreamer
and with which he feels himself to be at one.
You may be sure that when you repudiate any
correctly found interpretation of a dream of
your own,you do so from the same motives as
cause the censorship to be exercised and dis^
tortion effected, and make interpretation nec
essary. Consider the dream of our lady of
fifty: her dream, althoughit had not been in
terpreted,struckher as shocking and shewould
have been even more outraged if Dr. von HugHellmuth had told her something of its unmis
takable meaning; it was just this attitude of
condemnation which caused the offensive pas
sages in the dream to be replaced by a murmur.
Those tendencies against which the dreamcensorship is directed must next be described
from the point of view of this inner critical
standard. When we do this, we can only say
that they are invariably of an objectionable na
ture, offensive from the ethical, •- aesthetic or
social point of view, things about which we do
not dare to think at all, or think of only with
abhorrence. Above all are these censored wishes*
which in dreams are expressed in a distorted
fashion, manifestations of a boundless and
ruthless egoism; for the dreamer's own ego
makes its appearance in every dream, and plays
the principal part, even if it knows how to
disguise itself completely as far as the manifest
content is concerned. This sacro egoismo of
dreams is certainly not unconnected with the
attitude of mind essential to sleep: the with
drawal of interest from the whole outside world.
The ego which has discarded all ethical
bonds feels itself at one with all the demands
of the sexual impulse, those which have long
been condemned by our aesthetic training and
those which are contrary to all the restraints
imposed by morality. The striving for pleasure
*—the libido, as we say—chooses its objects
unchecked by any inhibition, preferring indeed
those which are forbidden: not merely the wife
of another man, but, above all, the incestuous
objects of choice which by common consent
humanity holds sacred--the mother and the
sister of men, the father and the brother of
women. (Even the dream of our fifty-year-old
lady is an incestuous one, the libido being un
mistakably directed towards the son.) Desires
which we believe alien to human nature show
themselves powerful enough to give
rise to
dreams. Hate, too, rages unrestrainedly; wishes

[505b]
Freud
for revenge, and death-wishes, against those
who in life are nearest and dearest—parents,
brothers
and sisters,
husband
or
wife, the
dreamer's own children—are by no means un
common. These censored wishes seem to rise
up from a veritable hell; when we know their
meaning, it seems to us in our waking moments
as if no censorship of them could be severe
enough. Dreams themselves, however, are not
to blame for this evil content; you surely have
not forgotten that their harmless, nay, useful,
function is to protect sleep from disturbance.
Depravity does not lie in the nature of dreams;
in fact, you know that there are dreams which
can be recognized as gratifying justifiable de
sires and urgent bodily needs. It is true that
there is no
distortion in these dreams, but
then there is no need for it, they can perform
their function without offending the ethical and
aesthetic tendencies of
the ego. Remember,
too, that the degree of distortion is proportion
ate to two factors: on the one hand, the more
shocking the wish that must be censored, the
greater will be the distortion; but it is also
great in proportion as the demands of the cen
sorship are severe. Hence in a strictly brought
up and prudish young girl, a rigid censorship
will distort dream-excitations which we medi
cal men would have recognized as permissible
and harmless libidinous desires, and which the
dreamer herself would judge in the same way
ten years later.
Besides, we are still not nearly far enough
advanced to allow ourselves to be outraged at
the result of our work of interpretation. I
think we still do not understand it properly;
but first of all it is incumbent upon us to
secure it against certain possible attacks. It is
not at all difficult to detect weak points in it.
Our interpretations were based on hypotheses
which we adopted earlier: that there really!Is
some meaning in dreams; that the idea of
mental processes being unconscious for a time,
which was first arrived at through hypnotic
sleep, may be applied also to normal sleep; and
that all associations are subject to determina
tion. Now if, reasoning from these hypotheses,
we had obtained plausible results in our dreaminterpretation we should have been justified in
concluding that these hypotheses were correct.
But what if these discoveries are of the kind
I have described? In that case, surely it seems
natural to say: "These results are impossibly
absurd, at the very least highly improbable, so*
there must have been something wrong about
the hypotheses. Either the dream is, after alii

[506a]
General Introduction
not a mental phenomenon, or there is nothing
which is unconscious in our normal condition,
or there is a flaw somewhere in our technique.
Is it not simpler and more satisfactory to as
sume this than to accept all the abominable
conclusions which we profess to have deduced
from our hypotheses?"
Both! It is both simpler and more satisfac
tory, but not on that account necessarily more
correct. Let us give ourselves time: the matter
is not yet ripe for judgment. First of all, we
can make the case against our interpretations
even stronger. The fact that our results are so
unpleasant and repellent would not perhaps
weigh so very heavily with us; a stronger argu
ment is the emphatic and well-grounded repu
diation
by dreamers of the wish-tendencies
which we try to foist upon them after inter
preting their dreams. "What," says one, "you
want to prove to me from my dream that I
grudge the money I have spent on my sister's
dowry and my brother's education? But it is
out of the question; I spend my whole time
working for my brothers and sisters and my
only interest in life is to do my duty by them,
as, beingthe eldest,I promised our deadmother
I would." Or a woman says: "I am supposed
to wish that my husband were dead? Really
that is outrageous nonsense! Not only is our
married life very happy, though perhaps you
won't believe that, but if he died I should lose
everything I possessin the world." Or someone
else will reply: "Do you mean to suggest that
I entertain sexual desires towards my sister?
The thing is ludicrous; she is nothing to me;
we get on badly with one another, and for
years I have not exchanged a word with her."
We still might not be much impressed if these
dreamers neither admitted nor denied the tend
encies attributed to them; we might say that
these are just the things of which they are
quite unconscious. But when they detect in
their own minds the exact opposite of such a
wish as is interpreted to them, and when they
can prove to us by their whole conduct in life
that the contrary desire predominates, surely
we must be nonplussed. Is it not about time
now for us to discard our whole work of dreaminterpretation as something which has led to a
reductio ad absurdum?
No, not even now. Even this stronger argu
ment falls to pieces when subjected to a critical
attack. Assuming that unconscious tendencies
do exist in mental life, the fact that the op
posite tendencies predominate in conscious life
goesto prove nothing. Perhaps there is roomin

[506b]
to Psycho-Analysis
s°3
the mind for opposite tendencies, for contra
dictions, existing side by side; indeed, possibly
the very predominance of the one tendency
conditions the unconscious nature of the op
posite.
So
the
first
objections
raised
only
amount to the statement that the results of
dream-interpretation are not
simple and are
very disagreeable. To the first charge we may
reply that, however much enamoured of sim
plicity you may be, you cannot thereby solve
one of the problems of dreams; you have to
make up your mind at the outset to accept the
fact of complicated relations. And, as regards
the second point, you are manifestly wrong in
taking the fact that something pleases or re
pels yourself as the motive for a scientific judg
ment. What does it matter if you do find the
results of dream-interpretation unpleasant, or
even mortifying and repulsive? Qa n'empeche
pas d'exister1—as I, when a young doctor,
heard my chief, Charcot, say in a similar case.
We must be humble and put sympathies and
antipathies honourably in the background if we
would learn to know reality in this world. If
a physicist could prove to you that organic
life on the earth was bound to become extinct
before long, would you venture to say to him
also: "That cannot be so; I dislike the prospect
too much." I think you would say nothing until
another physicist came along and convicted the
first of a mistake in his premises or his calcu
lations. If you repudiate whatever is distasteful
to you, you are repeating the mechanism of a
dream structure rather than understanding and
mastering it.
Perhaps, then, you will undertake to over
look the offensive nature of the censored dreamwishes and will fall back upon the argument
that it is surely very improbable that we ought
to concede so large a part in the human consti
tution to what is evil. But do your own experi
ences justify you in this statement? I will say
nothing of how you may appear in your own
eyes, but have you met with so much goodwill
in your superiors and rivals, so much chivalry
in your enemies and so little envy amongst
your acquaintances, that you feel it incumbent
on you to protest against the idea of the part
played by egoistic baseness in human nature?
Do you not know how uncontrolled and un
reliable the average human being is in all that
concerns sexual life? Or are you ignorant of the
fact that all the excesses and- aberrations of
which we dream at night are crimes actually
committed every day by men who are wide
1 It won't kill you.—Ed.

[507a]
504
Sigmund Freud
awake? What does psycho-analysis do in this
connection but confirm the old saying of Plato
that the good are those who content themselves
with dreaming of what others, the wicked, ac
tually do?
And now look away from individuals to the
great war still devastating Europe: think of
the colossal brutality, cruelty and mendacity
which is now allowed to spread itself over the
civilized world. Do you really believe that a
handful of unprincipled place-hunters and cor
rupters of men would have succeeded in letting
loose all this latent evil, if the millions of their
followers were not also guilty? Will you ven
ture, even in these circumstances, to break a
lance for the exclusion of evil from the mental
constitution of humanity?
You will accuse me of taking a one-sided
view of war, and tell me that it has also called
out all that is finest and most noble in man
kind, heroism, self-sacrifice, and public spirit.
That is true; but do not now commit the in
justice,
from
which
psycho-analysis has
so
often suffered, of reproaching it that it denies
one thing because it affirms another. It is no
part of our intention to deny the nobility in
human nature, nor have we ever done anything
to disparage its value. On the contrary, I show
you not only the evil wishes which are censored
but also the censorship which suppresses them
and makes them unrecognizable. We dwell up
on the evil in human beings with the greater
emphasis only because others deny it, thereby
making the mental life of mankind not indeed
better, but incomprehensible. If we give up the
one-sided ethical valuation then, we are sure to
find the truer formula for the relation of evil
to good in human nature.
Here the matter rests. We need not give up
the results of our work of dream-interpretation,
even
though
we
cannot
fail
to
find
them
strange. Perhaps later we shall be able to come
nearer to understanding them by another path.
For the present let us hold fast to this: dreamdistortion is due to the censorship exercised,
by certain recognized tendencies of the ego,
over desires of an offensive character which
stir in us at night during sleep. Obviously,
when we ask ourselves why it is just at night
that they appear and what is the origin of these
reprehensible wishes, we find that there is still
much to investigate and many questions to
answer.
It would, however, be wrong if we neglected
to give due prominence at this point to another
result of these investigations. The dream-wishes

[507b]
which would disturb our sleep are unknown to
us; we first learn about them by dream-inter
pretation; they are therefore to be designated
unconscious at
the moment in the sense in
which we have used the term. But we must
recognize that they are also more than un
conscious at the moment;
for
the dreamer
denies them, as we have so frequently found,
even after he has learnt of them through the
interpretation of his dream. Here we have a
repetition of the case which we first met with
when interpreting the slip of the tongue "hic
cough," where the after-dinner speaker indig
nantly assured us that neither then nor at any
time had he been conscious of any feeling of
disrespect towards his chief. We ventured even
then to doubt the value of this assertion and
assumed instead that the speaker was perma
nently ignorant of the existence of this feeling
within him. We meet with the same situation
every time we interpret a dream in which there
is a high degree of distortion, and this lends an
added significance to our conception. We are
now prepared to assume that there are proc
esses and tendencies in mental life, of which
we know nothing; have known nothing; have,
for a very long time, perhaps even never, known
anything about at all. This gives the term un
conscious a fresh meaning for us: the qualifica
tion at the moment or temporary is seen to be
no essential attribute, the term may also mean
permanently unconscious, not merely latent at
the moment. You see that later on we shall
have to discuss this point further.
TENTH LECTURE
Symbolism in Dreams
We have found out that the distortion in
dreams which hinders our understanding of
them is due to the activities of a censorship,
directed against the unacceptable, unconscious
wish-impulses. But of course we have not as
serted that the censorship is the only factor
responsible for the distortion, and as a matter
of fact a further study of dreams leads to the
discovery that there are yet other causes con
tributing to this effect; that is as much as to
say, if the censorship were eliminated we should
nevertheless be unable to understand dreams,
nor would the manifest dream be identical with
the latent dream-thoughts.
This other cause of the obscurity of dreams,
this additional contribution to distortion, is
revealed by our becoming aware of a gap in
our technique. I have already admitted to you

[508a]
General Introduction
that there are occasions when persons being
analysed really have no associations to single
elements in their dreams. To be sure, this does
not happen so often as they declare that it
does; in very many instances the association
may yet be elicited by perseverance; but still
there remain a certain number of cases where
association fails altogether or, if something is
finally extorted, it is not what we need. If this
happens during psycho-analytic treatment, it
has a certain significance which does not con
cern us here; but it also occurs in the course
of interpretation of dreams in normal people,
or when we are interpreting our own. When we
are convinced, in such circumstances, that no
amount of pressing is of any use, we finally
discover that this unwelcome contingency reg
ularly presents itself where special dreamelements are in question; and we begin to rec
ognize the operation of some new principle,
whereas at first we thought we had only come
across an exceptional case in which our tech
nique had failed.
In this way it comes about that we try to
interpret these silent elements, and attempt to
translate them by drawing upon our own re
sources. It cannot fail to
strike us that we
arrive at a satisfactory meaning in every in
stance in which we venture on this substitution,
whereas the dream remains meaningless and
disconnected as long as we do not resolve to
use this method. The accumulation of many
exactly similar instances then affords us the
required certainty, our experiment havingbeen
tried at first with considerable diffidence.
I am presentingall this somewhat in outline,
but that is surely allowable for purposes of
instruction, nor is it falsified by so doing, but
merely made simpler.
We arrive in this way at constant transla
tions for a series of dream-elements, just as in
popular books on dreams we find such trans
lations for everything that occurs in dreams.
You will not have forgotten that, when we em
ploy the method of free association, such con
stant substitutions for dream-elements never
make their appearance.
Now you will at once say that this mode of
interpretation seems to you far more uncertain
and open to criticism than even the former
method of free association. But there is still
something more to be said: when we have
collected from actual experience a sufficient
number of such constant translations, we even
tually realize that we could actually have filled
in these portions of the interpretation from our

[508b]
to Psycho-Analysis
505
own knowledge, and that they really could
have been understood without using the dream
er's associations. How it is that we are bound
to know their meaning is a matter which will be
dealt with in the second half of our discussion.
We call a constant relation of this kind be
tween a dream-element and its translation a
symbolic one, and the dream-element itself a
symbol of the unconscious dream-thought. You
will remember that some time ago, when we
were examining the different relations which
may exist between dream-elements and the
thoughts
proper underlying them,
I
distin
guished three relations: substitution of the part
for the whole, allusion, and imagery. I told you
then that there was a fourth possible relation,
but I did not tell you what it was. This fourth
relation is the symbolic, which I am now intro
ducing; there are connected with it certain
very interesting points for discussion, to which
we will turn attention before setting forth our
special observations on this subject. Symbolism
is perhaps the most remarkable part of our
theory of dreams.
First of all:
since the relation between a
symbol and the idea symbolized is an invari
able one, the latter being as it were a transla
tion of the former, symbolism does in some
measure realize the ideal of both ancient and
popular dream-interpretation, one from which
we have moved very far
in our technique.
Symbols make it possible for us in certain cir
cumstances to interpret a dream without ques
tioning the dreamer, who indeed in any case
can tell us nothing about the symbols. If the
symbols commonly appearing in dreams are
known, and also the personality of the dreamer,
the conditions under which he lives, and the
impressions in his mind after which his dream
occurred, we are often in a position to interpret
it straightaway; to translate it at sight, as it
were.
Such a feat flatters the vanity of the
interpreter and impresses the dreamer; it is
in pleasingcontrast to the laborious method of
questioning the latter. But do not let this lead
you away: it is no part of our task to perform
tricks nor is that method of
interpretation
which is based on a knowledge of symbolism
one which can replace, or even compare with,
that of free association. It is complementary
to this latter, and the results it yields are only
useful when applied in connection with the
latter. As regards our knowledge of the dream
er's mental situation, moreover, you must re
flect that you have not only to interpret dreams
of peoplewhom you know well; that, as a rule,

[509a]
So6
Sigmund Freud
you know nothing of the events of the previous
day which stimulated the dream; and that the
associations of the person analysed are the very
source from which we obtain our knowledge of
what we call the mental situation.
Further, it is especially remarkable, particu
larly with reference to certain considerations
upon which we shall touch later, that the most
strenuous opposition has manifested itself again
here, over this question of the existence of a
symbolic relation between the dream and the
unconscious. Even persons of judgment and
standing, who in other respects have gone a
long way with psycho-analysis, have renounced
their adherence at this point. This behaviour
is the more remarkable when we remember two
things: first, that symbolism is not peculiar to
dreams, nor exclusively characteristic of them;
and, in the second place, that the use of sym
bolism in dreams was not one of the discoveries
of psycho-analysis, although this science has
certainly not been wanting in surprising dis
coveries. If we must ascribe priority in this
field to anyone in modern times, the discoverer
must be recognized in the philosopher K. A.
Schemer (1861); psycho-analysis has confirmed
his discovery, although modifying it in certain
important respects.
Now you will wish to hear something about
the nature of dream-symbolism and will want
some examples. I will gladly tell you what I
know, but I confess that our knowledge is less
full than we could wish.
The symbolic relation is essentially that of
a comparison, but not any kind of comparison.
We must suspect that this comparison is sub
ject to particular conditions, although we can
not say what these conditions are. Not every
thing with which an object or an occurrence
can be compared appears in dreams as sym
bolic of it, and, on the other hand, dreams do
not employ symbohsm for anything and every
thing, but only for particular elements of latent
dream-thoughts; there are thus limitations in
both directions. We must admit also that we
cannot at present assign quite definite limits to
our conception of a. symbol; for it tends to
merge into substitution, representation, etc.,
and even approaches closely to allusion. In one
set of symbols the underlying comparison may
be easily apparent, but there are others in
which we have to look about for the common
factor, the tertium comparationis contained in
the supposed comparison. Further reflection
may then reveal it to us, or on the other hand
it may remain definitely hidden fromus. Again,

[509b]
if the symbol is really a comparison, it is re
markable that this comparison is not exposed
by the process of free association,and also that
the dreamer knows nothing about it, but makes
use of it unawares; nay, more, that he is ac
tually unwilling to recognize it
when it is
brought to his notice. So you see that the sym
bolic relation is a comparisonof a quite pecul
iar kind, the nature of whichis as yet not fully
clear to us. Perhaps some indication will be
found later which will throw some light upon
this unknown quantity.
The number of things which are represented
symbolically in dreams is not great. The hu
man body as a whole,parents, children, brothers
and sisters, birth, death, nakedness—and one
thing more. The only typical, that is to say,
regularly occurring, representation of the hu
man form as a wholeis that of a house, as was
recognized by Schemer, who even wanted to
attribute to this symbol an overwhelming sig
nificance which is not really due to it. People
have dreams of climbing down the front of a
house, with feelings sometimes of pleasureand
sometimes of dread. When the walls are quite
smooth, the house means a man; when there
are ledges and balconies which can be caught
hold of, a woman. Parents appear in dreams as
emperor and empress, king and queen or other
exalted personages; in this respect the dream
attitude is highly dutiful. Children and broth
ers and sisters are less tenderly treated, being
symbolized by little animals or vermin. Birth
is almost invariably represented by some refer
ence to water: either we are falling into water
or clambering out of it, saving someone from
it or being saved by them, i.e., the relation
between mother and child is symbolized. For
dying we have setting out upon a journey or
travelling by train, while the state of death is
indicated by various obscure and, as it were,
timid allusions; clothesand uniforms 5tand for
nakedness. You see that here the dividing line
between the symbolic and the allusive kinds ofi
representation tends to disappear.
.j
In comparison with the poverty of this enu
meration, it cannot fail to strike us that objects
and matters belonging to another range of
ideas are represented by a remarkably rich
symbolism. I am speaking of what pertains to
the sexual life—the genitals, sexual processes
and intercourse. An overwhelming majority of
symbols in dreams are sexual symbols. A curi
ous disproportion arises thus, for the matters
dealt with are few in number, whereas the
symbols for themare extraordinarily numerous,

[510a]
General Introduction
so that each of these few things can be ex
pressed by many symbols practically equiva
lent. When they are interpreted, therefore, the
result of this peculiarity givesuniversal offense,
for, in contrast to the multifarious forms of its
representation in dreams, the interpretation of
the symbols is very monotonous. This is dis
pleasing to everyone who comes to know of it:
but how can we help it?
As this is the first time in the course of these
lectures that I have touched upon the sexual
life, I oweyou someexplanationof the manner
in whichI proposeto treat this subject. Psycho
analysis sees no occasion for concealments or
indirect allusions, and does not think it neces
sary to be ashamed of concerning itself with
material so important;
it is of the opinion
that it is right and properto calleverything by
its true name, hoping in this way the more
easily to avoid disturbing suggestions. The fact
that I am speaking to a mixed audience can
make no
difference in
this. No science can
be treated in usum delphini, or in a manner
adapted to school-girls; the women present, by
appearing in this lecture-room, have tacitly
expressed their desire to be regarded on the
same footing as the men.
The male genital organ is symbolically rep
resented in dreams in many different ways,
with most of which the common idea under
lying the comparison is easily apparent. In the
first place,^ the sacrednumber three is symbolic
of the whole male genitalia. Its more conspicu
ous and, to both sexes, more interesting part,
the penis, is symbolized primarily by objects
which resemble it in form, being long and up
standing, such as sticks, umbrellas, poles, trees
and the like; also by objects which, like the
thing symbolized, have the property of pene
trating, and consequently of injuring, the body,
—that is to say, pointed weapons of all sorts:
knives, daggers, lances, sabres; fire-arms are
similarly used: guns, pistols and revolvers,
these last being a very appropriate symbol on
account of their shape. In the anxiety-dreams
of young girls, pursuit by a man armed with
a knife or rifle plays a great part. This is per
haps the most frequently occurring dreamsymbol: you can now easily translate it for
yourselves. The substitution of the male organ
by objects from which water flows is again
easily comprehensible: taps, watering-cans, pr
springs; and by other objects which are capa
ble of elongation, such as pulley lamps, pencils
which slide in and out of a sheath, and so on.
Pencils, penholders, nail-files, hammers and

[510b]
to Psycho-Analysis
5°7
other implements are undoubtedly male sexual
symbols, based on an idea of the male organ
which is equally easily perceived.
The peculiar property of this member of
being able to raise itself upright in defiance of
the law of gravity, part of the phenomenon of
erection, leads to symbolic representation by
means of balloons, aeroplanes, and, just re
cently, Zeppelins. But dreams have another,
much more impressive, way
of symbolizing
erection; they make the organ of sex into the
essential part of the whole person, so that the
dreamer himself flies. Do not be upset by hear
ing that dreams of flying, which we all know
and which are often so beautiful, must be in
terpreted as dreams of general sexual excite
ment, dreams of erection. One psycho-analytic
investigator, P. Federn, has established the
truth of this interpretation beyond doubt; but,
besides this, Mourly Void, a man highly praised
for his sober judgment, who carried out the
experiments with artificial postures of the arms
and legs, and whose theories were really widely
removed from those of psycho-analysis (indeed
he may have known nothing about it), was led
by his own investigations to the same conclu
sion. Nor must you think to object to this on
the ground that women can also have dreams
of flying; you should rather remind yourselves
that the purpose of dreams is wish-fulfilment,
and that the wish to be a man is frequently met
with in women, whether they are conscious of
it or not. Further, no one familiar with anat
omy will be misled by supposing that it is im
possible for a woman to realize this wish by
sensations similar to those of a man, for the
woman's sexual organs include a small one
which resembles the penis, and this little organ,
the clitoris, does actually play during child
hood and in the years before sexual intercourse
the same part as the large male organ.
Male sexual symbols less easy to understand
are certain reptiles and fishes: above all, the
famous symbol of the serpent. Why hats and
cloaks are used in the same way is certainly
difficult to divine, but their symbolic meaning
is quite unquestionable. Finally, it may be
asked whether the representation of the male
organby someother member, such as the hand
or the foot, may be termed symbolic. I think
the context in which this is wont to occur, and
the female counterparts with which we meet,
force this conclusion upon us.
The female genitalia are symbolically repre
sented by all such objects as share with them
the property of enclosing a space or are capa-

[511a]
508
Sigmund Freud
ble of acting as receptacles: such as pits, hol
lows and caves, and also jars and bottles, and
boxes of all sorts and sizes, chests, coffers,
pockets, and so forth. Ships too come into this
category. Many symbols refer rather to the
uterus than to the other genital organs: thus
cupboards, stoves and, above all, rooms. Room
symbolism here links up with that of houses,
whilst doors and gates represent the genital
opening. Moreover, material of different kinds
is a symbol of woman—wood, paper, and ob
jects made of these, such as tables and books.
From the animal world, snails and mussels at
any rate must be cited as unmistakable female
symbols; of the parts of the body, the mouth
as a representation of the genital opening, and,
amongst buildings, churches and chapels are
symbols of a woman. You see that all these
symbols are not equally easy to understand.
The breasts must be included amongst the
organs of sex; these, as well as the larger hemi
spheres of the female body, are represented by
apples, peaches and fruit in general. The pubic
hair in both sexes is indicated in dreams by
woods and thickets. The complicated topogra
phy of the female sexual organs accounts for
their often being represented by a landscape
with rocks, woods and water, whilst the im
posing mechanism of the male sexual apparatus
lends it to symbolization by all kinds of com
plicated and indescribable machinery.
Yet another noteworthy symbol of the fe
male genital organ is a jewel case, whilst jewel
and treasure are used also in dreams to repre
sent the beloved person,1 and sweetmeats fre
quently stand for sexual pleasures. Gratification
derived from a person's own genitals is indi
cated by any kind of play, including playing the
piano. The symbolic representation of onanism
by sliding or gliding and also by pulling off a
branch is very typical. A particularly remark
able dream-symbol is the falling out or extrac
tion of teeth; the primary significance of this is
certainly castration as a punishment for onan
ism. Special representations of sexual inter
course are less frequent in dreams than we
should expect after all this, but we may men
tion in this connection rhythmical activities
such as dancing, riding and climbing, and also
experiencing some violence, e.g.,being run over.
To these may be added certain manual occu
pations, and of course being threatened with
weapons.
You must not imagine/that these symbols are
either employed or translated quite simply: on
1 Cf. sweetheart, sweetest.—Tr.

[511b]
all sides we meet with what we do not expect.
For instance, it seems hardly credible that
there is often no sharp discrimination of the
different sexes in these symbolic representa
tions. Many symbols stand for sexual organs
in general, whether male or female:
for in
stance, a little child, or a little son or daughter.
At another time a symbol which is generally a
male one may be used to denote the female
sexual organ, or vice versa. This is incompre
hensible until we have acquired some knowl
edge of the development of conceptions about
sexuality amongst human beings. In many cases
this ambiguity of the symbols may be apparent
rather than real; and moreover, the most strik
ing amongst them, such as weapons, pockets
and chests, are never used bisexually in this
way.
I will now give a brief account, beginning
with the symbols themselves instead of with
the objects symbolized, to show you from what
spheres the sexual symbols have for the most
part been derived, and I will add a few re
marks relating particularly to those in which
the attribute in common with the thing sym
bolized is hard to detect. An instance of an ob
scure symbol of this kind is the hat, or per
haps head-coverings in general; this usually has
a masculine significance, though occasionally a
feminine one. In the same way a cloak be
tokens a man, though perhaps sometimes with
out special reference to the organs of sex. It is
open to you to ask why this should be so. A
tie, being an object which hangs down and is
not worn by women is clearly a male symbol,
whilst underlinen and linen in general stands
for the female. Clothes and uniforms, as we
have heard, represent nakedness or the human
form; shoes and slippers symbolize the female
genital organs. Tables and wood we have men
tioned as being puzzling, but nevertheless cer
tain, female symbols; the act of mounting lad
ders, steep places or stairs is indubitably sym
bohc of sexual intercourse. On closer reflection
we shall notice that the rhythmic character of
this climbing is the point in common between
the two, and perhaps also the accompanying
increase in excitation—the shortening of the
breath as the climber ascends.
We have already recognized that landscapes
represent the female sexual organs; mountains
and rocks are symbols of the male organ; gar
dens, a frequently occurring symbol of the fe
male genitalia. Fruitstands for the breasts, not
for a child. Wild animals denote human beings

[512a]
General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis
509
whose senses are excited, and, hence, evil im
pulses or passions. Blossoms and flowers repre
sent the female sexual organs, more particular
ly, in virginity. In this connection you will
recollect that the blossoms are really the sex
ual organs of plants.
We already know how rooms are used sym
bolically. This representation may be extended,
so that windows and doors (entrances and ex
its from rooms) come to mean the openings of
the body; the fact of rooms being open or
closed also accords with this symbolism: the
key, which opens them, is certainly a male
symbol.
This is some material for a study of dreamsymbolism. It is not complete, and could be
both extended and made deeper. However, I
think it will seem to you more than enough;
perhaps you may dislike it. You will ask: "Do
I then really live in the midst of sexual sym
bols? Are all the objects round me,
all the
clothes I wear, all the things I handle, always
sexual symbols and nothing else?" There really
is good reason for surprised questions, and the
first of these would be: How do we profess to
arrive at the meaning of these dream-symbols,
about which the dreamer himself can give us
little or no information.
My answer is that we derive our knowledge
from widely different sources: from fairy tales
and myths, jokes and witticisms, from folk
lore, i.e., from what we know of the manners
and customs, sayings and songs, of different
peoples, and from poetic and colloquial usage
of language. Everywhere in these various fields
the same symbolism occurs, and in many of
them we can understand it without being taught
anything about it. If we consider these various
sources individually, we shall find so many
parallels
to
dream-symbolism
that
we are
bound to be convinced of the correctness of
our interpretations.
The human body is, we said, according to
Schemer frequently symbolized in dreams by a
house; by an extension of this symbolism, win
dows, doors and gates stand for the entrances
to cavities in the body, and the facades may
either be smooth or may have balconies and
ledges to hold on to. The same symbolism is
met with in colloquialisms; for instance, we
speak of a thatch of hair, or a tile hat, or say
of someone that he is not right in the upper
storey. In anatomy, too, we speak of the open
ings of the body as its portals.
We may at first find it surprising that parents
appear in our dreams as kings and emperors

[512b]
and their consorts, but we have a parallel to
this in fairy tales. Does it not begin to dawn
upon us that the many fairy tales which begin
with the words "Once upon a time there were
a king and queen" simply mean: "Once upon a
time there were
a
father and mother"? In
family life the children are sometimes spoken
of jestingly as princes, and the eldest son as the
crown prince. The king himself is called the
father of his people. Again, in some parts, lit
tle children are often playfully spoken of as
little animals, e.g.,in Cornwall, as little toad, or
in Germany as little worm, and, in sympathiz
ing with a child, Germans say poor little worm.
Now let us return to the house symbolism.
When in our dreams we make use of the pro
jections of houses as supports, does that not
suggest a well-known, popular German saying,
with reference to a woman with a markedly de
veloped bust: "She has something for one to
hold on to" (Die hat etwas zum Anhalten),
whilst another colloquialism in the same con
nection is: "She has plenty of wood in front of
her house" (Die hat vied Holz vor dem Hause),
as though our interpretation were to be borne
out by this when we say that wood is a female
maternal symbol.
There is still something to be said on the
subject of wood. It is not easy to see why
wood should have come to represent a woman
or mother, but here a comparison of different
languages may be useful to us. The German
word Holz (wood) is said to be derived from
the same root as the Greek t5X#, which means
stuff, raw material. This would be an instance
of a process which is by no means rare, in that
a general name for material has come finally
to be applied to a particular material only.
Now, in the Atlantic Ocean, there is an island
named Madeira, and this name was given to it
by the Portuguese when they discovered it,
because at that time it was covered with dense
forests; for in Portuguese the word for wood
is madeira. But you cannot fail to notice that
this madeira is merely a modified form of the
Latin materia, which again signifies material in
general. Now materia is derived from mater—
mother, and the material out of which anything
is made may be conceived of as giving birth to
it. So, in the symbolic use of wood to repre
sent woman or mother, we have a survival of
this old idea.
Birth is regularly expressed by some connec
tion with water: we are plunging into or emerg
ing from water, that is to say, we give birth or
are being bom. Now let us not forget that this

[513a]
5*°
Sigmund Freud
symbol has a twofold reference to the actual
facts of evolution. Not only are all land mam
mals, from which the human race itself has
sprung, descended from creatures inhabiting the
water—this is the more remote of the two con
siderations—but also
every single mammal,
every human being, has passed the first phase
of existence in water—that is to say, as an
embryo in the amniotic fluid of the mother's
womb—and thus, at birth, emerged from wa
ter. I do not maintain that the dreamer knows
this; on the other hand, I contend that there is
no need for him to know it. He probably knows
something else from having been told it as a
child, but even this, I will maintain, has con
tributed
nothing
to
symbol-formation.
The
child is told in the nursery that the
stork
brings the babies, but then where does it get
them? Out of a pond or a well—again, out of
the water. One of my patients who had been
told this as a child (a little count, as he was
then) afterwards disappeared for a whole after
noon, and was at last found lying at the edge
of the castle lake, with his little face bent over
the clear water, eagerly gazing to see whether
he could catch sight of the babies at the bottom
of the water.
In the myths of the births of heroes, a com
parative study of which has been made by
0. Rank—the earliest is that of King Sargon of
Akkad, about 2800 B.C.—exposure in water and
rescue from it play a major part. Rank per
ceived that this symbolizes birth in a manner
analogous to that employed in dreams. When
anyone in his dream rescues somebody from
the water, he makes that person into his moth
er, or at any rate a mother; and in mythology,
whoever rescues a child from water confesses
herself to be its real mother. There is a wellknown joke in which an intelligent Jewish boy,
when asked who was the mother of Moses,
answers immediately: "The Princess." He is
told: "No, she only took him out of the water."
"That's what she said," he replies, showing that
he had hit upon the right interpretation of the
myth.
Going away on a journey stands in dreams
for dying; similarly, it is the custom in the
nursery, when a child asks questions as to the
whereabouts of someone who has died and
whom-he misses, to tell him that that person
has "gone away." Here again, I deprecate the
idea that the dream-symbol has its origin in
this evasive reply to the child. The poet uses
the same symbol when he speaks of the other
side as "the undiscovered country from whose

[513b]
bourne no traveller returns." Again, in every
day speech it is quite usual to speak of the "last
journey," and everyone who is acquainted with
ancient rites knows how seriously the idea of a
journey into the land of the dead was taken,
for instance, in ancient Egyptian belief. In
many cases the Book of the Dead survives,
which was given to the mummy, like a Bae
deker, to take with him on the last journey.
Since burial-grounds have been placed at a dis
tance from the houses of the living, the last
journey of the deadhas indeedbecomea reality.
Nor does sexual symbolism belong only to
dreams. You will all know the expression a
baggage as applied contemptuously to a woman,
but perhaps people do not know that they are
using a genital symbol. In the New Testament
we read: "The woman is the weaker vessel."
The sacred writings of the Jews, the style of
which so closely approaches that of poetry, are
full of expressions symbohc of sex, which have
not always been correctly interpreted and the
exegesis of which, e.g., in the Song of Solomon*
has led to many misunderstandings.1 In later
Hebrew literaturethe woman is very frequently
represented by a house, the door standing for
the genital opening; thus a man complains,
whenhe finds a womanno longera virgin, that
"he has found the door open." The symbol
table for a woman also occurs in this litera
ture ; the woman says of her husband "I spread
the table for him, but he overturned it." Lame
children are said to owe their infirmity to the
fact that the man "overturned the table." I
quote here from a treatise by L. Levy in Brunn:
Sexual Symbolism in the Bible and the Talmud.
That ships in dreams signify women is a
belief in which we are supported by the ety
mologists, who assert that ship (Schiff) was
originally the name of an earthen vessel and is
the same word as Schaff (a tub or wooden ves
sel). That an oven stands for a woman or the
mother's womb is an interpretation confirmed
by the Greek story of Periander of Corinth and
his wife Melissa. According to the version of
Herodotus, the tyrant adjured the shade of his
wife, whom he had loved passionately but had
murdered out of jealousy, to tell him some
thing about herself, whereupon the dead woman
identified herself by reminding him that he,
Periander, "had put his bread into a cold oven,"
thus expressing in a disguised form a circum
stance of which everyone else was ignorant. In
the Anthropophyteia, edited by F. S. Kraus,
a work which is an indispensable textbook on
1e. g., Song of Sol. 8. 10.

[514a]
General Introduction
everything concerning the sexual life of differ
ent peoples, we read that in a certain part of
Germany people say of a woman who is de
livered of a child that "her oven has fallen to
pieces." The kindling of fire and everything
connected with this is permeated through and
through with sexual symbolism, the flame al
ways standing for the male organ, and the fire
place or the hearth for the womb of the woman.
If you have chanced to wonder at the fre
quency with which landscapes are used in
dreams to symbolize the female sexual organs,
you may learn from mythologists how large a
part has been played in the ideas and cults of
ancient times by Mother Earth and how the
whole conception of agriculture was determined
by this symbolism. The fact that in dreams a
room represents a woman you may be inclined
to trace to the German colloquialism by which
Frauenzimmer (lit. woman's room) is used for
Frau, that is to say, the human person is rep
resented by the place assigned for her occupa
tion. Similarly we speak of the Porte, meaning
thereby the Sultan and his government, and the
name of the ancient Egyptian ruler, Pharaoh,
merely means great court. (In the ancient Ori
ent the courts between the double gates of the
city were places of assembly, like the market
place in classical times.) But I think this deri
vation is too superficial, and it strikes me as
more probable that the room came to symbol
ize woman on account of its property of enclos
ing within it the human being. We have already
met with the house in this sense; from myth
ology and poetry we may take towns, citadels,
castles and fortresses to be further symbols for
women. It would be easy to decide the point by
reference to the dreams of people who neither
speak nor understand German. Of late years I
have mainly treated foreign patients, and I
think I
recollect that in their dreams rooms
stand in the same way for women, even though
there is no word analogous to our Frauenzim
mer in their language. There are other indica
tions that symbolism may transcend the bound
aries of language, a fact already maintained by
the old dream-investigator, Schubert, in 1862.
Nevertheless, none of my patients were wholly
ignorant of German, so that I must leave this
question to be decided by those analysts who
can collect instances in other countries from
persons who speak only one language.1
Amongst the symbols for the male sexual
organ, there is scarcely one which does not ap
pear in jests, or in vulgar or poetic phrases,
1This is certainly so with English patients.—TR.

[514b]
to Psycho-Analysis
511
especially in the old classical poets. Here, how
ever, we meet not only with such symbols as
occur in dreams but also with new ones, e.g.,
the implements employed in various kinds of
work, first and foremost, the plough.Moreover,
when we come to male symbols, we tread on
very
extensive
and much-contested
ground
which, in order not to waste time, we will avoid.
I should just hke to devote a few remarks to
the one symbol which stands, as it were, by
itself; I refer to the number three. Whether
this number does not in all probability owe its
sacred character to its symbolic significance is
a question which we must leave undecided, but
it seems certain that many tripartite natural
objects, e.g., the clover-leaf, are used in coatsof-arms and as emblems on account of their
symbolism. The so-called "French" lily with its
three parts and, again, the trisceles, that curious
coat-of-arms of two such widely separated is
lands as Sicily and the Isle of Man (a figure
consisting of three bent legs projecting from a
central point), are supposed to be merely dis
guised forms of the male sexual organ, images
of which were believed in ancient times to be
the most powerful means of warding off evil in
fluences (apotropaea)', connected with this is
the fact that the lucky charms of our own time
may all be easily recognized as genital or sexual
symbols. Let us consider a collection of such
charms in the form of tiny silver pendants: a
four-leaved clover, a pig, a mushroom, a horse
shoe, a ladder and a chimney-sweep. The fourleaved clover has taken the place of that with
three leaves, which was really more appropriate
for the purpose of symbolism; the pig is an
ancient symbol of fruitfulness; the mushroom
undoubtedly symbolizes the penis, there are
mushrooms which derive their name from their
unmistakable resemblance to that organ (Phal
lus impudicus); the horseshoe reproduces the
contour of the female genital opening; while
the chimney-sweep with his ladder belongs to
this company because his occupation is one
which is vulgarly compared with sexual inter
course. fCf. Anthropophyteia.) We have learnt
to recognize his ladder in dreams as a sexual
symbol: expressions in language show what a
completely sexual significance the word steigen
(to mount) has, as in the phrases: Den Frauen
nachsteigen (to run after women) and ein alter
Steiger (an old roue). So, in French, where the
word for step is la marche, we find the quite
analogous expression for an old rake: un vieux
marcheur. Probably the fact that with many of
the larger animals sexual intercourse necessi-

[515a]
512
Sigmund
tates a mounting or climbing upon the female
has something to do with this association of
ideas.
Pulling off a branch to symbolize onanism is
not only in agreement with vulgar descriptions
of that act, but also has far-reaching parallels
in mythology. But especially remarkable is the
representation of onanism, or rather of castra
tion as the punishment for onanism, by the
falling-out or extraction of teeth; for we find
in folk-lore a counterpart to this which could,
only be known to very few dreamers. I think
that there can be no doubt that circumcision, a
practice common
to so many peoples, is an
equivalent and replacement of castration. And
recently we have learnt that certain aboriginal
tribes in
Australia practice circumcision as
a rite to mark the attaining of puberty (at
the celebration of the boy's coming of age),
whilst other tribes living quite near have sub
stituted for this practice that of knocking out
a tooth.
I will end my account with these examples.
They are only examples; we know more about
this subject and you can imagine how much
richer and more interesting a collection of this
sort might be made, not by dilettanti like our
selves, but by real experts in mythology, an
thropology, philology and folk-lore. We are
forced to certain conclusions, which cannot be
exhaustive, but nevertheless will give us plenty
to think about.
In the first place, we are confronted with the
fact that the dreamer has at his command a
symbolic mode of expression of which he knows
nothing, and does not even recognize, in his
waking life. This is as amazing as if you made
the discovery that your housemaid understood
Sanscrit, though you know that she was born in
a Bohemian village and had never learnt that
language. It is not easy to bring this fact into
line with our views on psychology. We can only
say that the dreamer's knowledge of symbolism
is unconscious and belongs to his unconscious
mental life, but even this assumption does not
help us much. Up till now we have only had to
assume the existence of unconscious tendencies
which are temporarily or permanently unknown
to us; but now the question is a bigger one and
we have actually to
believe in
unconscious
knowledge, thought-relations, and comparisons
between different objects, in virtue of which
one idea can constantly be substituted for an
other. These comparisons are not instituted
afresh every time, but are ready to hand, per
fect for all time;
this we infer from their

[515b]
Freud
identity in different persons, even probably in
spite of linguistic differences.
Whence is our knowledge of this symbolism
derived? The usages of speech cover only a
small part of it, whilst the manifold parallels
in other fields are for the most part unknown to
the dreamer; we ourselves had to collate them
laboriously in the first instance.
In the second place, these symbolic relations
are not peculiar to the dreamer or to the dreamwork by which they are expressed, for we have
discovered that the same
symbolism is em
ployed in myths and fairy tales, in popular say
ings and songs, in colloquial speech and poetic
phantasy. The province of symbolism is ex
traordinarily wide: dream-symbolism is only a
small part of it; it would not even be expedient
to attack the whole problem from the side of
dreams. Many of the symbols commonly oc
curring
elsewhere either do not
appear in
dreams at all or appear very seldom; on the
other hand, many of the dream-symbols are
not met with in every other department, but, as
you have seen, only here and there. We get the
impression that here we have to do with an
ancient but obsolete mode of expression, of
which different fragments have survived in dif
ferent fields, one here only, another there only,
a third in various spheres perhaps in slightly
different forms. At this point I am reminded of
the phantasy of a very interesting insane pa
tient, who had imagined a primordial language
(Grundsprache) of which all these symbols
were survivals.
In the third place, it must strike you that
the symbolism occurring in the other fields I
have named is by no means confined to sexual
themes, whereas in dreams the symbols are al
most exclusively used to represent sexual ob
jects and relations. This again is hard to ac
count for. Are we to suppose that symbols
originally
of
sexual
significance were later
employed differently and that perhaps the de
cline from symbolic to other modes of repre
sentation is connected with this? It is obviously
impossible to answer these questions by dealing
only with dream-symbolism; all we can do is
to hold fast to the supposition that there is a
specially close relation between true symbols
and sexuality.
An important clue in this
connection has
recently been given to us in the view expressed
by a philologist (H. Sperber, of Upsala, who
works independently of psycho-analysis), that
sexual needs have had the largest share in the
origin and development of language. He says

[516a]
that the first sounds uttered were a means of
communication, and of summoning the sexual
partner, and that, in the later development, the
elements of speech were used as an accompani
ment to the different kinds of work carried on
by primitive man. This work was performed
by associated efforts, to the sound of rhythmi
cally repeated utterances, the effect of which
was to transfer a sexual interest to the work.
Primitive man thus made his work agreeable,
so to speak, by treating it as the equivalent of
and substitute for sexual activities. The word
uttered during the communal work had there
fore two meanings, the one referring to the
sexual act, the other to the labour which had
come to be equivalent to it. In time the word
was dissociated from its sexual significance and
its application confined to the work. Genera
tions later the same thing happened to a new
word with a sexual signification,which was then
applied to a new form of work. In this way a
number of root-words arose which were all of
sexualoriginbut had all lost their sexualmean
ing. If the statement here outlined be correct,
a possibility at least of understanding dreamsymbolism opens out before us. We should
comprehend why it is that in dreams, which
retain something of these primitive conditions,
there is such an extraordinarily large number
of sexualsymbols; and why weapons and tools
in general stand for the male, and materials
and thingsworked on for the female. The sym
bolic relations would then be the survival of
the old identity in words; things which once
had the same name as the genitalia could now
appear in dreams as symbolizing them.
Further, our parallels to dream-symbolism
may assist you to appreciate what it is in psy
cho-analysis which makes it a subject of gen
eral interest, in a way that was not possible to
either psychology or psychiatry; psycho-ana
lytic work is so closely intertwined with so
many other branches of science, the investiga
tion of which gives promise of the most valua
ble
conclusions:
with mythology, philology,
folk-lore, folk psychology and the study of
religion. You will not be surprised to hear that
a publication has sprung from psycho-analytic
soil, of which the exclusive object is to foster
these relations. I refer to Imago, first pub
lished in 1912 and edited by Hans Sachs and
Otto Rank. In its relation to all these other
subjects, psycho-analysis has in the first in
stance given rather than received. True, analy
sis reaps the advantage of receiving confirma
tion of its own results, seemingly so strange,

[516b]
General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis
513
again in other fields; but on the whole it is
psycho-analysis which supplies the technical
methods and the points of view, the applica
tion of which
is to prove fruitful in these
other provinces. The mental life of the human
individual yields, under psycho-analytic investi
gation, explanations which solve many a riddle
in the life of the masses of mankind or at any
rate can show these problems in their true light.
I have still given you no idea of the circum
stances in which we may arrive at the deepest
insight into that hypothetical primordial lan
guage, or of the province in which it is for the
most part retained. As long as you do not know
this you cannot appreciate the true significance
of the whole subject. I refer to the province of
neurosis; the material is found in the symptoms
and other modes of expression of nervous pa
tients, for the explanation and treatment of
which psycho-analysis was indeed devised.
My fourth point of view takes us back to
the place from which we started and leads into
the track we have already marked out. We
said that even if there were no dream-censor
ship we should still find it difficult to interpret
dreams, for we should then be confronted with
the task of translating the symbolic language
of dreams into the language of waking fife.
Symbolism, then, is a second and independent
factor in dream-distortion, existing side by side
with the censorship. But the conclusion is ob
vious that it suits the censorship to make use
of symbolism, in that both serve the same
purpose: that of making the dream strange
and incomprehensible.
Whether a further study of the dream will
not introduce us to yet another contributing
factor in the distortion, we shall soon see. But
I must not leave the subject of dream-sym
bolism without once more
touching
on the
puzzling fact that it has succeeded in rousing
such strenuous opposition amongst educated
persons, although the prevalence of symbolism
in myth, religion, art and language is beyond
all doubt. Is it not probable that, here again,
the reason is to be found in its relation to
sexuality?
ELEVENTH LECTURE
The Dream Work
When you have successfully grasped the
dream-censorship and symbolic representation,
you will not, it is true, have mastered dreamdistortion in its entirety, but you will neverthe
lessbe in a position to understandmost dreams.

[517a]
514
Sigmund Freud
To do so, you will make use of the two com
plementary methods: you will call up the
dreamer's associations till you have penetrated
from the substitute to the thought proper for
which it stands, and you will supply the mean
ing of the symbols from your own knowledge
of the subject. We will speak later of certain
doubtful points which may arise in the process.
We can now return to a task which we at
tempted earlier with inadequate equipment,
when we were studying the relations between
dream-elements and the thoughts proper under
lying them. We then determined the existence
of four such main relations: substitution of the
part for the whole, hints or allusions, symbolic
connection, and
plastic
word-representation
(images). We will now try to deal with this
subject on a larger scale, by a comparison of
the manifest dream-content as a whole with
the latentdream as laid bare by our interpreta
tion.
I hope you will never again confuse these
two things. If you succeed in distinguishing
between them, you will have advanced further
towards an understanding of dreams than in all
probability most of the readers of my Inter
pretation of Dreams have done. Let me again
remind you that the process by which the latent
dream is transformed into the manifest dream
is called the dream-work; while the reverse
process, which seeks to progress from the mani
fest to the latent thoughts, is our work of inter
pretation; the work of interpretation therefore
aims at demolishing the dream-work. In dreams
of the infantile type in which the obvious wishfulfilments are easily recognized, the process
of dream-work has nevertheless been operative
to some extent, for the wish has been trans
formed into a reality and, usually, the thoughts
also into visual images. Here no interpretation
is necessary; we only have to retrace both these
transformations. The further operations of the
dream-work, as seen in the other types of
dreams, we call dream-distortion, and here the
original ideas have to be restored by our inter
pretative work.
Having had the opportunity of comparing
many dream-interpretations, I am in a position
to give you a comprehensive account of the
manner in which the dream-work deals with
the material of the latent dream-thoughts. But
please do not expect to understand too much:
it is a piece of description which should be
listened to quietly and attentively.
The first achievement of the dream-work is
condensation; by this term we mean to con

[517b]
vey the fact that the content of the manifest
dream
is less rich than that of the
latent
thoughts, is, as it were, a kind of abbreviated
translation of the latter. Now and again con
densation may be lacking, but it is present as
a rule and is often carried to a very high de
gree. It never works in the opposite manner,
i.e„ it never happens that the manifest dream
is wider in range or richer in content than is
the latent dream. Condensation is accomplished
in the following ways: (i) certain latent ele
ments are altogether omitted; (2) of many
complexes in the latent dream only a fragment
passes over into the manifest content; (3)
latent elements sharing some common charac
teristic are in the manifest dream put together,
blended into a single whole.
If you prefer to do so, you can reserve the
term "condensation" for this last process, the
effects of which are particularlyeasy to demon
strate. Taking your own dreams, you will be
able without any trouble to recall instances of
the condensation of different persons into a
single figure. Sucha composite figure resembles
A in appearance, but is dressed hke B, pursues
some occupation which recalls C, and yet all
the time you know that it is really D. The
composite picture serves, of course, to lay
special emphasis upon some characteristic com
mon to the four people. And it is possible also
for a composite picture to be formed with ob
jects or places, as with persons, provided only
that the single objects or places have some
common attribute upon which the latent dream
lays stress. It is as though a new and fugitive
concept were formed, of which the common
attributeis the kernel. Fromthe superimposing
of the separate parts which undergo condensa
tion there usually results a blurred and in
distinct picture, as if several photographs had
been taken on the same plate.
The formation of such composite figures
must beofgreat importance inthedream-work,
for we can prove that the common properties
necessary to their formation are purposely;
manufactured where at first sight they would |
seem to be lacking, as, for example, by the
choice of some particularverbal expression for
a thought. We have already met with instances
of condensation and composite-formation of
this sort; they played an important part in
originating many slips of the tongue. You will
remember the case of the young man who
wished to "insort" a lady (beleidigen = "in
sult,"begleiten = "escort," composite word begleitdigen). Besides, there are jokes inwhich the.

[518a]
General Introduction
technique is traceable to condensation of this
sort. Apart from this, however, we may ven
ture to assert that this process is something
quite unusual and strange. It is true that in
many a creation of phantasy we meet with
counterparts to the formation of the composite
persons of our dreams, component parts which
do not belong to one another in reality being
readily united into a single whole by phantasy,
as, for instance, in the centaurs and fabulous
animals of ancient mythology or of Boecklin's
pictures. Creative phantasy can, in fact, invent
nothing new, but can only regroup elements
from different sources. But the peculiar thing
about the way in which the dream-work pro
ceeds is this: its material consists of thoughts,
some of which may be objectionable and dis
agreeable, but which nevertheless are correctly
formed and expressed. The dream-work trans
mutes these thoughts into another form, and
it is curious and incomprehensible that in this
process of translation—of rendering them, as
it were, into another script or language—the
means of blending and combining are employed.
The translator's endeavour in other cases must
surely be to respect the distinctions observed
in the text, and especially to differentiate be
tween things which are similar but not the
same; the dream-work, on the contrary, strives
to condense two different thoughts by selecting,
after the manner of wit, an ambiguous word
which can suggest both thoughts. We must not
expectto understand this characteristic straight
away, but it may assume great significance for
our conception of the dream-work.
Although
condensation renders
the dream
obscure, yet it does not give the impression of
being an effect of the dream-censorship. Rather
we should be inclined to trace it to mechanical
or economic factors; nevertheless the censor
ship's interests are served by it.
What condensation can achieve is sometimes
quite extraordinary: by this device it is at
times possible for
two
completely
different
latent trains of thought to be united in a single
manifest dream, so that we arrive at an ap
parently adequate interpretation of a dream
and yet overlook a second possible meaning.
Moreover, one of the effects of condensation
upon the relationship between the manifest and
the latent dream is that the connection be
tween the elements of the one and of the other
nowhere remains a simple one; for by a kind
of
interlacing a manifest element represents
simultaneously several latent ones and, con
versely, a latent thought may enter into several

[518b]
to Psycho-Analysis
515
manifest elements. Again, when we come to
interpret dreams, we see that the associations
to a single manifest element do not commonly
make their appearance in orderly succession;
we often have to wait until we have the inter
pretation of the whole dream.
The dream-work, then, follows a very un
usual mode of transcription for the dreamthoughts; not a translation, word for word,
or sign for sign; nor yet a process of selection
according to some definite rule, for instance, as
though the consonants only of the words were
reproduced and the vowels omitted; nor again
what one might call a process of representation,
one element being always picked out to rep
resent several others. It works by a different
and much more complicated method.
The second achievement of the dream-work
is displacement. Fortunately here we are not
breaking perfectly fresh ground; indeed, we
know that it is entirely the work of the dreamcensorship. Displacement takes two forms; first,
a latent element may be replaced, not by a part
of itself, but by something more remote, some
thing of the nature of an allusion; and, secondly,
the accent may be transferred from an impor
tant element to another which is unimportant, so
that the centre of the dream is shifted as it
were, giving the dream a foreign appearance.
Substitution by allusion is familiar to us in
our waking thoughts also, but with a difference;
for it is essential in the latter that the allusion
should be easily comprehensible, and that the
content of the substitute should be associated
to that of the thought proper. Allusion is also
frequently employed in wit, where the con
dition of association in content is dispensed
with and
replaced by
unfamifiar external
associations, such as similarity of sound, am
biguity of meaning, etc. The condition of comprehensibility, however, is observed: the joke
would lose all its point if we could not recog
nize without any effort what is the actual thing
to which the allusion is made. But in dreams
allusion by displacement is unrestricted by
either limitation. It is connected most super
ficially and most remotely with the element for
which it stands, and for that reason is not
readily comprehensible; and, when the connec
tion is traced,
the interpretation gives the
impression of an unsuccessful joke or of a
forced, far-fetched and dragged in explanation.
The object of the dream-censorship is only ob
tained when it has
succeeded in making it
impossible to trace the thought proper back
from the allusion.

[519a]
5i6
Sigmund Feeud
Displacement of
accent is
not
a
legiti
mate device, if our object be the expression of
thought; though we do sometimes admit it in
waking life in order to produce a comic effect.
I can to some extent convey to you the impres
sion of confusion which then results, by re
minding you of an anecdote, according to which
there was in a certain village a smith who had
committed a capital offence. The court decided
that the smith was guilty; but, since he was
the only one of his trade in the village and
therefore indispensable, whereas there were
three tailors living there, one of these three
was hanged in his place!
The third achievement of the dream-work
is the most interesting from the psychological
point of view. It consists in the transformation
of thoughts into visual images. Let us be quite
clear that not everything in the dream-thoughts
is thus transformed; much keeps its original
form and appears also in the manifest dream
as thought or knowledge, on the part of the
dreamer; again, translation of them into visual
images is not the only possible transformation
of thoughts. But it is nevertheless the essential
feature in the formation of dreams, and, as we
know, this part of the dream-work is, if we ex
cept one other case, the least subject to varia
tion;
for
single dream-elements,
moreover,
plastic word-representation is a process already
familiar to us.
Obviously this achievement is by no means
an easy one. In order to get some idea of its
difficulty, imagine that you had undertaken to
replace a political leading article in a newspaper
by a series of illustrations; you would have to
abandon alphabetic
characters in
favour of
hieroglyphics. The people and concrete objects
mentioned in the article could be easily repre
sented, perhaps even more satisfactorily, in
pictorial form; but you would expect to meet
with difficulties when you came to the portrayal
of all the abstract words and all those parts of
speech which indicate relations between the
various thoughts, e.g., particles, conjunctions,
and so forth. With the abstract words you
would employ all manner of devices: for in
stance, you would try to render the text of the
article into other words, more unfamiliar per
haps, but made up of parts more concrete and
therefore more capable of such representation.
This will remind you of the fact that most
abstract words were originally concrete, their
original significance having faded; and there
fore you will fall back on the original concrete
meaning of these words wherever possible. So

[519b]
you will be glad that you can represent the
possessing of an object as a literal, physical
sitting upon it (possess= potis-\-sedeo). This
is just how the dream-work proceeds. In such
circumstances you can hardly demand great
accuracy of representation, neither will you
quarrel with the dream-work for replacing an
element which is difficult to reduce to pictorial
form, such as the idea of breaking marriage
vows,by some other kind of breaking, e.g., that
of an arm or leg.1 In this way you will to some
extent succeed in overcoming the awkwardness
of rendering alphabetic characters into hier
oglyphs.
When you come to represent those parts of
speech which indicate thought-relations, e.g.,
because, therefore, but,and so on, you have no
such means as those described to assist you;
so that these parts of the text must be lost, so
far as your translation into pictorial form is
concerned. Similarly, the content of the dream1Whilst correcting these pages, my eye happened to
fall upon a newspaper paragraph which I reproduce
here as affording unexpected confirmation of the above
words.
DIVINE RETRIBUTION
A Broken Arm for a Broken Marriage-Vow
Frau Anna M, the wife of a soldier in the reserve,
accused Frau Clementine K of unfaithfulness to her
husband. In her accusation she stated that Frau K had
had an illicit relationship with Karl M during her
husband's absence at the front, while he was sending
her as much as 70 crowns a month. Besides this, she
had already received a large sum of money from her
(Frau M's) husband, while his wife and children had
to live in hunger and misery. Some of her husband's
comrades had informed her that he and Frau K had
visited
public-houses
together
and
remained
there
drinking late into the night. The accused woman had
once actually asked the husband of the accuser, in the
presence of several soldiers, whether he would not soon
leave his "old woman" and come to her, and the care
taker of the house where Frau K lived had repeatedly
seen the plaintiff's husband in Frau K's room, in a state
of complete undress.
Yesterday, before a magistrate in the Leopoldstadt,
Frau K denied knowing M at all: any intimate rela
tions between them were out of the question, she said.
Albertine M, a witness, however, gave evidence of
having surprised Frau K in the act of kissing the ac
cuser's husband.
M, who had been called as a witness in some earlier
proceedings, had
then denied any intimate relations
with the accused. Yesterday, a letter was handed to
the magistrate, in which the witness retracted his for
mer denial and confessed that up to the previous June
he had carried on illicit relations with Frau K. In the
earlier proceedings he had denied his relations with the
accused only because she had come to him before the
action came into court and begged him on her knees
to save her and say nothing. "To-day," wrote the wit
ness, "I feel compelled to lay a full confession before
the court, for I have broken my left arm and regard
this as God's punishment for my offence."
The judge decided that the penal offence had been
committed too long ago for the action to stand, where
upon
the
accuser withdrew her
accusation and the
accused was
discharged.

[520a]
General Introduction
thoughts is resolved by the dream-work into
its "raw material," consisting of objects and
activities. You may be satisfied if there is any
possibility of indicating somehow, by a more
minute elaboration of the images, certain re
lations which cannot be represented in them
selves. In
a precisely similar manner, the
dream-work succeeds in expressing much of
the content of the latent thoughts by means of
peculiarities in the form of the manifest dream,
by its distinctness or obscurity, its division in
to various parts, etc. The number of parts into
which a dream is divided corresponds as a
rule with the number of its main themes, the
successive
trains
of
thought in
the
latent
dream; a short preliminary dream often stands
in an introductory or casual relation to the
subsequent detailed main dream; whilst a sub
ordinate dream-thought is represented by the
interpolation into the manifest dream of a
change of scene, and so on. The form of
dreams, then, is by no means unimportant in
itself,
and
itself
demands
interpretation.
Several dreams in the same night often have
the same meaning, and indicate an endeavour
to control more and more completely a stimulus
of increasing urgency. In a single dream, a
specially difficult element may be represented
by doubling it, i.e., by more than one symbol.
If we continue the comparison of dreamthoughts withthe manifest dreams representing
them, we discover in all directions things we
should never have expected, e.g., that even
nonsense and absurdity in dreams have their
meaning; in fact, at this point the contrast
between the medical and the psycho-analytic
view of dreams becomes more marked than
ever before. According to the medical view, the
dream is absurd because while dreaming our
mental activity has renounced its functions;
according to our view, on the other hand, the
dream becomes absurd when it has to represent
a criticism implicit in the latent thoughts—the
opinion: "It is absurd." The dream I told you,
about the visit to the theatre ("three tickets
for one florin and a half") is a good example
of this:
the
opinion thus expressed was as
follows: "It was absurd to marry so early."
Similarly, we find out when we interpret
dreams what is the real meaning of the doubts
and uncertainties, so frequently mentioned by
dreamers, whether a certain element did actual
lyappear inthedream,whether it was really this
and not rather something else. As a rule, there
is nothing in the latent thoughts corresponding
with these doubts and uncertainties; they origi-

[520b]
to Psycho-Analysis
517
nate wholly through the operation of the
censorship and are comparable to a not entirely
successful attempt at erasure.
One of our most surprising discoveries is the
manner in which opposites in the latent dream
are dealt with by the dream-work. We know
already that points of agreement in the latent
material are replaced by condensation in the
manifest dream. Now contraries are treated in
just the same way as similarities, with a
marked preference for expression by means of
the same manifest element. An element in the
manifest dream which admits of an opposite
may stand simply for itself, or for its opposite,
or for both together; only the sense can decide
which translation is to be chosen. It accords
with this that there is no representation of a
No in dreams, or at least none which is not
ambiguous.
A welcome analogy to this strange behaviour
of the dream-work is furnished in the develop
ment
of
language. Many philologists have
maintained that in the oldest languages oppo
sites such as: strong—weak, light—dark, large
—small, were expressed by the same root word
(antithetical sense of primal words). Thus, in
old Egyptian ken stood originally for both
"strong" and "weak." In speaking, misunder
standingwasguardedagainst in the use of such
ambivalent words by the intonation and ac
companying gestures; in writing, by the ad
dition of a so-called "determinative," that is
to say, of a picture which was not meant to be
expressed orally. Thus, ken="strong" was
written in such a way that after the letters
there was a picture of a little man standing
upright; when ken meant "weak," there was
addedthe picture of a manin a slack, crouching
attitude. Only at a later period did the two
opposite meanings of the same primal word
come to be designated in two different ways
by slight modifications of the original. Thus,
from ken meaning "strong—weak" were de
rived
two
words:
ken="strong"
and
kan
= "weak." Nor is it only the oldest languages,
in the last stages of their development, which
have retained many survivals of these early
words capable of meaning either of two oppo
sites, but the same is true of much younger
languages, even those which are today still
living. I will quote some illustrations of this
taken from the work of C. Abel (1884):
In Latin, such ambivalent words are:
altus=high or deep. sacer=sa.cred or accursed.
As examples of modifications of the original
root, I quote:

[521a]
5i8
Sigmund Freud
clamare—to shout,
clam=quietly, silently, se
cretly.
siccus=dry. succus=juice.
and,
in
German:
Stimme=voice,
stumm
=dumb.
A comparison of kindred languages yields a
large number of examples:
English: lock=to shut. German: Loch=hole.
Liicke = gap.
English:
cleave.1
German:
kleben=to
stick,
adhere.
The
English
word
"without,"
originally
carrying with it both a positive and a negative
connotation, is today used in the negative sense
only, but it is clear that "with" has the signifi
cation,
not
merely of "adding to," but of
"depriving of," from
the
compounds "with
draw," "withhold" (cf. the German wieder).
Yet another peculiarity of the dream-work
has its
counterpart in the
development of
language. In ancient Egyptian, as well as in
other later languages, the sequence of sounds
was transposed so as to result in different words
for the same fundamental idea. Examples of
this kind
of parallels between
English and
German words may be quoted:
Topf
(pot)—pot.
Boat—tub.
Hurry—Ruhe
(rest).
Balken
(beam)—Kloben (club), wait—t'duwen
(to wait).
Parallels between Latin and German:
capere—packen (to seize), ren—Niere (kidney).
Such transpositions as have taken place here
in the case of single words are made by the
dream-work in a variety of ways. The inversion
of the meaning, i.e., substitution by the opposite,
is a device with which we are already familiar;
but, besides this, we find in dreams inversion
of situations or of the relations existing be
tween two persons, as though the scene were
laid in a "topsy-turvy" world. In dreams often
enough the hare chases the hunter. Again, in
version is met with in the sequence of events,
so that in dreams cause follows effect, which
reminds us of what sometimes happens in a
third-rate theatrical performance, when first
the hero falls and then the shot which kills him
is fired from the wings. Or there are dreams
in which the whole arrangement of the elements
is inverted, so that in interpreting them the
1 Both senses of cleave are still alive in English: to
cleave (= separate) and to cleave to (= adhere).—
Tr.

[521b]
last must be taken first, and the first last, in
order to make sense at all. You remember that
we also found this in our study of dream-sym
bolism, in which the act of plunging or falling
into water has the same meaning as that of
emerging from water, namely, giving birth or
being bom and going up steps or a ladder
means the same as comingdownthem. We can
not fail to recognize the advantage reaped for
dream-distortion by this freedom from restric
tions in representing the dream-thoughts.
These features of the dream-work may be
termed archaic. They cling to the primitive
modes of expression of languages or scripts,
and yield the same difficulties, which we shall
touch upon later in the course of some critical
observations on this topic.
Now let us consider some other aspects of
the subject. Clearly what has to be accom
plished by the dream-work is the transformation
of the latent thoughts, as expressed in words,
into perceptual forms, most commonly into
visual images. Now our thoughts originated'in
such perceptual forms; their earliest material
and the first stages in their development con
sisted of sense-impressions, or,moreaccurately,
of memory-pictures of these. It was later that
words were attached to these pictures and then
connected so as to form thoughts. So that the
dream-work subjects our thoughts to a regres
sive process and retraces the steps in their de
velopment; in the course of this regression all
new acquisitions won during this development
of memory-pictures into thoughts must neces
sarily fall away.
This then is what we mean by the dreamwork. Besides what we have learnt of its proc
esses our interest in the manifest dream is
bound to recede far intothe background; I will,
however, devote still a few more remarks to
the manifest dream, for, after all, that is the
only part of the dream with which we have any
direct acquaintance.
It is natural that the manifest dream should
lose some of its importance in our eyes. It muststrike us as a matter of indifference whether it
is carefully composed or split up into a succes
sion of disconnected pictures. Even when the
outward form of the dream is apparently full
of meaning, we know that this appearance has
been arrived at by the process of dream-distor
tion, and can have as little organic connection
with the inner content of the dream as exists
between the faqade of an Italian church and
its
general
structure
and
ground-plan.
At
times, however, this faqade of the dream has a

[522a]
General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis
5i9
meaning too, reproducing an important part
of the latent thoughts with little or no dis
tortion.
But we
cannot know this until we
have interpreted the dream and thus arrived
at an opinion with regard to the degree of dis
tortion present. A similar doubt obtains where
two elements seem to be closely connected;
such connection may contain a valuable hint
that the corresponding elements in the latent
dream are similarly related, but at other times
we can convince ourselves that what is con
nected in thought has become widely separated
in the dream.
In general we must refrain from attempting
to explain one part of the manifest dream by
another part, as though the dream were a co
herent conception and a pragmatic representa
tion. It is in most cases comparable rather to
a piece of Breccia stone, composed of frag
ments of different kinds of stone cemented to
gether in such a way that the markings upon
it are not those of the original pieces contained
in it. There is, as a matter of fact, one mecha
nism in the dream-work, known as secondary
elaboration, the object of which is to combine
the immediate results of the work into a single
and fairly coherent whole; during this process
the material is often so arranged as to give rise
to total misunderstanding, and for this purpose
any necessary interpolations are made.
On the other hand, we should not overrate
the dream-work or attribute to it more than
is its due. Its activity is limited to the achieve
ments
here
enumerated;
condensation,
dis
placement, plastic representation and secondary
elaboration of the whole dream; these are all
that it can effect. Such manifestations of judg
ment, criticism, surprise, or deductive reason
ing, as are met with in dreams are not brought
about by the dream-work and are only very
rarely the expression of subsequent reflection
about the dream; but are for the most part
fragments of
the latent thoughts introduced
into the manifest dream with more
or less
modification and in a form suited to the con
text. Again, the dream-work cannot create con
versation in dreams; save in a few exceptional
cases, it is imitated from, and made up of,
things heard or even said by the dreamer him
self on the previous day, which have entered
into the latent thoughts as the material or
incitement of his dream. Neither do mathe
matical calculations come into the province of
the dream-work; anything of the sort appearing
in the manifest dream is generally a mere com
bination of numbers, a pseudo-calculation, quite

[522b]
absurd as such, and again only a copy of some
calculation comprised in the latent thoughts.
In these circumstances it is not surprising that
the interest which was felt in the dream-work
soon becomes directed instead towards the la
tent thoughts which disclose themselves in a
more or less distorted form through the mani
fest dream. We are not justified, however, in a
theoretical consideration of the subject, in let
ting our interest stray so far that we altogether
substitute the latent thoughts for the dream as
a whole, and make some pronouncement on the
latter which is only true of the former. It is
strange that the findings of psycho-analysis
could be so misused as to result in confusion
between the two. The term dream can only be
applied to the residts of the dream-work, i.e.,
to the form into which the latent thoughts have
been rendered by the dream-work.
This work is a process of a quite peculiar
type; nothing Hkeit has hitherto been known in
mental life. This kind of condensation, displace
ment, and regressive translation of thoughts
into images, is a novelty, the recognition of
which in itself richly rewards our efforts in the
field of psycho-analysis. You will again per
ceive, from the parallels to dream-work, the
connections revealed between psycho-analytic
and other research, especially in the fields of the
development of speech and thought. You*will
only realize the further significance of the in
sight so acquired when you
learn
that the
mechanism of the dream-work is
a
kind of
model for the formation of neurotic symptoms.
I know, too, that it is not possible for us yet
to grasp the full extent of the fresh gain accru
ing to psychology from these labours. We will
only hint at the new proofs thereby afforded of
the existence of unconscious mental activities
—for this indeed is the nature of the latent
dream-thoughts—and at the promise dreaminterpretation gives of an approach, wider than
we ever guessed at, to the knowledge of the
unconscious life of the mind.
Now, however, I think the time has come to
give you individual examples of various short
dreams, which will illustrate the points for
which I have already prepared you.
TWELFTH LECTURE
Examples of Dreams and Analysis of Them
You must not be disappointed if I present you
once more with fragments of dream-interpreta
tions, instead of inviting you to participate in
the interpretation of one fine long dream. You

[523a]
520
Sigmund Freud
will say that after so much preparation you
surely have a right to expect that; and you will
express your conviction that,
after
success
ful interpretations of so many thousands of
dreams, it should long ago have been possible
to collect a number of striking examples by
which the truth of all our assertions about the
dream-work and dream-thoughts could be dem
onstrated. Yes, but there are too many diffi
culties in the way of fulfilling this wish of
yours.
In the first place, I must confess that there
is nobody who makes the interpretation of
dreams his main business. In what circum
stances then, do we come to interpret them?
At times we may occupy ourselves, for no par
ticular purpose, with the dreams of a friend,
or we may work out our own dreams over a
period of time in order to train ourselves
for psycho-analytic work; but chiefly we have
to
do with the dreams of
nervous patients
who are undergoing psycho-analytic treatment.
These last dreams provide splendid material
and are in no respect inferior to those of
healthy persons, but the technique of the treat
ment obliges us to subordinate dream-interpre
tation to therapeutic purposes and to desist
from the attempt to interpret a large number
of the dreams as soon as we have extracted
from them something of use for the treatment.
Again, many dreams which occur during the
treatment elude full interpretation altogether;
since they have their origin in the whole mass
of material in the mind which is as yet un
known to us, it is not possible to understand
them until the completion of the cure. To re
late such dreams would necessarily involve
revealing all the secrets of a neurosis; this will
not do for us, since we have taken up the
problem of dreams in preparation for the study
of the neuroses.
Now I expect you would willingly dispense
with this material and would prefer to listen
to the explanation of dreams of healthy persons
or perhaps of your own. But the content of
these dreams makes that impossible. One can
not expose oneself, nor anyone whose confi
dence has been placed in one, so ruthlessly as
a thorough interpretation of a dream would
necessitate; for,
as you
already know, they
touch upon all that is most intimate in the
personality. Apart from the difficulty arising
out of the nature of the material, there is
another
difficulty
as
regards
relating
the
dreams. You are aware that the dream seems
foreign and strange to the dreamer himself;

[523b]
how much more so to an outsider to whom his
personality is unknown. The literature of psy
cho-analysis shows no lack of good and detailed
dream-analyses; I myself have published some
which formed part of the history of certain
pathological cases. Perhaps the best example of
a dream-interpretation is that published by
O. Rank, consisting of the analysis of two mu
tually related dreams of a young girl. These
cover about two pages of print, while the anal
ysis of them runs into 76 pages. It would need
almost a whole term's lectures in order to take
you through a work of this magnitude. If we
selected some fairly long and considerably dis
torted dream we should have to enter into so
many explanations, to adduce so much material
in the shape of associations and recollections,
and to go down so many sidetracks, that a
single lecture would be quite inadequate and
would give no clear idea of it as a whole. So
I must ask you to be content if I pursue a less
difficult course, and relate some fragments from
dreams of neurotic patients, in which this or
that isolated feature may be recognized. Sym
bols are the easiest features to
demonstrate
and, after them, certain peculiarities of the re
gressive character of dream-representation. I
will tell you why I regard each of the following
dreams as worth relating.
1. A dream consisting only of two short pic
tures.: The dreamer's uncle was smoking a cig
arette, although it was Saturday. A woman was
fondling and caressing the dreamer as though
he were her child.
With
reference
to
the
first
picture,
the
dreamer (a Jew) remarked that his uncle was
a very pious man who never had done, and
never would do, anything so sinful as smoking
on the Sabbath. The only association to the
woman in
the
second picture was
that
of
the dreamer's mother. These two pictures or
thoughts must obviously be related to one an
other; but in what way? Since he expressly
denied that his uncle would in reality perform
the action of the dream, the insertion of the
conditional if will at once suggest itself. "If my
uncle, that deeply religious man, were to smoke
a cigarette on the Sabbath, then I myself might
be
allowed to
let my mother
fondle
me."
Clearly, that is as much as to say that being
fondled
by
the
mother
was
something
as
strictly forbidden as smoking on the Sabbath
is to the pious Jew. You will remember my
telling you that in the dream-work all relations
among the dream-thoughts disappear; the
thoughts are broken up into their' raw material,

[524a]
General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis
521
and our task in interpreting is to reinsert these
connections which have been omitted.
2. My writings on the subject of dreams have
placed me to some extent in the position of
public consultant on the question, and for many
years now I have received letters from the most
diverse quarters communicating dreams to me
or asking for my opinion. Naturally I am grate
ful to all those who have given me sufficient
material with their dreams to make an inter
pretation possible, or have themselves volun
teered one. The following dream of a medical
student in Munich dating from 1910, belongs
to this category; and I quote it because it may
prove to you how hard it is, generally speaking,
to understand a dream until the dreamer has
given us what information he can about it. For
I have a suspicion that in the bottom of your
hearts you think that the translating of the
symbols is the ideal method of interpretation
and that you would like to discard that of free
association; I want, therefore, to clear your
minds of so pernicious an error.
"July 13th, 1910. Towards morning I had
the following dream: / was bicycling down a
street in Tubingen, when a brown dachshund
came rushing after me and caught hold of one
of my heels. I rode a little further and then dis
mounted, sat down on a step and began to beat
the creature off, for it had set its teeth fast in
my heel. (The dog's biting me and the whole
scene roused no unpleasant sensations.) Two
elderly ladies were sitting opposite, watching
me with grinning faces. Then I woke up and,
as has frequently happened before, with the
transition to waking consciousness the whole
dream was clear to me."
In this instance symbolism cannot help us
much, but the dreamer goes on to tell us: "I
recently fell in love with a girl, just from see
ing her in the street; but I had no means of
introduction to her. I should have liked best to
make her acquaintance through her dachshund,
for I am a great animal-lover myself and was
attracted by seeing she was one too." He adds
that several times he had separated fighting
dogs very skilfully, often to the amazement of
the onlookers. Now we learn that the girl who
had taken his fancy was always seen walking
with this particular dog. She, however, has been
eliminated from the manifest dream; only the
dog associated with her has remained. Possibly
the elderly ladies who grinned at him repre
sented her, but the rest of what he tells us does
not clear up this point. The fact that he was
riding a bicycle in the dream was a direct repe

[524b]
tition of the situation as he remembered it, for
he had not met the girl with the dog except
when he was bicycling.
3. When a man has lost someone dear to
him, for a considerable period afterwards he
produces a special type of dream, in which the
most remarkable compromises are effected be
tween his knowledge that that person is dead
and his desire to call him back to life. Some
times the deceased is dreamt of as being dead,
and yet still alive because he does not know
that he is dead, as if he would only really die
if he did know it; at other times he is half
dead and half alive, and each of these condi
tions has its distinguishing marks. We must not
call these dreams merely nonsensical, for to
come to life again is no more inadmissible in
dreams than in fairy-tales, in which it is quite
a common fate. As far as I have been able to
analyse such dreams, it appeared that they
were capable of a reasonable explanation, but
that the pious wish to recall the departed is apt
to manifest itself in the strangest ways. I will
submit a dream of this sort to you, which cer
tainly sounds strange and absurd enough, and
the analysis of which will demonstrate many
points already indicated in our theoretical dis
cussions. The dreamer was
a
man who had
lost his father some years previously:
My father was dead but had been exhumed
and looked ill. He went on living, and I did all
I could to prevent his noticing it. Then the
dream goes on to other matters, apparently
very remote.
That the father was dead we know to be a
fact; but the exhumation had not taken place
in reality; indeed, the question of real fact has
nothing to do with anything that follows. But
the dreamer went on to say that after he re
turned from his father's funeral one of his teeth
began to ache. He wanted to treat it accord
ing to the Jewish precept: "If thy tooth offend
thee, pluck it out," and, accordingly, went to
the dentist. The latter, however, said that that
was not the way to treat a tooth; one must
have patience with it. "I will put something in
it," he said, "to kill the nerve, and you must
come back in three days' time, when I will take
it out again." "This 'taking out,'" said the
dreamer suddenly, "is the exhuming."
Now was he right? True, the parallel is not
exact, for it was not the tooth which was taken
out, but only a dead part of it. As a result of
experience, however, we can well credit the
dream-work with inaccuracies of this sort. We

[525a]
522
Sigmund
must suppose that the dreamer had, by a proc
ess of condensation, combined the dead father
with the tooth, which was dead and which he
yet retained. No wonder then that an absurdity
was the result in the manifest dream, for obvi
ously not all that was said about the tooth
could apply to the father. What then are we to
regard as the tertium comparationis between
-
the father and the tooth, what common factor
makes the comparison possible?
Such a factor must have existed, for the
dreamer went on to observe that he knew the
saying that if one dreams of losing a tooth it
means that one is about to lose a member of
his family.
We know that this popular interpretation is
incorrect or at least correct only in a very dis
torted sense. We' shall therefore be the more
surprised actually to discover the subject thus
.'touched upon behind the other elements of the
dream-content.
Without being pressed further, the dreamer
then began to talk of his father's illness and
death, and of the relations which had existed
between father and son. The illness had been
a long one, and the care and treatment of the
invalid had cost the son a large sum of money.
Yet it never seemed too much to him, nor did
his patience ever fail or the wish occur to him
that the end should come. He prided himself
on his true Jewish filial piety and on his strict
observance of the Jewish law. Does not a cer
tain contradiction strike us here in the thoughts
relating to the dream? He had identified the
tooth with the father. He wanted to treat the
former according to the Jewish law which com
manded that a tooth which causes pain and an
noyance should be plucked out. His father he
also wanted to treat according to the precepts
of the law, but here the command was that he
must pay no heed to expense and annoyance,
must take the whole burden upon himself, and
not allow any hostile intention to arise against
the cause of the trouble. Would not the agree
ment between the two situations be much more
convincing if he had really gradually come to
have the same feelings towards his sick father
as he had towards his diseased tooth, that is to
say, if he had wished for death to put a speedy
end to
his father's superfluous, painful and
costly existence?
I have no doubt that this was, in reality, his
attitude towards
his father during the pro
tracted illness and that his ostentatious asser
tions of filial piety were designed to divert his
mind from any recollections of the sort. Under

[525b]
Freud
conditions such as these it is no uncommon
thing for the death-wish against the father to
be roused, and to mask itself with some osten
sibly compassionate reflection, such as: "It
would be a blessed release for him." But I want
you particularly to notice that here in the la
tent thoughts themselves a barrier has been
-broken down. The first part of the thoughts
was, we may be sure, only temporarily uncon
scious, that is, during the actual process of the
dream-work; the hostile feelings towards the
father, on the other hand, had probably been
permanently so, possibly dating from childhood
and having at times, during the father's illness,
crept as it were timidly and in a disguised form
into consciousness. We can maintain this with
even greater certainty of other latent thoughts
which have unmistakably contributed to the
content of the dream. There are, it is true, no
indications in it of hostile feelings towards the
father; but when we enquire into the origin of
such hostility in the life of the child we re
member that fear of the father arises from the
fact that in the earliest years of life it is he
who opposes the sexual activity of the boy, as
he is usually compelled to do again, after pu
berty, from motives of social expediency. This
was the relation in which our dreamer stood to
his father; his affection for him had been tinged
with a good deal of respect and dread, the
source of which was early sexual intimidation.
We can now explain the further phrases in
the dream from the onanism complex. "He
looked ill" was an allusion to another remark
of the dentist's—that it did not look well for
a tooth to be missing just there—but it also
refers at the same time to the "looking ill" by
which the young man, during the period of
puberty, betrays, or fears lest he might betray,
his excessive sexual activity. It was with a
lightening of his own heart that in the manifest
dream the dreamer transferred the look of ill
ness from himself to his father, an inversion
with which you are familiar as a device of the1
dream-work. "He went on living" accords both
with the wish to recall the father to life and
the promise of the dentist to save the tooth.
The phrase "I did everything I could to prevent
his noticing" is extremely subtly designed to
lead us to complete it with the words "that he
was dead." The only completion of them that
really makes sense, however, is again to be
traced to the onanism complex, where it is a
matter of course that the young man should do
all he can to conceal his sexual life from his
father. Finally, I would remind you that the

[526a]
General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis
523
so-called "tooth-ache dreams" always refer to
onanism, and
the punishment for it that is
feared.
You see how this incomprehensible dream is
built up by a piece of remarkable and mislead
ing condensation, by omitting from it all the
thoughts that belong to the core of the latent
train
of
thought,
and
by
the
creation
of
ambiguous substitute-formations to represent
those thoughts which were deepest and most
remote in time.
4. We have already tried repeatedly to get
to the bottom of those prosaic and banal dreams
which have nothing absurd or strange in them,
but which suggest the question: Why should
we dream about such trivialities at all? I will
therefore quote a fresh example of this sort in
the shape of three dreams connected with one
another and dreamt by a young lady in the
course of a single night.
(a) She was going through the hall in her
house and struck her head on a low-hanging
chandelier with such force as to draw blood.
This episode did not remind her of anything
that had actually happened; her remarks led in
quite another direction: "You know how ter
ribly my hair is coming out. Well, yesterday
my mother said to me: 'My dear child, if it
goes on like this, your head will soon be as bald
as your buttocks.' " We see here that the head
stands for the other end of the body. No fur
ther assistance is required to understand the
symbolism of the chandelier: all objects capa
ble of elongation are symbols of the male or
gan. The real subject of the dream then is a
bleeding at the lower end of the body, caused
by contact with the penis. This might still have
other meanings; the dreamer's further associa
tions show that the dream has to do with the
belief that menstruation results from sexual
intercourse with a man, a notion about sexual
matters which is by no means uncommon
amongst immature girls.
(b) The dreamer saw in a vineyard a deep
hole which she knew had been caused by the
uprooting of a tree. Her remark on this point
was that "the tree was missing" meaning that
she did not see the tree in the dream; but the
same phrase serves to express another thought,
which leaves us in no doubt as to the symbolic
interpretation. The dream refers to another in
fantile notion on the subject of sex, to the be
lief that girls originally had the same genital
organ as boys and that the later conformation
of this organ has been brought about by castra
tion (uprooting the tree).
(c) The dreamer was standing in front of
her writing-table drawer which she knows so
well that, if anyone touched it, she would im
mediately be aware of it. The writing-table
drawer, Hke all drawers, chests and boxes, is a
symbol of the female genital. She knew that
when sexual intercourse (or, as she thought, any
contact at all) has taken place the genital shows
certain indications of the fact, and she had
long had a fear of being convicted of this. I
think that in all three dreams the main empha
sis lies on the idea of knowing. She had in mind
the time of childish investigations into sexual
matters, of the results of which she had been
very proud at the time.
5. Here is another example of symbolism.
But this time I must preface it with a short
account of the mental situation in which the
dream occurred. A man and a woman who were
in love had spent a night together; he described
her nature as maternal, she was one of those
women whose desire to have a child comes out
irresistibly during caresses. The conditions of
their meeting, however, made it necessary to
take precautions to prevent the semen from
entering the womb. On waking the next morn
ing, the woman related the following dream:
An officer with a red cap was pursuing her in
the street. She fled from him and ran up the
staircase, with him after her. Breathless, she
reached her rooms and slammed and locked the
door behind her.
The man remained outside
and, peeping through the keyhole in the door,
she saw him sitting on a bench outside, weeping.
In the pursuit by the officer with the red cap
and the breathless climbing of the stairs you
will recognize the representation of the sexual
act. That the dreamer shuts her pursuer out
may serve as an example of the device of in
version so frequently employed in dreams, for
in reality it was the man who withdrew before
the completion of the sexual act. In the same
way, she has projected her own feeling of grief
on to her partner, for it is he who weeps in the
dream, his tears at the same time alluding to
the seminal fluid.
You will certainly have heard it said at some
time or other that psycho-analysis maintains
that all dreams have a sexual meaning. You
are now in a position yourselves to form an
opinion as to the falseness of this reproach.
You have learnt of
wish-fulfilment dreams,
dealing with the gratification of the most obvi
ous
needs—hunger,
thirst,
and
the longing
for liberty—comfort-dreams,
and impatientdreams, as well as those which are
frankly

[527a]
524
Sigmund Freud
avaricious and egoistical. You may, however,
certainly bear it in mind that, according to the
results of psycho-analysis, dreams in which a
marked degree of distortion is present mainly
(but here again not exclusively) give expres
sion to sexual desires.
6.1 have a special motive in giving many
instances of the use of symbols in dreams. In
our first lecture I complained of the difficulty
of demonstrating my statements in such a way
as to carry conviction with regard to the find
ings of psycho-analysis, and since then you
have doubtless agreed with me. Now the sep
arate propositions of psycho-analysis are never
theless so intimately related that conviction on
a single point easily leads to acceptance of the
greater part of the whole theory. It might be
said of psycho-analysis that if you give it your
little finger it will soon have your whole hand.
If you accept
the explanation of
errors as
satisfactory, you cannot logically stop short of
belief in all the rest. Now dream-symbolism
provides another, equally good, approach to
such acceptance. I will recount to you a dream,
which has already been published, of a woman
of the poorer classes, whose husband was a
watchman and of whom we may be sure that
she had never heard of dream-symbolism and
psycho-analysis. You can then judge for your
selves whether the
interpretation arrived at
with the help of sexual symbols can justly be
called arbitrary or forced.
".. . Then someone broke into the house and
in terror she cried for a watchman. But the
watchman, accompanied by two tramps, had
gone into a church, which had several steps
leading up to it. Behind the church there was
a mountain and, up above, a thick wood. The
watchman wore a helmet, gorget and cloak, and
had a full brown beard. The two tramps, who
had gone along peaceably with him, had aprons
twisted round their hips like sacks. A path led
from the church to the mountain and was over
grown on both sides with grass and bushes
which grew denser and denser, and at the top
of the mountain there was a regular wood."
You will recognize without any trouble the
symbols here employed:
the
male organ is
represented by the trinity of three persons
appearing, whilst the female sexual organs are
symbolized by a landscape with a chapel, a
mountain and a wood, and once more you have
the act of going up steps as symbolic of the
sexual act. The part of the body called in the
dream a mountain is similarly termed in anat
omy the mons veneris.

[527b]
7. I will tell you another dream which is to
be explained in the light of symbolism, a dream,
moreover, which is noteworthy and convincing
from the fact that the dreamer himself trans
lated all the symbols, though he brought no
previous theoretical knowledge to the interpre
tation. This is a very unusual circumstance
and we have no accurate idea of the conditions
which give rise to it.
He was walking with his father in a place
which must have been the Prater, for they saw
the Rotunda with a little building in front of
it, to which was made fast a captive balloon
which looked rather slack. His father asked him
what it was all for; the son wondered at his
asking,but explained it nevertheless. Then they
came to a court-yard, where a large sheet of
metal lay spread out. His father wanted to
break off a big piece, but looked round first in
case anyone should notice him. He said to his
son that all the same he need only tell the over
seer and then he could take it straightaway.
Some steps led downfrom this courtto a shaft,
the sides of which were upholstered with some
soft stuff, something like a leather armchair.
At the bottom of this shaft was a rather long
platform and, beyond it, another shaft.
The following is the dreamer's own interpre
tation: "The Rotunda stands for my genitals
and the captive balloon in front of it for the
penis, which I have had to complain of for
being limp." A more detailed translation would
then run thus: the rotunda stands for the but
tocks (regularly included by children amongst
the genitals), the smaller structure in front is
the scrotum. In the dream, his father asks him
what all this is, i.e., what are the purpose and
function of the genitals. To invert this situation
so that the son asks the questions is an obvious
idea, and, since these questions were never
asked in reality, we must construe the dreamthoughts as a wish or take them in a conditional
sense: "If I had asked my father to explain
. . . ." The sequel to this thought we shall find
presently.
The court-yard where the sheet-metal lay is
not in the first place to be explained symbol
ically, but is a reference to the father's place
of business. From motives of discretion I have
substituted sheet-metal for the actual material
dealt with by him, but otherwise I have made
no alteration in the words of the dream. The
dreamer had entered his father's business and
had been much scandalized by the extremely
questionable practices upon which the high

[528a]
General Introduction
profits largely depended. Hence the sequel to
the dream-thought mentioned above would run:
"(If I had asked him), he would have deceived
me as he deceives his customers." The dreamer
himself gives a second explanation for the pull
ing off the piece of metal which serves to rep
resent commercial dishonesty:
it
means, he
says, the practice of masturbation. Not only is
this an explanation with which we have long
been familiar, but it is well in accordance with
this interpretation that the secret practice of
masturbation should be expressed by the op
posite idea ("We may do it openly"). So the
fact that this practice is imputed to the father,
as was the questioning in the first scene of the
dream, is exactly what we should expect. The
dreamer immediately interpreted the shaft, on
account of the soft upholstering of the walls,
as the vagina, and I, on my own account, offer
the remark that going-downas well as going-up
stands for sexual intercourse.
The details of the long platform at the bot
tom of the first shaft, and beyond that the
second shaft, were explained by the dreamer
himself from his own history. He had practised
intercourse for some time and then given it up
on account of inhibitions, but hoped to be able
to resume it by the help of the treatment.
8.1 quote the two following dreams, dreamt
by a foreigner with marked polygamous tend
encies, because they may serve to illustrate the
statement that the dreamer's own person is
present in every dream, even when it is dis
guised in the manifest content. The trunks in
the dreams are female symbols.
(a) Thedreamer was going on a journey and
his luggage was being taken to the station on
a carriage. Therewerea number of trunks piled
one on the top of the other, and amongst them
two large black boxes like those of a commer
cial traveller. He said consolingly to someone:
"You see those are only going as far as the
station."
He does, as a matter of fact, travel with a
great deal of luggage, and he also brings many
stories about women to the treatment. The two
black trunks stand for two dark women who
at the moment are playing the principal part
in his life. One of them wanted to follow him
to Vienna, but on my advice he had telegraphed
to put her off.
(b) A scene at a customs house: A fellowtraveller opened his trunk and said noncha
lantly, smoking a cigarette: "There is nothing
to declare in that." The customs official seemed

[528b]
to Psycho-Analysis
525
to believe him, but felt in the trunk again and
found a strictly prohibited article. The travel
ler then said in a resigned way: "Well it can't
be helped."The dreamer himself is the traveller
and I am the official. He is generally very
straightforward with me, but had made up his
mind to conceal from me a relation which he
had recently formed with a lady, for he as
sumed, quite correctly that I knew her. He dis
places on to a stranger the embarrassing situa
tion of being detected, so that he himself does
not seem to come into the dream at all.
9. Here we have an example of a symbol
which I have not yet mentioned:
The dreamer met his sister with two friends
who were themselves sisters. He shook hands
with these two, but not with his sister.
There was no real episode connected with
this in his mind. Instead, his thoughts went
back to a time when his observations led him
to wonder why a girl's breasts are so late in
developing. The two sisters, therefore, stand
for the breasts; he would have liked to grasp
them with his hand, if only it had not been
his sister.
10. Here is an example of death symbolism
in dreams: The dreamer was crossing a very
high, steep, iron bridge, with two people whose
names he knew but forgot on waking.Suddenly
both of them had vanished and he saw a
ghostly man in a cap and an overall. He asked
him whether he were the telegraph messenger
. . . "No." Or the coachman? . . . "No." He
then went on, and in the dream, had a feeling
of great dread; on waking, he followed it up
with the phantasy that the iron bridge suddenly
broke and that he fell into the abyss.
When stress is laid upon the fact that people
in a dream are unknown to the dreamer, or
that he has forgotten their names, they are, as
a rule, persons with whom he is intimately con
nected. The dreamer was one of a family of
three children; if he had ever wished for the
death of the other two, it would be only just
that he should be visited with the fear of death.
With reference to the telegraph messenger, he
remarked that they always bring bad news.
From his uniform, the man in the dream might
have been a lamplighter, who also puts out the
lights, as the spirit of death extinguishes the
torch of fife. With the coachman he associated
Uhland's poem of the voyage of King Karl,
and recalled a dangerous sail on a lake with
two companions, when he played the part of
the king in the poem. The iron bridge suggested

[529a]
526
Sigmund Freud
to him a recent accident, also the stupid say
ing: "Life is a suspension bridge."
ii. The following may be regarded as an
other example of a death-dream:
An unknown gentleman was leaving a blackedged visiting card on the dreamer.
12. I give another dream which will interest
you from several points of view; it is to be
traced partly, however, to a neurotic condition
in the dreamer:
He was in a train which stopped in the open
country. He thought there was going to be an
accident and that he must make his escape, so
he went through all the compartments, killing
everyone he met—driver, guard, and so on.
This dream recalls a story told him by a
friend. On a certain Italian line, an insane man
was being conveyed in a small compartment,
but by some mistake a passenger was allowed
to get in with him. The madman murdered the
other traveller. Thus, the dreamer identified
himself with this insane man, his reason being
that he was at times tormented by an obsession
that he must make away with "everyone who
shared his knowledge." Then he himself found
a better motivation for the dream. The day
before, he had seen at the theatre a girl he had
meant to marry but had given up because she
gave him
cause
for
jealousy. Knowing the
intensity which jealousy could assume in him,
he would really have been mad to want to
marry her. That is to say, he thought her so
unreliable that his
jealousy would have led
him to murder everyone who got in his way.
The going through a number of rooms, or,
as here, compartments, we have already learnt
to know as a symbol of marriage (the ex
pression of monogamy according to the rule of
opposites).
With reference to the train's stopping in the
open country and the fear of an accident, he
told the following story:
Once when such a sudden halt occurred on
the line outside a station, a young lady who
was in the carriage said that perhaps there was
going to be a collision, and that the best thing
to do was to raise the legs high. This phrase
"raise the legs" had associations with many
walks and excursions into the country, which
he had shared with the girl mentioned above in
the happy early days of their love. Here was a
new argument for the contention that he would
be mad to marry her now; nevertheless, my
knowledge of the situation led me to regard it
as certain that there existed in him all the

[529b]
same the desire to fall a victim to this form
of madness.
THIRTEENTH LECTURE
Archaic and Infantile Features in Dreams
Let us start afresh from our conclusion that,
under
the
influence of the censorship, the
dream-work translates the latent dreamthoughts into another form. These thoughts
are of the same nature as the familiar, con
scious thoughts of waking life; the new form
in which they are expressed is, owing to many
peculiar characteristics, incomprehensible to us.
We have said that it goes back to phases in our
intellectual development which we have long
outgrown—to hieroglyphic writing, to symbol
ic-connections, possibly to conditions which ex
isted
before
the
language
of
thought
was
evolved. On this account we called the form of
expression employed by the dream-work archaic
or regressive.
From this you may draw the inference that
a more profound study of the dream-work
must lead to valuable conclusions about the
initial stages of our intellectual development, of
which at present little is known. I hope it will
be so, but so far this task has not been at
tempted. The era to which the dream-work
takes us back is primitive in a two-fold sense:
in the first place, it means the early days of the
individual—his childhood—and, secondly, in so
far as each individual repeats in some abbrevi
ated fashion during childhood the whole course
of the development of the human race, the
reference is phylogenetic. I believe it not im
possible that we may be able to discriminate
between that part of the latent mental proc
esses which belongs to the early days of the
individual and that which has its roots in the
infancy of the race. It seems to me, for in
stance, that symbolism, a mode of expression
which has never been individually acquired,
may claim to be regarded as a racial heritage.
This, however, is not the only archaic fea
ture in dreams. You are all familiar from actual
experience with the peculiar amnesia of child
hood to which we are subject. I mean that the
first years of life, up to the age of five, six,
or eight, have not left the same traces in mem
ory as our later experiences. True, we come
across individuals who can boast of continu
ous recollection from early infancy to the pres
ent time, but it is incomparably more common
for the opposite, a blank in memory, to be
found. In my opinion, this has not aroused suf-

[530a]
General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis
S27
ficient surprise. At two years old the child can
speak well and soon shows his capacity for
adapting himself to complicated mental situa
tions,and, moreover, says thingswhich he him
self has forgotten when they are repeated to
him years later. And yet memory is more effi
cient in early years, being less overburdened
than it is later. Again, there is no reason to
regard the function of memory as an especially
high or difficult form of mental activity; on
the contrary, excellent memory may be found
in people who are yet on a very low plane
intellectually.
But I must draw your attention to a second
peculiarity based upon the first—namely, that
from the oblivion in which the first years of
childhood are shrouded certain clearly retained
recollections emerge, mostly in the form of
plastic images, for the retention of which there
seems no adequate ground. Memory deals with
the mass of impressions received in later life
by a process of selection, retaining what is im
portantand omitting what is not; but withthe
recollections retained from childhood this is
not so. They do not necessarily reflect im
portant experiences in childhood, not even such
as must have seemed important from the child's
standpoint, but are often so banal and mean
ingless in themselves that we canonlyask our
selves in amazement why just this particular
detail has escaped oblivion. I have tried, with
the help of analysis, to attack the problem of
childhood amnesia and of the fragments of
recollection which break through it, and have
come to the conclusion that, whatever may ap
pear to the contrary, the child no less than the
adult only retains in memory what is impor
tant; but that what is important is represented
(by the processes of condensation and, more
especially of displacement, already familiar to
you) in the memory by something apparently
trivial. For this reason I have called these child
hood recollections screen-memories; a thorough
analysis can evolve from them all that has been
forgotten.
It is a regular task in psycho-analytic treat
ment to fill in the blank in infantile memories,
and, in so far as the treatment is successful to
any extent at all (very frequently, therefore)
we are enabled to bring to light the content of
those early years long buried in oblivion. These
impressions have never really been forgotten,
but were only inaccessible and latent, having
become part of the unconscious. But some
times it happens that they emerge spontane

[530b]
ously from the unconscious, and it is in con
nection with dreams that this happens. It is
clear that the dream-life knows the way back
to these latent, infantile experiences. Many
good illustrations of thisare to be found in psy
choanalytical literature, andI myself havebeen
able to furnish a contribution of the sort. I
once dreamt in a particular connection of some
one who had evidently done me a service and
whom I saw plainly. He was a one-eyed man,
short, fat and high-shouldered; from the con
text I gathered that he was a doctor. Fortu
nately I was able to ask my mother, who was
still living, what was the personal appearance
of the doctor who attended us at the place
where I was born and which I left at the age
of three; she told me that he had only one
eye and was short, fat and high-shouldered; I
learnt also of the accident which was the oc
casion of this doctor's being called in and which
I had forgotten. This command of the for
gotten material of the earliest years of child
hood
is
thus
a
further
archaic feature
of
dreams.
This knowledge has a bearing on another
of the problems which up to the present
have proved insoluble. You will remember the
astonishment caused
by
our discovery that
dreams have their origin in actively evil or in
excessive sexual desires, which have made both
the dream-censorship and dream-distortion nec
essary.Supposing now that we have interpreted
a dream of this sort, and the circumstances are
specially favourable in that the dreamer does
not quarrel with the interpretation itself, he
does nevertheless invariably ask how any such
wish could come into his mind, since it seems
quite foreign to him and he is conscious of
desiring the exact opposite. We need have no
hesitation in pointing out to him the origin of
the wish he repudiates: these evil impulses may
be traced to the past, often indeed to a past
which is not so very far away. It may be
demonstrated that he once knew and was con
scious of them, even if this is no longer so. A
woman who had a dream meaning that she
wished to see her only daughter (then seven
teen years old) lyingdead found,with our help,
that at one time she actually had cherished this
death-wish. The child was the offspring of an
unhappy marriage, which ended in the speedy
separation of husbandand wife. Once whenthe
child was as yet unborn the mother, in an
access of rage after a violent scene with her
husband, beat her body with her clenched fists

[531a]
'528
Sigmund Freud
in order to kill the baby in her womb. How
many mothers who today love their children
tenderly, perhaps with excessive tenderness,
yet conceived them unwillingly and wished that
the life within them might not develop fur
ther; and have indeed turned this wish into
various actions, fortunately of a harmless kind.
The later death-wish against beloved persons,
which appears so puzzling, thus dates from the
early days of the relationship to them.
A father,
whose dream
when interpreted
shows that he wished for the death of his eldest
and favourite child, is in the same way obliged
to recall that there was a time when this wish
was not unknown to him. The man, whose
marriage had proved a disappointment, often
thought when the child was still an infant that if
the little creature who meant nothing to him
were to die he would again be free and would
make better use of his freedom. A large num
ber of similar impulses of hate are to be traced
to a similar source; they are recollections of
something belonging to the past, something
which was once in consciousness and played its
part in mental life. From this you will be in
clined to draw the conclusion that such dreams
and such wishes would not occur in cases where
there have been no changes of this sort in the
relations between two persons, that is to say,
where the relation has been of the same charac
ter from the beginning. I am prepared to grant
you this conclusion, only I must warn you that
you have to consider, not the literal meaning
of the dream, but what it signifies on interpre
tation. It may be that the manifest dream of
the death of some beloved person was only
using this as a terrible mask, whilst really
meaning something totally different, or it is
possible that the beloved person is an illusory
substitute for someone else.
This situation will, however, raise in you
another and much more serious question. You
will say: "Even though this death-wish did at
one time actually exist and this is confirmed
by recollection, that is still no true explanation;
for the desire has long since been overcome
and surely at the present time can exist in the
unconscious merely as a recollection, of no af
fective value, and not as a powerful exciting
agent. For this later assumption we have no
evidence. Why is the wish recollected at all in
dreams?" This is a question which you are
really justified in asking; the attempt to an
swer it would take us far afield and would
oblige us to define our position with regard to

[531b]
one of the most important points in the theory
of dreams. But I must keep within the limits
of our discussion and must forbear to follow
up this question; so you must be reconciled to
leaving it for the present. Let us content ourselves with the actual evidence that this wish,
long smce subdued, can be proved to have
given rise to the dream, and let us continue our
enquiry whether other evil wishes also can be
traced in the same way to the past.
Let us keep to the death-wishes, which we
shall certainly find mostly derived from the
unbounded egoism of the dreamer. Wishes of
this sort are very often found to be the under
lying agents of dreams. Whenever anyone gets
in our way in life—and how often must this
happen when our relations to one another are
so complicated!—a dream is immediately pre
pared to make away with that person, even if
it be father, mother, brother or sister, husband
or wife. It appeared to us amazing that such
wickedness should be innate in humanity, and
certainly we were not inclined to admit without
further evidence that this result of our inter
pretation of dreams was correct. But, when
once we had seen that the origin of wishes of
this sort must be looked for in the past, we had
little difficulty in finding the period in the past
of the individual in which there is nothing
strange in such egoism and such wishes, even
when directed against the nearest and dearest.
A child in his earliest years (which later are
veiled in oblivion) is just the person who fre
quently displays such egoism in boldest relief;
invariably,
unmistakable
tendencies
of
this
kind, or, more accurately, surviving traces of
them, are plainly visible in him. For a child
loves himself first and only later learns to love
others and to sacrifice something of his own
ego to them. Even the people whom he seems
to love from the outset are loved in the first
instance because he needs them and cannot do
without them—again therefore, from motives
of egoism. Only later does the impulse of love
detach itself from egoism: it is a literal fact
that the child learns how to love through his
own egoism.
In this connection it will be instructive to
compare a child's attitude towards his brothers
and sisters with his attitude towards his par
ents. The little child does not necessarily love
his brothers and sisters, and often he is quite
frank about it. It is unquestionable that in
them he sees and hates his rivals, and it is well
known how commonly this attitude persists

[532a]
General Introduction
without interruption for many years, till the
child reaches
maturity and even
later.
Of
course it often gives place to a more tender
feeling, or perhaps we should say it is overlaid
by this, but the hostile attitude seems very
generallyto be the earlier. We can most easily
observe it in children of two and a half to four
years old when a new baby arrives, which gen
erally meets with a very unfriendly reception;
remarks such as "I don't like it. The stork is
to take it away again" are very common. Sub
sequently every opportunity is seized to dis
paragethe new-comer; attempts are evenmade
to injure it and actual attacks upon it are by
no means unheard-of. If the difference in age is
less, by the time the child's mental activity is
more fully developed the rival is already in
existence and he adapts himself to the situa
tion; if on the other hand there is a greater
difference between their ages, the new baby
may rouse certain kindly feelings from the
first, as an object of interest, a sort of living
doll; and when there is as much as eight years
or more between them, especially if the elder
child is a girl, protective, motherly impulses
may at once come into play. But, speaking
honestly, when we find a wish for the death of
a brother or a sister latent in a dream we need
seldom be puzzled, for we find its origin in
early childhood without much trouble, or in
deed, quite often in the later years when they
still lived together.
There is probably no nursery without violent
conflicts between the inhabitants, actuated by
rivalry for the love of the parents, competition
for possessions shared by them all, even for
the actual spacein the room they occupy. Such
hostility is directed against older as well as
younger brothers and sisters. I think it was
Bernard Shaw who said: "If there is anyone
whom a young English lady hates more than
her mother it is her elder sister." Now there is
something in this dictum which jars upon us;
it is hard enough to bring ourselves to under
stand hatred and rivalry between brothers and
sisters, but how can feelings of hate force them
selves into the relation between mother and
daughter, parents and children?
This relationship is no doubt a more favour
able one, also from the children's point of
view; and this too is what our expectations
require: we find it far more offensive for love
to be lacking between parents and children than
between brothers and sisters. We have, so to
speak, sanctified the former love while allow-

[532b]
to Psycho-Analysis
529
ing the latter to remain profane. Yet everyday
observation may show us how frequently the
sentiments entertained towards each other by
parents and grown-up children fall short of the
ideal set up by society, and how much hostility
lies smouldering, ready to burst into flame if
it were not stifled by considerations of filial or
parental duty and by other, tender impulses.
The motives for this hostility are well known,
and we recognize a tendency for those of the
same sex to become alienated, daughter from
mother and father from son. The daughter sees
in her mother the authority which imposes lim
its to her will, whose task it is to bring her to
that renunciation of sexual freedom which so
ciety demands; in certain cases, too, the mother
is still a rival, who objects to being set aside.
The same thing is repeated still more blatantly
between father and son. To the son the father
is the embodiment of the social compulsion to
which he so unwillingly submits, the person
who stands in the way of his following his own
will, of his early sexual pleasures and, when
there is family property, of his enjoyment of
it. When a throne is involved, this impatience
for the
death of the
father may approach
tragic intensity. The relation between father
and daughter or mother and son would seem
less liable to disaster; the latter relation fur
nishes the purest examples of unchanging ten
derness, undisturbed by any egoistic consid
eration.
Why, you ask, do I speak of things so banal
and so well-known to everybody? Because there
exists an unmistakable tendency in people's
minds to deny the significance of these things
in real life and to pretend that the social ideal
is much more frequently realized than it ac
tually is. But it is better that psychology should
tell the truth than that it should be left to
cynics to do so. This general denial is only
applied to real life, it is true; for fiction and
drama are free to make use of the motives laid
bare when these ideals are rudely disturbed.
There is nothing to wonder at therefore if
the dreams of a great number of people bring
to light the wish for the removal of their par
ents, especially of the parent whose sex is the
same as the dreamer's. We may assume that
the wish exists in waking life as well, some
times even in consciousness if it can disguise
itself behind another motive, as the dreamer
in our third example disguised his real thought
by pity for his father's useless suffering. It is
but rarely that hostility reigns alone—far more

[533a]
530
Sigmund
often it yields to more tender feelings which
finally suppress it, when it has to wait in abey
ance till a dream shows it, as it were, in isola
tion. That which the dream shows in a form
magnified by this very isolation resumes its
true proportions when our interpretation has
assigned to it its proper place in relation to
the rest of the dreamer's life. (H. Sachs.) But
we also find this death-wish where there is no
basis for it in real life and where the adult
would never have to confess to entertaining it
in his waking life. The reason for this is that the
deepest and most common motive for estrange
ment, especially between parent and child of the
same sex, came into play in the earliest years of
childhood. I refer to that rivalry of affections
in which sexual elements are plainly empha
sized. The son, when quite a little child, already
begins to develop a peculiar tenderness towards
his mother, whom he looks upon as his own
property, regarding his father in the light of a
rival who disputes this sole possession of his;
similarly the little daughter sees in her mother
someone who disturbs her tender relation to
her father and occupies a place which she feels
she herself could very well fill. Observation
shows us how far back these sentiments date,
sentiments which we describe by the term
Oedipus complex, because in the Oedipus myth
the two extreme forms of the wishes arising
from the situation of the son—the wish to kill
the father and to marry the mother—are real
ized in an only slightly modified form. I do
not assert that the Oedipus complex exhausts
all the possible relations which may exist be
tween parents and children; these relations
may well be a great deal more complicated.
Again, this complex may be more or less strong
ly developed, or it may even become inverted,
but it is a regular and very important factor in
the mental life of the child; we are more in
danger of underestimating than of overestimat
ing its influence and that of the developments
which may follow from it. Moreover, the par
ents themselves frequently stimulate the chil
dren to react with an Oedipus complex, for
parents are often guided in their preferences by
the difference in sex of their children, so that
the father favours the daughter and the mother
the son; or else, where conjugal love has grown
cold, the child may be taken as a substitute for
the love-object which has ceased to attract.
It cannot be said that the world has shown
great gratitude to psycho-analytic research for
the discovery of the Oedipus complex; on the

[533b]
Freud
contrary, the idea has excited the most violent
opposition in grown-up people; and those who
omitted to join in denying the existence of
sentiments so universally reprehended and ta
booed have later made up for this by proffering
interpretations so wide of the mark as to rob
the complex of its value. My own unchanged
conviction is that there is nothing in it to deny
or to gloss over. We ought to reconcile our
selves to facts in which the Greek myth itself
saw the hand of inexorable destiny. Again, it
is interesting to find that the Oedipus complex,
repudiated in actual life and relegated to fic
tion, has there come to its own. 0. Rank in a
careful study of this theme has shown how this
very complex has
supplied dramatic poetry
with an abundance of motives in countless vari
ations, modifications and disguises, in short,
subject to just the distortion familiar to us in
the work of the dream-censorship. So we may
look for the Oedipus complex even in those
dreamers who have J>een fortunate enough to
escape conflicts with their parents in later life;
and closely connected with this we shall find
what is termed the castration complex, the re
action to that intimidation in the field of sex or
to that restraint of early infantile sexual activ
ity which is ascribed to the father.
What we have already ascertained has guided
us to the study of the child's mental fife, and
we may now hope to find in a similar way an
explanation of the source of the other kind of
prohibited wishes in dreams, i.e., the excessive
sexual desires. We are impelled therefore to
study the development of the sexual life of the
child, and here from various sources we leam
the following facts. In the first place, it is an
untenable fallacy to suppose that the child has
no sexual life and to assume that sexuality first
makes its appearance at puberty, when the
genital organs come to maturity. On the con
trary he has from the very beginning a sexual
life rich in content, though it differs in many
points from that which later is regarded as
normal. What in adult life are termed perver
sions depart from the normal in the following
respects: (i) in a disregard for the barriers of
species (the gulf between man and beast), (2)
in the insensibility to barriers imposed by dis
gust, (3) in the transgression of the incestbarrier (the prohibition against seeking sexual
gratification with close blood-relations), (4) in
homosexuality and, (5) in the transferring of
the part played by the genital organs to other
organs and different areas of the body. All

[534a]
General Introduction
these barriers are not in existence from the
outset, but are only gradually built up in the
course of development and education. The lit
tle child is free from them: he does not per
ceive any immense gulf between man and beast,
the arrogance with which man separates him
self from the other animals only dawns in him
at a later period. He shows at the beginning of
life no disgust for excrement, but only learns
this feeling slowly under the influence of edu
cation ; he attaches no particular importance to
the difference between the sexes, in fact he
thinks that both have the same formation of
the genital organs; he directs his earliest sexual
desires and his curiosity to those nearest to him
or to those who for other reasons are specially
beloved—his parents, brothers and sisters or
nurses; and finally we see in him a character
istic which manifests itself again later at the
height of some love-relationship—namely, he
does not look for gratification in the sexual
organs only, but discovers that many other
parts of the body possess the same sort of
sensibility and can yield analogous pleasurable
sensations, playing thereby the part of genital
organs. The child may be said then to be
polymorphously perverse, and even if mere
traces of all these impulses are found in him,
this is due on the one hand to their lesser in
tensity as compared with that which they as
sume in later life and, on the other hand, to the
fact
that
education
immediately
and
ener
getically suppresses all sexual manifestations
in the child. This suppression may be said to
be embodied in a theory; for grown-up people
endeavour to overlook some of these manifes
tations, and, by misinterpretation, to rob others
of their sexual nature, until in the end the
whole thing can be altogether denied. It is
often the same people who first inveigh against
the sexual naughtiness of children in the nurs
ery and then sit down to their writing-tables to
defend the sexual purity of the same children.
When they are left to themselves or when they
are seduced,
children often display perverse
sexual activity to a really remarkable extent.
Of course grown-up people are right in not
taking this too seriously and in regarding it, as
they say, as childish tricks and play, for the
child cannot be judged either by a moral or
legal code as if he were mature and fully re
sponsible; nevertheless these things do exist,
and they have their significance both as evi
dence of innate constitutional tendencies and
inasmuch as they cause and foster later devel-

[534b]
to Psycho-Analysis
531
opments: they give us an insight into the child's
sexual life and so into that of humanity as a
whole. If, then, we find all these perverse wishes
behind the distortions of our dreams, it only
means that dreams in this respect also have
regressed completely to the infantile condition.
Amongst
these
forbidden
wishes
special
prominence must still be given to the incestu
ous desires, i.e., those directed towards sexual
intercourse with parents or brothers and sisters.
You know in what abhorrence human society
holds, or at least professes to hold, such inter
course, and what emphasis is laid upon the
prohibitions of it. The most preposterous at
tempts have been made to account for this
horror of incest: some people have assumed
that it is a provision of natuie for the pres
ervation of the species, manifesting itself in
the mind by these prohibitions
because in
breeding would result in racial degeneration;
others have asserted that propinquity from
early childhood has deflected sexual
desire
from
the persons
concerned. In both these
cases, however, the avoidance of incest would
have been automatically secured and we should
be at a loss to understand the necessity for
stern prohibitions, which would seem rather to
point to a strong desire. Psycho-analytic.inves
tigations have shown beyond the possibility of
doubt that an incestuous love-choice is in fact
the first and the regular one, and that it is only
later that any opposition is manifested towards
it, the causes of which are not to be sought in
the psychology of the individual.
Let us sum up the results which our excur
sions into child-psychology have brought to the
understanding of dreams. We have learnt not
only that the material of the forgotten childish
experiences is accessible to the dream, but also
that the child's mental life, with all its peculi
arities, its egoism, its incestuous object-choice,
persists in it and therefore in the unconscious,
and that our dreams take us back every night
to this infantile stage. This corroborates the
belief that the
Unconscious is the
infantile
mental life, and, with this, the objectionable
impression that so much evil lurks in human
nature grows somewhat less. For this terrible
evil is simply what is original, primitive and
infantile in mental life, what we find in opera
tion in the child, but in part overlook in him
because it is on so small a scale, and in part
do not take greatly to heart because we do not
demand a high ethical standard in a child. By
regressing to this infantile stage our dreams

[535a]
532
Sigmund Freud
appear to have brought the evil in us to light,
but the appearance is deceptive, though we
have let ourselves be dismayed by it; we are
not so evil as the interpretation of our dreams
would lead us to suppose.
If the evil impulses of our dreams are merely
infantile, a reversion to the beginnings of our
ethical development, the dream simply making
us children again in thought and feeling, it is
surely not reasonable to be ashamed of these
evil dreams. But the reasoning faculty is only
part of our mental life; there is much in it
besides which is not reasonable, and so it hap
pens that, although it is unreasonable, we never
theless are ashamed of such dreams. We sub
ject them to
the
dream-censorship and
are
ashamed and indignant when one of these wishes
by way of exception penetrates our conscious
ness in a form so undisguised that we cannot
fail to recognize it; yes, we even at times feel
just as much ashamed of a distorted dream as
if we really understood it. Just think of the
outraged comment of the respectable elderly
lady upon her dream about love service, al
though it was not interpreted to her. So the
problem is not yet solved, and it is still possible
that if we pursue this question of the evil in
dreams we may arrive at another conclusion
and another estimate of human nature.
Our whole enquiry has
led to two results
which, however, merely indicate the beginning
of new problems and new doubts. In the first
place: the regression in dreams is one not only
of form but of substance. Not only does it
translate our thoughts into a primitive form of
expression, but it also re-awakens the peculi
arities of our primitive mental life—the old
supremacy of the ego, the initial impulses of our
sexual life, even restores to us our old intellec
tual possession if we may conceive of symbol
ism in this way. And secondly: all these old
infantile characteristics, which were once domi
nant and solely dominant, must today be ac
counted to the unconscious and must alter and
extend our views about it. Unconscious is no
longer a term for what is temporarily latent:
the unconscious is a special realm, with its own
desires and modes of expression and peculiar
mental mechanisms not elsewhere operative.
Yet the latent dream-thoughts disclosed by our
interpretation do not belong to
this realm;
rather they correspond to the kind of thoughts
we have in waking life also. And yet they are
unconscious: how is the paradox to be resolved?
We begin to realize that here we must discrimi
nate. Something which has its origin in our

[535b]
conscious life and shares its characteristics—
we call it the residue from the previous day—
meets together with something from the realm
of the unconscious in the formation of a dream,
and it is between these two regions that the
dream-work is accomplished. The influence of
the unconscious impinging upon this residue
probably constitutes the condition for regres
sion. This is the deepest insight into the nature
of dreams possible to us until we have explored
further fields in the mind; but soon it will be
time to give another name to the unconscious
character of the latent dream-thoughts, in order
to distinguish it from that unconscious ma
terial which has its origin in the province of the
infantile.
We can of course also ask: What is it that
forces our mental activity during sleep to such
regression? Why cannot the mental stimuli that
disturb sleep be dealt with without it? And if
on account of the dream-censorship the mental
activity has to disguise itself in the old, and
now incomprehensible,
form
of
expression,
what is the object of re-animating the old im
pulses, desires and characteristics, now sur
mounted ; what, in short, is the use of regression
in substance as well as in form? The only satis
factory answer would be that this is the one
possible way in which dreams can be formed,
that, dynamically considered, the relief from
the stimulus giving rise to the dream cannot
otherwise be accomplished. But this is an an
swer for which, at present, we have no justifi
cation.
FOURTEENTH LECTURE
Wish-Fulfilment
Shall I remind you once more of the steps
by which we have arrived at our present posi
tion? When in applying our technique we came
upon the distortion in dreams, we made up our
minds to avoid it for the moment and turned
to the study of infantile dreams for some defi
nite information about the nature of dreams in
general. Next, equipped with the results of this
investigation,
we
attacked
the
question
of
dream-distortion directly, and I hope that bit
by bit we have also mastered that. Now, how
ever, we are bound to admit that our findings
in these two directions do not exactly tally,
and it behooves us to combine and correlate
our results.
Both enquiries have made it plain that the
essential feature in the dream-work is the trans
formation of thoughts into hallucinatory experi-

[536a]
General Introduction
ence. It is puzzling enough to see how this
process is accomplished, but this is a problem
for general psychology, and wehave not to deal
with it here. We have learnt from children's
dreams that the object of the dream-work is to
remove, by means of the fulfilment of some
wish, a mental stimulus which is disturbing
sleep. We could make no similar pronounce
ment with regard to distorted dreams until we
understood how to interpret them, but from
the outset we expected to be able to bring our
ideas about them into line with our views on
infantile dreams. This expectation was for the
first time fulfilled when we recognized that all
dreams are really children's dreams; that they
make use of infantile material and are charac
terized by impulses and mechanisms which be
long to the childish mind. When we feel we
have mastered the distortion in dreams we must
go on to find out whether the notion that dreams
are wish-fulfilments holds good of distorted
dreams also.
We have just subjected a series of dreams to
interpretation, but without taking the question
of wish-fulfilment into consideration at all. I
feel certain that, while we were talking about
them, the questionrepeatedly forceditself upon
you: "What has become of the wish-fulfilment
which is supposed to be the object of the
dream-work?" Now this question is important,
for it is the one which our lay critics are con
stantly asking. As you know, mankind has an
instinctive antipathy to intellectual novelties;
one of the ways in which this shows itself is that
any such novelty is immediately reduced to its
very smallest compass,and if possibleembodied
in some catch-word. Wish-fulfilment has be
come the catch-word for the new theory of
dreams. Directly they hear that dreams are
said to be wish-fulfilments, the laity asks:
"Where does the wish-fulfilment come in?" and
their asking the question amounts to a repudia
tion of the idea. They can immediately think
of countless dreams of their own which were
accompanied by feeling so unpleasant as some
times to reach the point of agonizing dread;
and so this statement of the psycho-analytical
theory of dreams appears to them highly im
probable. It is easy to reply that in distorted
dreams the wish-fulfilment is not openly ex
pressed, but has to be looked for, so that it
cannot be shown until the dreams have been
interpreted. We know too that the wishes un
derlying these distorted dreams are those which
are prohibited and rejected by the censorship,
and that it is just their existence which is the

[536b]
to Psycho-Analysis
533
cause of distortion and the motive for the in
tervention of the censorship. But it is difficult
to make the lay critic understand that we must
not ask about the wish-fulfilment in a dream
before it has been interpreted; he always for
gets this. His reluctance to accept the theory of
wish-fulfilment is really nothing but the effect
of the dream-censorship, causing him to re
place the real thought by a substitute, and fol
lowing from his repudiation of these censored
dream-wishes.
Of course we ourselves must feel the need
to explain why so many dreams are painful in
content; and in particular we shall want to
know how we come to have anxiety-dreams.
Here for the first time we are confronted with
the problem of the affects in dreams; a prob
lem which deserves special study, but one which
we cannot concern ourselves with just now,
unfortunately. If the dream is a wish-fulfil
ment, it should be impossible for any painful
emotions to come into it: on this point the lay
critics seem to be right. But the matter is com
plicated by three
considerations which they
have overlooked.
First, it may happen that the dream-work is
not wholly successful in creating a wish-fulfil
ment, so that part of the painful feeling in the
latent thoughts is carried over into the mani
fest dream. Analysis would then have to show
that these thoughts were a great deal more
painful than the dream which is formed from
them; this much can be proved in every in
stance. We admit then that the dream-work has
failed in its purpose, just as a dream of drink
ing excited by the stimulus of thirst fails to
quench that thirst. One is still thirsty after it
and has to wake up and drink. Nevertheless, it
is a proper dream: it has renounced nothing of
its essential nature. We must say: "Ut desint
vires, tamen est laudandavoluntas?- The clearly
recognizable intention remains a praiseworthy
one, at any rate. Such instances of failure in the
work are by no means rare, and one reason is
that it is so much more difficult for the dreamwork to produce the required change in the
nature of the affect than to modify the con
tent; affects are often very intractable. So it
happens that in the process of the dream-work
the painful content of the dream-thoughts is
transformed into a
wish-fulfilment while the
painful affect persists unchanged. When this
occurs, the affect is quite out of harmony with
the content, which gives our critics the oppor1The will is commendable, though the ability may be
wanting.

[537a]
534
Sigmund Freud
tunity of remarking that the dream is so far
from being a wish-fulfilment that even a harm
less content may be accompanied in it by pain
ful feelings. Our answer to this rather unintelli
gent comment will be that it is just in dreams
of this sort that the wish-fulfilling tendency of
the dream-work is most apparent, because it is
there seen in isolation. The mistake in this
criticism arises because people who are not
familiar with the neuroses imagine a more inti
mate connection between content and affect
than actually exists, and so cannot understand
that there may be an alteration in the content
while. the accompanying affect remains un
changed.
A second consideration, much more important
and far-reaching but equally overlooked by the
laity, is the following. A wish-fulfilment must
certainly bring some pleasure; but we go on to
ask: "To whom?" Of course, to the person
who has the wish. But we know that the atti
tude of the dreamer towards his wishes is a
peculiar one: he rejects them, censors them, in
short, he will have none of them. Their fulfil
ment then can afford him no pleasure, rather
the opposite, and here experience shows that
this opposite, which has still to be explained,
takes the form of anxiety. The dreamer, where
his wishes are concerned, is like two separate
people closely linked together by some im
portant thing in common. Instead of enlarging
upon this I will remind you of a well-known
fairy-tale in which you will see these relation
ships repeated. A good fairy promised a poor
man and his wife to fulfil their first three
wishes. They were delighted and made up their
minds to choose the wishes carefully. But the
woman was tempted by the smell of some sau
sages being cooked in the next cottage and
wished for two like them. Lo! and behold, there
they were—and the first wish was
fulfilled.
With that, the man lost his temper and in his
resentment wished that the sausages might hang
on the tip of his wife's nose. This also came to
pass, and the sausages could not be removed
from their position; so the second wish was
fulfilled, but it was the man's wish and its ful
filment was most unpleasant for the woman.
You know the rest of the story: as they were
after all man and wife, the third wish had to
be that the sausages should come off the end
of the woman's nose. We might make use of
this fairy-tale many times over in other con
texts, but here it need only serve to illustrate
the fact that it is possible for the fulfilment of
one person's wish to be very disagreeable to

[537b]
someone else, unless the tv/o people are en
tirely at one.
It will not be difficult now to arrive at a still
better understanding of anxiety-dreams. There
is just one more observation to be made use of
and then we may adopt an hypothesis which
is supported by several considerations. The
observation is that anxiety-dreams often have
a content in which there is no distortion; it
has, so to speak, escaped the censorship. This
type of dream is frequently an undisguised
wish-fulfilment, the wish being of course not
one which the dreamer would accept but one
which he has rejected; anxiety has developed
in place of the working of the censorship.
Whereas the infantile dream is an open fulfil
ment of a wish admitted by the dreamer, and
the ordinary distorted dream is the disguisedful
filment of a repressed wish, the formula for the
anxiety-dream is that it is the open fulfilment
of a repressed wish. Anxiety is an indication
that the repressed wish has proved too strong
for the censorship and has accomplished or was
about to accomplish its fulfilment in spite of
it. We can understand that fulfilment of a re
pressed wish can only be, for us who are on
the side of
the censorship, an occasion for
painful emotions and for setting up a defence.
The anxiety then manifested in our dreams is,
if you like to put it so, anxiety experienced be
cause of the strength of wishes which at other
times we manage to stifle. The study of dreams
alone does not reveal to us why this defence
takes the form of anxiety; obviously we must
consider the latter in other connections.
The hypothesis which holds good for anxietydreams without any distortion may be adopted
also for those which have undergone some de
gree of distortion, and for other kinds of un
pleasant dreams in which the accompanying
unpleasant feelings probably approximate to
anxiety. Anxiety-dreams generally wake us; we
usually break off our sleep before the repressed
wish behind the dream overcomes the censor
ship and reaches complete fulfilment. In such
a case the dream has failed to achieve its pur
pose, but its essential character is not thereby
altered. We have compared the dream with a
night-watchman, a guardian of sleep, whose
purpose it is to protect sleep from interruption.
Now night-watchmen also, just like dreams,
have to rouse sleepers when they are not strong
enough to ward off the cause of disturbance or
danger alone. Nevertheless we do sometimes
succeed in continuing to sleep even when our
dreams begin to give us some uneasiness and

[538a]
General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis
535
to turn to anxiety.We say to ourselves in sleep:
"It is only a dream after all," and go on
sleeping.
You may ask when it happens that the
dream-wish is able to overcome the censorship.
This may depend either on the wish or on the
censorship: it may be that for unknown rea
sons the strength of the wish at times becomes
excessive; but our impression is that it is more
often the attitude of the censorship which is
responsible for this shifting in the balance of
power. We have already heard that the censor
ship works with varying intensity in each in
dividual instance, treating the different ele
ments with different degrees of strictness; now
we may add that it is very variable in its gen
eral behaviour and does not show itself always
equally severe towards the same element. If
then it chances that the censorship feels itself
for once powerless against some dream-wish
which threatens to overflow it, it then, instead
of making use of distortion, employs the last
weapon left to it and destroys sleepby bringing
about an access of anxiety.
At this point it strikes us that we still have
no idea why these evil, rejected wishes rise up
just at night-time, so as to disturb us when
we sleep. The answer can hardly be found ex
cept in another hypothesis which goes back to
the nature of sleep itself. During the day the
heavypressureof a censorship is exercised upon
these wishes and, as a rule, it is impossible for
them to make themselves felt at all. But in the
night it is probable that this censorship, like
all the other interests of mental life, is sus
pended, or at least very much weakened, in fa
vour of the single desire for sleep. So it is due
to this partial abrogation of the censorship at
night that the forbidden wishes can again be
come active. There are nervous people suffering
from insomnia who confess that their sleepless
ness was voluntary in the first instance; for
they did not dare to go to sleep because they
were afraid of their dreams—that is to say,
they feared the consequences of the diminished
vigilance of the censorship. You will have no
difficultyin understanding that this curtailment
of the censorship does not argue any flagrant
carelessness:
sleep impairs our motor func
tions; even if our evil intentions do begin to
stir within us the utmost they can do is to pro
duce a dream, which is for all practical pur
poses harmless; and it is this comforting cir
cumstance which gives rise to
the sleeper's
remark, made, it is true, in the night but yet
not part of his dream-life: "It is only a dr,eam."
So we let it have its way and continue to sleep.
Thirdly, if you call to mind our idea that
the dreamer striving against his own wishes is
like a combination of two persons, separate and
yet somehow intimately united, you will be
able to understand another possible way in
which something that is highly unpleasant may
be brought about through wish-fulfilment: I
am speaking of punishment. Here again the
fairy-tale of the three wishes may help to make
things clear. The sausages on the plate were
the direct fulfilment of the first person's (the
woman's) wish; the sausages on the tip of her
nose were the fulfilment of the second person's
(the husband's) wish, but at the same time
they were the punishment for the foolish wish
of the wife. In the neuroses we shall meet with
wishes corresponding in motivation to the third
wish of the fairy-tale, the only one left. There
are many such punishment tendencies in the
mental life of man; they are very strong and
we may well regard them as responsible for
some of our painful dreams. Now you will
probably think that with all this there is very
little of the famous wish-fulfilment left; but on
closer consideration you will admit that you
are wrong. In comparison with the manifold
possibilities (to be discussed later) of what
dreams might be—according to some writers,
what they actually are—the solution:
wishfulfilment, anxiety-fulfilment, punishment-ful
filment, is surely quite a narrow one. Add to
this, that anxiety is the direct opposite of a
wish and that opposites lie very near one an
other in association and, as we have learned,
actually coincide in the unconscious. Moreover,
punishment itself is the fulfilment of a wish,
namely, the wish of the other, censoring person.
On the whole then, I have made no conces
sion to your objections to the wish-fulfilment
theory; we are bound, however, to demon
strate its presence in any and every distorted
dream, and we have certainly no desire to shirk
this task. Let us go back to the dream we have
already interpreted, about the three bad theatre
tickets for one florin and a half, from which
we have already learnt a good deal. I hope you
still remember it: A lady, whose husband told
her one day about the engagement of her
friend Elise who was only three months younger
than herself, dreamt on the following night that
she and her husband were at the theatre and
that one side of the stalls was almost empty.
Her husband told her that Elise and her fiance
had wanted to go to the theatre too; but could
not, because they could only get such bad seats,

[539a]
536
Sigmund
three tickets for a florin and a half. His wife
said that they had not lost much by it. We dis
covered that the dream-thoughts had to do with
her vexation at having been in such a hurry to
marry and her dissatisfaction withher husband.
We may well be curious how these gloomy
thoughts can have been transformed into a
wish-fulfilment, and what trace of it can be
found in the manifest content. Now we know
already that the element too soon, too great a
hurry, was eliminated by the censorship; the
empty stalls are an allusion to this element.
The puzzling phrase "three for one florin and a
half" is now more comprehensible to us than
at first, through the knowledge of symbolism
that we have acquired since then.1 The number
three really stands for a man and we can easily
translate the manifest element to mean: to buya
man (husband) with the dowry. ("I could have
bought one ten times better for my dowry.")
Going to the theatre obviously stands for mar
riage. Getting the tickets too soon is in fact a
direct substitute for marrying too soon. Now
this substitution is the work of the wish-fulfil
ment. The dreamer had not always felt so
dissatisfied with her premature marriage as she
was on the day when she heard of her friend's
engagement. She had been proud of her mar
riage at the time and considered herself more
highlyfavoured than her friend. Onehears that
naive girls, on becoming engaged, frequently
express their delight at the idea that they will
now soon be able to go to all plays and see
everything hitherto forbidden them.
The indication of curiosity and a desire to
"look on" evinced here comes, without doubt,
originally from the sexual gazingimpulse, espe
cially regarding the parents, and this became
a strong motive impelling the girl to marry
early; in this manner going to the theatre be
came an obvious allusive substitute for getting
married. In her vexation at the present time
on account
of her premature marriage
she
therefore reverted to the time when this same
marriage fulfilled a wish, by gratifying her
skoptophilia; and so, guided by this old wishimpulse, she replaced the idea of marriage by
that of going to the theatre.
We may say that the example we have chosen
to demonstrate a hidden wish-fulfilment is not
the most convenient one, but in all other dis
torted dreams we should have to proceed in a
1 Another interpretation of the number three, occur
ring in the dream of this childless woman, lies very
close;
but I
will not mention it
here, because this
analysis did not furnish any material illustrating it.

[539b]
Freud
manner analogousto that employedabove. It is
not possible for me to do this here and now, so
I will merely express my conviction that such
procedure will invariably meet with success.
But I wish to dwell longer upon this point in
our theory: experience has taught me that it is
one of the most perilous of the whole theory of
dreams, exposed to many contradictions and
misunderstandings. Besides, you are perhaps
still under the impression that I have already
retracted part of my statement by saying that
the dream may be either a wish-fulfilment, or
its
opposite,
an
anxiety
or
a
punishment,
brought to actuality; and you may think this a
good opportunity to force me to make further
reservations. Also I have been reproached with
presenting facts that seem obvious to myself
in a manner too condensed to carry conviction.
When anyone has gone as far as this in
dream-interpretation and has accepted all our
conclusions up to this point, it often happens
that he comes to a standstill at this question of
wish-fulfilment and asks: "Admitting that every
dream means something and that this meaning
may be discovered by employing the technique
of psycho-analysis, why must it always, in face
of all the evidence to the contrary, be forced
into the formula of wish-fulfilment? Why must
our thoughts at night be any less many-sided
than our thoughts by day; so that at one time
a dream might be a fulfilment of some wish, at
another time, as you say yourself, the opposite,
the actualization of a dread; or, again, the ex
pression of a resolution, a warning, a weighing
of some problem with its pros and cons, or a
reproof, some prick of conscience, or an at
tempt to prepare oneself for something which
has to be done—and so forth? Why this per
petual insistence upon a wish or, at the most,
its opposite?"
It might be supposed that a difference of
opinion on this point is a matter of no great
moment, if there is agreement on all others.
Cannot we be satisfied with having discovered
the meaning of dreams and the ways by which
we can find out the meaning? We surely go back
on the advance we have made if we try to
limit this meaning too strictly. But this is not
so. A misunderstanding on this head touches
what is essential to our knowledge of dreams
and imperils its value for the understanding of
neuroses. Moreover, that readiness to oblige the
other party which has its value in business life
is not only out of place but actually harmful in
scientific matters.
My first answer to the question why dreams

[540a]
General Introduction
should not be many-sided in their meaning is
the usual one in such a case: I do not know
why they should not be so, and should have
no objection if they were. As far as I am con
cerned, they can be so! But there is just one
trifling obstacle in the way of this wider and
more convenient conception of dreams—that
as a matter of fact they are not so. My second
answer would emphasize the point that to as
sume that dreams represent manifold modes of
thought and intellectual operations is by no
means a novel idea to myself: once, in the his
tory of a pathological case, I recorded a dream
which occurred three nights running and never
again; and gave it as my explanation that this
dream corresponded to a resolution, the repeti
tion of which became unnecessary as soon as
that resolution was carried out. Later on, I
published a dream which represented a confes
sion. How is it possible for me then to con
tradict myself and assert that dreams are al
ways and only wish-fulfilments?
I do it rather than permit a stupid misunder
standing which might cost us the fruit of all
our labours on the subject of dreams; a mis
understanding that confounds the dream with
the latent dream-thoughts, and makes state
ments with regard to the former which are ap
plicable to the latter and to the latter only. For
it is perfectly true that dreams can represent,
and be themselves replaced by, all the modes of
thought
just enumerated: resolutions, warn
ings, reflections, preparations or attempts to
solve some problem in regard to conduct, and
so on. But when you look closely, you will rec
ognize that all this is true only of the latent
thoughts which have been transformed into
the dream. You learn from interpretations of
dreams that the unconscious thought-processes
of mankind are occupied with such resolutions,
preparations
and
reflections,
out
of
which
dreams are formed by means of the dreamwork. If your interest at any given moment is
not so much in the dream-work, but centres on
the unconscious thought-processes in people,
you will then eliminate the dream-formation
and say of dreams themselves, what is for all
practical purposes correct, that they represent
a warning, a resolve, and so on. This is what is
often done in psycho-analytic work: generally
we endeavour simply to demolish the manifest
form of dreams and to substitute for it the cor
responding latent thoughts in which the dream
originated.
Thus it is that we learn quite incidentally
from our attempt to assess the latent dream-

[540b]
to Psycho-Analysis
537
thoughts that all the highly complicated mental
acts we have enumerated can be performed un
consciously—a conclusion surely as
tremen
dous as it is bewildering.
But to go back a little: you are quite right
in speaking of dreams as representing these
various modes of thought, provided that you
are quite clear in your own minds that you are
using an abbreviated form of expression and
do not imagine that the manifold variety of
which you speak is in itself part of the essential
nature of dreams. When you speak of a dream
you must mean either the manifest dream, i.e.,
the product of the dream-work, or at most that
work
itself, i.e., the
mental process which
forms the latent dream-thoughts into the mani
fest dream. To use the word in any other sense
is a confusion of ideas which is bound to be
mischievous. If what you say is meant to apply
to the latent thoughts behind the dream, then
say so plainly, and do not add to the obscurity
of the problem by your loose way of expressing
yourselves. The latent dream-thoughts are the
material which is transformed by the dreamwork into the manifest dream. What makes
you constantly confound the material with the
process which deals with it? If you do that, in
what way are you superior to those who know
of the final product only, without being able to
explain where it comes from or how it is con
structed?
The only thing essential to the dream itself is
the dream-work which has operated upon the
thought-material; and when we come to theory
we have no right to disregard this, even if in
certain practical situations it may be neglected.
Further, analytic observation shows that the
dream-work never consists merely in translat
ing the latent thoughts into the archaic or re
gressive forms of expression described. On the
contrary, something is invariably added which
does not belong to the latent thoughts of the
day-time, but which is the actual motive force
in dream-formation; this indispensable com
ponent being the equally unconscious wish, to
fulfil which the content of the dream is trans
formed. In so far, then, as you are considering
only the thoughts represented in it, the dream
may be any conceivable thing—a warning, a
resolve, a preparation, and so on; but besides
this, it itself is always the fulfilment of an un
conscious wish, and, when you regard it as the
result of the dream-work, it is this alone. A
dream, then, is never simply the expression of
a resolve or warning, and nothing more: in it
the resolve, or whatever it may be, is trans-

[541a]
538
Sigmund
lated into the archaic form with the assistance
of an unconscious wish, and metamorphosed in
such a way as to be a fulfilment of that wish.
This single characteristic, that of fulfilling a
wish, is the constant one: the other component
varies; it may indeed itself be a wish; in which
event the dream represents the fulfilment of
a latent wish from our waking hours brought
about by the aid of an unconscious wish.
Now all this is quite clear to myself, but I
do not know whether I have succeeded in mak
ing it equally clear to you; and it is difficult to
prove it to you; for, on the one hand, proof
requires the evidence afforded by
a careful
analysis of many dreams and, on the other
hand, this, the crucial and most important
point in our conception of dreams, cannot be
presented convincingly without reference to
considerations upon which we have not yet
touched. Seeing how closely linked up all phe
nomena are, you can hardly imagine that we
can penetrate very far into the nature of any
one of them without troubling ourselves about
others of a similar nature. Since as yet we
know nothing about those phenomena which
are so nearly akin to dreams—neurotic symp
toms—we must once more content ourselves
with what we actually have achieved. I will
merely give you the explanation of one more
example and adduce a new consideration.
Let us take once more that dream to which
we have already reverted several times, the one
about the three theatre tickets for one florin
and a half. I can assure you that I had no
ulterior motive in selecting it in the first in
stance for an illustration. You know what the
latent thoughts were: the vexation, after hear
ing that her friend had only just become en
gaged, that she herself should have married so
hastily; depreciation of her husband and the
idea that she could have found a better one if
only she had waited. We also know already
that the wish which made a dream out of these
thoughts was the desire to look on, to be able to
go to the theatre—very probably an offshoot
of an old curiosity to find out at last what
really does happen after marriage. It is well
known that in children this curiosity is regu
larly directed towards the sexual life of the
parents; that is to say, it is an infantile im
pulse and, wherever it persists later in life, it
has its roots in the infantile period. But the
news received on the day previous to the dream
gave no occasion for the awakening of this
skoptophilia; it only roused vexation and re-

[541b]
Freud
gret. This wish-impulse (of skoptophilia) was
not at first connected with the latent thoughts,
and the
results of the dream-interpretation
could have been used by the analysis without
taking it into consideration at all. But again,
the vexation was not in itself capable of pro
ducing a dream: no dream could be formed out
of the thought: "It was folly to be in such a
hurry to marry" until that thought had stirred
up the early wish to see at last what happened
after marriage. Then this wish
formed the
dream-content, substituting for marriage the
going to the theatre; and the form was that of
the
fulfilment of the
earlier wish:
"Now I
may go to the theatre and look at all that we
have never been allowed to see; and you may
not. I am married and you have got to wait."
In this way the actual situation was trans
formed into its opposite and an old triumph
substituted for the recent discomfiture; and
incidentally, satisfaction both of a gazing im
pulse and of one of egoistic rivalry was brought
about. It is this latter satisfaction which deter
mines the manifest content of the dream; for
in it she is actually sitting in the theatre, while
her friend cannot get in. Those portions of the
dream-content behind which the latent thoughts
still conceal themselves are to be found in the
form
of inappropriate and incomprehensible
modifications of the gratifying situation. The
business of interpretation is to put aside those
features in the whole which merely represent a
wish-fulfilment and to reconstruct the painful
latent dream-thoughts from these indications.
The consideration which I said I wished to
call to your notice is intended to direct your
attention to these latent dream-thoughts now
brought into prominence. I must beg you not
to forget that, first, the dreamer is unconscious
of them; secondly, that they are quite reason
able and coherent, so that we can understand
them as comprehensible reactions to whatever
stimulus has given rise to the dream; and,
thirdly, that they may have the value of any
mental impulse or intellectual operation. I will
designate these thoughts more strictly now than
hitherto as the residue from the previous day;
the dreamer may acknowledge them or not. I
then distinguish between this residue and latent
dream-thoughts so that, as we have been ac
customed to do all along, I will call everything
which we learn from the interpretation of the
dream the latent dream-thoughts, while the
residue from the previousday is only a part of
the latent dream-thoughts. Then our concep
tion of what happens is this: something has

[542a]
General Introduction
been added to the residue from the previous
day, something which also belongs to the un
conscious, a strong but repressed wish-impulse,
and it is this alone which makes the formation
of a dream possible. The wish-impulse, acting
upon the residue, creates the other part of the
latent
dream-thoughts,
that
part which
no
longer need appear rational or comprehensible
from the point of view of our waking life.
To illustrate the relation between the resi
due and the unconscious wish I have elsewhere
made use of a comparison which I cannot do
better than repeat here. Every business under
taking requires a capitalist to defray the ex
penses and an entrepreneur who has the idea
and understands how to carry it out. Now the
part of the capitalist in dream-formation is al
ways and only played by the unconscious wish;
it supplies the necessary fund of mental energy
for it: the entrepreneur is the residue from
the previous day, determining the manner of
the expenditure. It is, of course, quite possible
for the capitalist himself to have the idea and
the special knowledge needed, or for the entre
preneur himself to have capital. This simplifies
the practical situation but makesthe theory of it
more difficult. In economics we discriminate
between the man in his function of capitalist
and the same man in his capacity as entrepre
neur; and this distinction restores the funda
mental situation upon which our comparison is
based. The same variations are to be found in
the formation of dreams: I leave you to follow
them out for yourselves.
We cannot go any further at this point; for
I think it likely that a disturbing thought has
long since occurred to you and it deserves a
hearing. You may ask: "Is the so-calledresidue
really unconscious in the sense in which the
wish necessary for the formation of the dream
is unconscious?" Your suspicion is justified:
this is the salient point in the whole matter.
They are not both unconscious in the same
sense. The dream-wish belongs to a different
type of unconscious, which, as we have seen,
has its roots in the infantile period and is fur
nished with special mechanisms. It is very
expedient to distinguish the two types of un
conscious from one another by speaking of
them in different terms. But, all the same, we
will rather wait until we have familiarized our
selves with the phenomena of the neuroses. If
our conception of the existence of any kind of
unconscious be already regarded as fantastic,
what will people say if we admit that to reach
our solution we have had to assume two kinds?

[542b]
to Psycho-Analysis
539
Let us break off at this point. Once more you
have heard only an incomplete statement; but
is it not a hopeful thought that this knowledge
will be carried further, either by ourselves or
by those who come after us? And have not we
ourselves
learnt
enough
that
is
new
and
startling?
FIFTEENTH LECTURE
Doubtful Points and Critical
Observations
We will not leave the subject of dreams with
out dealing with the most common doubts and
uncertainties arising in connection with the
novel ideas
and
conceptions we have been
discussing: those of you who have followed
these lectures attentively will have collected
some material of the kind.
1. You may have received an impression that
even with strict adherence to technique our
work of dream-interpretation leaves so much
room for uncertainty that reliable translation
of manifest dreams into their latent dreamthoughts will be thereby frustrated. You will
urge first that one never knows whether any
particular element in a dream is to be under
stood literally or symbolically, since things
employed as symbols do not thereby cease to
be themselves. Where there is no
objective
evidence to decide the question the interpreta
tion on that particular point will be left to be
arbitrarily determined by the interpreter. Fur
ther,
since
in
the
dream-work
opposites
coincide, it
is in
every instance uncertain
whether
a specific dream-element is to be
understood in a positive or a negative sense,
as itself or as its opposite—another opportuni
ty for the interpreter to exercise a choice.
Thirdly, on account of the frequency with
which inversion of every kind is employed in
dreams, it is open to him to assume whenever
he chooses that such an inversion has taken
place. Finally you will point to having heard
that one is seldom certain that the interpre
tation arrived at is the only possible one, and
that there is danger of overlooking another
perfectly admissible interpretation of the same
dream. In these circumstances, you will con
clude, the discretion of the interpreter has a
latitude that seems incompatible with any ob
jective certainty in the result. Or you may
also assume that the fault does not lie in dreams
themselves, but that something erroneous in
our conceptions and premises produces the un
satisfactory character of our interpretations.

[543a]
540
Sigmund Freud
All that you say is undeniable and yet I do
not think it justifies either of your conclusions:
that dream-interpretation as practised by us
is at the mercy of the interpreter's arbitrary
decisions or that the inadequacy of the results
calls in question the correctness of our pro
cedure. If for the arbitrary decision of the
interpreter you will substitute his skill, his ex
perience and his understanding, then I am with
you. This kind of personal factor is of course
indispensable, especially when interpretation is
difficult; it is just the same in other scientific
work, however; it can't be helped that one man
will use any given technique less well, or apply
it
better, than
another. The impression of
arbitrariness made, for example, by the inter
pretation of symbols is corrected by the reflec
tion
that
as
a
rule
the
connection
of
the
dream-thoughts with one another, and of the
dream with the life of the dreamer and the
whole
mental
situation at the time
of
the
dream, points directly to one of all the pos
sible interpretations and renders all the rest
useless.
The
conclusion
that
the
imperfect
character of the interpretations proceeds from
fallacious hypotheses loses its force when con
sideration shows that, on
the contrary, the
ambiguity or indefiniteness of dreams is a
quality which we should necessarily expect in
them.
Let us call to mind our statement that the
dream-work undertakes
a
translation
of the
dream-thoughts into a primitive mode of ex
pression, analogous to hieroglyphics. Now all
such primitive systems of expression are nec
essarily acompanied by ambiguity and indefi
niteness ; but we should not on that account be
justified in doubting their practicability. You
know that the coincidence of opposites in the
dream-work is analogous to what is called the
antithetical sense of primal words in the oldest
languages/The philologist, R. Abel, to whom
we owe this information, writing in 1884, begs
us not on any account to imagine that there
was any ambiguity in what one person said to
another by means of ambivalent words of this
sort. On the contrary, intonation, gestures and
the whole context can have left no doubt what
ever which of the two opposites the speaker
had in mind to convey. In writing where ges
tures are absent the addition of little pictorial
signs, not meant to receive separate oral ex
pression, replaced them: e.g., a drawing of a
little man, either crouching or standing upright,
according as the ambiguous ken of the hiero
glyphic meant weak or strong. So that mis

[543b]
understanding was avoided in spite of the
ambiguity of sounds and signs.
In ancient systems of expression, for in
stance, in the scripts of the oldest languages,
indefiniteness of various kinds is found with
a frequency which we should not tolerate in
our writings today. Thus in many Semitic
writings
only the
consonants
of
the
words
appear: the omitted vowelshave to be supplied
by the reader from his knowledge and from
the context. Hieroglyphic writing follows a
similar principle, although not exactly the
same; and this is the reason why nothing is
known of the pronunciation of ancient Egyp
tian. There are besides other kinds of indefi
nitenessin the sacred writingsof the Egyptians:
for example, it is left to the writer's choice to
inscribe the pictures from right to left or from
left to right. To be able to read them, we have
to remember that we must be guided by the
direction of the faces of the figures, birds, and
so forth. But it was also open to the writer to
set the pictures in vertical columns and, in the
case of inscriptions on smaller objects, he was
led by considerations of what was pleasing to
the eye, and of the space at his disposal, to in
troduce still further alterations in the arrange
ment of the signs. The most confusing feature
in hieroglyphic script is that there is no spac
ing between the words. The pictures are all
placed at equal intervals on the page, and it is
generallyimpossible to knowwhetherany given
sign goes with the preceding one or forms the
beginning of a new word. In Persian cuneiform
writing, on the other hand, a slanting sign is
used to separate the words.
The Chinese language, both spoken and
written, is exceedingly ancient but is still used
today by four hundred million people. Don't
suppose that I understand it at all; I only ob
tained some information about it because I
hoped to find in it analogies to the kinds of
indefiniteness occurring in dreams; nor was I
disappointed in my expectation, for Chinese
is so full of uncertaintiesas positivelyto terrify
one. As is well known, it consists of a number
of syllabic sounds which are pronounced singly
or doubled in combination. One of the chief
dialects
has
about
four
hundred
of
these
sounds, and since the vocabulary of this dialect
is estimated at somewhere about four thousand
words it is evident that every sound has an
averageof ten different meanings—some fewer,
but some all the more. For this reason there
are a whole series of devices to escape am
biguity, for the context alone will not show

[544a]
General Introduction
which of the ten possible meanings of the
syllable the speaker wishes to convey to the
hearer. Amongst these devices is the combining
of two sounds into a single word and the use
of four different "tones" in which these syl
lables may be spoken. For purposes of our
comparison a still more interesting fact is that
this language is practically without grammar:
it is impossible to say of any of the one-syl
lable words whether it is a noun, a verb or an
adjective; and, further there are no inflections
to show gender, number, case, tense or mood.
The language consists, as we may say, of the
raw material only; just as our thought-language
is resolved into its raw material by the dreamwork omitting to express the relations in it.
Wherever there is any uncertainty in Chinese
the decision is left to the intelligence of the
listener, who is guided by the context. I made
a note of a Chinese saying, which literally
translated runs thus: "Little what see, much
what
wonderful." This is simple enough
to
understand. It may mean: "The less a man has
seen, the more he finds to wonder at," or
"There is much to wonder at for the man who
has seen little." Naturally there is no occasion
to choose between these two translations which
differ only in grammatical construction. We are
assured that in spite of these uncertainties the
Chinese language is a quite exceptionally good
medium of expression; so it is clear that
indefiniteness
does
not
necessarily
lead
to
ambiguity.
Now we must
certainly admit
that the
position of affairs is far less favourable in re
gard to the mode of expression in dreams than
it is with these ancient tongues and scripts;
for these latter were originally designed as a
means of communication; that is, they were
intended to be understood, no matter what
ways or means they had to employ. But just
this character is lacking to dreams: their ob
ject is not to tell anyone anything; they are
not a means of communication; on the con
trary, it is important to them not to be under
stood. So we ought not to be surprised or
misled if the result is that a number of the
ambiguities and uncertainties in dreams cannot
be determined. The
only certain
piece of
knowledge gained from our comparison is that
this indefiniteness (which people would like to
make use of as an argument against the ac
curacy of our dream-interpretations) is rather
to be recognized as a regular characteristic of
all primitive systems of expression.
Practice and experience alone can determine

[544b]
to Psycho-Analysis
541
the extent to which dreams can in actual fact
be understood. My own opinion is that this is
possible to a very great extent; and a compar
ison of the results obtained by properly trained
analysts confirms my view. It is well known
that the lay public, even in scientific circles,
delights to make a parade of superior scepticism^in the face of thedifficulties anduncertain
ties which beset a scientific achievement;
I
think they are wrong in so doing. You may
possibly not all know that the same thing
happened at the time when the Babylonian
and
Assyrian inscriptions were being de
ciphered. There was a point at which public
opinion was active in declaring that the men
deciphering the cuneiform writing were victims
of a chimera and that the whole business of
investigation was a fraud. But in the year 1857
the Royal Asiatic Society made a conclusive
test. They challenged four of the most dis
tinguished men engaged in this branch of
research—Rawlinson, Hincks, Fox Talbot and
Oppert—to send to the Society in sealed en
velopes independent translations of a newly
discovered inscription, and, after comparing
the four versions, they were able to announce
that there was sufficientagreement between the
four to justify belief in what had been achieved
and confidence in further progress. The mock
ery of the learned laity then gradually came
to an end, and certainty in the reading of
cuneiform documents has advanced enormously
since then.
2. A second series of objections is closely
connected with an impression which you also
have probably not escaped; namely, that a
number
of
the
solutions
achieved
by
our
method of dream-interpretation seem strained,
specious, dragged in—in other words, forced,
or even comical or joking. These criticisms are
so frequent that I will take at random the last
that has come to my ears. Now listen: a head
master in
Switzerland—that
free
country—
was recently asked to resign his post on account
of his interest in psycho-analysis. He protested
and a Berne paper published the decision of
the school authorities on his case. I shall quote
from the article a few sentences which refer
to psycho-analysis: "Further, we are amazed
at the far-fetched and factitious character of
many of the examples given in the said book
by Dr. Pfister of Zurich. ... It is indeed a
matter for surprise that the head-master of a
Training College should accept so credulously
all these assertions and such specious evidence."
These sentences purport to be the final opinion

[545a]
542
Sigmund Freud
of "One who judges calmly." I am much more
inclined to think this "calm" factitious. Let
us examine these remarks more closely in the
expectation that a certain amount of reflection
and knowledge of the subject will do no harm,
even to a "calm judgment."
It is really quite refreshing to see how swiftly
and unerringly anyone relying merely on his
first impressions can arrive at an opinion on
some
critical question of psychology in its
more abstruse aspects. The interpretations seem
to him far-fetched and strained, and do not
commend themselves to
him;
consequently,
they are wrong and
the
whole business is
rubbish. Such critics never give even a passing
thought to the possibility that there may be
good
reasons
why
the
interpretations
are
bound
to
convey
this
very
impression—a
thought
which
would
lead
to
the
further
question what these good reasons are.
The
circumstance
which
calls
forth
this
criticism is essentially related to the effect of
displacement, which you have learnt to know
as the most powerful instrument in the service
of
the
dream-censorship.
With
its
aid
the
substitute-formations which we call allusions
are created; but these allusions are of a kind
not easy to recognize as such; nor is it easy to
discover the thought proper by working back
from them, for they are connected with it by
the most extraordinary and unusual extrinsic
associations. But the whole matter throughout
concerns things which are meant to be hidden,
intended to be concealed: that is exactly the
object of the dream-censorship. We must not
expect, though, to find something that has been
hidden by looking in the very place where it
ordinarily belongs. The frontier surveillance
authorities nowadays are a good deal more
cunning in this respect than the Swiss school
authorities; for they are not content with ex
amining portfolios and letter-cases when hunt
ing for documents and plans; but consider the
possibility that spies and smugglers may con
ceal anything compromising about their per
sons, in places where it is most difficult to
detect and where such things certainly do not
belong, for example, between the double soles
of their boots. If the concealed articles are
found there, it is certainly true that they have
been dragged to light, but they are none the
less a very good find.
In admitting the possibility that the connec
tion between a latent dream-element and its
manifest substitute may appear most remote
and extraordinary, sometimes even comical or

[545b]
joking, we are guided by our wide experience
of instances in which we did not as a rule find
the meaning ourselves. It is often impossible
to arrive at such interpretations by our own
efforts: no sane person could guess the bridge
connecting the two. The dreamer either solves
the riddle straightaway by a direct association
(he can do it because it is in his mind that the
substitute-formation originated);
or else he
provides so much material that there is no
longer any need for special penetration in order
to solve it—the solution thrusts itself upon us
as inevitable. If the dreamer does not help us
in either of these
two ways the
manifest
element in question will remain for ever in
comprehensible. Let me give you one more
instance of this kind which happened recently.
A patient of mine lost her father during the
course of the treatment, after which she seized
every opportunity to bring him back to life in
her dreams. In one of these her father appeared
in a certain connectionotherwisenot applicable
and said: "It is quarter past eleven, it is half
past eleven, it is quarter to twelve" For the
interpretation of this curious detail she could
only provide the association that her father
was
pleased
when
his
older
children
were
punctual at the midday meal. This certainly
fitted in with the dream-element, but it threw
no light on its origin. The situation which had
just been reached in the treatment gave good
grounds for the suspicion that a carefully sup
pressed critical antagonism to her much loved
and honoured father had played a part in this
dream. Following out her further associations,
apparently quite remote from the dream, she
told how she had heard a long discussion of
psychological questions on the day before and a
relative had said: "Primitive man (Urmensch)
survives in all of us." Now a light dawns on
us. Here was again a splendid opportunity for
her to imagine that her dead father survived,
and so in the dream she made him a "clockman" (Uhrmensch), telling the quarters up to
the time of the midday meal.
The likeness to a pun in this cannot be
ignored, and as a matter of fact it has often
happened that a dreamer's pun has been as
cribed to the interpreter; there are yet other
examples in which it is not at all easy to decide
whether we are dealing with a joke or a dream.
But you will remember that the same sort of
doubt arose with some slips of the tongue. A
man related as a dream that he and his uncle
were sitting in the latter's auto (automobile)
and his uncle kissed him. The dreamer himself

[546a]
General Introduction
instantly volunteered the interpretation:
it
meant auto-erotism (a term used in our theory
of the libido, signifying gratification obtained
without any external love-object). Now was
this man allowing himself a joke at our expense
and pretending that a pun which occurred to
him was part of a dream? I do not think so:
he really did dream it. But where does this
bewildering resemblance between dreams and
jokes come from? At one time this question
took me somewhat out of my
way,
for it
necessitated my making a thorough investi
gation into the question of wit itself. This led
to the conclusion that wit originates as follows:
a preconscious train of thought is for a moment
left to a process of unconscious elaboration,
from which it emerges in the form of a wit
ticism. While under the influence of the uncon
scious it is subject to the mechanisms there
operative—to condensation and displacement;
that is to say, to the same processes as we
found at work in the dreamrwork; and the
similarity sometimes found
between dreams
and wit is to be ascribed to this character
common to both. But the unintentional dreamjoke does not amuse us as does an ordinary
witticism; a deeper study of wit may show you
why this is so. The dream-joke strikes us as a
poor form of wit; it does not make us laugh,
it leaves us cold.
Now in this we are following the path of
the ancient method of
dream-interpretation,
which has given us, besides much that is use
less, many a valuable example of interpretation
upon which we ourselves could not improve.
I will tell you a dream of historic importance
which is related in slightly different versions
by Plutarch and Artemidorus bf Daldis, the
dreamer being Alexander the Great. When he
was laying siege, to the city of Tyre, which was
putting up an obstinate resistance (b.c. 322),
he dreamt one night that he saw a dancing
satyr. The dream-interpreter Aristandros, who
accompanied the army on its campaigns, inter
preted this dreamby dividing the wordsatyros
into 2a Tvpos (Tyre is thine), and prophesied
from this the king's victory over the city. This
interpretation decided Alexander to continue
the siege and eventually the city fell. The
interpretation, factitious as it seems, was un
doubtedly the right one.
3. I can well imagine that you will be
especially impressed on being told that even
people who havelongstudied the interpretation
of dreams in
the course of
their work as
psycho-analysts have raised objections to our

[546b]
to Psycho-Analysis
543
conception of dreams. It would indeed have
been exceptional if so excellent an opportunity
for new mistakes had been let slip; and
so
assertions have been made, due to confusion
of ideas and based on unjustifiable generaliza
tions, which are hardly less incorrect than the
medical conception of dreams. One of these
statements you
know
already: that dreams
deal with attempts at adaptation to the situa
tion at the moment and with the solution of
future problems; in other words, that they
pursue a "prospective tendency" or aim (A.
Maeder). We have already demonstrated that
this statement rests upon a confusion between
dreams and the
latent dream.7thoughts
and
ignores the process of dream-work. If those
who speak
of
this
"prospective
tendency"
mean thereby to characterize the unconscious
mental activity to which the latent thoughts
belong, then, on the one hand, they tell us
nothing new and, on the other hand, the de
scription is not exhaustive; for the unconscious
mental activity occupies itself with many other
things besides preparation for the future. There
seems to be a much worse confusion behind
the assurance that the death clause may be
found underlying every dream; I am not quite
clear what this formula is intended to mean,
but I suspect that behind it the dream is con
founded with the whole personality of the
dreamer.
An unjustifiable generalization, based on a
few striking examples, is contained in the
statement that every dream admits of two kinds
of interpretation: one of the kind we have
described, the so-called psycho-analytic inter
pretation, and the other the so-called anagogic,
which disregards the instinctual tendenciesand
aims at a representation of the higher mental
functions (H. Silberer); there are dreams of
this kind, but you will seek in vain to extend
this conception to include even a majority of
dreams. After all you have heard, the statement
that all dreams are to be interpreted bisexually,
as a combination of two tendencies which may
be called male and female
(A. Adler), will
seem to you quite
incomprehensible. Here
again, single dreams of this sort do of course
occur and later on you may leam that their
structure is similar to that of certain hysterical
symptoms. I mention all these discoveries of
new general characteristics of dreams in order
to warn you against them, or at least to leave
you in no doubt about my own opinion of
them.
4. At one time the objective value of research

[547a]
544
Sigmund
into dreams seemed to be discredited by the
fact that patients treated analytically appeared
to suit the content of their dreams to the
favourite theories of their doctors, one class
dreaming
mainly
of
sexual
impulses,
and
another of impulses for mastery, others again
even of rebirth (W. Stekel). The force of this ob
servation is weakened by the reflection that peo
ple dreamed dreams before there was any such
thing as psycho-analytic treatment to influence
their dreams and that the patients undergoing
treatment nowadays also used to dream before
they began it. The actual fact in this supposedly
new observation is soon shown to be self-evi
dent and of no consequence for the theory of
dreams. The residue from the previous day
which gives rise to dreams is a residue from
the great interests of waking life. If the physi
cian's words and the stimuli which he gives have
become of importance to the patient they then
enter into whatever constitutes the residue and
can act as mental stimuli for dream-formation,
just like
other interests
of
affective value
roused on the preceding day which have not
subsided; they operate in the same way as
bodily stimuli which affect the sleeper during
sleep. Like these other factors inciting dreams,
the trains of thought roused by the physician
can appear in the manifest dream-content or
be revealed in the latent thoughts. We know
indeed
that
dreams
can
be
experimentally
produced, or, to speak more accurately, a part
of the dream-material can be thus introduced
into the dream. In influencing his patients thus
the analyst plays a part no different from that
of an experimenter, like Mourly Void, who
placed in certain positions the limbs
of the
person upon whom he experimented.
We
can often influence what a
man shall
dream about, but never what he will dream; for
the mechanism of the dream-work and the un
conscious dream-wish are inaccessible to exter
nal influence of any sort. We realized, when we
were considering dreams arising out of bodily
stimuli, that in the reaction to the bodily or
mental
stimuli
brought
to
bear
upon
the
dreamer the peculiarity and independence of
dream-life is clearly seen. The criticism I have

[547b]
Freud
just discussed which tends to cast a doubt upon
the objectivity of dream investigation is again
an assertion based upon confounding, this time
confounding dreams with—their material.
I wanted to tell you as much as this about
the problems of dreams. You will guess that I
have passed over a great deal and will have
discovered for yourselves that my treatment of
nearly every point has necessarily been incom
plete; but this is due to the phenomena of
dreams being so closely connected with those
of the neuroses. Our plan was to study dreams
as an introduction to the study of the neuroses
and it was certainly a better one than beginning
the other way about; but since dreams prepare
us for comprehension of the neuroses, so also
can a correctly formed estimate of dreams be
acquired only after some knowledge of neurotic
manifestations has been gained.
I do not know how you may think about it,
but I can assure you that I do not regret having
taken up so much of your interest and of the
time at our disposal in the consideration of
problems connected with dreams. I know no
other way by which one can so speedily arrive
at conviction of the correctness of those state
ments by which psycho-analysis stands or falls.
It requires strenuous work for many months,
and even years, to demonstrate that the symp
toms
in
a
case
of
neurotic
illness
have
a
meaning, serve a purpose, and arise from the
patient's experiences in life. On the other hand,
a few hours' effort may be enough to show these
things in some dream which at first seemed
utterly confused and incomprehensible, and in
this way to confirm all the premises upon which
psycho-analysis rests—the existence of uncon
scious mental processes, the special mechanisms
which they obey, and the instinctive propelling
forces which are expressed by them. And when
we remember how far-reaching is the analogy
in the structure of dreams to that of neurotic
symptoms and, with that, reflect how rapid is
the transformation of a dreamer into a wide
awake, reasonable human being, we acquire an
assurance that the neuroses too depend only
upon an alteration in the balance of the forces
at work in mental life.

[548a]
PART III. GENERAL THEORY OF NEUROSES
SIXTEENTH LECTURE
Psycho-Analysis and Psychiatry
It pleases me greatly to see you here again to
continue
our
discussions
after
a
year
has
passed. Last year the subject of my lectures
was the application of psycho-analysis to errors
and to dreams; I hope this year to lead you
to some comprehension of neurotic phenomena
which, as you will soon discover, have much in
common with both our former subjects. I must
tell you before I begin, however, that I cannot
concede you the same attitude towards me now
as I did last year. Then I endeavoured to make
no step without being in agreement with your
judgment; I debated a great deal with you,
submitted to your objections, in fact, recog
nized you and your healthy common sense as
the deciding factor. That is no longer possible
and
for
a very simple
reason.
Errors and
dreams are phenomena which were familiar to
you; one might say you had as much experience
of them as I, or .could easily have obtained it.
The manifestations of neurosis, however, are an
unknown region to you; those of you who are
not yourselves medical men have no access
there except through the accounts I give you;
and of what use is the most excellent judgment
where there is no knowledge of the subject
under debate?
However, do not receive this announcement
as though I were going to give these lectures
ex cathedra or to demand unconditional accept
ance from you. Any such misconception would
do me a gross injustice. I do not aim at pro
ducing conviction—my aim is to
stimulate
enquiry and to destroy prejudices. If, owing
to ignorance of the subject, you are not in a
position to adjudicate, then you should neither
believe nor reject. You should only listen and
allow what I tell you to make its own effect
upon you. Convictions are not so easily ac
quired, or, when they are
achieved without
much trouble, they soon prove worthless and
unstable. No one has a right to conviction on
these matters who has not worked at this sub
ject for many years, as I have, and has not
himself experienced the same new and aston
ishing discoveries.
Then
why
these
sudden
convictions in
intellectual matters, lightning
conversions, and
instantaneous repudiations?
Do you not see that the coup de foudre, love

[548b]
General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis
545
at first sight, proceeds from a very different
mental sphere, from the affective one? We do
not require even our patients to bring with
them any
conviction in
favour of
psycho
analysis or any devotion to it. It would make
us suspicious of them. Benevolent scepticism
is
the attitude in them which we like best.
Therefore will
you
also try to let psycho
analytical conceptions develop quietly in your
minds alongside the popular or the psychiatric
view, until opportunities arise for them to in
fluence each other and be united into a decisive
opinion.
On the other hand, you are not for a moment
to suppose that the psycho-analytic point of
view which I shall lay before you is a specu
lative system of ideas. On the contrary, it is
the result of experience, being founded either
on direct observations or on conclusions drawn
from
observation.
Whether these have been
drawn in an adequate or a justifiable manner
future advances in science will show;
after
nearly two and a half decades and now that I
am fairly well advanced in years I may say,
without boasting, that it was particularly diffi
cult,
intense,
and
all-absorbing
work
that
yielded these observations. I have often had
the impression that our opponents were un
willing to consider this source of our state
ments,, as if they looked upon them as ideas
derived subjectively which anyone could dis
pute at his own sweet will. This attitude on the
part of my opponents is not quite comprehen
sible to me. Perhaps it comes from the circum
stance that physicians pay so little attention to
neurotics and listen so carelessly to what they
say that it has become impossible for them to
perceive anything in the patients' communica
tions or to make detailed observations from
them. I will take this opportunity of assuring
you that in these lectures I shall make few
controversial references, least of all
to in
dividuals. I have never been able to convince
myself of the truth of the saying that "strife
is the father of all things." I think the source
of it was the philosophy of the Greek sophists
and that it errs, as does the latter, through the
overestimation of dialectics. It seems to me,
on
the
contrary, that scientific controversy,
so-called, is on the whole quite unfruitful, apart
from the fact that it is almost always conducted
in a highly personal manner. Until a few years

[549a]
546
Sigmund
ago I could boast that I had only once been
engaged in a regular scientific dispute, and that
with
one single investigator, Lowenfeld
of
Munich. The end of it was that we became
friends and have remained so to this day. But
I did not repeat the experiment for a very long
time because I was not certain that the out
come would be the same.
Now you will surely judge that a refusal of
this kind to discuss matters publicly points to
a high degree of inaccessibility to criticism, to
obstinacy, or, in the polite colloquialism of the
scientific world, to pig-headedness. My reply
to you would be that, should you have arrived
at a conviction by means of such hard work,
you would also thereby derive a certain right
to maintain it with some tenacity. Further, on
my own behalf, I can say that in the course of
my work I have modified my views on im
portant points, changed them or replaced them
by others, and have of course in each case
published the fact. What has been the result of
this frankness? Some people have ignored my
corrections of myself altogether and still today
criticize me in respect of views which no longer
mean the same to me. Others positively re
proach me for these changes and declare me to
be unreliable on that account.
No one who
changes his views once or twice deserves to be
believed, for it is only too likely that he will
be mistaken again in his latest assertions; but
anyone who sticks to anything he has once said,
or refuses to give way upon it easily enough, is
obstinate or pig-headed; is it not so? What is
to be done in the face of these self-contradic
tory criticisms except to remain as one is and
behave as seems best to one? This is what I
decided to do; and I am not deterred from re
modelling and improving my theories in ac
cordance with later experience. I have so far
found nothing to
alter in my fundamental
standpoint and I
hope
this
will
never be
necessary.
So now I have to lay before you the psycho
analytic theory of neurotic manifestations. For
this purpose it will be simplest, on account of
both the analogy and the contrast, to take an
example which links up with the phenomena
we have already considered. I will take a symp
tomatic act which I see many people commit in
my own consulting-room. The analyst has little
to offer to the people who come to a physician's
consulting-room for half-an-hour to
recount
the lifelong misery of their fate. His deeper
comprehension makes it difficult for him to
give, as another might, the opinion that there

[549b]
Freud
is nothing wrong with them and that they had
better take a light course of hydro-therapy.
One of our colleagues once replied, with a
shrug, when asked how he dealt with consulta
tion patients, that he "fined them so many
crowns for 'wasting the time of the court.'"
You will, therefore, not be surprised to hear
that even the busiest psycho-analysts are not
much sought after for consultations. I have had
the ordinary door between the waiting-room and
my consulting-room supplemented by another
door and covered with felt. The reason for this
is obvious. Now it constantly happens when I
admit people from the waiting-room that they
omit to close these doors, leaving even both
doors open behind them. When I see this hap
pen, I at once, with some stiffness, request him
or her to go back and make good the omission,
no matter how fine a gentleman he may be or
how many hours she has spent on her toilet.
My action gives the impression of being un
called-for and pedantic; occasionally too I have
found myself in the wrong, when the person
turned out to be one of those who cannot them
selves grasp a door-handle and are glad when
those with them avoid it. But in the majority
of cases I was right, for anyone who behaves
in this way and leaves the door of a physician's
consulting-room open into the waiting-room
belongs to the rabble and deserves to be re
ceived with coldness. Now don't allow yourselves
to be biased before you have heard the rest. This
omission on the part of a patient occurs only
when he has been waiting alone in the outer
room and thus leaves an empty room behind
him, never when others, strangers to him, have
also been waiting there. In the latter case he
knows very well that it is to his own interest
not to be overheard while he talks to the phy
sician and he never neglects to close both doors
carefully.
Occuring in this way, the patient's omission
is neither accidental nor meaningless, and not
even unimportant, for it betrays the visitor's
attitude to the physician. He belongs to that
large class who seek those in high places, and
wish to be dazzled and intimidated. Perhaps
he had made enquiries by telephone at what
time he would be most likely to gain admit
tance and had been expecting to find a crowd
of applicants in a queue, as if at the grocer's in
war-time. Then he is shown into an empty
room which, moreover, is most modestly fur
nished, and he is dumbfounded. He must some
how make the physician atone for the superflu
ous respect he had been prepared to show him;

[550a]
General Introduction
and so he omits to close the doors between the
waiting- and the consulting-rooms. He intends
this to mean: "Pooh! there is no one here and
I daresay there won't be, however long I stay!"
He would behave during the interview in an
uncivil and supercilious manner, too, if his pre
sumption were not curbed at the outset by a
sharp reminder.
In the analysis of this little symptomatic
act you find nothing that is not already known
to you; namely, the conclusion that it is no
accident but has in it motive, meaning, and in
tention; that it belongs to a mental context
which can be specified; and that it provides a
small indication of a more important mental
process. But above all it implies that the proc
ess thus indicated is not known to the con
sciousness of the person who carries it out; for
not one of the patients who left the two doors
open would have admitted that he wished to
show any depreciation of me by his neglect.
Many of them couldprobably recall a senseof
disappointment on entering the empty waitingroom, but the connection between this impres
sion and the succeeding symptomatic act cer
tainly remained outside their consciousness.
Now let us place this little analysis of a
symptomatic act by the side of an observation
made on a patient. I will choose one which is
fresh in my memory, and also because it can
be described in comparatively few words. A
certain amount of detail is indispensable for
any such account.
A young officer, home on short leave of ab
sence, asked me to treat his mother-in-law,
who was living in the happiest surroundings
and yet was embittering her own and her fam
ily's lives by a nonsensical idea. I found her a
well-preserved lady, fifty-three years of age, of
a friendly, simple disposition, who gave with
out hesitation the following account of herself.
She is most happily married, and lives in the
country with her husband who manages a large
factory. She cannot say enough of her hus
band's kindness and consideration; theirs had
been a love-marriage thirty years ago, since
when they had never had a cloud, a quarrel, or
a moment's jealousy. Her two children have
both married well, but her husband's sense of
duty keeps him still at work. A year before, an
incredible and, to her, incomprehensible thing
happened. She received an anonymous letter
telling her that her excellent husband was car
rying on an intrigue with a young girl, and be
lieved it on the spot—since then her happiness
has been destroyed. The details were more or

[550b]
to Psycho-Analysis
547
less as follows: she had a housemaid with whom
she
discussed
confidential
matters,
perhaps
rather too freely. This young woman cherished
a positively venomous hatred for another girl
who had succeeded better in life than herself,
although of no better origin. Instead of going
into service, the other young woman had had a
commercial training, been taken into the fac
tory and, owing to vacancies caused by the
absence of staff on service in the field, had been
promoted to a good position. She lived in the
factory, knew all the gentlemen, and was even
addressed as "Miss." The other one who had
been left behind in life was only too ready to
accuse her former schoolmate of all possible
evil. One day our patient and her housemaid
were discussing an elderly gentleman who had
visited the house and of whom it was said that
he did not live with his wife but kept a mis
tress. Why, she did not know, but she suddenly
said: "I cannot imagine anything more awful
than to hear that my husband had a mistress."
The next day she received by post an anony
mous letter in disguised handwriting which in
formed her of the very thing she had
just
imagined. She concluded—probably correctly
—that the letter
was the handiwork of her
malicious housemaid, for the woman who was
named as the mistress of her husband was the
very girl who was the object of this house
maid's hatred. Although she at once saw through
the plot and had seen enough of such cowardly
accusations in her own surroundings to place
little credence in them, our patient was never
theless prostrated by this letter. She became
terribly excited and at once sent for her hus
band to overwhelm him with reproaches. The
husband laughingly denied the accusation and
did the best thing he could. He sent for the
family physician (who also attended the fac
tory), and he did his best to calm the unhappy
lady. The next thing they did was also most
reasonable. The housemaid was dismissed, but
not the supposed mistress. From that time on
the patient claims to have repeatedly brought
herself to a calm view of the matter, so that
she no longer believes the contents of the let
ter; but it has never gone very deep nor lasted
very long. It was enough to hear the young
woman's name mentioned, or to meet her in
the street, for a new attack of suspicion, agony,
and reproaches to break out.
This is the clinical picture of this excellent
woman's case. It did not require much experi
ence of psychiatry to perceive that, in contrast
to other neurotics, she described her symptoms

[551a]
548
Sigmund Freud
too mildly—as we say, dissimulated them—and
that she had never really overcome her belief
in the anonymous letter.
Now what attitude does a psychiatrist take
up to such a case? We know already what he
would say to the symptomatic act of a patient
who does not close the waiting-room doors. He
explains it as an accident, without interest psy
chologically, and no concern of his. But he can
not continue to take up this attitude in regard
to the case of the jealous lady. The sympto
matic action appears to be unimportant; the
symptom calls for notice as a grave matter.
Subjectively it involves intense suffering, and
objectively it threatens to break up a family;
its
claim to psychiatric interest is therefore
indisputable.
First
the psychiatrist
tries to
characterize the symptom by some essential
attribute. The idea with which this lady tor
ments herself cannot be called nonsensical in
itself; it does happen that elderly husbands
contract relationships with young women. But
there is something else about it that is non
sensical and incomprehensible. The patient has
absolutely no grounds, except the anonymous
letter, for supposing that her loving and faith
ful husband belongs to this category of men,
otherwise not so uncommon. She knows that
this communication carries no proof, she can
explain
its
origin
satisfactorily;
she
ought
therefore to be able to say to herself that she
has no grounds for her jealousy and she does
even say so, but she suffers just as much as if
she
regarded
her
jealousy as
well-founded.
Ideas of this kind that are inaccessible to logic
and the arguments of reality are unanimously
described as delusions. The good lady suffers
therefore, from a delusion of jealousy. That is
evidently the
essential characteristic of
the
case.
Having established this first point, our psy
chiatric interest
increases.
When
a
delusion
cannot be dissipated by the facts of reality, it
probably does not spring from reality. Where
else then does it spring from? Delusions can
have the most various contents; why is the
content of it in this ease jealousy? What kind
of people have delusions, and particularly de
lusions of jealousy? Now we should like to
listen to the psychiatrist, but he leaves us in the
lurch here. He considers only one of our ques
tions. He will examine the family history of
this woman and will perhaps bring us the an
swer that the kind of people who suffer from
delusions are those in whose families similar
or different disorders have occurred repeatedly.

[551b]
In other words, this lady has developed a de
lusion because she had an hereditary predispo
sition to do so. That is certainly something; but
is it all that we want to know? Is it the sole
cause of her disease? Does it satisfy us to as
sume that it is unimportant, arbitrary, or in
explicable that one kind of delusion should
have been developed instead of another? And
are we to understand the proposition—that the
hereditary predisposition is decisive—also in
a negative sense; that is, that no matter what
experiences and emotions life had brought her
she was destined some-time or other to produce
a delusion? You will want to know why scien
tific psychiatry gives no further explanation.
And I reply: "Only a rogue gives more than he
has." The psychiatrist knows of no path lead
ing to any further explanation in such a case.
He has to content himself with a diagnosis and,
in spite of wide experience, with a very un
certain prognosis of its future course.
Now can psycho-analysis do better than this?
Yes, certainly I hope to show you that even in
such an obscure case as this it is possible to
discover something which makes closer com
prehension possible. First, I shall ask you to
notice this incomprehensible detail; that the
anonymous letter on which her delusion is
founded was positively provoked by the patient
herself, by her saying to the scheming house
maid the day before that nothing could
be
more awful than to hear that her husband had
an intrigue with a young woman. She first put
the idea of sending the letter into the servant's
mind by this. So the delusion acquires a certain
independence of the letter; it existed before
hand as a fear—or, as a wish?—in her mind.
Besides this, the further small indications re
vealed in the bare two hours of analysis are
noteworthy. The patient responded very coldly,
it is true, to the request to tell me her further
thoughts, ideas, and recollections, after she had
finished her story. She declared that nothing
came to her mind, she had told me everything;
and after two hours the attempt had to be given
up, because she announced that she felt quite
well already and was certain that the morbid
idea would not return. Her saying this was
naturally due to resistance and to the fear of
further analysis. In these two hours she had
let fall some remarks, nevertheless, which made
a certain interpretation not only possible but
inevitable, and this interpretation threw a sharp
light on the origin of the delusion of jealousy.
There actually existed in her an infatuation for
a young man, for the very son-in-law who had

[552a]
General Introduction
urged her to seek my assistance. Of this in
fatuation she herself knew nothing or only per
haps very little; in the circumstances of their
relationship it was easily possible for it to dis
guise itself as harmless tenderness on her part.
After what we have already learnt it is not
difficult
to
see
into the mind of
this good
woman and excellent mother. Such an infatua
tion, such a monstrous,impossible thing, could
not come into her conscious mind; it persisted,
nevertheless, and unconsciouslyexerted a heavy
pressure. Something had to happen, some sort
of relief had to be found; and the simplest
alleviation lay in that mechanism of displace
ment which so regularly plays its part in the
formation of delusional jealousy. If not merely
she, old woman that she was,werein love with
a young man, but if only her old husband too
were in love with a young mistress, then her
torturing conscience would be absolved from
the infidelity. The phantasy of her husband's
infidelity was thus a cooling balm on her burn
ing wound. Of her own love she never became
conscious; but its reflection in the delusion,
which brought such advantages, thus became
compulsive, delusional and conscious. All argu
ments against it could naturally avail nothing;
for they were directed only against the reflec
tion, and not against the original to which its
strength was due and which lay buried out of
reach in the unconscious.
Let us now piece together the results of this
short, obstructed psycho-analytic attempt to
understand this case. It is assumed, of course,
that the information acquired was correct, a
point which I cannot submit to your judgment
here. First of all, the delusion is no longer
senseless and incomprehensible; it is sensible,
logically motivated, and has its place in con
nection with an affective experience of the pa
tient's. Secondly, it has arisen as a necessary
reaction to another mental process which has
itself been revealed by other indications; and
it owes its delusional character, its quality of
resisting real and logical objections, to this
relation with this other mental process. It is
something desired in itself, a kind of consola
tion. Thirdly, the fact that the delusion is one
of jealousy and no other is unmistakably de
termined by the experience underlying the dis
ease. You will also recognize the two important
analogies with the symptomatic act we ana
lysed; namely, the discovery of the sense or
intention behind the symptom and the relation
of it to something in the givensituation which
is unconscious.

[552b]
to Psycho-Analysis
549
This does not, of course, answer all the ques
tions arising out of this case. On the contrary,
it bristles with further problems, some of which
have not yet proved soluble at all, while others
cannot be solved owing to the unfavourable
circumstances met with in this case. For in
stance, why does this happily married lady fall
in love with her son-in-law, and why does re
lief come to her in the form of this kind of
reflection, this projection of her own state of
mind on to her husband, when other forms of
relief were also possible? Do not think that it
is idle and uncalled for to propound these ques
tions. We have already a good deal of material
at hand to provide possible answers. The pa
tient had come to that critical time of life
which brings a sudden and unwelcome increase
of sexual desire to a woman; that may have
been sufficient in
itself. Or there may have
been an additional reason, in that the sexual
capacity of her excellent and faithful husband
may have been for some years insufficient for
the still vigorous woman's needs. Observation
has taught us that it is just such men, whose
fidelity is thus a matter of course, who treat
their wives with particular tenderness and are
unusually considerate of their nervous ailments.
Neither is it unimportant, moreover, that the
object of this abnormal infatuation should be
her daughter's young husband. A strong erotic
attachment to the daughter, with its roots in
the individual sexual constitution of the moth
er, often manages to maintain itself in such a
transformation. I may perhaps remind you in
this
connection
that
the
relation
between
mother-in-law and son-in-law has from time
immemorial been regarded by mankind as a
particularly sensitive one, which among primi
tive races has given rise to very powerful ta
boos and precautions.1 On the positive as well
as on the negative side it frequently exceeds
the limits regarded as desirable in civilized so
ciety. Of these three possible factors, whether
one of them has been at work in the case be
fore us, or two of them, or whether all three
together have taken part, I cannot tell you;
though only because the analysis of the case
could not be continued beyond the second hour.
I perceivenow that I have been speakingen
tirely of thingswhich you werenot yet prepared
to understand. I did so in order to carry out
the comparison between psychiatryand psycho
analysis. But I may ask you one thing at this
point: Have you observed anything in the na
ture of a contradiction between the two? Psy1 Cf. Totem and Taboo.

[553a]
550
Sigmund Freud
chiatry does not employ the technical methods
of psycho-analysis, neglects any consideration
of the content of the delusion, and in pointing
to heredity gives us but a general and remote
aetiology instead of first disclosing the more
scientific and immediate one. But is any con
tradiction or opposition contained in this? Is
not the one rather a supplement to the other?
Is the hereditary factor inconsistent with the
importance of experience and would they not
both work together most effectively? You will
admit that there is nothing essential in the
work of psychiatry which could oppose psycho
analytic researches. It is therefore the psy
chiatrists who oppose it, and not psychiatry
itself.
Psycho-analysis
stands
to
psychiatry
more or less as histology does to anatomy; in
one, the outer forms of organs are studied, in
the other, the construction of these out of the
tissues and constituent elements. It is not easy
to conceive of any contradiction between these
two fields of study, in which the work of the
one is continued in the other. You know that
nowadays anatomy is the basis of the scientific
study of medicine; but time was when dissect
ing human corpses in order to discover the
internal structure of the body was as much a
matter for
severe
prohibition
as
practising
psycho-analysis in order to discover the inter
nal workings of the human mind seems today
to be a matter for condemnation. And, pre
sumably at a not too distant date, we shall
have perceived that there can be no psychiatry
which is scientifically radical without a thor
ough knowledge of the deep-seated unconscious
processes in mental life.
There may be some of you who perhaps are
friendly enough towards psycho-analysis, often
attacked as it is, to wish that it would justify
itself in another direction also, that is, thera
peutically. You know that psychiatric therapy
has hitherto been unable to influence delusions.
Can psycho-analysis do so perhaps, by reason
of
its insight into the mechanism of these
symptoms? No, I have to tell you that it can
not; for the present, at any rate, it is just as
powerless as any other therapy to heal these
sufferers. It is
true that we can understand
what has happened to the patient; but we have
no means by which we can make him under
stand it himself. You have heard that I could
not continue the analysis of this delusion be
yond the first preliminaries. Would you then
maintain that analysis of such cases is undesir
able because it remains fruitless? I do not think
so. It is our right, yes, and our duty, to pursue

[553b]
our researches without respect to the immedi
ate gain effected. The day will come, where and
when we know not, when every little piece of
knowledge will be converted into power, and
into therapeutic power. Even if psycho-analysis
showed itself as unsuccessful with all other
forms of nervous and mental diseases as with
delusions, it would still remain justified as an
irreplaceable instrument of scientific research.
It is true that we should not be in a position
to practise it; the human material on which we
learn lives, and has its own will, and must have
its own motives in order to participate in the
work; and it would then refuse to do so. I will
therefore close my lecture for today by telling
you that there are large groups of nervous dis
turbances for which this conversion of our own
advance in knowledge into therapeutic power
has actually been carried out; and that with
these diseases, otherwise so refractory, our
measures yield under certain conditions, re
sults which give place to none in the domain
of medical therapy.
SEVENTEENTH LECTURE
The Meaning of Symptoms
In the last lecture I explained to you that
clinical psychiatry troubles itself little about
the actual form of the individual symptom or
the content of it; but that psycho-analysis has
made this its starting-point, and has ascertained
that the symptom itself has a meaning and is
connected with experiences in the life of the
patient. The meaning of neurotic symptoms
was first discovered by J. Breuer in the study
and successful cure of a case of hysteria (188082), which has since then become famous. It
is true that P. Janet independently reached the
same result; in fact, priority in publication
must be granted to the French investigator,
for Breuer did not publish his observations
until more than a decade later (1893-95), dur
ing the period of our work together. Inciden
tally, it is of no great importance to us who
made the discovery, for you know that every
discovery is made more than once, and none is
made all at once, nor is success meted out ac
cording to deserts. America is not called after
Columbus. Before Breuer and Janet, the great
psychiatrist Leuret expressed the opinion that
even the delusions of the insane would prove
to have some meaning, if only we knew how to
translate them. I confess that for a long time
I was willing to accord Janet very high recog
nition for his explanation of neurotic symp-

[554a]
General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis
551
toms, because he regarded them as expressions
of "idees inconscientes" possessing the patient's
mind. Since then, however, Janet has taken up
an attitude of undue reserve, as if he-meant to
imply that the unconscious had been nothing
more to him than a manner of speaking, a
makeshift, une faqon de parler, and that he had
nothing "real" in mind. Since then I have not
understood Janet's views, but I believe that he
has gratuitously deprived himself
of
great
credit.
Neurotic symptoms then, just like errors and
dreams, have their meaning and, like these, are
related to the life of the person in whom they
appear. This is an important matter which I
should like to demonstrate to you by some
examples. I can merely assert, I cannot prove,
that it is so in every case; anyone observing
for himself will be convinced of it. For certain
reasons though, I shall not take these examples
from cases of hysteria, but from another very
remarkable form of neurosis, closely allied in
origin to the latter, about which I must say a
few preliminary words. This, which we call the
obsessional neurosis, is not so popular as the
widely known hysteria; it is, if I may so ex
press myself, not so noisily ostentatious, be
haves more as if it were a private affair of the
patient's, dispenses almost entirely with bodily
manifestations and creates all its symptoms in
the mental sphere. The obsessional neurosis
and hysteria are the two forms of neurotic dis
ease upon the study of which psycho-analysis
was first built up, and in the treatment of which
also our therapy celebrates its triumphs. In the
obsessional neurosis, however, that mysterious
leap from the mental to the physical is absent,
and it has really become more intimately com
prehensible and transparent to us through psy
cho-analytic research than hysteria; we have
come to understand that it displays far more
markedly certain extreme features of the neu
rotic constitution.
The obsessional neurosis1 takes this form:
the patient's mind is occupied with thoughts
that do not really interest him, he feels im
pulses which seem alien to him, and he is im
pelled to perform actions which not only afford
him no pleasure but from which he is powerless
to desist. The thoughts (obsessions) may be
meaningless in themselves or only of no inter
est to the patient; they are often absolutely
silly; in every case they are the starting-point
of a strained concentration of thought which
1 Sometimes called in English compulsion-neurosis.
—Tr.

[554b]
exhausts the patient and to which he yields
most unwillingly. Against his will he has to
worry and speculate as if it were a matter of
life or death to him. The impulses which he
perceives within him may seem to be of an
equally childish and meaningless character;
mostly, however, they consist of something ter
rifying, such as temptations to commit serious
crimes, so that the patient not only repudiates
them as alien, but flees from them in horror,
and guards himself by prohibitions, precau
tions, and restrictions against the possibility of
carrying them out. Asa matter of fact he never,
literally not even once, carries these impulses
into effect; flight and precautions invariably
win. What he does really commit are very
harmless, certainly trivial acts—what are termed
the obsessive actions—which are mostly repeti
tions and ceremonial elaborations of ordinary
every-day performances, making these common
necessary actions—going to bed, washing,dress
ing, going for walks, etc.—into highly laborious
tasks of almost insuperable difficulty. The mor
bid ideas, impulses, and actions are not by any
means combined in the same proportions in
individual types and cases of the obsessional
neurosis; on the contrary, the rule is that one
or another of these manifestations dominates
the picture and gives the disease its name; but
what is common to all forms of it is unmis
takable enough.
This is a mad disease, surely. I don't think
the wildest psychiatric phantasy could have in
vented anything like it, and if we did not see
it every day with our owneyes we couldhardly
bring ourselves to believe in it. Now do not
imagine that you can do anything for such a
patient by advising him to distract himself, to
pay no attention to these silly ideas, and do
something sensible instead of his nonsensical
practises. This is what he would like himself;
for he is perfectly aware of his condition, he
shares your opinion about his obsessionalsymp
toms, he even volunteers it quite readily. Only
he simply cannot help himself; the actions per
formed in an obsessional condition are sup
ported by a kind of energy which probably has
no counterpart in normal mental life. Only one
thing is open to him—he can displace and he
can exchange; instead of one silly idea he can
adopt another of a slightly milder character,
from one precaution or prohibition he can pro
ceed to another, instead of one ceremonial rite
he can perform another. He can displace his
sense of compulsion, but he cannot dispel it.
This capacity for displacing all the symptoms,

[555a]
552
Sigmund Freud
involving radical alteration of their original
forms, is a main characteristic of the disease;
it is, moreover, striking that in this condition
the opposite values (polarities) pervading men
tal life appear to be exceptionally sharply dif
ferentiated. In addition to compulsions of both
positive and negative character, doubt appears
in the intellectual sphere, gradually spreading
until it gnaws even at what is usually held to be
certain. All these things combine to bring about
an ever-increasing indecisiveness, loss of en
ergy, and curtailment of freedom; and that
although the obsessional neurotic is originally
always a person of a very energetic disposition,
often highly opinionated,and as a rule intellec
tually gifted above the average. He has usually
attained to an agreeably high standard of eth
ical development, is over-conscientious, and
more than usually correct. You may imagine
that it is a sufficiently arduous task to find
one's bearings in this maze of contradictory
character-traits and morbid manifestations. At
the moment our aim is merely to interpret
some symptoms of this disease.
Perhaps in view of our previous discussions
you would like to know what present-day psy
chiatry has to offer concerning the obsessional
neurosis; it is but a miserable contribution,
however. Psychiatry has given names to the
various compulsions, and has nothing more to
say about them. It asserts instead that persons
exhibiting these symptoms are degenerate. That
is not much satisfaction to us; it is no more
than an estimate of their value, a condemnation
instead of an explanation. We are intended, I
suppose, to conclude that deterioration from
type would naturally produce all kinds of oddi
ties in people. Now, we do believe that people
who develop such symptoms must be some
what different in type from other human be
ings; but we should like to know whether they
are more degenerate than other nervous pa
tients, than hysterical or insane people. The
characterization is clearly again much too gen
eral. One may even doubt whether it is justified
at all when one learns that such symptoms
occur in men and women of exceptional ability
who have left their mark on their generation.
Thanks to their own discretion and the un
truthfulness of biographers we usually learn
very little of an intimate nature about our
exemplary great men; but it does happen oc
casionally that one of them is a fanatic about
truth like Emile Zola,1 and then we hear of the
1 E. Toulouse, Emile Zola: Enquete medico-psychologique (Paris, 1896).

[555b]
many extraordinary obsessive habits from which
he suffered throughout life.
Psychiatry has got out of this difficulty by
dubbing these people "degineres superieurs."
Very well; but psycho-analysis has shown that
these extraordinary obsessional symptoms can
be removed permanently, like the symptoms of
other diseases, and as in other people who are
not degenerate. I myself have frequently suc
ceeded in doing so.
I shall only give you two examples of analy
sis of obsessional symptoms; one is an old one,
but I have never found a better; and one is a
recent one. I shall limit myself to these two
because an account of this kind must be very
explicit and go into great detail.
A lady of nearly thirty years of age suffered
from
very
severe
obsessional
symptoms.
I
might perhaps have been able to help her if
my work had not been destroyed by the ca
price of fate—perhaps I shall tell you about
it later. In the course of a day she would per
form
the
following peculiar
obsessive
act,
among others, several times over. She would
run out of her room into the adjoining one,
there take up a certain position at the table in
the center of the room, ring for her maid, give
her a trivial order or send her away without,
and then run back again. There was certainly
nothing very dreadful about this, but it might
well arouse
curiosity. The explanation pre
sented itself in the simplest and most unexcep
tionable manner, without any assistance on
the part of the analyst. I cannot imagine how
I could even have suspected the meaning of
this obsession or could possibly have suggested
an
interpretation for it. Every time I
had
asked the patient, "Why do you do this? What
is the meaning of it?" she had answered, "I
don't know." But one day, after I had suc
ceeded in overcoming a great hesitation on her
part, involving a matter of principle, she sud
denly did know, for she related the history of
the obsessive act. More than ten years pre
viously she had
married a man very much
older than herself, who had proved impotent
on the wedding-night. Innumerable times on
that night he had run out of his room, into hers
in order to make the attempt, but had failed
every time. In the morning he had said angrily:
"It's enough to disgrace one in the eyes of the
maid who does the beds," and seizing a bottle
of red ink which happened to be at hand he
poured it on the sheet, but not exactly in the
place where such a mark might have been. At
first I
did not understand what this recollec-

[556a]
General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis
553
tion could have to do with the obsessive act in
question; for I could see no similarity between
the two situations, except in the running from
one room into the other, and perhaps also in
the appearance of the servant on the scene. The
patient then led me to the table in the adjoin
ing room, where I found a great mark on the
table-cover. She explained further that she
stood by the table in such a way that when the
maid came in she could not miss seeing this
mark. After this, there could no longer be any
doubt about the connection between the cur
rent obsessiveact and the scene of the weddingnight, though there was still a great deal to
learn about it.
It was clear, first of all, that the patient
identified herself with her husband; in imitat
ing his running from one room into another
she acted his part. To keep up the similarity
we must assume that she has substituted the
table and table-cover for the bed and sheet.
This might seem too arbitrary; but then we
have not studied dream-symbolism in vain. In
dreams a table is very often found to represent
a bed. Bed and board together mean marriage,
so that the one easily stands for the other.
All this would be proof enough that the obses
sive act is full of meaning; it seems to be a rep
resentation, a repetition of that all-important
scene. But we are not bound to stop at this*
semblance; if we investigate more closely the
relation between the two situations we shall
probably find out something more, the purpose
of the obsessive act. The kernel of it evidently
lies in the calling of the maid, to whom she
displays the mark, in contrast to her husband's
words: "It's enough to disgrace one before the
servant." In this way he, whose part she is
playing, is not ashamed before the servant, the
stain is where it ought to be. We see therefore
that she has not simply repeated the scene, she
has continued it and corrected it, transformed
it into what it ought to have been. This implies
something else, too, a correction of the circum
stance which made that night so distressing,
and which made the red ink necessary: namely,
the husband's impotence. The obsessive act thus
says: "No, it is not true, he was not disgraced
before the servant, he was not impotent." As in
a dream she represents this wish as fulfilled, in
a current obsessive act, which serves the pur
pose of restoring her husband's credit after that
unfortunate incident.
Everything else which I could tell you about
this lady fits in with this, or, more correctly
stated, everything else that we know about her

[556b]
points to this interpretation of the obsessive
act, in itself so incomprehensible. She had been
separated from her husband for years and was
trying to make up her mind to divorce him
legally. But therewould have been no prospect
of beingfree from him in her mind; she forced
herself to be true to him. She withdrew from
the world and from everyone so that she might
not be tempted, and in her phantasies she ex
cused and idealized him. The deepest secret of
her illness was that it enabled her to shield him
from malicious gossip, to justifyher separation
from him, and to make a comfortable existence
apart from her possible for him. The analysis
of a harmless obsessive act thus leads straight
to the inmost coreof the patient's disease, and
at the same time betrays a great deal of the
secret of the obsessionalneurosis in general. I
am quite willing that you should spend some
time over this example, for it unites conditions
which cannot reasonably be expected in all
cases. The interpretation of the symptom was
discovered by the patient herself in a flash,
without guidance or interference from the ana
lyst, and it had arisen in connection with an event
which did not belong, as it commonly does,
to a forgotten period in childhood, but which
had occurred in the patient's adult life and was
clear in her memory. All those objections which
critics habitually raise against our interpreta
tions of symptoms are quite out of place here.
To be sure, we cannot always be so fortunate.
And one thing more! Has it not struck you
that this innocent obsessive act leads directly
to this lady's most private affairs? A woman
can hardly have anything more intimate to
relate than the story of her wedding-night; and
is it by chanceand without specialsignificance
that we are led straight to the innermost secrets
of her sexual life? It might certainly be due to
the choice I made of this example. Let us not
decide this point too quickly; but let us turn
to the second example, which is of a totally
different nature, and belongs to a very com
mon type, that of rituals preparatory to sleep.
A well-grown clever girl of 19, the only child
of her parents, superior to them in education
and intellectual activity, was a wild, high-spir
ited child, but of late years had become very
nervous without any apparent cause. She was
very irritable, particularly with her mother, was
discontented and depressed, inclined to inde
cision and doubt, finally confessing that she
could no longer walk alone through squares and
wide streets. We will not go very closely into
her complicated condition, which requires at

[557a]
554
Sigmund Freud
least two diagnoses: agoraphobia and obses
sional neurosis; but will turn our attention to
the ritual elaborated by this young girl prepara
tory to going to bed, as a result of which she
caused her parents great distress. In a certain
sense, every normal person may be said to
carry out a ritual before going to sleep, or at
least, he requires certain conditions without
which he is hindered in going to sleep; the
transition from waking life to sleep has been
made into a regular formula which is repeated
every night in the same manner. But everything
that a healthy person requires as a condition of
sleep can be rationally explained, and if the
external
circumstances make any alteration
necessaryhe adapts himself easily to it without
waste of time. The morbid ritual on the other
hand is inexorable,it will be maintained at the
greatest sacrifices; it is disguised, too, under
rational motives and appears superficially to
differ from the normal only in a certain exag
gerated carefulness of execution. On a closer
examination, however, it is clear that the dis
guise is insufficient, that the ritual includes ob
servances which go far beyond what reason
can justify and even some which directly con
travene this. As the motive of her nightly pre
cautions, our patient declares that she must
have silence at night and must exclude all pos
sibility of noise. She does two things for this
purpose; she stops the large clock in her room
and removes all other clocks out of the room,
including even the tiny wrist-watch on her bedtable. Flower-pots and vases are placed care
fully together on the writing-table, so that they
cannot fall down in the night and break, and
so disturb her sleep. She knows that these pre
cautions have only an illusory justification in
the demand for quiet; the ticking of the little
watch could not be heard, even if it lay on the
table by the bed; and we all know that the
regular ticking of a pendulum-clock never dis
turbs sleep, but is more likely to induce it. She
also admits that her fear that the flower-pots
and vases, if left in their places at night, might
fall down of themselves and break is utterly
improbable. For some other practices in her
ritual this insistence upon silence as a motive is
dropped; indeed, by ordaining that the door
between her bedroom and that of her parents
shall remain half-open (a condition which she
ensures by placing various objects in the door
way) she seems, on the contrary, to open the
way to sources of noise. The most important
observances are concerned with the bed itself,
however. The bolster at the head of the bed

[557b]
must not touch the back of the wooden bed
stead. The pillow must lie across the bolster
exactly in a diagonal position and in no other;
she then places her head exactly in the middle
of this diamond, lengthways. The eiderdown
must be shaken before she puts it over her, so
that all the feathers sink to the foot-end; she
never fails, however, to press this out and re
distribute them all over it again.
I will pass over other trivial details of her
ritual; they would teach us nothing new and
lead us too far from our purpose. Do not sup
pose, though, that all this is carried out with
perfect smoothness. Everything is accompanied
by the anxiety that it has not all been done
properly; it must be tested and repeated; her
doubts fix first upon one, then another, of the
precautions; and the result is that one or two
hours elapse before the girl herself can sleep,
or lets the intimidated parents sleep.
The analysis of these torments did not pro
ceed so simply as that of the former patient's
obsessive act. I had to offer hints and sugges
tions of its interpretation which were invariably
received by her with a positive denial or with
scornful doubt. After this first reaction of re
jection, however, there followed a period in
which she herself took up the possibilities sug
gested
to
her,
noted
the
associations they
aroused, produced memories, and established
connections until she herself had accepted all
the interpretations in working them out for her
self. In proportion as she did this she began
to relax the performance of her obsessive pre
cautions and before the end of the treatment
she had given up the whole ritual. I must also
tell you that analytic work, as we conduct it
nowadays,
definitely
excludes
any
uninter
rupted concentration on a single symptom until
its meaning becomes fully clear. It is necessary,
on the contrary, to abandon a given theme
again and again, in the assurance that one will
come upon it anew in another context. The in
terpretation of the symptom, which I am now
going to tell you, is therefore a synthesis of the
results which, amid the interruptions of work
on other points, took weeks and months to
procure.
The patient gradually learnt to understand
that she banished clocks and watches from her
room at night because they were symbols of
the female genitals. Clocks, which we know
may have other symbolic meanings beside this,
acquire this significance of a genital organ by
their relation to periodical processes and regu
lar intervals. A woman may be heard to boast

[558a]
General Introduction
that menstruation occurs in her as regularly as
clockwork. Now this patient's special fear was
that the ticking of the clocks would disturb her
during sleep. The ticking of a clock is com
parable to the throbbing of the clitoris in sex
ual excitation. This sensation, which was dis
tressing to her, had actually on several occasions
wakened her from sleep; and now her fear of
an erection of the clitoris expressed itself by
the imposition of a rule to remove all going
clocks and watches far away from her during
the night. Flower-pots and vases are, like all
receptacles, also symbols of the female geni
tals. Precautions to prevent them from falling
and breaking during the night are therefore
not lackingin meaning. We knowthe very wide
spread custom of breaking a vessel or a plate
on the occasion of a betrothal; everyone pres
ent possesses himself of a fragment in symbolic
acceptance of the fact that he may no longer
put forward any claim to the bride,presumably
a custom which arose with monogamy. The
patient also contributed a recollection and sev
eral associations to this part of her ritual. Once
as a child she had fallen while carrying a glass
or porcelain vessel, and had cut her finger
which had bled badly. As she grew up and
learnt the facts about sexual intercourse, she
developed the apprehension that on her wed
ding-night she would not bleed and so would
prove not to be a virgin. Her precautions against
the vases breaking signified a rejection of the
whole complex concerned with virginity and
with the question of bleeding during the first
act of intercourse; a rejection of the anxiety
both that she would bleed and that she would
not bleed. These precautions were in fact only
remotelyconnected with the prevention of noise.
One day she divined the central idea of her
ritual when she suddenly understood her rule
not to let the bolster touch the back of the bed.
The bolster had always seemed a woman to
her, she said, and the upright back of the bed
stead a man. She wished therefore, by a magic
ceremony, as it were, to keep man and woman
apart; that is to say, to separate the parents
and prevent intercourse from occurring. Years
before the institution of her ritual, she had at
tempted to achieve this end by a more direct
method. She had simulated fear, or had ex
ploited a tendency to fear, so that the door be
tween her bedroom and that of her parents
should not be closed. This regulation was still
actually included in her present ritual; in this
way she managed to make it possible to over
hear her parents; a proceeding which at one

[558b]
to Psycho-Analysis
555
time had caused her months of sleeplessness.
Not content with disturbing her parents in
this way, she at that time even succeeded oc
casionally in sleeping between the father and
mother in their bed. Bolster and bedstead were
then really prevented from coming together.
As she finally grew too big to be comfortable
in the same bed with the parents, she achieved
the same thing by consciously simulating fear
and getting her mother to change places with
her and to give up to her, her place by the
father. This incident was undoubtedly the
starting-point of phantasies, the effectof which
was evident in the ritual.
If the bolster was a woman, then the shak
ing of the eiderdown till all the feathers were
at the bottom, making a protuberance there,
also had a meaning. It meant impregnating a
woman; she did not neglect, though, to obliter
ate the pregnacy again, for she had for years
been terrified that intercourse between herpar
ents might result in another child and present
her with a rival. On the other hand, if the
larger bolster meant the mother then the small
pillow could only represent the daughter. Why
had this pillow to be placed diamond-wise
upon the bolster and her head be laid exactly
in its middle lengthways? S^e was easily re
minded that a diamond is repeatedly used in
drawings on walls to signify the open female
genitals. The part of the man (the father) she
thus played herself and replaced the male or
gan by her own head. (Cf. Symbolism of be
heading for castration.)
^Horrible thoughts, you will say, to run inthe
mind of a virgin girl. I admit that; but do not
forget that I havenotinvented these ideas, only
exposed them. A ritual of this kind beforesleep
is also peculiar enough, and you cannot deny
the correspondence, revealed by the interpre
tation, between the ceremonies and the phanta
sies. It is more important to me, however, that
you should notice that the ritual was the out
come, not of one single phantasy, but of several
together which of course must have had a nodal
point somewhere. Note, too, that the details of
the ritual reflect the sexual wishes both posi
tively and negatively, and serve in part as ex
pressions of them, in part as defences against
them.
It would be possible to obtain much more
out of the analysis of this ritual by bringing it
into its place in connection with the patient's
other symptoms. But that is not our purposeat
the moment. You must be content with a refer
ence to an erotic attachment to the father,

[559a]
556
Sigmund Freud
originating very early in childhood, which had
enslaved this girl. It was perhaps for this rea
son that she was so unfriendly towards her
mother. Also we cannot overlook the fact that
the analysis of this symptom has again led to
the patient's sexual life. The more insight we
gain into the meaning and purpose of neurotic
symptoms,the less surprising will this seem.
From two selected examples I have now
shown you that neurotic symptoms have mean
ing, like errors and like dreams, and that they
are closely connected with the events of the
patient's life. Can I expect you to believe this
exceptionally
significant
statement on the
strength of two examples? No. But can you ex
pect me to goon quoting examples to you until
you declare yourselves convinced? Again, no;
for in view of the exhaustive treatment given
to each individual case I should have to devote
five hours a week for a whole term to the con
sideration of this one point in the theory of the
neuroses. I will content myself therefore with
the samples given, as evidence of my state
ment; and will refer you for more to the
literature on the subject, to the classical inter
pretation of symptoms in Breuer's first case
(hysteria), to the strikingelucidations of very
obscure symptoms in dementia praecox, socalled, made by &. G. Jung atatime when this
investigator was a mere psycho-analyst and
did not yet aspireto be a prophet,andto all the
subsequent contributions with which our peri
odicals have been filled since then. Precisely this
type of investigationis plentiful. Analysis,inter
pretation, and translation of neurotic symptoms
has proved so attractive to psycho-analysts
that
in comparison they have
temporarily
neglected the other problems of the neuroses.
Any one of you who makes the necessary ef
fort to look up this question will certainly be
Strongly impressed by the wealth of evidential
material. But he will also meet with a difficulty.
The meaning of a symptom lies, as we have
seen, in its connection with the life of the pa
tient. The more individually the symptom has
been formed, the more clearly may we expect
to establish this connection. Then the task re
solves itself specifically into a discovery, for
every nonsensical idea and every useless action,
of the past situation in which the idea was jus
tified and the action served a useful purpose.
The obsessive act of the patient who ran to the
table and rang for the maid is a perfect model
of this kind of symptom. But symptoms of
quite a different type are very frequently seen.
They are what we call typical symptoms of a

[559b]
disease,in each case they are practically identi
cal, the individual differences in them vanish or
at least fade away, so that it is difficult to con
nect them with the patient's life or to relate
them to special situations in his past. Let us
consider the obsessional neurosis again. The
second
patient's
ceremonies preparatory
to
sleep are in many ways quite typical, although
showing enough individual features as well to
make an "historical" interpretation, so to speak,
possible. But all obsessional patients are given
to repetitions, to isolating certain of their ac
tions and to rhythmic performances. Most of
them wash too much. Those patients who suf
fer from agoraphobia (topophobia,
fear of
space), no longer reckoned as an obsessional
neurosis but now classified as anxiety-hysteria,
reproduce the same features of the pathologi
cal picture often with fatiguing
monotony.
They fear enclosed spaces, wide, open squares,
long stretches of road, and avenues; they feel
protected if accompanied, or if a vehicle drives
behind them, and so on. Nevertheless, on this
groundwork of similarity the various patients
construct individual conditions of their own,
moods, one might call them, which directly con
trast with other cases. One fears narrow streets
only, another wide streets only, one can walk
only when few people are about, others only
when surrounded with people. Similarly in hys
teria, beside the wealth of individual features
there are always plenty of common typical
symptoms which appear to resist an easy inter
pretation on historical lines. Do not let us for
get that it is these typical symptoms which
enable us to take our bearings in forming a
diagnosis. Supposing we do trace back a typi
cal symptom in a case of hysteria to an experi
ence or to a chain of similar experiences (for
instance, an hysterical vomiting to a series of
impressions of a disgusting nature), it will be
confusing to discover in another case of vomit
ing an entirely dissimilar series of apparently
causative experiences. It almost looks as though
hysterical patients must vomit, for some un
known reason, and as though the historical fac
tors revealed by analysis were but pretexts,
seized upon by an inner necessity, when oppor
tunity offered, to serve its purpose.
This brings us to the discouraging conclusion
that, although individual forms of neurotic
symptoms can certainly be satisfactorily ex
plained by their relation to the patient's ex
periences, yet our science fails us for the far
more frequent typical symptoms in the same
cases. In addition to this, I have not nearly

[560a]
General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis
557
explained to you all the difficulties that arise
during a resolute pursuit of the historical mean
ing of a symptom. Nor shall I do so; for al
though my intention is to conceal nothing from
you and to gloss over nothing, I do not need to
confuse you and stupefy you at the outset of
our studies together. It is true that our under
standing of symptom-interpretation has only
just begun, but we will hold fast to the knowl
edge gained and proceed to overcome step by
step the difficulties of the unknown. I will try
to cheer you with the thought that it is hardly
possible to presume a fundamental difference
between the one kind of symptom and the
other. If the individual form of symptom is so
unmistakably connected with the patient's ex
periences, it is possible that the typical symp
tom relates to an experience which is itself typi
cal and common to all humanity. Other regu
larly recurring features of a neurosis, such as
the repetition and doubt of the obsessional neu
rosis, may be universal reactions which the
patient is compelled to exaggerate by the na
ture of the morbid change. In short, there is no
reason to give up hastily in despair; let us see
what more we can find out.
There is a very similar difficulty met with in
the theory of dreams, one which I could not
deal with in the course of our previous discus
sions
of
dreams.
The
manifest
content
of
dreams is multifarious and highly differentiated
individually, and we have shown exhaustively
what can be obtained by analysis from this con
tent. But there are also dreams which may in
the same way be called typical and occur in ev
erybody, dreams with an identical content,
which present the same difficulties to analysis.
These are the dreams of falling, flying, floating,
swimming, of being hindered, of being naked,
and certain other anxiety-dreams; which yield
first this, then that, interpretation, according
to the person concerned, without any explana
tion of their monotonous and typical recur
rence. But we notice that in these dreams also
the common groundwork is embroidered with
additions of an individually varying character.
Most probably they too will prove to fit in with
other knowledge about the dream-life, gained
from a study of other kinds of dreams—not by
any forcible twist, but by a gradual widening
of our comprehension of these things.
EIGHTEENTH LECTURE
Fixation upon Traumas: The Unconscious
I said last time that we would take, as a start
ing-point for further work, the knowledge we

[560b]
have gained already, and not the doubts which
it has roused in us. We have not yet even be
gun to discuss two of the most interesting con
clusions arising from the analysis of the two
examples.
First: both the patients give the impression
that they are fixed to a particular point in their
past, that they do not know how to release
themselves from it, and are consequently alien
ated from both present and future. They are
marooned in their illness, as it were; just as in
former times people used to withdraw to the
cloister to live out their unhappy fate there. In
the case of the first patient, it was the mar
riage to the husband, which in reality had long
ago come to an end, that had settled this doom
upon her. Her symptoms enabled her to con
tinue
her
relationship with him;
we could
perceive in
them the voices which pleaded
for him, excused him, exalted him, lamented
his
loss.
Although she
is young and could
attract other men, she has seized upon every
possible real and imaginary (magical) precau
tion that will preserve her fidelity to him. She
will not meet strangers, she neglects her ap
pearance; moreover, she cannot readily rise
from any chair which she sits upon, and she
refuses to sign her name and can give no pre
sents, because no one must have anything which
is hers.
With the second patient, the young girl, it is
the erotic attachment to the father established
in the years before puberty that plays this part
in her life. She also has herself perceived that
she cannot marry as long as she is so ill. We
may suspect that she became so ill in order to
be unable to marry and so to remain with her
father.
We cannot avoid asking the question how, by
what means and impelled by what motives,
anyone can take up such an extraordinary and
unprofitable attitude towards life.
Provided,
that is, that this attitude is a universal charac
ter of neurosis and is not a special peculiarity
of these two patients. As a matter of fact, this
is so; it is a universal trait common to every
neurosis, and one of great practical significance.
Breuer's first hysterical patient was fixated, in
the same way, to the time when her father was
seriously ill and she nursed him. In spite of her
recovery, she has remained to some extent cut
off from life since that time; for although she
has remained healthy and active, she did not
take up the normal career of a woman. In every
one of our patients we learn through analysis
that the symptoms and their effects have set

[561a]
558
Sigmund Freud
the sufferer back into some past period of his
life. In the majority of cases it is actually a
very early phase of the life-history which has
been thus selected, a period in childhood, even,
absurd as it may sound, the period of existence
as a suckling infant.
The closest analogy to this behaviour in our
nervous patients is provided by the forms of
illness recently made so common by the war—
the
so-called
traumatic
neuroses.
Of
course
similar cases have occurred before the war,
after railway accidents and other terrifying ex
periences involving danger to life. The trau
matic neuroses are not fundamentally the same
as those which occur spontaneously, which we
investigate analytically and are accustomed to
treat; neither have we been successful so far
in correlating them with our views on other
subjects; later on I hope to show you where
this limitation lies. Yet there is a complete
agreement between them on one point which
may be emphasized. The traumatic neuroses
demonstrate very clearly that a fixation to the
moment of the traumatic occurrence lies at
their root. These patients regularly produce
the traumatic situation in their dreams;
in
cases showing attacks of an hysterical type in
which analysis is possible, it appears that the
attack constitutes a complete reproduction of
this situation. It is as though these persons had
not yet been able to deal adequately with the
situation, as if this task were still actually be
fore them unaccomplished. We take this atti
tude of theirs in all seriousness; it points the
way to what we may call an economic concep
tion of the mental processes. The term trau
matic has actually no other meaning but this
economic one.
An experience which we call
traumatic is one which within a very short
space of time subjects the mind to such a very
high increase of stimulation that assimilation
or elaboration of it can no longer be effected
by normal means, so that lasting disturbances
must result in the distribution of the available
energy in the mind.
This analogy tempts us also to classify as
traumatic those experiences to which our ner
vous patients seem to be fixated. In this way
we should be provided with a simple condition
for a neurotic illness; it would be incomparable
to a traumatic illness and would result from an
incapacity to deal with an overpowering af
fective experience. Indeed, the first formula in
which Breuer and I, in 1893-95, reduced our
new observations to a theory was expressed
very similarly. A case like that of the first

[561b]
patient described, the young woman separated
from her husband, fits very well into this de
scription; she had not been able to get over
the impracticability of her marriage and was
still attached to her trauma. But the second
case of the young girl who was tied to her
father shows us at once that the formula is not
comprehensive enough. On the one hand, an
infantile adoration of her father by a little girl
is such a common experience and so frequently
grown out of that the term traumatic would
lose all its meaning if applied to it; on the other
hand, the history of the case shows that this
first erotic fixation was gone through by the
patient quite harmlessly at the time, to all ap
pearances, and only several years later came to
expression in the obsessional neurosis. So we
see that there are complications ahead, a con
siderable variety and number of determining
factors in neurosis; but we divine that the trau
matic view will not necessarily be abandoned as
false, and that it will fit in and have to be co
ordinated properly elsewhere.
Here again we must leave the path we have
been following. At the moment it will take us
no further, and we have much more to leam
before we can find a satisfactory continuation
of it. But before leaving the subject of fixation
to traumas it should be noted that it is a phe
nomenon manifested extensively outside the
neuroses; every neurosis contains such a fixa
tion, but not every fixation leads to a neurosis,
or is necessarily combined with a neurosis, or
arises in the course of a neurosis. Grief is a
prototype and perfect example of an affective
fixation upon something that is past, and, like
the neuroses, it also involves a state of com
plete alienation from the present and the fu
ture. But even the lay public distinguishes
clearly between grief and neurosis. On the other
hand, there are neuroses which may be de
scribed as morbid forms of grief.
It does also happen that persons may be
brought to a complete standstill in life by a
traumatic experience which has shaken the
whole structure of their lives to the founda
tions, so that they give up all interest in the
present and the future, and live permanently
absorbed in their retrospections; but these un
happy persons do not necessarily become neu
rotic. Therefore this single feature must not
be overestimated as a characteristic of neuro
sis, however invariable and significant it may
be otherwise.
Now let us turn to the second conclusion to
be drawn from our analyses; it is one upon

[562a]
General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis
559
which we shall not need to impose any subse
quent limitation. With the first patient we have
heard of the senseless obsessive act she per
formed and of the intimate memories she re
called in connection with it; we also considered
the relation between the two, and deduced the
purpose of the obsessive act from its connec
tion with the memory. But there is one factor
which we have entirely neglected, and yet it is
one which deserves our fullest attention. As
long as the patient continued this performance
she did not know that it was in any way con
nected with the previous experience; the con
nection between the twoi things: waschidden;
she could quite truly answer that she did not
know what impulse led her to do it. Then it
happened suddenly that, under the influence of
the treatment, she found this connection and
was able to tell it. But even then she knew
nothing of the purpose she had in performing
the action, the purpose that was to correct a
painful event of the past and to raise the hus
band she loved in her own estimation. It took
a long time and much effort for her to grasp,
and admit to me, that such a motive as this
alone could have been the driving force behind
the obsessive act.
The connection with the scene on the morn
ing after the unhappy bridal-night, and the pa
tient's own tender feeling for her husband,
together, make up what we have called the
meaning of the obsessive act. But both sides of
this meaning were hidden from her, she under
stood neither the whence nor the whither of
her act, as long as she carried it on. Mental
processes had been at work in her, therefore, of
which the obsessive act was the effect; she was
aware in a normal manner of their effect; but
nothing of the mental antecedents of this ef
fect had come to the knowledge of her con
sciousness. She was behaving exactly like a sub
ject under hypnotism whom
Bernheim had
ordered to open an umbrella in the ward five
minutes after he awoke, but who had no idea
why he was doing it. This is the kind of oc
currence we have in mind when we speak of
the existence of unconscious mental processes;
we may challenge anyone in the world to give a
more correctly scientific explanation of this
matter, and will then gladly withdraw our in
ference that unconscious mental processes ex
ist. Until they do, however, we will adhere to
this inference and, when anyone objects that
in a
scientific sense the unconscious has no
reality, that it is a mere makeshift, une faqon
de parler, we, must resign ourselves with a

[562b]
shrug to rejecting his statement as incompre
hensible. Something unreal, which can never
theless produce something so real and palpable
as an obsessive action!
In the second patient fundamentally the
same thing is found. She has instituted a rule
that the bolster must not touch the back of the
bedstead, and she had to carry out this rule,
but shedoesnot know whence it comes, what it
means, or to what it owes its strength. Whether
she regards it indifferently, or struggles against
it, or rages against it, or determines to over
come it, matters not; it will be followed. It
must be followed; in-vain she asks herself why.
It is undeniable that these symptoms of the
obsessional neurosis, these ideas and these im
pulses which arise no man knows where and
which oppose sucha powerful resistance against
all the influences to which an otherwise nor
mal mental life is susceptible, give the impres
sion, even, to the patients themselves, of being
all-powerful visitants from another world, im
mortal beings mingling in the whirlpool of mor
tal things. In these symptoms lies the clearest
indication of a specialsphere of mental activity
cut off from all the rest. They show the way
unmistakably to conviction on the question of
the unconscious in the mind; and for that very
reason clinical psychiatry, which only recog
nizes a psychology of consciousness, can do
nothing with these symptoms except to stig
matize them as signs of a special kind of de
generation. Naturally, the obsessive idea and
impulses are not themselves unconscious, any
more that is the performance of the obsessive
acts. They would not have become symptoms
if they had not penetrated into consciousness.
But the mental antecedents of them disclosed
by analysis, the connections into which they
fit after interpretation, are unconscious, at least
until the time when we make the patient con
scious of them by the work of the analysis.
Consider now, in addition, that the facts es
tablished in these two cases are confirmed in
every symptom of every neurotic disease; that
always and everywhere the meaning of
the
symptoms is unknown to the
sufferer; that
analysis invariably shows that these symptoms
are derived from unconscious mental processes
which can, however, under various favourable
conditions, become conscious. You will then
understand that we cannot dispense with the
unconscious part of the mind in psycho-analy
sis, and that we are accustomed to deal with it
as with something actual and tangible. Perhaps
you will also be able to realize how unfitted all

[563a]
S6o
Sigmund Freud
those who only know the unconscious as a
phrase, who have never analysed, never inter
preted dreams, or translated neurotic symp
toms into their meaning and intention, are to
form an opinion on this matter. I will repeat
the substance of it again in order to impress it
upon you: The fact that it is possible to find
meaning in neurotic symptoms by means of
analytic interpretation is an irrefutable proof
of the existence—or, if you prefer it, of the
necessity for assuming the existence—of un
conscious mental processes.
But that is not all. Thanks to a second dis
coveryof Breuer's, for whichhe alone deserves
credit and which seems to me even more farreaching in its significance than the first, more
still has been leamt about the relation between
the unconscious and the symptoms of neu
rotics. Not merely is the meaning of the symp
tom invariably unconscious; there exists also a
connection of a substitutive nature between
the two; the existence of the symptom is only
possible by reason of this unconscious activity.
You will soon understand what I mean. With
Breuer, I maintain the following: Every time
we meet with a symptom we may concludethat
definite unconscious activities which contain
the meaning of the symptom are present in the
patient's mind. Conversely, this meaning must
be unconscious before a symptom can arise
from it. Symptoms are not produced by con
scious processes; as soon as the unconscious
processes involved are made conscious the
symptom must vanish. You will perceive at
once that here is an opening for therapy, a
way by which symptoms can be made to dis
appear. It was by this means that Breuer ac
tually achieved the recovery of his patient,that
is, freed her from her symptoms; he found a
method of bringing into her consciousness the
unconscious processes which contained the
meaning of her symptoms and the symptoms
vanished.
This discovery of Breuer's was not the re
sult of any speculation but of a fortunate ob
servation made possible by the co-operation of
the patient.Nowyoumustnot rackyourbrains
to try and understand this by seeking to com
pare it with something similar that is already
familiar to you; but you must recognize in it
a fundamentally new fact, by means of which
much else becomes explicable. Allow me there
fore to express it again to you in other words.
The symptom is formed as a substitute for
something else which remains submerged. Cer
tain mental processes would, under normal con

[563b]
ditions, develop until the person became aware
of them consciously. This has not happened;
and, instead, the symptom has arisen out of
these processes which have been interrupted
and interfered with in some way and have had
to remain unconscious. Thus something in the
nature of an exchange has occurred; if we can
succeed in reversing this process by our thera
py, we shall have performed our task of dis
persing the symptom.
Breuer's discovery still remains the founda
tion of psycho-analytic therapy. The proposi
tion that symptoms vanish when their uncon
scious antecedents have been made conscious
has been borne out by all subsequent research;
although the most
extraordinary and unex
pected complications are met with in attempt
ing to carry this proposition out in practice.
Our therapy does its work by transforming
something unconscious into something con
scious, and only succeeds in its work in so far
as it is able to effect this transformation.
Now for a rapid digression, lest you should
run the risk of imagining that this therapeutic
effect is achieved too easily. According to the
conclusions we have reached so far, neurosis
would be the result of a kind of ignorance, a
not-knowing of mental processes which should
be known. This would approach very closely to
the well-known Socratic doctrine according to
which even vice is the result of ignorance. Now
it happens in analysis that an experienced prac
titioner can usually surmise very easily what
those feelings are which have remained uncon
scious in each individual patient. It should not
therefore be a matter of great difficulty to cure
the patient by imparting his knowledge to him
and so relieving his ignorance. At least, one
side of the unconscious meaning of the symp
tom would be easily dealt with in this way,
although it is true that the other side of it, the
connection between the symptom and the pre
vious
experiences in the patient's life,
can
hardly be divined thus; for the analyst does
not know what the experiences have been, he
has to wait till the patient remembers them
and tells him. But one might find a substitute
even for this in many cases. One might ask for
information about his past life from the friends
and relations; they are often in a position to
know what events have been of a traumatic
nature, perhaps they can even relate some of
which the patient is ignorant because they took
place at some very early period of childhood.
By a combination of these two means it would
seem that the pathogenic ignorance of the pa-

[564a]
General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis
561
tients might be overcome in a short time with
out much trouble.
If only it were so! But we have made dis
coveries that we were quite unprepared for at
first. There is knowing and knowing; they are
not always the same thing. There are various
kinds of knowing, which psychologically are
not by any means of equal value. II y a fagots
et fagots,1 as Moliere says. Knowing on the
part of the physician is not the same thing as
knowing on the part of the patient and does
not have the same effect. When the physician
conveys his knowledge to the patient by tell
ing him what he knows, it has effect. No, it
would be incorrect to say that. It does not have
the effect of dispersing the symptoms; but it
has a different one, it sets the analysis in mo
tion, and the first result of this is often an
energetic denial. The patient has learned some
thing that he did not know before—the mean
ing of his symptom—and yet he knows it as
little as ever. Thus we discover that there is
more than one kind of ignorance. It requires a
considerable degree of insight and understand
ing of psychological matters in order to see in
what the difference consists. But the proposi
tion that symptoms vanish with the acquisition
of knowledge of their meaning remains true,
nevertheless. The necessary condition is that
the knowledge must be founded upon an inner
change in the patient which can only come
about by a mental operation directed to that
end. We are here confronted by problems which
to us will soon develop into the dynamics of
symptom-formation.
Now I must really stop and ask you whether
all that I have been saying is not too obscure
and complicated? Am I confusing you by so
often qualifying and restricting, spinning out
trains of thought and then letting them drop?
I should be sorry if it were so. But I have a
strong dislike of simplification at the expense
of truth, I am not averse from giving you a full
impressionof the many-sidedness and intricacy
of the subject, and also I believe that it does no
harm to tell you more about each point than
you can assimilate at the moment. I know that
every listener and every reader arranges what is
offered him as suits him in his own mind,
shortens it, simplifies it, and extracts from it
what he will retain. Within certain limits it is
true that the more we begin with the more we
shall have at the end. So let me hope that, in
spite of the elaboration, you will have grasped
the essential substance of my remarks concern1 There are men and men.—Ed.

[564b]
ing the meaning of symptoms, the unconscious,
and the connection between the two. You have
probably understood also that our further ef
forts will proceed in two directions; first, to
wards discovering how people become ill, how
they come to take up the characteristic neu
rotic attitude towards life, which is a clinical
problem; and secondly, how they develop the
morbid symptoms out of the conditions of a
neurosis, which remains a problem of mental
dynamics. The two problems must somewhere
have a point of contact.
I shall not go further into this today; but as
our time is not yet up I propose to draw your
attention to another characteristic of our two
analyses; namely, the memory gaps or amne
sias, again a point which onlylater will appear
in its full significance. You have heard that the
task of the psycho-analytic treatment can be
summedup in this formula: "Everything patho
genic in the unconscious must be transferred
into consciousness." Now you will perhaps be
astonished to hear that another formula may
be substituted for that one: "All gaps in the
patient's memory must be filled in, his am
nesias removed." It amounts to the same thing;
which means that an important connection is
to be recognized between the development of
the symptoms and the amnesias. If you con
sider the case of the first patient analysed you
will, however, not find this view of amnesia
justified; the patient had not forgotten the
scene from which the obsessive act is derived;
on the contrary, it was vivid in her memory,
nor is there any other forgotten factor involved
in the formation of her symptom. The situa
tion is quite analogous, although less clear, in
the second case, the girl with the obsessional
ceremonies. She, too, had not really forgotten
her behaviour in former years, the fact that
she had insisted upon the open door between
her parents' bedroom and her own,and that she
had turned her mother out of her place in the
parents' bed; she remembered it quite clearly,
although with hesitation and unwillingness.
What is remarkable about it is that the first
patient, although she had carried out her obses
sive act such a countless number of times, had
not once been reminded of its similarity to the
scene after the wedding-night, nor did this rec
ollection ever occur to her when she was di
rectly asked to search for the origin of her
obsessive act. The same thing is true in the
case of the girl, where not merely the ritual,
but the situation which gave rise to it, was re
peated identically every evening. In neither

[565a]
562
Sigmund
case was there really an amnesia, a lapse of
memory; but a connection, which should have
existed intact and have led to the reproduction,
the recollection, of the memory, had been
broken. This kind of disturbance of memory
suffices for the obsessional neurosis; in hys
teria it is different. This latter neurosis
is
usually characterized by amnesias on a grand
scale. As a rule the analysis of each single
hysterical symptom leads to a whole chain of
former impressions, which upon their return
may be literally described as having beenhith
erto forgotten. This chain reaches, on the one
hand, back to the earliest years of childhood,
so that the hysterical amnesia is seen to be a
direct continuation of the infantile amnesia
which hides the
earliest impressions of our
mental life from all of us. On the other hand,
we are astonished to find that the most recent
experiences of the patient are liable to be for
gotten also, and that in particular the provoca
tions which induced the outbreak of the disease
or aggravated it are at least partially obliter
ated, if not entirely wiped out, by amnesia.
From the complete picture of any such recent
recollection, important details have invariably
disappeared or been replaced by falsifications.
It happens again and again, almost invariably,
that not until shortly before the completion of
an analysis do certain recollections of recent
experiences come to the surface, which had
managed to be withheld throughout it and had
left noticeable gaps in the context.
These derangements in the capacity to recall
memories are, as I have said, characteristic of
hysteria, in which disease it also happens even
that states occur as symptoms (the hysterical
attacks) without necessarily leaving a trace of
recollection behind them. Since it is otherwise
in the obsessional neurosis, you may infer that
these amnesias are part of the psychological
character of the hysterical change and are not
a universal trait of neurosis in general. The
importance of this difference will be dimin
ished by the
following consideration. Two
things are combined to constitute the meaning
of a symptom; its whence and its whither or
why; that is, the impressions and experiences
from which it sprang, and the purpose which
it serves. The whence of a symptom is resolved
into impressionswhichhave been receivedfrom
without, which were necessarily at one time
conscious, and which may have become uncon
scious by being forgotten since that time. The
why of the symptom, its tendency, is however
always an endo-psychic process, which may

[565b]
Freud
possibly have been conscious at first, but just
as possibly may never have been conscious and
may have remained in the unconscious from its
inception. Therefore, it is not very important
whether the amnesia has also infringed upon
the whence, the impressions upon which the
symptom is supported, as happens in hysteria;
the whither, the tendency of the symptom,
which may have been unconscious from the be
ginning, is what maintains the symptom's de
pendence upon the unconscious, in the obses
sional neurosis no less strictly than in hysteria.
By
thus emphasizing the unconscious
in
mental life we have called forth all the malevo
lence in
humanity in
opposition to psycho
analysis. Do not be astonished at this and do
not suppose that this opposition relates to the
obvious difficulty of conceiving the unconscious
or to the relative inaccessibility of the evidence
which supports its existence. I believe it has a
deeper source. Humanity has in the course of
time had to endure from the hands of science
two great outrages upon its naive self-love.
The first was when it realized that our earth
was not the centre of the universe, but only a
tiny speck in a world-system of a magnitude
hardly conceivable; this is associated in our
minds with the name of Copernicus, although
Alexandrian doctrines taught something very
similar. The second was when biological re
search robbed man of his peculiar privilege of
having been specially created, and relegated
him to a descent from the animal world, imply
ing an ineradicable animal nature in him: this
transvaluation has been accomplished in our
own time upon the instigation of Charles Dar
win, Wallace, and their predecessors, and not
without the most violent opposition from their
contemporaries. But man's craving for grandi
osity is now suffering the third and most bitter
blow from present-day psychological research
which is endeavouring to prove to the ego of
each one of us that he is not even master in his
own house, but that he must remain content
with the veriest scraps of information about
what is going on unconsciously in his own mind.
We psycho-analysts were neither the first nor
the only ones to propose to mankind that they
should look inward; but it appears to be our
lot to advocate it most insistently and to sup
port it by empirical evidence which touches ev
ery man closely. This is the kernel of the uni
versal revolt against our science, of the total
disregard of academic courtesy in dispute, and
the liberation of opposition from all the con
straints of impartial logic. And besides this, we

[566a]
General Introduction
have been compelled to disturb the peace of
the world in yet another way, as you will soon
hear.
NINETEENTH LECTURE
Resistance and Repression
We now need more data before we can advance
further in our understanding of the neuroses;
two observations lie to hand for us. Both are
very remarkable and at first were very surpris
ing. You are of course prepared for both of
them by the work we did last year.
First: when we undertake to cure a patient
of his symptoms, he opposes against us a
vigorous and tenacious resistance throughout
the entire course of the treatment. This is such
an extraordinary thing that we cannot expect
much belief in it. It is best to say nothing about
it to the patient's relations, for they invariably
regard it as a pretext set up by us to excuse the
length or
the failure of the treatment. The
patient, too, exhibits all the manifestations of
this resistance without recognizing it as such,
and it is a great step forward when we have
brought him to realize this fact and to reckon
with it. To think that the patient, whose symp
toms
cause him and those about him such
suffering, who is willing to make such sacrifices
in time, money, effort, and self-conquest in
order to be freed from them—that he should,
in the interests of his illness, resist the help
offered him. How improbable this statement
must sound! And yet it is so, and if the im
probability is made a reproach against us we
need
only reply that it is not
without its
analogies; for a man who has rushed off to a
dentist with a frightful toothache may very
well fend him off when he takes his forceps to
the decayed tooth.
The resistance shown by patients is highly
varied and exceedingly subtle, often hard to
recognize and protean in the manifold forms
it takes; the analyst needs to be continually
suspicious and on his guard against it. In
psycho-analytic therapy we employ the tech
nique which is already familiar to you through
dream-interpretation: we require the patient
to put himself into a condition of calm selfobservation, without trying to think of any
thing, and then to communicate everything
which he becomes inwardly aware of, feelings,
thoughts, remembrances, in the order in which
they arise in his mind. We expressly warn him
against giving way to any kind of motive
which would cause him to select from or to
exclude
any of the ideas
(associations),

[566b]
to Psycho-Analysis
563
whether because they are too "disagreeable,"
or too "indiscreet" to be mentioned, or too
"unimportant" or "irrelevant" or "nonsensical"
to be worth saying. We impress uponhim that
he has only to attend to what is on the surface
consciously in his mind, and to abandon all ob
jections to whatever he finds, no matter what
form they take; and we inform him that the
success of the treatment, and, above all, its
duration, will depend upon his conscientious
adherence to this fundamental technical rule.
We know from the technique of dream-inter
pretation that it is precisely those associations
against which innumerable doubts and objec
tions are raised that invariably contain the
material leading to the discovery of the un
conscious.
The first thing that happens as a result of
instituting this technical rule is that it becomes
the first point of attack for the resistance. The
patient attempts to escape from it by every
possible means. First he says nothing comes
into his head, then that so much comes into
his head that he can't grasp any of it. Then
we observe with displeasure and astonishment
that he is giving in to his critical objections,
first to this, then to that; he betrays it by
the long pauses which occur in his talk. At
last he admits that he really cannot say some
thing, he is ashamed to, andhe lets this feeling
get the better of his promise. Or else, he has
thought of something but it concerns someone
else and not himself, and is therefore to be
made an exception to the rule. Or else, what
he has just thought of is really too unimpor
tant, too stupid and too absurd, I could never
have meant that he should take account of
such thoughts. So it goes on, with untold varia
tions, to which one continuallyreplies that tell
ing everything really means telling every
thing.
One hardly ever meets with a patient who
does not attempt to make a reservation in some
department of his thoughts, in order to guard
them against intrusion by the analysis. One
patient, who in the ordinary way was remark
ably intelligent,
concealed
a most
intimate
love-affair from me for weeks in this way;
when accused of this violation of the sacred
rule he defended himself with the argument
that he considered this particular story his
private affair. Naturally analytic
treatment
cannot countenance a right of sanctuary like
this; one might as well try to allow an excep
tion to be made in certain parts of a town like
Vienna, and forbid that any arrests should be

[567a]
564
Sigmund Freud
made in the market-place or in the square by
St. Stephen's church, and then attempt to take
up a wanted man. Of course he would neverbe
found anywhere but in those safe places. Once
I decided to permit a man to make an excep
tion of such a point; for a great deal depended
on his recovering his capacity for work and he
was bound by his oath as a civil servant not
to communicate certain matters to any other
person. He was content with the result, it is
true, but I was not: I made up my mind never
again to repeat the attempt under such con
ditions.
Obsessional patients are exceedingly clever
at making the technical rule almost useless by
bringing their over-conscientiousness and doubt
to bear upon it. Patients with anxiety-hysteria
sometimes succeed in reducing it to absurdity
by only producing associations which are so
far removed from what is wanted that they
yield nothing for analysis. However, I do not
intend
to introduce you to these technical
difficulties of the treatment. It is enough to
know that finally, with resolution and perse
verance, we do succeed in extracting from the
patient a certain amount of obedience for the
rules of the technique; and then the resistance
takes another line altogether. It appears as
intellectual opposition, employs arguments as
weapons, and turns to its own use all the
difficulties and improbabilities which normal
but uninstructed reasoning finds in analytical
doctrines. We then have to hear from the mouth
of the individual patient all the criticisms and
objections which thunder about us in chorus
in scientific literature. What the critics outside
shout at us is nothing new, therefore. It is
indeed a storm in a teacup. Still, the patient
can be argued with; he is very glad to get us
to instruct him, teach him, defeat him, point
out the literature to him so that he can leam
more; he is perfectly ready to become a sup
porter of psycho-analysis on the conditionthat
analysis shall spare him personally. We recog
nize resistance in this desire for knowledge,
however; it is a digression from the particular
task in hand and we refuse to allow it. In the
obsessional neurosis the resistance makes use
of special tactics which we are prepared for.
It permits the analysis to proceed uninter
ruptedly along its course, so that more and
more light is thrown upon the problems of the
case, until we begin to wonder at last why these
explanations have no practical effect and entail
no corresponding improvement in the symp
toms. Then we discover that the resistance has

[567b]
fallen back upon the doubt characteristic of
the obsessional neurosis
and
is
holding us
successfully at bay from this vantage-point.
The patient has said to himself something of
this kind: "This is all very pretty and very
interesting. I should like to go on with it. I am
sure it would do me a lot of good if it were
true. But I don't believe it in the least, and as
long as I don't believe it, it doesn't affect my
illness." So it goes on for a long time, until at
last this reservation itself is reached and then
the decisive battle begins.
The
intellectual
resistances
are
not
the
worst; one can always get the better of them.
But the patient knows how to set up resistances
within the boundaries of analysis proper, and
the defeat of these is one of the most difficult
tasks of the technique. Instead of remembering
certain of the feelings and states of mind of
his previous life,
he
reproduces them, lives
through again such of them as, by means of
what is called the transference, may be made
effective in opposition against the physician and
the
treatment. If the patient is a man, he
usually takes this material from his relation
ship with his father, in whose place he has now
put the physician; and in so doing he erects
resistance out of his struggles to attain to per
sonal independence and independence of judg
ment, out of his ambition, the earliest aim of
which was to equal or to excel the father, out
of his
disinclination to take the burden of
gratitude upon himself for the second time in
his life. There are periods in which one feels
that the patient's desire to put the analyst in
the wrong, to make him feel his impotence, to
triumph over him, has completely ousted the
worthier desire to bring the illness to an end.
Women have a genius for exploiting in the
interests of resistance a tender erotically tinged
transference to the analyst; when this attrac
tion reaches a certain intensity all interest in
the actual situation of treatment fades away,
together with every obligation incurred upon
undertaking it. The inevitable jealousy and the
embitterment consequent upon the unavoidable
rejection, however considerately it is handled,
is bound to injure the personal relationship
with the physician, and so to put out of action
one of the most powerful propelling forces in
the analysis.
Resistances of this kind must not be nar
rowly condemned. They contain so much of the
most important material from the
patient's
past life and bring it back in so convincing a
fashion that they come to be of the greatest

[568a]
General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis
565
assistance to the analysis, if a skilful technique
is employed correctly to turn them to the best
use. What is noteworthy is that this material
always serves at first as a resistance and comes
forward in a guise which is inimical to the
treatment. Again it may be said that they are
character-traits, individual attitudes of the ego,
which are
thus mobilized to oppose the at
tempted alterations. One learns then how these
character-traits have been developed in con
nection with the conditions of the neurosis and
in reaction against its demands, and observes
features
in this
character which would not
otherwise
have
appeared,
at
least,
not
so
clearly: that is, which may be designated latent.
Also you must not carry away the impression
that we look upon the appearance of these
resistances as an unforeseen danger threatening
our analytic influence. No, we know that these
resistances are bound to appear; we are dis
satisfied only if we cannot rouse them definitely
enough and make the patient perceive them as
such. Indeed, we understand at last that the
overcoming of these resistances is the essential
work of the analysis, that part of the work
which alone assures us that we have achieved
something for the patient.
Besides this, you must take into account that
all accidental occurrences arising during the
treatment are made use of by the patient to
interfere with it, anything which could distract
him or deter him from it, every hostile expres
sion of opinion from anyone in his circle whom
he can regard as an
authority, any
chance
organic illness or one complicating the neurosis;
indeed, he even converts every improvement
in his condition into a motive for slackening
his efforts. Then you will have obtained an
approximate, though still incomplete, picture
of the forms and the measures taken by the
resistances which must be met and overcome
in the course of every analysis. I have given
such a detailed consideration to this point be
cause I
am
about to
inform you that our
dynamic conception of the neuroses is founded
upon this experience of ours of the resistances
that neurotic patients set up against the cure
of their symptoms. Breuer and I both originally
practiced
psycho-therapy
by
the
hypnotic
method.
Breuer's
first
patient was
treated
throughout in a state of hypnotic suggestibility;
at first I followed his example. I admit that at
that time my work went forward more easily
and agreeably and also took much less time:
but the results were capricious and not perma
nent; therefore I finally gave up hypnotism.

[568b]
And then I understood that no comprehension
of the dynamics of these affectionswas possible
as long as hypnosis was employed. In this con
dition
the
very
existence
of
resistances is
concealed
from
the
physician's observation.
Hypnosis drives back the resistances and frees
a certain field for the work of the analysis, but
dams them up at the boundaries of this field
so that they are insurmountable; it is similar
in effect to the doubt of the obsessional neu
rosis. Therefore I may say that true psycho
analysis only began when the help of hypnosis
was discarded.
If it is a matter of such importance to establish
these resistances then surely it would be wise
to allow caution and doubt full play, in case
we have been too ready with our assumption
that they exist. Perhaps cases of neurosis may
be found in which the associations really fail
for
other
reasons,
perhaps
the
arguments
against our theories really deserve serious at
tention, and we may be wrong in so conven
iently disposing
of
the patient's intellectual
objections by stigmatizing them as resistance.
Well, I can only assure you that our judgment
in this matter has not been formed hastily; we
have had opportunity to observe these critical
patients both before the resistance comes to
the surface and after it disappears. In the
course of the treatment the resistance varies in
intensity continually; it always increases as a
new topic is approached, it is at its height dur
ing the work upon it, and dies down again when
this theme has been dealt with. Unless certain
technical errors have been committed, we never
have to meet the full measure of resistance, of
which any patient is capable, at once. Thus we
could definitely ascertain that the same man
would take up and then abandon his critical
objections over and over again in the course of
the analysis. Whenever we are on the point of
bringing to his consciousness some piece of un
conscious material which is particularly painful
to him, then he is critical in the extreme; even
though he may have previously understood and
accepted a great deal, yet now all these gains
seem to
be
obliterated; in his
struggles to
oppose at all costs he can behave just as though
he were mentally deficient, a form of emotional
stupidity. If he can be successfully helped to
overcome this new resistance he regains his
insight and comprehension. His critical faculty
is not functioning independently, and therefore
is not to be respected as if it were; it is merely
a maid-of-all-work for his affective attitudes
and is directed by his resistance. When he dis-

[569a]
566
Sigmund Freud
likes anything he can defend himself against it
most ingeniously; but when anything suits his
book he can be credulous enough. We are
perhaps all much the same; a person being
analysed shows this dependence of the intellect
upon the affective lifesoclearly because in the
analysis he is so hard-pressed.
In what way can we now account for this
fact observed, that the patient struggles so
energeticallyagainst the relief of his symptoms
and the restoration of his mental processes to
normal functioning? We say that we have come
upon the traces of powerful forces at work
here opposing any change in the condition;
they must be the same forces that originally
induced the condition. In the formation of
symptoms some process must have been gone
through, which our experience in dispersing
them makes us able to
reconstruct. As we
already know from Breuer's observations, it
follows from the existence of a symptom that
some mental process has not been carried
through to an end in a normal manner so that
it could become conscious; the
symptom is
a
substitute
for
that which has
not
come
through. Now we know where to place the
forces which we suspect to be at work. A vehe
ment effort must have been exercised to prevent
the mental processin question from penetrating
into consciousness and as a result it has re
mained unconscious; being unconscious it had
the power to construct a symptom. The same
vehement effort is again at work during analyt
ic treatment, opposing the attempt to bring
the unconscious into consciousness. This we
perceive in the form of resistances. The patho
genic process which is demonstrated by the
resistances we call Repression.
It will now be necessary to make our con
ception of this process of repression more
precise. It is the essential preliminary condition
for the development of symptoms, but it is
also something else, a thing to which we have
no parallel. Let us take as a model an impulse,
a mental process seeking to convert itself into
action: we know that it can suffer rejection, by
virtue of what we call repudiation or condem
nation; whereupon the energy at its disposal
is withdrawn, it becomes powerless, but it can
continue to exist as a memory. The whole
process of decision on the point takes place
with the full cognizance of the ego. It is very
different when we imagine the same impulse
subject to repression: it would then retain its
energy and no memory of it would be left
behind; the process of repression, too, would

[569b]
be accomplished without the cognizance of the
ego. This comparison therefore brings us no
nearer to the nature of repression.
I will expound to you those theoretical con
ceptions which alone have proved useful in
giving greater definiteness to the term repres
sion. For this purpose it is first necessary that
we should proceed from the purely descriptive
meaning of the word unconscious to its system
atic meaning; that is, we resolve to think of
the consciousness or unconsciousness of a men
tal process as merely one of its qualities and
not necessarily definitive. Suppose that a proc
ess of this kind has remained unconscious, its
being withheld from consciousness may be
merely a sign of the fate it has undergone, not
necessarily the fate itself. Let us suppose, in
order to gain a more concrete notion of this
fate, that every mental process—there is one
exception, which I will go into later—first exists
in an unconscious state or phase,
and only
develops out of this into a conscious phase,
much as a photograph is first a negative and
then becomes a picture through the printing
of the positive. But not every negative is made
into a positive, and it is just as little necessary
that every unconscious mental process should
convert itself into a conscious one. It may be
best expressed as follows: Each single process
belongs in the first place to the unconscious
psychical system;
from this system it can
under certain conditions proceed further into
the conscious system.
The crudest conception of these systems is
the one we shall find most convenient, a spatial
one. The unconscious system may therefore
be compared to a large ante-room, in which
the various mental excitations are crowding
upon one another, like individual beings. Ad
joining this
is a second, smaller apartment, a
sort of reception-room, in which consciousness
resides. But on the threshold between the two
there stands a personage with the office of
door-keeper, who examines the various mental
excitations, censors them, and denies them ad
mittance to the reception-room when he dis
approves of them. You will see at once that
it does not make much difference whether the
door-keeper turns any one impulse back at the
threshold, or drives it out again once it has
entered the reception-room; that is merely a
matter
of the
degree of his vigilance and
promptness in recognition. Now this metaphor
may be employed to widen our terminology.
The excitations in the unconscious, in
the
ante-chamber, are not visible to consciousness,

[570a]
which is of course in the other room, so to
begin with they remain unconscious. When
they have pressed forward to the threshold and
been turned back by the door-keeper, they are
incapable of becoming conscious; we call them
then repressed. But even those excitations
which are allowed over the threshold do not
necessarily become conscious; they can only
become so if they succeed in attracting the eye
of consciousness. This second chamber there
fore may be suitably called the preconscious
system. In this way the process of becom
ing conscious retains its purely descriptive
sense. Being repressed, when applied to any
single impulse, means being unable to pass
out of the unconscious system because of the
door-keeper's refusal of admittance into the
preconscious. The door-keeper is what we have
learnt to know as resistance in our attempts
in analytic treatment to loosen the
repres
sions.
Now I know very well that you will say that
these
conceptions are as crude as they are
fantastic and not at all permissible in a scien
tific presentation. I
know they
are
crude;
further indeed, we even know that they are
incorrect, and unless I am mistaken, we have
something better ready as a substitute for
them; whether you will then continue to think
them so fantastic, I do not know. At the
moment they are useful aids to understanding,
like AmpSrefs manikin swimming in the electric
current, and, in so far as they do assist com
prehension, are not to be despised. Still, I
should like to
assure you that these crude
hypotheses, the two chambers, the door-keeper
on the threshold between the two, and con
sciousness as a spectator at the end of the
second room, must indicate an extensive ap
proximation to the actual reality. I should also
like to hear you admit that our designations,
unconscious, preconscious, and conscious, are
less prejudicial and more easily defensible than
some others which have been suggested or have
come into use, e.g., sub-conscious, inter-con
scious, co-conscious, etc.
If so, I should think it more significant if
you then went on to point out that any such
constitution of the mental apparatus as-I have
assumed in order to account for neurotic symp
toms can only be of universal validity and
must throw light on normal functioning. In
this, of course, you are perfectly right. We
cannot follow up this conclusion at the mo
ment; but our interest in the psychology of
symptom-development
would
certainly
be

[570b]
General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis
567
enormously increased if we
could see any
prospect of obtaining, by the study of patho
logical conditions, an insight into normal mental
functioning, hitherto such a mystery.
Do you not recognize, moreover, what it is
that supports these
conceptions of the two
systems and the relationship between them and
consciousness? The door-keeper between the
unconscious and the preconscious is nothing
else than the censorship to which we found the
form of the manifest dream subjected. The
residue of
the day's
experiences which we
found to be the stimuli exciting the dream, was
preconscious material which at night during
sleep had been influenced by unconscious and
repressed wishes and excitations; and had thus
by association with them been able to form the
latent dream, by means of their energy. Under
the dominion of the unconscious system this
material had been elaborated (worked over)—
by condensation and displacement—in a way
which in normal mental life, i.e., in the precon
scious system, is unknown or admissible very
rarely.
This
difference in their manner of
functioning is what distinguishes the two sys
tems for us; the relationship to consciousness,
which is a permanent feature of the precon
scious, indicates to which of the two systems
any given process belongs. Neither is dreaming
a
pathological
phenomenon;
every . healthyperson may dream while asleep. Every infer
ence concerning the constitution of the mental
apparatus which comprises an understanding
of both dreams and neurotic symptoms has an
irrefutable claim to be regarded as applying
also to normal mental life.
This is as much as we will say about repres
sion for the present. Moreover, it is but a
necessary preliminary condition, a prerequisite,
of symptom-formation. We know that
the
symptom is a substitute for some other process
which was held back by repression; but even
given repression we have still a long way
to go before we can obtain comprehension of
this substitute-formation. There are other sides
to the problem of repression itself which pre
sent questions to be answered: What kind of
mental
excitations
suffer
repression?
What
forces effect it? and from what motives? On
one point only, so far, have we-gained any
knowledge relevant to these questions. While
investigating the
problem of resistance we
learned that the forces behind it proceed from
the ego, from character-traits, recognizable or
latent: it is these forces therefore which have
also effected the repression, or at least they

[571a]
568
Sigmund Freud
have taken a part in it. We know nothing more
than this at present.
The second observation for which I prepared
you will help us now. By means of analysis we
can always discover the purpose behind the
neurotic symptom. This is of course nothing
new to you: I have already pointed it out in
two cases of neurosis. But, to be sure, what do
two cases signify? You have a right to de
mand two hundred cases, innumerable cases,
in
demonstration of it.
But then, I
cannot
comply with that. So you must fall back on
personal experience, or upon belief, which in
this matter can rely upon the unanimous testi
mony of all psycho-analysts.
You will remember that in the two cases in
which we submitted the symptoms to detailed
investigation
analysis
led
to
the
innermost
secrets of the patient's sexual life. In the first
case, moreover, the purpose or tendency of the
symptom under examination was particularly
evident; in the second case, it was perhaps to
some extent veiled by another factor to
be
mentioned later. Well now, what we found in
these two examples we should find in every
case we submitted to analysis. Every time we
should be led by analysis to the sexual experi
ences and desires of the patient, and every
time we should have to affirm that the symp
tom served the
same purpose. This purpose
shows itself to be the gratification of sexual
wishes; the symptoms serve the purpose of
sexual gratification for the patient; they are
a
substitute for satisfactions which he does
not obtain in reality.
Think of the obsessive act of our first pa
tient.
This
woman
has
to
do
without
the
husband she loved so intensely; on account of
his deficiencies and short-comings she could
not share his life. She had to be faithful to
him; she could not put anyone else in his place.
Her obsessional symptom gives her what she
so much desires; it exalts her husband, denies
and corrects his deficiencies, above all, his im
potence.
This
symptom is fundamentally a
wish-fulfilment, in that respect exactly like a
dream; it is, moreover, what a dream is not
always, an erotic, wish-fulfilment. In the case
of the second patient you could see that her
ritual aims at preventing intercourse between
the parents or at hindering the procreation of
another child; you have probably also divined
that fundamentally it seeks to set her in her
mother's place. It again, therefore, constitutes
a removal of hindrances to sexual satisfaction
and the fulfilment of the subject's, own sexual

[571b]
wishes. Of the complications referred to in the
second case I shall speak shortly.
I wish to avoid making reservations later
on about the universal applicability of these
statements, and therefore I will ask you to
notice that all I have just been saying about
repression, symptom-formation and symptominterpretation
has
been
obtained
from
the
study of three types of neurosis, and for the
present is only applicable to these three types—
namely, anxiety-hysteria, conversion-hysteria,
and the obsessional neurosis. These three dis
orders, which we are accustomed to combine
together in
a group
as
the transference
neuroses, constitute the field open to psycho
analytic therapy. The other neuroses have been
far less closely studied psycho-analytically; in
one group of them the impossibility of thera
peutic influence has no doubt been one reason
for this neglect. You must not forget that
psycho-analysis is still a very young science,
that much time and trouble are required for
the study of it, and that not so very long ago
there was only one man practising it: yet we
are approaching from all directions to a nearer
comprehension of these other conditions which
are not transference neuroses. I hope I shall
still be able to tell you of the developments
that
our
hypotheses
and
conclusions
have
undergone in the course of adaptation to this
new material, and
to show you that these
further studies have not yielded contradictions
but have led to a higher degree of unification in
our knowledge. Everything that has been said,
then, applies only to
the three transference
neuroses and I will now add another piece of
information which throws further light upon
the significance of the symptoms. A compara
tive examination of the situation out of which
the disease arose yields the following result,
which may be reduced to a formula—namely,
that these persons have fallen ill from the pri
vation (frustration) which they suffer when
reality withholds from them gratification of
their sexual wishes. You will perceive how beau
tifully these two conclusions supplement one
another. The symptoms are now explicable as
substitute-gratifications for desires which are
unsatisfied in life.
It is certainly possible to make all kinds of
objections
to
the
proposition
that
neurotic
symptoms are substitutes for sexual gratifica
tions. I will discuss two of them today. If any
one of you has himself undertaken the analysis
of a large number of neurotics, he will perhaps
shake his head and say: "In certain cases this.

[572a]
General Introduction
is not at all applicable, in them the symptoms
seem rather to contain the opposite purpose,
of excluding or of discontinuing sexual gratifi
cation." I shall not dispute your interpretation.
In psycho-analysis thingsare often a good deal
more complicated than we could wish: if they
had been simpler psycho-analysis would per
haps not have been required to bring them to
light. Certain features of the ritual of our sec
ond patient are distinctly recognizable as being
of this ascetic character, inimical to sexual sat
isfaction; e.g., her removing the clocks for the
magic purposeof preventingerections at night,
or her trying to prevent the falling and break
ing of vessels, which amounts to a protection
of her virginity. In other cases of ceremonials
on going to bed which I have analysed this
negative character was far more marked; the
whole ritual could consist of defensive regula
tions against sexual recollections and tempta
tions. But we have long ago learnt from psycho
analysis that opposites do not constitute a
contradiction. We might extend our proposition
and say that the purpose of the symptom is
either a sexual gratification or a defence against
it; in hysteria the positive, wish-fulfilling char
acter predominates on the whole, and in the
obsessional neurosis the negative ascetic char
acter. The symptoms can serve the purpose
both of sexual gratification and of its opposite
so well because this double-sidedness, or po
larity, has a most suitable foundation in one
element of their mechanism which we have not
yet had an opportunityto mention. They are in
fact, as we shallsee, the effects of compromises
between two opposed tendencies, acting on one
another; they represent both that which is re
pressed, and also that which has effected the
repression and has co-operatedin bringingthem
about. The representation of either one or an
other of these two factors may predominate
in the symptom, but it happens very rarely
that one of them is absent altogether. In hys
teria a collaboration of the two tendencies in
onesymptom is usuallyachieved. In the obses
sional neurosis the two parts are often distinct:
the symptomis then a double one and consists
of two
successive actions which cancel each
other.
It will not be so easy to dispose of a second
difficulty. When you consider a whole series of
symptom-interpretations
your
first opinion
would probably be that the conception of a
sexualsubstitute-gratification has to be stretched
to its widest limits in order to include them.
You will not neglect to point out that these

[572b]
to Psycho-Analysis
569
symptoms offernothing real in the way of grati
fication, that often enough they are confined to
re-animating a sensation, or to enacting a phan
tasy arising from some sexual complex. Fur
ther, that the ostensible sexual gratification is
very often of an infantile and unworthy char
acter, perhaps approximatingto a masturbatory
act, or is reminiscent of dirty habits which
long ago in childhood had been forbidden and
abandoned. And further still, you will express
your astonishment that anyone should reckon
among sexual gratifications those which can
only be described as gratifications of cruel or
horrible appetites, or which may be termed
unnatural. Indeed, we shall come to no agree
ment on these latter points until we have sub
mitted human sexuality to a thorough investi
gation and have thus established what we are
justified in calling sexual.
TWENTIETH LECTURE
The Sexual Life of Man
One would certainly think that there could be
no doubt about what is to be understood by
the term sexual. First and foremost, of course,
it means the improper, that which must not be
mentioned. I have been told a story about some
pupils of a famous psychiatrist, who once en
deavoured to convince their master that the
symptoms of an hysteric are frequently repre
sentations of sexual things. With this object,
they took him to the bedside of an hysterical
woman whose attacks were unmistakable imi
tations of childbirth. He objected, however:
"Well, there is nothing sexualabout childbirth."
To be sure, childbirth is not necessarily always
improper.
I perceive that you don't approve of my jok
ing about such serious matters. It is not al
together a joke, however. Seriously, it is not
so easy to definewhat the term sexual includes.
Everything connected with the difference be
tween the two sexes is perhaps the only way of
hitting the mark; but you will find that too
general and indefinite. If you take the sexual
act itself as the central point, you will perhaps
declare sexual to mean everything which is
concerned with obtaining pleasurable gratifica
tion from the body (and particularly the sexual
organs) of the opposite sex; in the narrowest
sense, everything which is directedto the union
of the genital organs and the performance of
the sexual act. In doing so, however, you come
very near to reckoning the sexual and the im
proper as identical, and childbirthwould really

[573a]
S70
Sigmund Freud
have nothing to do with sex. If then you make
the function of reproduction the kernel of sex
uality you run the risk of excluding from it a
whole host of things like masturbation, or even
kissing, which are not directed towards repro
duction, but which are nevertheless undoubt
edly sexual. However, we have already found
that attempts at definition always lead to diffi
culties ; let us give up trying to do any better
in this particular case. We may suspect that in
the development of the concept sexual some
thing has happened which has resulted in what
H. Silberer has aptly called a covering error.
On the whole,indeed, we know pretty well what
is meant by sexual.
In the popular view, which is sufficient for
all practical purposes in ordinary life, sexual is
something which combines references to the
difference between the sexes, to pleasurable ex
citement and gratification, to the reproductive
function, and to the idea of impropriety and
the necessity for concealment. But this is no
longer sufficient for science. For painstaking
researches (only possible, of course, in a spirit
of self-command maintained by self-sacrifice)
have revealed that classes of human beings
exist whose sexual life deviates from the usual
one in the most striking manner. One group
among these perverts has, as it were, expunged
the
difference
between
the
sexes
from
its
scheme of life. In these people, only the same
sex as their own can rouse sexual desire; the
other sex (especially the genital organ of the
other sex) has absolutely no sexual attraction
for them, can even in extreme cases be an ob
ject of abhorrence to them. They have thus, of
course, foregone all participation in the process
of reproduction. Such persons are called homo
sexuals or inverts. Often, though not always,
they are men and women who otherwise have
reached an irreproachably high standard of
mental growth and development, intellectually
and ethically, and are only afflicted with this
one fateful peculiarity. Through the mouths of
their scientific spokesmen they lay claim to be
a special variety of the human race, a third
sex, as they call it, standing with equal rights
alongside the other two. We may perhaps have
an opportunity of critically examining these
claims. They are not, of course, as they would
gladly maintain, the elect of mankind; they
contain in their ranks at least as many inferior
and worthless individuals as are to be found
among those differently constituted sexually.
These perverts do at least seek to achieve
very much the same ends with the objects of

[573b]
their desires as normal people do with theirs.
But after them comes a long series of abnormal
types, in whom the sexual activities become
increasingly further removed from anything
which appears attractive to a reasonable being.
In their manifold variety and their strangeness
these types may be compared to the grotesque
monstrosities painted by P. Breughel to repre
sent the temptation of St. Anthony, or to the
long procession of effete gods and worshippers
which G. Flaubert shows us passing before his
pious penitent, and to nothing else. The chaotic
assembly calls out for classification if it is not
to bewilder us completely. We divide them
into those in whom the sexual object has been
altered, as with the homosexuals, and those in
whom, first and foremost, the sexual aim has
been altered. In the first group belong those
who have dispensed with the mutual union of
the genital organs and who have substituted
for the genitals, in one of the partners in the
act, another organ or part of the body (mouth
or anus, in place of the vagina) making light of
both the anatomical difficulties and the sup
pression of disgust involved. There follow oth
ers who, it is true, still retain the genital organs
as object; not, however, by virtue of their
sexual function, but on account of other func
tions in which they take part anatomically or
by reason of their proximity. These people
demonstrate that the excretory functions, which
in the course of the child's upbringing are rele
gated to a limbo as indecent, remain capable
of attracting the entire sexual interest. There
are others who have given up altogether the
genital organs as object; and, instead, have
exalted some other part of the body to serve
as the object of desire, a woman's breast, foot,
or plait of hair. There are others yet to whom
even a part of the body is meaningless, while a
particle of clothing, a shoe or a piece of under
clothing, will gratify all their desires; these are
the fetichists. Farther on in the scale come
those who indeed demand the object as a
whole: but whose requirements in regard to it
take specific forms, of an extraordinary or
horrible nature—even to the point of seeking
it as a defenceless corpse and, urged on by
their criminal obsessions, of making it one in
order so to enjoy it. But enough of these
horrors!
Foremost in the second group are those per
verts whose sexual desires aim at the perform
ance of an act which normally is but an intro
ductory or preparatory one. They are those
who seekgratification in looking and touching,

[574a]
General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis
571
or in watching the other person's most intimate
doings; or those who expose parts of their own
bodies which should be concealed, in the vague
expectation of being rewarded by a similar
action on the part of the other. Then come the
incomprehensible sadists, in whomall affection
ate feeling strains towards the one goal of caus
ing their object pain and torture, ranging in
degree from mere indications of a tendency to
humiliate the other up to the infliction of se
vere bodily injuries. Then, as though comple
mentary to these, come the masochists whose
only longing is to suffer, in real or in symbolic
form, humiliations and torturesat the hands of
the loved object. There are others yet, in whom
several abnormal characteristics of this kind
are combined and interwoven with one another.
Finally, we learn that the persons belonging to
each of these groups may be divided again:
into those who seek their particular form of
sexual satisfaction in reality and those who
are satisfied merely to imagine it in their own
minds, needing no real object at all but being
able to substitute for it a creation of phantasy.
There is not the slightest possible doubt that
these mad, extraordinary and horrible things
do actually constitute the sexual activities of
these people. Not merely do they themselves
so regard them, recognizing their substitutive
character; but we also have to acknowledge
that they play the same part in their lives as
normal sexual satisfaction plays in ours, exact
ing the same, often excessive, sacrifices. It is
possible to traceout, both broadly andin great
detail, where these abnormalities merge into
the normal and where they diverge from it.
Nor will it escape you that that quality of im
propriety which adheres inevitably to a sexual
activity is not absent from these forms of it:
in most of them it is intensified to the point
of odium.
Well, now, what attitude are we to take up
to these unusual forms of sexual satisfaction?
Indignationand expressions of our personal dis
gust, together with assurances that we do not
share these appetites, will obviously not carry
us very far. That is not the point at issue.After
all, this is a field of phenomena like any other;
attempts to turn away and flee from it, on the
pretext that these are but rarities and curiosi
ties, could easily be rebutted. On the contrary,
the phenomena are common enough and widely
distributed. But if it is objected that our views
on the sexual life of mankind require no revi
sion on this account, since these things are one
and all aberrations and divagations of the sex

[574b]
ual instinct, a serious reply will be necessary.
If we do not understand these morbid forms of
sexuality and cannot relate them to what is
normal in sexual life, then neither can we
understand normal sexuality. It remains, in
short, our undeniable duty to account satis
factorily in theory for the existence of all the
perversions described and to explain their re
lation to normal sexuality, so-called.
In this task we can be helped by a point of
view, and by two new evidential observations.
The first we owe to Ivan Bloch; according to
him, the view that all the perversions are "signs
of degeneration" is incorrect; because of the
evidence existing that such aberrations from
the sexual aim, such erratic relationships to the
sexual object, have been manifested since the
beginning of time through every age of which
we have knowledge, in every race from the
most primitive to the most highly civilized, and
at times have succeeded in attaining to tolera
tion and general prevalence. The two eviden
tial observations have been made in the course
of psycho-analytic investigations of neurotic
patients; they must undoubtedly influence our
conception of sexual perversions in a decisive
manner.
We have said that neurotic symptoms are
substitutes for sexual satisfactions and I have
already indicated that many difficulties will
be met with in proving this statement from the
analysis of symptoms. It is, indeed, only ac
curate if the perverse sexual needs, so-called,
are included under sexual satisfactions; for an
interpretation of the symptoms on this basis
is forced upon us with astonishing frequency.
The claim made by homosexuals or inverts,
that they constitute a select class of mankind,
falls at once to the ground when we discover
that, in every single neurotic, evidence of
homosexual tendencies is forthcoming and that
a large proportion of the symptoms are ex
pressions of this latent inversion. Those who
openly call themselves homosexuals are merely
those in whom the inversion is conscious and
manifest; their number is negligible compared
with those in whom it is latent. We are bound,
in fact, to regard the choice of an object of
the same sex as a regular type of offshoot of
the capacity to love, and are learningevery day
more and more to recognize it as especially
important. The differences between manifest
homosexuality and the normal attitude are cer
tainly not thereby abrogated; they have their
practical importance, which remains, but theo
retically their value is very considerably dimin-

[575a]
572
Sigmund Freud
ished. In fact, we have even come to the con
clusion that one particular mental disorder,
paranoia, no longer to be reckoned among the
transference neuroses, invariably arises from
an attempt to subdue unduly powerful homo
sexual tendencies. Perhaps you will remember
that one of our patients,1 in her obsessive act,
played the part of a man—of her own husband,
that is, whom she had left; such symptoms,
representing the impersonation of a man, are
very commonly produced by neurotic women.
If this is not actually attributable to homo
sexuality, it is certainly very closely connected
with its origins..
As you probably know, the neurosis of hys
teria can create its symptoms in all systems of
the body (circulatory, respiratory, etc.) and
may thus disturb all the functions. Analysis
shows that all those impulses, described as
perverse, which aim at replacing the genital
organ by another come to expression in these
symptoms. These organs thus behave as sub
stitutes for the genital organs: it is precisely
from the study of hysterical symptoms that we
have arrived at the view that, besides their
functional role, a sexual—erotogenic—signifi
cance must be ascribed to the bodily organs;
and that the needs of the former will be inter
fered with if the demands of the latter upon
them are too great. Countless sensations and
innervations, which we meet as hysterical symp
toms, in organs apparently not concerned with
sexuality, are thus discovered to be essentially
fulfilments of perverse sexual desires, by the
other organs having usurped the function of
the genitalia. In this way also the very great
extent to which the organs of nutrition and of
excretion, in particular, may serve in yielding
sexual excitement is brought home to us. It is
indeed the same as is manifested in the per
versions; except that in the latter it is unmis
takable and recognizable without any difficulty,
whereas in hysteria we have to make the de
tour of interpreting the symptom, and then do
not impute the perverse sexual impulse in
question to the person's consciousness, but
account it to the unconscious part of his
personality.
Of the many types of symptoms characteristic
of the obsessional neurosis, the most important
are found to be brought about by the undue
strength of one group of sexual tendencies with
a perverted aim, i.e., the sadistic group. These
symptoms, in accordance with the structure of
the obsessional neurosis, servemainly as a de1 See p. ss$.

[575b]
fence against these wishes or else they express
the conflict between satisfaction and rejection.
Satisfaction does not find short shrift, how
ever; it knows how to get its own way by a
roundabout route in the patient's behaviour,
by preference turning against him in selfinflicted torment. Other forms of this neurosis
are seen in excessive worry and brooding; these
are the expressions of an exaggerated sexualization of acts which are normally only prepar
atory to sexual satisfaction: the desireto see,to
touch and to investigate. In this lies the ex
planation of the very great importance dread of
contact and obsessive washing attains to in this
disease. An unsuspectedly large proportion of
obsessive actions are found to be disguised
repetitions and modifications of masturbation,
admittedly the only uniform act which accom
panies all the varied flights of sexual phantasy.
It would not be difficult to show you the
connections between perversion and neurosis in
a much more detailed manner, but I believe
that I have said enough for our purposes. We
must beware, however, of overestimating the
frequency and intensity of the perverse tend
encies in mankind, after these revelations of
theirimportance in the interpretation of symp
toms. You have heard that frustration of nor
mal sexual satisfactions may lead to the devel
opment of neurosis. In consequence of this
frustration in reality the need is forced into
the abnormal paths of sexual excitation. Later
you will be able to understand how this hap
pens. You will at any rate understand that a
collateral damming-up of this kind must swell
the force of the perverse impulses, so that they
become more powerful than they would have
been had no hindrance to normal sexual satis
faction been present in reality. Incidentally, a
similar factor may be recognized also in the
manifest perversions. In many cases they are
provoked or activated by the unduly great
difficulties in the way of normal satisfaction of
the sexual instinct which are produced either
by temporary conditions or by permanent so
cial institutions. In other cases, certainly, per
verse tendencies are quite independent of such
conditions; they are, as it were, the natural
kind of sexual life for the individual concerned.
Perhaps you are momentarily under the im
pression that all this tends to confuse rather
than to explain the relations between normal
and perverted sexuality. But keep in mind this
consideration. If it is correct that real obstacles
to sexual satisfaction or frustration in regard
to it bring to the surface perverse tendencies

[576a]
General Introduction
in people who would otherwise have shown
none,we must conclude that somethingin these
people is ready to embrace the perversions; or,
if you prefer it, the tendencies must have been
present in them in a latent form. Thus we
come to the second of the new evidential ob
servations of which I spoke. Psycho-analytic
investigation has found it necessary also to
concern itself with the sexual life of children,
for the reason that in the analysis of symptoms
the forthcoming reminiscences and associations
invariably lead back to the earliest years of
childhood. That which we discovered in this
wayhas sincebeen corroborated point by point
by the direct observation of children. In this
way it has been found that all the perverse
tendencies have their roots in childhood, that
children are disposed towards them all and
practise them all to a degree conforming with
their immaturity; in short, perverted sexuality
is nothing else but infantile sexuality, magni
fied and separated into its component parts.
Now you will see the perversions in an al
together different light and no longer ignore
their connection with the sexual life of man
kind; but what distressing emotions these as
tonishing and grotesque revelations will pro
voke in you! At first you will certainly be
tempted to deny everything—the fact that
there is anything in children which can be
termed sexual life, the accuracy of our obser
vations, and the justification of our claim to
see in the behaviour of children any connection
with that which in later years is condemned as
perverted. Permit me first to explain to you
the motives of your antagonism and then to
put beforeyou a summary of our observations.
That children should have no sexual life—sex
ual excitement, needs, and gratification of a
sort_but that they suddenly
acquire
these
things in the years between twelve and four
teen would be, apart from any observations at
all, biologically just as improbable, indeed,
nonsensical, as to suppose that they are born
without genital organs which first begin to
sprout at the age of puberty. What does ac
tually awake in them at this period is the re
productive function, which then makes use for
its own purposes of material lying to hand in
body and mind.You are making the mistakeof
confounding sexuality and reproduction with
each other and thus you obstruct your own way
to the comprehension of sexuality, the perver
sions, and the neuroses. This mistake, more
over, has a meaning in it. Strange to say, its
originlies in the fact that you yourselves have

[576b]
to Psycho-Analysis
573
all been children and as children were subject
to the influence of education. For it is indeed
one of the most important social tasks of edu
cation to restrain, confine, and subject to an
individual control (itself identical with the de
mands of society) the sexual instinct when it
breaks forth in the form of the reproductive
function. In its own interests, accordingly, so
ciety would postpone the child's full develop
ment until it has attained a certain stage of
intellectual maturity, since educability practi
cally ceases with the full onset of the sexual
instinct. Without this the instinct would break
all bounds, and the laboriously erected struc
ture of civilization would be swept away. Nor
is the task of restraining it ever an easy one:
success in this direction is
often poor and,
sometimes, only too great. At bottom society's
motive is economic;
since it has not means
enough to support life for its members without
work on their part, it must see to it that the
number of these members is restricted and
their energies directed away from sexual ac
tivities on to their work—the eternal primordial
struggle for existence, therefore, persisting to
the present day.
Experience must have taught educators that
the task of moulding the sexual will of the
next generation can only be carried out by be
ginning to impose their influence very early,
and intervening in the sexual life of children
before puberty, instead of waiting till the storm
bursts. Consequently almost all infantile sexual
activities are forbidden or made disagreeable
to the child; the ideal has been to make the
child's life asexual, and in course of time it
has come to this that it is really believed to be
asexual, and is given out as such, even at the
hands of science. In order, then, to avoid any
contradiction with established beliefs and aims,
the sexual activity of children is overlooked—
no small achievement by the way—while sci
ence contents itself with otherwise explaining it
away. The little child is supposed to be pure
and innocent; he who says otherwise shall be
condemned as a hardened blasphemer against
humanity's tenderest and most sacred feelings.
The children alone take no part in this con
vention; they assert their animal nature na
ively enoughand demonstrate persistently that
they have yet to leam their purity. Strange to
say, those who deny sexuality in children are
the last to relax educative measures against it;
they follow up with the greatest severity every
manifestation of the childish tricks the exist
ence of which they deny. Moreover, it is theo-

[577a]
574
retically of great interest that the time of life
which most flagrantly contradicts the prejudice
about asexual childhood, the years of infancy
up to five or six, is precisely the period which
is veiled by oblivion in most people's memories;
an oblivion which can only be dispelled com
pletely by analysis but which even before this
was sufficiently penetrable to allow some of the
dreams of childhood to be retained.
I will now tell you the most clearly recogniz
able of the child's sexual activities. It will be
expedient if I first introduce you to the term
libido. In every way analogous to hunger,
libido is the force by means of which the in
stinct, in this case the sexual instinct, as, with
hunger, the nutritional instinct, achieves ex
pression. Other terms, such as sexual excitation
and satisfaction, require no definition. Inter
pretation finds most to do in regard to the
sexualactivities of the infant, as you will easily
perceive; and no doubt you will find a reason
for objections. This interpretation is formed
on the basis of analytic investigation, working
backwards from a given symptom. The infant's
first sexual excitations appear in connection
with the other functions important for life. Its
chief interest, as you know, is concerned with
taking nourishment; as it sinks asleep at the
breast, utterly satisfied, it bears a look of per
fect content which will come back again later
in life after the experience of the sexual or
gasm. This would not be enough to found a
conclusion upon. However, we perceive that
infants wish to repeat, without really getting
any nourishment, the action necessary to tak
ing nourishment; they are therefore not im
pelled to this by hunger. We call this action
pleasure-sucking (German: lutschen, signifying
the enjoyment of sucking for its own sake—as
with a rubber comforter); and as when it does
this the infant again falls asleep with a blissful
expression we see that the action of sucking
is sufficient in itself to give it satisfaction.
Admittedly, it very soon contrives not to go
to sleepwithouthavingsucked in this way. An
old physician for children in Budapest, Dr.
Lindner, was the first to .maintain the sexual
nature of this procedure. Nurses and people
who look after children appear to take the same
view of this pleasure-sucking, though without
taking up any theoretic attitude about it. They
have no doubt that its only purpose is in the
pleasure derived; they account it one of the
child's naughty tricks; and take severe meas
ures to force it to give it up, if it will not do
so of its own accord. And so we leam that an

[577b]
Sigmund Freud
infant performs actions with no other object
but that of obtaining pleasure. We believethat
this pleasure is first of all experienced while
nourishment is being taken, but that the infant
learns rapidly to enjoy it apart from this con
dition. The gratification obtained can only re
late to the region of the mouth and lips; we
therefore call these areas of the body eroto
genic zones and describe the pleasure derived
from this sucking as a sexual one. To be sure,
we have yet to discuss the justification for the
use of this term.
If the infant could express itself, it would
undoubtedly acknowledge that the act of suck
ing at its mother's breast is far and away the
most important thing in life. It would not be
wrong in this, for by this act it gratifies at
the same moment the two greatest needs in
life. Then we learn from psycho-analysis, not
without astonishment, how much of the mental
significance of this act is retained throughout
life. Sucking for nourishment becomes the
point of departure from which the whole sexual
life develops, the unattainable prototype of
every later sexual satisfaction, to which in
times of need phantasy often enough reverts.
The desire to suck includes within it the desire
for the mother's breast, which is therefore
the first object of sexual desire; I cannot con
vey to you any adequate idea of the importance
of this first object in determining every later
object adopted, of the profound influence it
exerts,
through transformation and
substitu
tion, upon the most distant fields of mental
life. First of all, however, as the infant'takes
to sucking for pleasure this object is given up
and is replaced by a part of its own body; it
sucks its thumb or its own tongue. For pur
poses of obtaining pleasure it thus makes itself
independent of the concurrence of the outer
world and, in addition, it extends the region
of excitation to a second area of the body, thus
intensifying it. The erotogenic zones are not
all equally capable of yielding enjoyment; it
is therefore an important experience when, as
Dr. Lindner says, the infant in feeling about
on its own body discovers the particularly ex
citable region of its genitalia, and so finds the
way from pleasure-sucking to onanism.
This assessment of the nature of pleasuresucking has now brought to our notice two of
the decisive characteristics of infantile sexu
ality. It appears in connection with the satis
faction of the great organic needs, and it be
haves auto-erotically, that is to say, it seeks
and finds its objects in its own person. What is

[578a]
General Introduction
most clearly discernible in regard to the taking
of nourishment is to some extent repeated with
the process of excretion. We conclude that in
fants experience pleasure in the evacuation of
urine and the contents of the bowels, and that
they very soon endeavour to contrive these
actions so that the accompanying excitation of
the membranes in these erotogenic zones may
secure them the maximum possible gratifica
tion. As Lou Andreas has pointed out, with fine
intuition, the outer world first steps in as a
hindrance at this point, a hostile force opposed
to the child's desire for pleasure—the first hint
he receives of external and internal conflicts
to be experienced later on. He is not to pass his
excretions whenever he likes but at times ap
pointed by other people. To induce him to
give up these sources of pleasure he is told
that everything connected with these functions
is improper, and must be kept concealed. In
this way he is first required to exchange pleas
ure for value in the eyes of others. His own
attitude to the excretions is at the outset very
different. His own faeces produce no disgust in
him; he values them as part of his own body
and is unwilling to part with them, he uses
them as the first present by which he can mark
out those people whom he values especially.
Even after education has succeeded in alienat
ing him from these tendencies, he continues to
feel the same high regard for his presents and
his money; while his achievements in the way
of urination appear to be the subject of partic
ular pride.
I know that for some time you have been
longing to interrupt me with criesof: "Enough
of
these monstrosities!
The motions of the
bowels a source of pleasurable sexual satisfac
tion exploited even by infants! Faeces a sub
stance of great value and the anus a kind of
genital organ! We do not believe it; but we
understand why children's physicians and edu
cationists have emphatically rejected psycho
analysis and its conclusions!" Not at all; you
have merely forgotten for the moment that I
have been endeavouring to show you the con
nection between the actual facts of infantile
sexual life and the actual facts of the sexual
perversions. Why should you not know that
in many adults, both homosexual and hetero
sexual, the anus actually takes over the part
played by the vagina in sexual intercourse?
And that there are many persons who retain
the pleasurable sensations accompanying evac
uations of the bowels throughout life and de
scribe them as far from insignificant? You may

[578b]
to Psycho-Analysis
575
hear from children themselves, when they are
a little older and able to talk about these things,
what an interest they take in the act of defaecation and what pleasure they find in watching
others in the act. Of course if you have previ
ously systematically intimidated these children
they will understand very well that they are
not to speak of such things. And for all else
that you refuse to believe I refer you to the
evidence brought out in analysis and to the
direct observation of children and I tell you
that it will require the exercise of considerable
ingenuity to avoid seeing all this or to see it
in a different light. Nor am I at all averse from
your thinking the relationship between childish
sexual activities and the sexual perversions
positively striking. It is a matter of course that
there should be this relationship; for if a child
has a sexual life at all it must be of a perverted
order, since, apart from a few obscure indica
tions, he is lacking in all that transforms sexu
ality into the reproductive function. Moreover,
it is a characteristic common to all the per
versions that in them reproduction as an aim
is put aside. This is actually the criterion by
which we judge whether a sexual activity is
perverse—if it departs from reproduction in
its aims and pursues the attainment of grati
fication independently. You will understand
therefore that the gulf and turning-point in
the development of the sexual life lies at the
point of its subordination to the purposes of
reproduction. Everything that occurs before
this
conversion
takes
place, and everything
which refuses to conform to it and serves the
pursuit of gratification alone, is called by the
unhonoured title of perversion and as such is
despised.
So let me continue my brief account of in
fantile sexuality. I could supplement what I
have told you concerning two of the bodily
systems by extending the same scrutiny to the
others. The sexual life of
the child consists
entirely in the activities of a series of compo
nent-instincts which seek for gratification in
dependently of one another, some in his own
body and others already in an external object.
Among the organs of these bodily systems the
genitalia rapidly take the first place; there are
people in whom pleasurable gratification in
their own genital organ, without the aid of any
other genital organ or object, is continued
without intermption from the onanismhabitual
in the suckling period of infancy to the onan
ism of necessity occurring in the years of
puberty, and then maintained indefinitely be-

[579a]
576
Sigmund Freud
yond that. Incidentally, the subject of onanism
is not so easily exhausted; it contains material
for consideration from various angles.
In spite of my wish to limit the extent of this
discussion I must still say something about
sexual curiosity in children. It is too character
istic of childish sexuality and too important
for the symptom-formation of the neuroses to
be omitted. Infantile sexual curiosity begins
very early, sometimes before the third year. It
is not connected with the difference between
the sexes, which is nothing to children, since
they—boys, at least—ascribe the same male
genital organ to both sexes. If. then, a boy dis
covers the vagina in a little sister or playmate,
he at once tries to deny the evidence of his
senses, for he cannot conceive of a human be
ing like himself without his most important
attribute. Later, he is horrified at the possibil
ities it reveals to him; the influence of previous
threats occasionedby too great a preoccupation
with his own little member now begins to be
felt. He comes under the dominion of the cas
tration complex, which will play such a large
part in the formation of his character if he re
mains healthy, and of his neurosis if he falls
ill, and of his resistances if he comes under
analytic treatment. Of little girls we know that
they feel themselves heavily handicapped by
the absence of a large visible penis and envy
the boy's possession of it; from this source
primarily springs the wish to be a man which
is resumed again later in the neurosis, owing to
some mal-adjustment to a female development
The clitoris in the girl, moreover, is in every
way equivalent during childhood to the penis;
it is a region of especial excitability in which
auto-erotic satisfaction is achieved. In the tran
sition to womanhood very much depends upon
the early and complete relegation of this sensi
tivity from the clitoris over to the vaginal
orifice.In those women who are sexually anaes
thetic, as it is called,the clitoris has stubbornly
retained this sensitivity.
The sexual interest of children is primarily
directed to the problem of birth—the same
problem that lies behind the riddle of the Theban Sphinx.This curiosity is for the most part
aroused by egoistic dread of the arrival of an
other child. The answer which the nursery has
ready for the child, that the stork brings the
babies, meets with incredulity even in little
children much more often than we imagine.
The feelingof having been deceivedby grown
up people, and put off with lies, contributes
greatly to a sense of isolation and to the de

[579b]
velopment of independence. But the child is
not able to solve this problem on his own ac
count. His undeveloped sexual constitution sets
definite limits to his capacity to understand it.
He first supposes that children are made by
mixing some special thing with the food taken;
nor does he know that only women can have
children. Later, he learns of this limitation and
gives up the idea of children being made by
food, though it is retained in fairy-tales. A lit
tle later he soon sees that the father must have
something to do with, making babies, but he
cannot discover what it is. If by chance he is
witness of the sexual act he conceives it as an
attempt to overpower the woman, as a combat,
the sadistic misconception of coitus; at first,
however, he does not connect this act with the
creation of children; if he discovers blood on
the mother's bed or under-linen he takes it as
evidence of injury inflicted by the father. In
still later years of childhood he probably
guesses that the male organ of the man plays
an essential part in the procreation of children,
but cannot ascribe to this part of the body
any function but that of urination.
Children are all united from the outset in the
belief that the birth of a child takes place by
the bowel; that is to say, that the baby is pro
duced like a piece of faeces. Not until all in
terest has been weaned from the anal region
is this theory abandoned and replaced by the
supposition that the navel opens, or that the
area between the two nipples is the birthplace
of the child. In some such manner as this the
enquiring child approaches some knowledge of
the facts of sex, unless, misled by his ignorance,
he overlooks them until he receives an imper
fect and discrediting account of them, usually
in the period before puberty, which not infre
quently affects him traumatically.
Now you will probably have heard that the
term sexual has suffered an unwarrantable ex
pansion of meaning.at the hands of psycho
analysis, in order that its assertions regarding
the sexual origin of the neuroses and the sexual
significance of the symptoms may be main
tained. You can now judge for yourselves
whether this amplification is justified or not.
We have extended the meaning of the concept
sexuality only so far as to include the sexual
life of perverted persons and also of children;
that is to say, we have restored to it its true
breadth of meaning. What is called sexuality
outside psycho-analysis applies only to the re
stricted sexual life that is subordinated to the
reproductive function and is called normal.

[580a]
General Introduction
TWENTY-FIRST LECTURE
Development of the Libido and Sexual
Organizations
It is my impression that I have not succeeded
in bringing home to you with complete convic
tion the importance of the perversions for our
conception of sexuality. I wish therefore, as
far as I am able, to review and improve upon
what I have already said on this subject.
Now I do not wish you to think that it was
theperversions alone that required us to make
the alteration in the meaning of the term sex
uality which has aroused such vehement oppo
sition. The study of infantile sexuality has con
tributed even more to it, and the unanimity
between the two was decisive. But, however
unmistakably theymay be in the later years of
childhood, the manifestations of infantile sex
uality in its earliest forms do seem to fade
away indefinitely. Those who do not wish to
pay attention to evolution and to the connec
tions brought out by analysis will dispute the
sexual nature of them, and will ascribe in con^-
sequence some other, undifferentiated charac
ter to them. You must not forget that as yet
we have no generally acknowledged criterion
for the sexual nature of a phenomenon, unless
it is some connection with the reproductive
function—a definition which we have had to
reject as too narrow. The biological criteria,
such as the periodicities of twenty-three and
twenty-eight days, suggested by W. Fliess, are
exceedingly debatable; the peculiar chemical
features which we may perhaps assume for
sexual purposes are yet to be discovered. The
sexual perversions in adults, on the other hand,
are something definite and unambiguous. As
their generally accepted description implies,
they are unquestionably of a sexual nature;
whether you call them marks of degeneration
or anything else, no one has yet been so bold
as to rank them anywhere but among the
phenomena of sexual life. In view of them
alone we are justified in maintaining that
sexuality and the reproductive function are not
identical, for they one and all abjure the aim
of reproduction.
I notice a not uninteresting parallel here.
Whereas, for most people, the word mental
means conscious, we found ourselves obliged to
widen the application of the term mental to in
clude a part of the mind that is not conscious.
In a precisely similar way, most people declare
sexual identical with pertaining to reproduction
—or, if you like it expressed more concisely,

[580b]
to Psycho-Analysis
577
with genital; whereas we cannot avoid admit
ting things as sexual that are not genital and
havenothingto do with reproduction. It is only
a formal analogy, but it is not without deeper
significance.
However, if the existence of sexual perver
sions is such a forcible argument on this point,
why has it not long ago done its work and
settled the question? I really am unable to say.
It seems to me that the sexual perversions have
come under a very special ban, which insinu
ates itself into the theory, and interferes even
with scientific judgment on the subject. It
seems as if no one could forget, not merely that
they are detestable, but that they are also
something monstrous and terrifying; as if they
exerted a seductive influence; as if at bottom
a secret envy of those who enjoy them had to
be strangled—the same sort of feeling that is
confessed by the count who sits in judgment in
the famous parody of Tannhauser:
So in the Mount of Venus conscience, duty, are
forgot!
—Remarkable that such a thing has never been
my lot!
In reality, perverts are more likely to be poor
devils who have to pay most bitterly for the
satisfaction they manage to procure with such
difficulty.
That which makes perverse activities so un
mistakably sexual, in spite of all that seems
unnatural in their objects or their aims, is the
fact that in perverse satisfaction the act still
terminates usually in a complete orgasm with
evacuation of the genital product. This is of
course only the consequence of adult develop
ment in the persons concerned; in children,
orgasm and genital excretion are not very well
possible; as substitutes they have approxima
tions to them which are again not recognized
definitely as sexual.
I must still add something more in order to
complete our assessment of the sexual perver
sions. Abominated as they are, sharply distin
guished from normal sexual activity as they
may be, simple observation will show that very
rarely is one feature or another of them absent
from the sexual life of a normal person. The
kiss, to begin with, has some claim tobe called
a perverse act, for it consists of the union of
the two erotogenic mouth zones instead of the
two genital organs. Butno one condemns it as
perverse; on the contrary, in the theatre it is
permitted as a refined indication of the sexual
act. Nevertheless, kissing is a thing that can

[581a]
578
Sigmund Freud
easily become an absolute perversion—namely,
when it occurs in such intensity that orgasm
and emission directly accompanyit, which hap
pens not at all uncommonly. Further, it will be
found that gazing at and handling the object
are in one person an indispensable condition of
sexual enjoyment, while another at the height
of sexual excitement pinches or bites; that in
another lover not always the genital region, but
some other bodily region in the object, pro
vokes the greatest excitement, and so on in end
less variety. It would be absurd to exclude peo
ple with single idiosyncrasies of this kind from
the ranks of the normaland place them among
perverts; rather, it becomes more and more
clear that what is essential to the perversions
lies, not in the overstepping of the sexual aim,
not in the replacement of the genitalia, not al
ways even in the variations in the object, but
solely in the exclusiveness with which these de
viations are maintained, so that the sexual act
which serves the reproductive process is re
jected altogether. In so far as perverse per
formances are included in order to intensify or
to lead up to the performance of the normal
sexual act, they are no longer actually perverse.
Facts of the kind just described naturally tend
to diminish the gulf between normal and per
verse sexuality very considerably. The obvious
inference is that normal sexuality has arisen,
out of something existing prior to it, by a proc
ess of discarding some components of this ma
terial as useless, and by combining the others
so as to subordinate them to a new aim, that
of reproduction.
The point of view thus gained in regard to
the perversions can now be employed by us in
penetrating more deeply, with a clear perspec
tive,into the problem of infantilesexuality; but
before doing this I must draw your attention
to an important difference between the two.
Perverse sexuality is as a rule exceedingly con
centrated, its whole activity is directed to one
—and mostly to only one—aim; one particular
component-impulse is supreme; it is either the
only one discernible or it has subjected the
others to its own purposes. In this respectthere
is no difference between perverse and normal
sexuality, except that the dominating compo
nent-impulse, and therefore the sexual aim, is
a different one. Both of them constitute a wellorganized tyranny; only that in one case one
ruling familyhas usurped all the power, and in
the other, another. This concentration and or
ganization, on the other hand, is in the main
absentfrominfantilesexuality; its component-

[581b]
impulses are equally valid, each of them strives
independently after its own pleasure. Both the
lack of this concentration (in childhood) and
the presence of it (in the adult) correspond
well with the fact that both normal and per
verse sexuality are
derived from
the same
source, namely, infantile sexuality. There are
indeed also cases of perversion which corre
spond even more closely to infantile sexuality
in that numerous component-instincts, inde
pendently of one another, with their aims, are
developed or, better, perpetuated in them. With
these cases it is more correct to speak of in
fantilism than of perversion of the sexual life.
Thus prepared we may nowgo on to consider
a suggestion which we shall certainly not be
spared. It will be said: "Why are you so set
upon declaring as already belonging to sex
uality those indefinite manifestations of child
hood out of which what is sexual later devel
ops, and
which you
yourself
admit
to be
indefinite? Why are you not content rather to
describe them physiologically and simply to
say that activities, such as sucking for its own
sake and the retaining of excreta, may be ob
served already in young infants, showing that
theyseek pleasure in their organs? In that way
you would have avoided the conception of a
sexual life even in babies which is so repug
nant to all our feelings." Well, I can only an
swer that I have nothing against pleasure de
rived from the organs of the body; I know
indeed that the supreme pleasure of the sexual
union is also only a bodily pleasure, derived
from the activity of the genitalorgan. But can
you tell me when this originally indifferent
bodily pleasure acquires the sexual character
that it undoubtedly possesses in later phases of
development? Do we know any more about
this organ-pleasure than we know about sex
uality? You will answer that the sexual char
acter is added to it when the genitalia begin to
playtheir part; sexuality simply means genital.
You will even evade the obstacle of the perver
sions by pointing out that after all with most
of them a genital orgasm occurs, although
brought about by other means than the union
of the genitalia. If you were to eliminate the
relation to reproduction from the essential char
acteristics of sexuality since this view is un
tenable in consequence of the existence of the
perversions, and were to emphasize instead
activity of the genital organs, you would ac
tually take up a much better position. But then
weshould nolonger differ verywidely; it would
be a caseof the genital organs versus the other

[582a]
General Introduction
organs.What do you now make of the abundant
evidence that the genital organs may be re
placed by other organs for the purpose of grati
fication, as in the normal kiss, or the perverse
practices of loose living, or in the symptoma
tology of hysteria? In this neurosis it is quite
usual for stimulation phenomena, sensations,
innervations, and even the processes of erec
tion, which properly belong to the genitalia to
be displaced on to other distant areas of the
body (e.g., the displacement from below up
wards to the head and face). Thus you will find
that nothing is left of all that you cling to as
essentially characteristic of sexuality; and you
will have to make up your minds to follow my
example and extend the designation sexual to
include those activities of early infancy which
aim at organ-pleasure.
And now will you permit me to bring for
ward two further considerations in support of
my view. As you know, we call the doubtful
and indefinable activities of earliest infancy
towards pleasure sexual, because in the course
of analysing symptoms we reach them by way
of material that is undeniably sexual. They
would not thereby necessarily be sexual them
selves, let us grant; but let us take an analo
gous case. Suppose that there were no way to
observe the development from seed of two
dicotyledonous plants—the apple-tree and the
bean; but imagine that in both it was possible
to follow back its development from the fully
developed plant to the first seedling with two
cotyledons. The two cotyledons are indistin
guishable in each; they look exactly alike in
both plants. Shall I conclude from this that
they actually are exactly alike and that the
specific differences betweenapple-treeand beanplant arise later in the plant's development?
Or is it not more correct biologically to believe
that this difference exists already in the seed
lings, although I cannot see any in the cotyle
dons? This is what we do when we call infan
tile pleasurable activities sexual. Whether each
and every organ-pleasure may be called sexual
or whether there exists, besides the sexual, an
other kind of pleasure that does not deserve
this name is a matter I cannot discuss here. I
know too little about organ-pleasure and its
conditions; and I am not at all surprised that,
in consequence of the retrogressive character
of analysis, I arrive finally at factors which at
the present time do not permit of definite
classification.
One thing more. You have on the whole
gained very little for what you are so eager to

[582b]
to Psycho-Analysis
579
maintain, the sexual purity of children, even if
you can convince me that the infant's activi
ties had better not be regarded as sexual. For
from the third year onwards there is no longer
any doubt about sexual life in the child; at this
period the genital organs begin already to show
signs of excitation; there is perhaps a regular
period of infantile masturbation, that is, of
gratification in the genital organs. The mental
and social sides of sexual life need no longer
be overlooked: choice of object, distinguishing
of particular persons with affection, even de
cision in favour of one sex or the other, and
jealousy, were conclusively established inde
pendently by impartial observation before the
time of psycho-analysis; they may be con
firmed by any observer who will use his eyes.
You will object that you never doubted the
early awakening of affection but only that this
affection was of a sexual quality. Children be
tween the ages of three and eight have cer
tainly learnt to conceal this element in it; but
nevertheless if you look attentively you will
collect enough evidence of the sensualnature of
this affection, and whatever still escapes your
notice will be amply and readily supplied by
analytic investigation. The sexual aims in this
period of life are in closest connection with the
sexual curiosity arising at the same time, of
which I have given you some description. The
perverse character of some of these aims is a
natural result of the immature constitution of
the child who has not yet discovered the aim of
the act of intercourse.
From about the sixth or eighth year onwards
a standstill or retrogression is observed in the
sexual development, which in those cases reach
ing a high cultural standard deserves to be
called a latency period. This latency period,
however, may be absent; nor does it neces
sarily entail an interruption of sexual activities
and sexual interests over the whole field. Most
of the mental experiences and excitations oc
curring before the latency period then suc
cumb to the
infantile amnesia, already dis
cussed, which veils our earliest childhood from
us and estranges us from it. It is the task of
every psycho-analysis to bring this forgotten
period of life back into recollection; one can
not resist the supposition that the beginnings
of sexual life belonging to this period are the
motive for this forgetting, that is, that this ob
livion is an effect of repression.
From the third year onwards, the sexual life
of children shows much in common with that
of adults; it is differentiated from the latter, as

[583a]
5»o
Sigmund Freud
we already know, by the absence of a stable
organization under the primacy of the genital
organs, by inevitable traits of a perverse order,
and of course also by far less intensity in the
whole impulse. But those phases of the sexual
development,or as we will call it, of the libidodevelopment, which are of greatest interest
theoretically lie before this period. This devel
opment is gone through so rapidly that direct
observation alone would perhaps never have
succeeded in determining its fleeting forms.
Only by the help of psycho-analytic investiga
tion of the neuroses has it become possible to
penetrate so far back and to discover these
still earlier phases of libido-development. These
phases are certainly only theoretic construc
tions, but in the practice of psycho-analysis
you will find them necessary and valuable con
structions. You will soon understand how it
happens that a pathological condition enables
us to discover phenomena which we should cer
tainly overlook in normal conditions.
Thus we can now define the forms taken by
the sexual life of the child before the primacy
of the genital zone is reached; this primacyis
prepared for in the early infantile period, be
fore the latent period, and is premanently or
ganized from puberty onwards. In this early
period a loosesort of organization exists which
we shall call pre-genital; for during this phase
it is not the genital component-instincts, but
the sadistic and anal, which are most promi
nent. The contrast between masculine and femi
nine plays no part as yet; instead of it there is
the contrastbetween active and passive, which
may be described as the forerunner of the sex
ual polarity with which it also links up later.
That which in this period seems masculine to
us, regarded from the stand-point of the genital
phase, proves to be the expression of an im
pulse to mastery, which easily passes over into
cruelty. Impulses with a passive aim are con
nected with the erotogenic zone of the rectal
orifice, at this period very important; the im
pulses of skoptophilia (gazing) and curiosity
are powerfully active; the function of excreting
urine is the only part actually taken by the
genital organ in the sexual life. Objects are not
wanting to the
component-instincts in
this
period, but these objects are not necessarily all
comprised in one object. The sadistic-anal or
ganization is the stage immediately preceding
the phase of primacy of the genital zone.Closer
study reveals how much of it is retained intact
in the later final structure, and what are the
paths by which these component-instincts are

[583b]
forced into the service of the new genital or
ganization. Behind the sadistic-anal phase of
the libido-development we obtaina glimpse of
an even more primitive stage of development,
in which the erotogenic mouth zone plays the
chief part. You can guess that the sexual ac
tivity of sucking (for its own sake) belongs to
this stage; and you may admire the under
standing of the ancient Egyptians in whose art
a child, even the divine Horus, wasrepresented
with a finger in the mouth. Abraham has quite
recently published work showing that traces of
this primitive oral phase of development sur
vive in the sexual life of later years.
I can indeed imagine that you will have
found this last information about the sexual
organizations less of an enlightenment than an
infliction. Perhaps I have again gone too much
into detail; but have patience! what you have
just heard will be of more use when we employ
it later. Keep in view at the moment the idea
that the sexual life—the libido-function, as we
call it—does not first spring up in its final
form, does not even expand along the lines of
its earliest forms, but goes through a series of
successive phases unlike one another; in short,
that many changes occurin it, like thosein the
development of the caterpillar into the but
terfly. The turning-point of this development
is the subordination of all the sexual compo
nent-instincts under the primacy of the genital
zone and, together with this, the enrolment of
sexuality in the service of the reproductive
function. Before thishappens the sexual lifeis,
so to say, disparate—independent activities of
single component-impulses each seeking organpleasure (pleasure in a bodily organ). This
anarchy is modified by attempts at />re-genital
organizations, of which the chief is the sadisticanal phase, behind which is the oral, perhaps
the most primitive. In addition there are the
various processes, about which little is known
as yet, which effect the transition from one
stage of organization to the next above it. Of
what significance this long journey over so
many stages in the development of the libido
is for comprehension of the neuroses we shall
learn later on.
Today we will follow up another aspect of
this development—namely, the relation of the
sexual component-impulses to an object; or,
rather, we will take a fleeting glimpse over this
development so that we may spend more time
upon a comparatively late result of it. Certain
of the component-impulses of the sexual in
stinct have an object from the very beginning

[584a]
General Introduction
and hold fast to it: such are the impulses to
mastery (sadism), to gazing (skoptophilia) and
curiosity. Others, more plainly connected with
particular erotogenic areas in the body, only
have an object in the beginning, so long as they
are still dependent upon the non-sexual func
tions, and give it up when they become de
tached from these later. .Thus the first object
of the oral component of the sexual instinct is
the mother's breast which satisfies the infant's
need for nutrition. In the act of sucking for its
own sake the erotic component, also gratified
in sucking for nutrition, makes itself independ
ent, gives up the object in an external person,
and replaces it by a part of the child's own
person. The oral impulse becomes auto-erotic,
as the anal and other erotogenic impulses are
from the beginning. Further development has,
to put it as concisely as possible, two aims:
first, to renounce auto-erotism, to give up again
the object found in the child's own body in
exchange again for an external one; and sec
ondly, to combine the various objects of the
separate impulses and replace
them by one
single one. This naturally can only be done if
the single object is again itself complete, with
a body like that of the subject; nor can it be
accomplished without some part of the auto
erotic impulse-excitations being abandoned as
useless.
The processes by which an object is found
are rather involved, and have not so far re
ceived comprehensive exposition. For our pur
poses it may be emphasized that, when the
process has reached a certain point in the years
of childhood before the latency period, the ob
ject adopted proves almost identical with the
first object of the oral pleasure impulse, adopt
ed by reason of the child's dependent relation
ship to it; it is, namely, the mother, although
not the mother's breast. We call the mother the
first love-oh}ect. We speak of love when we lay
the accent upon the mental side of the sexual
impulses and disregard, or wish to forget for a
moment,
the
demands
of
the
fundamental
physical or sensual side of the impulses. At
about the time when the mother becomes the
love-object, the mental operation of repression
has already begun in the child and has with
drawn from him the knowledge of some part of
his sexual aims. Now with this choice of the
mother as love-object is connected all that
which, under the name of the Oedipus complex,
has become of such great importance in the
psycho-analytic explanation of
the neuroses,
and which has had a perhaps equally important

[584b]
to Psycho-Analysis
581
share in causing the opposition against psycho
analysis.
Here is a little incident which occurred dur
ing the present war. One of the staunch adher
ents of psycho-analysis was stationed in his
medical capacity on the German front in Po
land; he attracted the attention of his col
leagues by the fact that he occasionally effected
an unexpected influence upon a patient. On
being questioned, he admitted that he worked
with psycho-analytic methods and with readi
ness agreed to impart his knowledge to his
colleagues. So every evening the medical men
of the corps, his colleagues and superiors, met
to be initiated into the mysteries of psycho
analysis. For a time all went well; but when
he had introduced his audience to the Oedipus
complex a superior officer rose and announced
that he did not believe this, it was the be
haviour of a cad for the lecturer to relate such
things to brave men, fathers of families, who
were fighting for their country, and he forbade
the continuation of the lectures. This was the
end; the analyst got himself transferred to an
other part of the front. In my opinion, how
ever, it is a bad outlook if a victory for Ger
man arms depends upon an
organization of
science such as this, and German science will
not prosper under any such organization.
Now you will be impatiently waiting to hear
what this terrible Oedipus complex comprises.
The name tells you: you all know the Greek
myth of King Oedipus, whose destiny it was to
slay his father and to wed his mother, who did
all in his power to avoid the fate prophesied by
the oracle, and who in self-punishment blinded
himself when he discovered that in ignorance
he had committed both these crimes. I trust
that many of you have yourselves experienced
the profound effect of the tragic drama fash
ioned by Sophocles from this story. The Attic
poet's work portrays the gradual discovery of
the deed of Oedipus, long since accomplished,
and brings it slowly to light by skilfully pro
longed enquiry, constantly fed by new
evi
dence ; it has thus a certain resemblance to the
course of a psycho-analysis. In the dialogue,
the deluded mother-wife, Jocasta, resists the
continuation of the enquiry; she points out that
many people in their dreams have mated with
their mothers, but that dreams are of no ac
count. To us dreams are of much account,
especially typical dreams which occur in many
people; we have no doubt that the
dream
Jocasta speaks of is intimately related to the
shocking and terrible story of the myth.

[585a]
582
Sigmund Freud
It is surprising that Sophocles' tragedy does
not call forth indignant remonstrance in its au
dience; this
reaction would be much better
justified in them than it was in the blunt army
doctor. For at bottom it is an immoral play; it
sets aside the individual's responsibility to so
cial law, and displays divine forces ordaining
the crime and rendering powerless the moral
instincts of the human being which would guard
him against the crime. It would be easy to
believe that an accusation against destiny and
the gods was intended in the story of the myth;
in the hands of the critical Euripides, at vari
ance with the gods, it would probably have be
come such an accusation. But with the reverent
Sophocles there is no question of such an in
tention; the pious subtlety which declares it
the highest morality to bow to the will of the
gods, even when they ordain a crime, helps him
out of the difficulty. I do not believe that this
moral is one of the virtues of the drama, but
neither does it detract from its effect; it leaves
the hearer indifferent; he does not react to
this, but to the secret meaning and content of
the myth itself. He reacts as though by selfanalysis he had detected the Oedipus complex
in himself, and had recognized the will of the
gods and the oracle as glorified disguises of his
own unconscious; as though he remembered in
himself the wish to do away with his father and
in his place to wed his mother, and must abhor
the thought. The poet's words seem to him to
mean: "In vain do you deny that you are ac
countable, in vain do you proclaim how you
have striven against these evil designs. You
are guilty, nevertheless; for you could not stifle
them; they still survive unconsciously in you."
And psychological truth is contained in this;
even though man has repressed his evil desires
into his Unconscious and would then gladly
say to himself that he is no longer answerable
for them, he is yet compelled to feel his re
sponsibility in the form of a sense of guilt for
which he can discern no foundation.
There is no possible doubt that one of the
most important sources of the sense of guilt
which so often torments neurotic people is to
be found in the Oedipus complex. More than
this: in 1013, under the title of Totem and
Taboo, I published a study of the earliest forms
of religion and morality in which I expressed a
suspicion that perhaps the sense of guilt of
mankind as a whole, which is the ultimate
source of religion and morality, was acquired
in the beginnings of history through the Oedi
pus complex. I should much like to tell you

[585b]
more of this, but I had better not; it is difficult
to leave this subject when once one begins
•upon it,
and we
must return to individual
psychology.
Now what does direct observation of chil
dren, at the period of object-choice before the
latency period,showus in regard to the Oedipus
complex? Well, it is easy to see that the little
man wants his mother all to himself, finds his
father in the way, becomes restive when the
latter takes upon himself to caress her, and
shows his satisfaction when the father goes
away or is absent. He often expresses his feel
ings directly in words and promises his mother
to marry her; this may not seem much in com
parison with the deeds of Oedipus, but it is
enough in fact; the kernel of each is the same.
Observation is often rendered puzzling by the
circumstance that the same child on other oc
casions at this period will display great affec
tion for the father; but such contrasting—or,
better, ambivalent—states of feeling, which in
adults would lead to conflicts, can be tolerated
alongside one another in the child for a long
time, just as later on they dwell together per
manently in the unconscious. One might try to
object that the little boy's behaviour is due to
egoistic motives and does not justify the con
ception of an erotic complex; the mother looks
after all the child's needs and consequently it is
to the child's interest that she should trouble
herself about no one else. This too is quite
correct; but it is soon clear that in this, as in
similar dependent situations, egoistic interests
only provide the occasion on which the erotic
impulses seize. When the little boy shows the
most open sexual curiosity about his mother,
wants to sleep with her at night, insists on be
ing in the room while she is dressing, or even
attempts physical
acts
of seduction, as the
mother so often observes and laughingly re
lates, the erotic nature of this attachment to
her is established without a doubt. Moreover,
it should not be forgotten that a mother looks
after a little daughter's needs in the same way
without producing this effect; and that often
enough a father eagerly vies with her in trou
ble for the boy without succeeding in winning
the same importance in his eyes as the mother.
In short, the factor of sex preference is not to
be eliminated from the situation by any criti
cisms.From the point of viewof the boy's ego
istic interests, it would merely be foolish if he
did not tolerate two people in his service rather
than only one of them.
As you see, I have only described the rela-

[586a]
General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis
583
tionship of a boy to his father and mother;
things proceed in just the same way, with the
necessary reversal, in little girls. The loving
devotion to the father, the need to do away
with the superfluous mother and to take her
place, the early display of coquetry and the
arts of later womanhood, make up a particu
larly charming picture in a little girl, and may
cause us to forget its seriousness and the grave
consequences which may later result from this
situation. Let us not fail to add that frequently
the parents themselves exert a decisive influ
ence upon the awakening of the Oedipus com
plex in a child, by themselves following the sex
attraction where there is more than one child;
the father in an unmistakable manner prefers
his little daughter with marks of tenderness,
and the mother, the son: but even this factor
does not seriously impugn the spontaneous na
ture of the infantile Oedipus complex. When
other children appear, the Oedipus
complex
expands and becomes a family complex. Re
inforced anew by the injury resulting to the
egoistic interests, it actuates a feeling of aver
sion towards these new arrivals and an unhesi
tating wish to get rid of them again. These feel
ings of hatred are as a rule much more often
openly expressedthan those connectedwith the
parental complex. If such a wishis fulfilled and
after a short time death removes the unwanted
addition to the family, later analysis can show
what a significant event this death is for the
child, although it does not necessarily remain
in memory. Forced into the second place by
the birth of another child and for the first time
almost entirely parted from the mother, the
child finds it very hard to forgive her for this
exclusion of him; feelings which in adults we
should describe as profound embitterment are
roused in him, and often become the ground
work of a lasting estrangement. That sexual
curiosity and all its consequences is usually
connected with these experiences has already
been mentioned. As these new brothers and
sisters grow up the child's attitude to them un
dergoes the most important transformations. A
boy may take his sister as love-object in place
of his faithless mother; where there are several
brothers to win the favour of a little sister
hostile rivalry, of great importance in after
life, shows itself already in the nursery. A lit
tle girl takes an older brother as a substitute
for the father who no longer treats her with
the same tenderness as in her earliest years;
or she takes a little sister as a substitute for the
child that she vainly wished for from her father.

[586b]
So much and a great deal more of a similar
kind is shown by direct observation of chil
dren, and by consideration of clear memories
of childhood, uninfluenced by any analysis.
Among other things you will infer from this
that a child's position in the sequence of broth
ers and sisters is of very great significance for
the course of his later life, a factor to be con
sidered in every biography. What is even more
important, however, is that in the face of these
enlightening considerations, so easily to be ob
tained, you will hardly recall without smiling
the scientific theories accounting for the pro
hibition of incest. What has not been invented
for this purpose! We are told that sexual at
traction is diverted from the members of the
opposite sex in one family owing to their living
together from early^ childhood; or that a bio
logical
tendency
against
in-breeding
has
a
mental equivalent in
the horror of
incest!
Whereby it is entirely overlooked that no such
rigorous prohibitions in law and custom would
be required if any trustworthy natural barriers
against the temptation to incest existed. The
opposite is the truth. The first choice of object
in mankind is regularly an incestuous one, di
rected to the mother and sister of men, and
the most stringent prohibitions are required to
prevent this sustained infantile tendency from
being carried into effect. In the savage and
primitive peoples surviving today the incest
prohibitions are a great deal stricter than with
us; Theodor Reik has recently shown in a bril
liant work that the meaning of the savage rites
of puberty, which represent re-birth, is the
loosening of the boy's incestuous attachment
to the mother and his reconciliation with the
father.
Mythology will show you that incest, osten
sibly so much abhorred by men, is permitted
to their gods without a thought; and from an
cient history you may learn that incestuous
marriage with a sister was prescribed as a sa
cred duty for kings (the Pharaohs of Egypt and
the Incas of Peru); it was therefore in the na
ture of a privilege denied to the common herd.
Incest with the mother is one of the crimes
of Oedipus and parricide the other. Incidental
ly, these are the two great offences condemned
by totemism, the first
social-religious institu
tion of mankind. Now let us turn from the di
rect observation of children to the analytic in
vestigation of adults who have become neurotic;
what does analysis yield in further knowledge
of the Oedipus complex? Well, this is soon told.
The complex is revealed just as the myth re-

[587a]
584
Sigmund
lates it; it will be seen that every one of these
neurotics
was himself an
Oedipus or, what
amounts to the same thing, has become a Ham
let in his reaction to the complex. To be sure,
the analytic picture of the Oedipus complex is
an enlarged and accentuated edition of the in
fantile sketch; the hatred of the father and
the death-wishes against him
are no longer
vague hints, the affection for the mother de
clares itself with the aim of possessing her as
a woman. Are we really to accredit such grossness and intensity of the feelings to the tender
age of childhood; or does the analysis deceive
us by introducing another factor? It is not
difficult to find one. Every time anyone de
scribes anything past, even if he be a historian,
we have to take into account all that he unin
tentionally imports into that past period from
present and intermediate times, thereby falsi
fying it. With the neurotic it is even doubtful
whether this retroversion is altogether unin
tentional; we shall hear later on that there are
motives for it and we must explore the whole
subject of the retrogressive phantasy-making
which goes back to the remote past. We soon
discover, too, that the hatred against the father
has been strengthened by a number of mo
tives arising in later periods and other relation
ships in life, and that the sexual desires to
wards the mother have
been
moulded into
forms which would have been as yet foreign
to the child. But it would be a vain attempt if
we endeavoured to explain the whole of the
Oedipus
complex by retrogressive phantasymaking, and by motives originating in later
periods of life. The infantile nucleus with more
or less of the accretions to it, remains intact,
as is confirmed by direct observation of chil
dren.
The clinical fact which confronts us behind
the form of the Oedipus complex as established
by analysis now becomes of the greatest practi
cal importance. We learn that at the time of
puberty, when the sexual instinct first asserts
its demand in full strength, the older familiar
incestuous objects are taken up again, and again
invested by the libido. The infantile objectchoice was but a feeble venture in play, as it
were, but it laid down the direction for the ob
ject-choice of puberty. At this time a very
intense flow of
feeling towards the Oedipus
complex or in reaction to it comes into force;
since their mental antecedents
have become
intolerable, however, these feelings must re
main for the most part outside consciousness.
From the time of puberty onward the human

[587b]
Freud
individual must devote himself to the great
task of freeing himself from the parents; and
only after this detachment is accomplished
can he cease to be a child and so become a
member of the social community. For a son,
the task consists in releasing his libidinal de
sires from his mother, in order to employ them
in the quest of an external love-object in real
ity; and in reconciling himself with his father
if he has remained antagonistic to him, or in
freeing himself from his domination if, in the
reaction to the infantile revolt, he has lapsed
into subservience to him. These tasks are laid
down for every man; it is noteworthy how sel
dom they are carried through ideally, that is,
how seldom they are solved in a manner psy
chologically as well as socially satisfactory. In
neurotics, however, this detachment from the
parents is not accomplished at all; the son re
mains all his life in subjection to his father,
and incapable of transferring his libido to a new
sexual object. In the reversed relationship the
daughter's fate may be the same. In this sensed
the Oedipus complex is justifiably regarded as
the kernel of the neuroses.
You will imagine how incompletely I am
sketching a large number of the connections
bound up with the Oedipus complex which
practically and theoretically are of great im
portance. I shall not go into the variations and
possible inversions of it at all. Of its less im
mediate effects I should like to allude to one
only, which proves it to have influenced liter
ary production in a far-reaching manner. Otto
Rank has shown in a very valuable work that
dramatists throughout the ages have drawn
their material principally from the Oedipus
and incest complex and
its variations and
masked forms. It should also be remarked that
long before the time of psycho-analysis the two
criminal offences of Oedipus were recognized
as the true expressions of unbridled instinct.
Amongthe works of the Encyclopaedist Diderot
you will find the famous dialogue, Le neveu de
Rameau, which was translated into German by
no less a person than Goethe. There you may
read these remarkable words: Si le petit sauvage etait abandonne a lui-meme, qu'il conserva
toute son imbecilliti et qu'il reunit au peu de
raison de Venfant au berceau la violence des
passions de Vhomme de trente ans, il tordrait
le cou d son pere et coucherait avec sa mbre.1
1 If the young savage were left to himself, so that
he
could keep all his foolishness and could unite to
the slight reason of the baby in the crib the violent
emotions of a man of thirty, he would wring the neck
of his father and go to bed with his mother —Ed.

[588a]
General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis
585
There is yet one thing more which I cannot
pass over. The mother-wife of Oedipus must
not remind us of dreams in vain. Do you still
remember the results of our dream-analyses,
how so often the dream-forming wishes proved
perverse and incestuous in their nature, or be
trayed an
unsuspected enmity to
near and
beloved relatives? We then left the source of
these evil strivings of feeling unexplained. Now
you can answer this question yourselves. They
are dispositions of the libido, and investments
of objects by libido, belonging to early infancy
and long since given up in conscious life, but
which at night prove to be still present and
in a certain sense capable of activity. But,
since all men and not only neurotic persons
have
perverse,
incestuous,
and
murderous
dreams of this kind, we may infer that.those
who are
normal today have
also made the
passage through the perversions and the objectinvestments of the Oedipus complex; and that
this is the path of normal development; only
that neurotics show in a magnified and exag
gerated form what we also find revealed in the
dream-analyses of normal people. And this is
one of the reasons why we chose the study
of dreams
to lead up to that of neurotic
symptoms.
TWENTY-SECOND LECTURE
Aspects of Development and Regression.
Aetiology
As we have heard, the libido-function goes
through
an extensive development before it
can enter the service of reproduction in the
way that is called normal. Now I wish to show
you the significance of this fact for the causa
tion of the neuroses.
I think that it will be in agreement with the
doctrines of general pathology to assume that
such
a
development
involves
two
dangers;
first, that of inhibition, and secondly, that of
regression. That is to say, owing to the general
tendency to variation in biological processes
it must necessarily happen that not all these
preparatory phases will be passed through and
completely out-grown with the same degree
of success; some parts of the function will be
permanently arrested at these early stages, with
the result that with the general development
there
goes
a
certain
amount
of
inhibited
development.
Let us seek analogies to these processes in
other fields. When a whole people leaves its

[588b]
dwellings in order to seek a new country,
often happened in earlier periods of human
history, their entire number certainly did not
reach the new destination. Apart from losses
due to other causes, it must invariably have
happened that small groups or bands of the
migrating people halted on the way, and set
tled down in these stopping-places, while the
main body went further. Or, to take a nearer
comparison, you know that in the higher mam
mals the seminal glands, which are originally
located deep in the abdominal cavity, begin a
movement at a certain period of intra-uterine
development which brings them almost under
the skin of the pelvic extremity. In a number
of males it is found that one of this pair of
organs has remained in the pelvic cavity, or
else that it has taken up a permanent position
in the inguinal canal which both of them had
to pass through on the journey, or at least that
this canal has not closed as it normally should
after the passage of the seminal glands through
it. When as a young student I was doing my
first piece of scientific research under von
Brucke, I was working on the origin of the
dorsal nerve-roots in the spinal cord of a small
fish, still very archaic in form. I found that the
nerve-fibres of these roots grew out of large
cells in the posterior horn of the grey matter,
a condition which is no longer found in other
vertebrates. But soon after I
discovered that
similar nerve-cells were to be found outside
the grey matter along the whole length to the
so-called spinal ganglion of the posterior roots,
from which I concluded that the cells of this
ganglion had moved out of the spinal cord
along the nerve-roots. Evolutionary develop
ment shows this too; in this little fish, however,
the whole route of this passage was marked
by cells arrested on the way. Closer consider
ation will soon show you the weak points of
these
comparisons. Therefore let me
simply
say that we consider it possible that single
portions of every separate sexual impulse may
remain in an early stage of development, al
though at the same time other portions of it
may have reached their final goal. You will
see from this that we conceive each such im
pulse as a current continuously flowing from
the beginning of life, and that we have divided
its flow to some extent artificially into separate
successive forward movements. Your impres
sion that these conceptions require further
elucidation is correct, but the attempt would
lead us too far afield. We will, however, decide
at this point to call this arrest in a component

[589a]
586
Sigmund
impulse at an early stage a fixation (of the
impulse).
The
second danger in a development by
stages such as this we call regression; it also
happens that those portions which have pro
ceeded further
may easily revert in a back
ward direction to
these earlier stages.
The
impulse will find occasion to regress in this
way when the exercise of its function in a later
and more developed form meets with powerful
external obstacles, which thus prevent it from
attaining the goal of satisfaction. It is a short
step to assume that fixation and regression are
not independent of each other; the stronger
the fixations in the path of development the
more easily will the function yield before the
external obstacles, by regressing on to those
fixations; that is, the less capable of resistance
against the external difficulties in its path will
the developed function be. If you think of a
migrating people who have left large numbers
at the stopping-places on their way, you will
see that the foremost will naturally fall back
upon these positions when they are defeated
or when they meet with an enemy too strong
for them. And again, the more of their number
they leave behind in their progress, the sooner
will they be in danger of defeat.
It is important for
comprehension of the
neuroses that you should keep in mind this
relation between fixation and regression. You
will thus acquire a secure foothold from which
to investigate the causation of the neuroses—
their aetiology—which we shall soon consider.
For the present we will keep to the question
of regression. After what you have heard about
the development of the libido you may antici
pate two kinds of regression; a return to the
first
objects invested with libido,
which
we
know to be incestuous in character, and a re
turn of the whole sexual organization to earlier
stages. Both kinds occur in
the transference
neuroses and play a great part in their mecha
nism. In particular, the return to
the first
incestuous objects of the libido is a feature
found with quite fatiguing regularity in neu
rotics. There is much more to be said about
the regressions of libido if another group of
neuroses, called the narcissistic, is taken into
account; but this is not our intention at the
moment.
These
affections
yield
conclusions
about other developmental processes of the
libido-function, not yet mentioned, and
also
show us new types of regression corresponding
with them. I think, however, that I had better
warn you now above all not to
confound

[589b]
Freud
regression with repression and that I must
assist you to clear your minds about the re
lation between the two processes. Repression,
as you will remember, is the process by which
a mental act capable of becoming conscious
(that is, one which belongs to the preconscious
system) is made unconscious and forced back
into the unconscious system. And we also call
it repression when the unconscious mental act
is not permitted to enter the adjacent precon
scious system at all, but is turned back upon
the
threshold by
the
censorship.
There is,
therefore, no connection with sexuality in the
concept repression; please mark this very care
fully. It denotes a purely psychological process;
and would be even better described as topo
graphical, by which we mean that it has to do
with the spatial relationships we assume within
the mind, or, if we again abandon these crude
aids to the formulation of theory, with the
structure of the mental apparatus out of sep
arate psychical systems.
The comparisons just now instituted showed
us that hitherto we have not been using the
word regression in its general sense but in a
quite specific one. If you give it its general
sense, that of a reversion from a higher to a
lower stage of development in general, then
repression also ranges itself under regression;
for repression can also be described as rever
sion to an earlier and lower stage in the de
velopment of a mental act. Only, in repression
this retrogressive direction is not a point of
any moment to us; for we also call it repression
in a dynamic sense when a mental process is
arrested before it leaves the lower stage of
the unconscious. Repression is thus a topo
graphic-dynamic conception, while regression
is a purely descriptive one. But what we have
hitherto called regression and considered in its
relation to fixation signified exclusively the
return of the libido to its former halting-places
in development, that is, something which is
essentially quite different from repression and
quite independent of it. Nor can we call regres
sion of the libido a purely psychical process;
neither do we know where to localize it in the
mental apparatus; for though it may exert the
most powerful influence upon mental life, the
organic factor in it is nevertheless the most
prominent.
Discussions of this sort tend to be rather
dry; therefore let us turn to clinical illustra
tions of them in order to get a more vivid
impression of them. You know that the group
of the transference neuroses consists principally

[590a]
General Introduction
of hysteria and the obsessional neurosis. Now
in hysteria, a regression of the libido to the
primary incestuous sexual objects is without
doubt quite regular, but there is little or no
regression to an earlier stage of sexual organ
ization. Consequently the principal part in the
mechanism of hysteria is played by repression.
If I may be allowed to supplement by a con
struction the certain knowledge of this neurosis
acquired up to the present, I might describe
the situation as
follows: The fusion of the
component-impulses under the primacy of the
genital zone has been accomplished; but the
results of this union meet with resistance from
the direction of the preconscious system with
which consciousness is connected. The genital
organization therefore holds good for the un
conscious, but not also for the preconscious,
and this rejection on the part of the precon
scious results in a picture which has a certain
likeness to the state prior to the primacy of
the genital zone. It is nevertheless actually
quite different. Of the two kinds of regression
of the libido, that on to an earlier phase of
sexual organization is much the more striking.
Since it is absent in hysteria and our whole
conceptionof the neuroses is still far too much
dominated by the study of hysteria which came
first in point of time, the significance of libidoregressionwas recognized much later than that
of repression. We may be sure that our points
of view will undergo still further extensions
and alterations when we include consideration
of still other neuroses
(the narcissistic)
in
addition
to
hysteria
and
the
obsessional
neurosis.
In the obsessional neurosis,
on the other
hand, regression of the libido* to the antecedent
stage of the sadistic-anal organization is the
most conspicuous factor and determines the
form taken by the symptoms. The impulse to
love must then mask itself under the sadistic
impulse. The obsessive thought, "I should like
to murder you," means (when it has been de
tached from
certain superimposed elements
that are not, however, accidental but indispen
sable to it) nothing else but "I should like to
enjoy love of you." When you consider in ad
dition that regression to the primary objects
has also set in at the same time, so that this
impulse concerns only the nearest and most
beloved persons,you can gain some idea of the
horror roused in the patient by these obsessive
ideas and at the same time how unaccountable
they appear to his conscious perception. But
repression alsohas its share, a great one,in the

[590b]
to Psycho-Analysis
587
mechanism of this neurosis, and one which is
not easy to expound in a rapid survey such as
this. Regression of libido without repression
would never give rise to a neurosis, but would
result in a perversion. You will see from this
that repression is the
process which
distin
guishes the neuroses particularly and by which
they are best characterized. Perhaps, however,
I may have an opportunity at some time of
expounding to you what we know of the mech
anism of the perversions, and you will then see
that there again nothing proceeds so simply as
we should like to imagine in our constructions.
I think that you will be soonest reconciled
to this exposition of fixation and regression of
the libido if you will regard it as preparatory
to a study of the aetiology of the neuroses. So
far I have only given you one piece of infor
mation on this subject, namely, that people
fall ill of a neurosis when the possibility of
satisfaction for
the libido is removed from
them—they fall ill in consequence of a frus
tration, as I called it, therefore—and that their
symptoms
are
actually
substitutes
for
the
missing satisfaction. This of course does not
mean that every frustration in regard to libid
inal satisfaction makes everyone who meets
with it neurotic, but merely that in all cases
of neurosis investigated the factor of frustra
tion was demonstrable. The statement, there
fore, cannot be reversed. You will no doubt
have understood that this statement was not
intended to reveal the
whole secret of
the
aetiology of the neuroses, but that it merely
emphasized an important and indispensable
condition.
Now in order to consider this proposition
further we do not know whether to begin upon
the nature of the frustration or the particular
character of the person affected by it. The
frustration is very rarely a comprehensive and
absolute one; in order to have a pathogenic
effect it would probably have to strike at the
only form of satisfaction which that person
desires, the only form of which he is capable.
In general, there are very many ways by which
it is possible to endure lack of libidinal satis
faction without falling ill. Above all we know
of people who are able to take such abstinence
upon themselves without injury; they are then
not happy, they suffer from unsatisfiedlonging,
but they do not become ill. We therefore have
to conclude that the sexual impulse-excitations
are exceptionally plastic, if I may use the
word.
One of them can step in in place of
another; if satisfaction of one is denied in

[591a]
588
Sigmund Freud
reality, satisfaction of another can offer full
recompense. They arc related to one another
like a network of communicating canals filled
with fluid, and this in spite of their subordi
nation to the genital primacy, a condition which
is not at all easily reduced to an image. Fur
ther, the component-instincts of sexuality, as
well as the united sexual impulse which com
prises them, show a great capacity to change
their object, to exchange it for another—i.e.,
for one more easily attainable; this capacity
for
displacement
and
readiness
to
accept
surrogates must produce a powerful countereffect to the effect of a frustration. One amongst
these processes serving as protection against ill
ness arising from want has reached a particular
significance in the development of culture. It
consists in the abandonment, on the part of the
sexual impulse, of an
aim previously found
either in the
gratification of
a componentimpulse or in
the gratification incidental to
reproduction, and the adoption of a new aim—
which new aim, though genetically related to
the first, can no longer be regarded as sexual,
but must be called social in character. We call
this process sublimation, by which we sub
scribe to the general standard which estimates
social aims above sexual (ultimately selfish)
aims.
Incidentally,
sublimation
is merely
a
special case of the connections existing between
sexual impulses and other, asexual ones. We
shall have occasion to discuss this again in
another context.
Your impression now will be that we have
reduced want of satisfaction to
a
factor of
negligible proportions by the recognition of so
many means of enduring it. But no; this is not
so: it retains its pathogenic power. The means
of dealing with it are not always sufficient. The
measure of unsatisfied libido that the average
human being can take upon himself is limited.
The plasticity and free mobility of the libido
is not by any means retained to the full in all
of us;
and sublimation can never discharge
more than a certain proportion of libido, apart
from the fact that many people possess the
capacity for sublimation only in a slight degree.
The
most important of these limitations is
clearly that referring to the mobility of the
libido, since it confines the individual to the
attaining of aims and objects which are very
few in number. Just remember that incomplete
development of the libido leaves behind it very
extensive
(and
sometimes
also
numerous)
libido-fixations upon earlier phases of organi
zation
and
types
of
object-choice,
mostly

[591b]
incapable of satisfaction in reality; you will
then recognize fixation of libido as the second
powerful factor working together with frustra
tion
in
the
causation
of
illness.
We
may
condense this schematically and say that libidofixation represents the internal, predisposing
factor, while frustration represents the external,
accidental
factor,
in
the
aetiology
of
the
neuroses.
I will take this opportunity to warn you
against taking sides in a quite superfluous dis
pute. It is a popular habit in scientific matters
to seize upon one side of the truth and set it
up as the whole truth, and then in favour of
that element of truth to dispute all the rest
which is equally true. More than one faction
has already split off in this way from the
psycho-analytic movement; one of them recog
nizes only the egoistic impulses and denies the
sexual; another perceives only the
influence
of real tasks in life but overlooks that of the
individual's past life, and so on. Now here is
occasion for another of
these antitheses and
moot-points: Are the neuroses exogenous or
endogenous diseases—the inevitable result of
a certain type of constitution or the product
of certain injurious (traumatic) events in the
person's life? In particular, are they brought
about by the fixation of libido and the rest of
the sexual constitution, or by the pressure of
frustration? This dilemma seems to me about
as sensible as another I could point to: Is the
child created by the father's act of generation
or by the conception in the mother? You will
properly reply: Both conditions are alike indis
pensable. The conditions underlying the neu
roses are very similar, if not exactly the same.
From the point of view of causation, cases of
neurotic illness fall into a series, within which
the two factors—sexual constitution and events
experienced, or, if you wish, fixation of libido
and frustration—are represented in such a
way that where one of them predominates the
other is proportionately less pronounced. At
one end of the series stand those extreme cases
of whom one can say: "These people would
have fallen ill whatever happened, whatever
they
experienced, however merciful life has
been
to
them,
because of their anomalous
libido development." At the other end stand
cases which call forth the opposite verdict—
they would undoubtedly have escaped illness
if life had not put such and such burdens upon
them. In the intermediate cases in the series,
more or less of the disposing factor (the sexual
constitution) is combined with less or more

[592a]
General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis
S89
of the injurious impositions of life. Their sex
ual constitution would not have brought about
their neurosis if they had not gone through
such and such experiences, and life's vicissi
tudes would not have worked traumatically
upon them if the libido had been otherwise
constituted. In this series I can perhaps admit
a certain preponderance in the effect of the
predisposing factor, but this admission again
depends
upon where you
draw the line
in
marking the boundaries of nervousness.
I shall now suggest to you that we should
call series such as these complemental series,
and
will
inform
you
beforehand
that
we
shall find occasion to establish others of this
kind.
The tenacity with which the libido holds to
particular channels and particular objects, the
adhesiveness of the libido, so to say, seems to
be an independent factor, varying in individ
uals, the determining conditions of which are
completely unknown to us, but the importance
of which in the aetiology of the neuroses we
shall certainly no longer underestimate. At the
same time we should not overestimate the close
relation
between the two
things. A similar
adhesiveness of the libido occurs—from un
known causes—in normal people under num
erous conditions, and is found as a decisive
factor in those persons who in a certain sense
are the extreme opposite of neurotics—namely,
perverted persons. It was known before the
time of psycho-analysis that in the anamnesis
of such persons a very early impression, relating
to
an abnormal instinct-tendency or objectchoice, is frequently discovered, to which the
libido of that person henceforth remains at
tached for life (Binet). It is often hard to say
what has enabled this impression to exert such
an intense power of attraction upon the libido.
I will .describe a case of this kind observed by
myself. A man to whom the genitals and all
the other attractions in a woman now mean
nothing can be aroused to irresistible sexual
excitation only by a shoe-clad foot of a certain
shape; he can remember an event in his sixth
year which determined this fixation of libido.
He was sitting upon a stool by the side of his
governess who was to give him an English
lesson. She was a plain, elderly, shrivelled old
maid, with watery blue eyes and a snub nose,
and on this day she had hurt her foot and had
it therefore stretched out on a cushion in a
velvet slipper, with the leg itself most deco
rously concealed. Later on, after a timid at
tempt at normal sexual activity during puberty,

[592b]
a thin sinewy foot like that of the governess
became his only sexual object; and if still other
features in the person reminded him of the
type of woman represented by
the English
governess, the man was helplessly attracted.
This fixation of the libido, however, rendered
him not neurotic but perverse; he became, as
we say, a foot-fetichist. So you see that although
an excessive and, in addition, premature fix
ation of libido is an indispensable condition in
the causation of neuroses, the extent of its in
fluence
far
exceeds
the
boundaries
of
the
neuroses. This condition by itself is also as
little
decisive
as
the
frustration
mentioned
previously.
So the problem of the causation of the neu
roses seems to become more complicated. In
fact, psycho-analytic investigation acquaints
us with yet a new factor, not considered in our
aetiological series, and best observed in some
one whose previous good health is suddenly dis
turbed by falling ill of a neurosis. In these
people,
signs of
contradictory and
opposed
wishes, or, as we say, of mental conflict, are
regularly found. One side of the personality
stands for certain wishes, while another part
struggles
against them and fends them off.
There is no neurosis without such a conflict.
There might seem to be nothing very special
in this; you know that mental life in all of us
is perpetually engaged with conflicts that have
to be decided. Therefore it would seem that
special conditions must be fulfilled before such
a conflict can become pathogenic; we may ask
what these conditions are, what forces in the
mind take part in these pathogenic conflicts,
and what relation conflict bears to the other
causative factors.
I hope to be able to give you answers to
these questions which will be satisfactory al
though perhaps schematically condensed. Con
flict is produced by frustration, in that the
libido which lacks satisfaction is urged to seek
other paths and other objects. A condition of
it then is that these other paths and objects
arouse disfavour in one side of the personality,
so that a veto ensues, which at first makes the
new way of satisfaction impossible. This is
the point of departure for the formation of
symptoms, which we shall follow up later. The
rejected libidinal longings manage to pursue
their course by circuitous paths, though not
indeed without paying toll to the prohibition
in the form of certain disguises and modifica
tions. The circuitous paths are the ways of
symptom-formation;
the symptoms are the

[593a]
590
Sigmund Freud
new and substitutive satisfactions necessitated
by the fact of the frustration.
The significance of the mental conflict can
be defined in another way, thus: in order to
become pathogenic external frustration must
be supplemented by internal frustration. When
this is so, the external and the internal frustra
tion relate of course to
different paths and
different objects; external frustration removes
one possibility of satisfaction, internal frustra
tion tries to exclude another possibility, and it
is this second possibility which becomes the
debatable ground of the conflict. I choose this
form of presentation because it contains a cer
tain implication; it implies that the internal
impediment arose originally, in primitive phases
of human development, out of real external
obstacles.
But what are these forces out of which the
prohibition against the libidinal longings pro
ceeds,
the
other parties in
the
pathogenic
conflict? Speaking very broadly, we may say
that they are the non-sexual instincts. We in
clude them all under the name ego-instincts;
analysis of the transference neuroses offers no
adequate opportunity for further investigation
of them; at most we learn something of them
from the resistances opposed to the analysis.
The pathogenic conflict is, therefore, one be
tween the ego-instincts and the sexual instincts.
In a whole series of cases it looks as though
there might also be conflict between various
purely sexual impulses; at bottom, however,
this is the same thing, because of the two sexual
impulses engaged in a conflict one will always
be found consistent with the ego (ego-syntonic)
while the other calls forth a protest from the
ego. It remains, therefore, a conflict between
ego and sexuality.
Over and over again when psycho-analysis
has regarded something happening in the mind
as an expression of the sexual instincts, indig
nant protests have been raised to the effect that
other instincts and other interests exist in men
tal life besides the sexual, that one should not
derive everything from sexuality, and so on.
Well, it is a real pleasure for once to be in
agreement with one's opponents. Psycho-analy
sis has never forgotten that non-sexual instincts
also exist; it has been built upon a sharp
distinction between sexual instincts and egoinstincts ; and in the face of all opposition it has
insisted, not that they arise from sexuality, but
that the neuroses owe their origin to a conflict
between ego and sexuality. It has no conceiv

[593b]
able motive in denying the existence or the
significance of the ego-instincts while it in
vestigates the part played by sexual instincts
in disease.and in life generally. Only, psycho
analysis has been destined to
concern itself
first and foremost with the sexual instincts,
because in the transference neuroses these are
the most accessible to investigation, and be
cause it was obliged to study what others had
neglected.
It is not any more accurate to say that
psycho-analysis has not occupied itself at all
with the non-sexual side of the personality.
The very distinction between the ego and sex
uality has shown us with particular clearness
that the ego-instincts also undergo an important
development which is neither entirely inde
pendent of the development of the libido nor
without influence upon the latter. We certainly
understand the development of the ego much
less well than the development of the libido,
because it is only by the study of the narcis
sistic neuroses that we have just reached some
hope of insight into the structure of the ego.
Nevertheless, we have already a notable at
tempt on the part of Ferenczi1 to reconstruct
theoretically the developmental stages of the
ego; and there are at least two points at which
we have a secure foothold from which to ex
amine this development further. We are not
at all disposed to think that the libidinal inr
terests of a human being are from the outset
in opposition to the interests of self-preser
vation; the egois rather impelledat every stage
to attempt to remain in harmony with the corr
responding stage of sexual organization and to
accommodate itself to that. The succession of
the separate phases in the development of the
libido probably follows a prescribed course;
it is undeniable, however, that this course may
be influenced from the direction of the ego. A
certain parallelism, a definite correspondence
between the phases in the two developments
(of the ego and of the libido) may also be
assumed; indeed, a disturbance in this corre
spondence may become a pathogenic factor.
More important to us is the question of how
the ego behaves when the libido has undergone
a powerful fixation at an earlier point in its
development. The ego may countenance the
fixation and will then be perverse to that ex
tent, or, what is the same thing, infantile; it
1 Ferenczi, Contributions to Psycho-Analysis. Eng
lish translation by Ernest Jones (1916) chap. viii.
p. 181.

[594a]
General Introduction
may, however, hold itself averse from this at
tachment of libido, the result of which is that
where the libido undergoes a fixation there the
ego institutes an act of repression.
In this way we arrive at the conclusion that
the third factor in the aetiology of the neuroses,
the susceptibility to conflict, is as much con
nected with the development of the ego as with
the development of the libido; our insight into
the causation of the neuroses is thus enlarged.
First, there is the most general condition of
privation, then the fixation of libido (forcing
it into particular channels), and thirdly, the
susceptibility to conflict produced by the de
velopment of the ego having repudiated libidi
nal excitations of that particular kind. The
thing is, therefore, not so very obscure and
intricate as you probably thought it during the
course of my exposition. To be sure, though,
after all, we have not done with it yet; there
is still something new to add and something
we already know to dissect further.
In order to demonstrate the effect of the
development of the ego upon the tendency to
conflict and therewith upon the causation of
the neurosis, I will quote an example which,
although entirely imaginary, is not at all im
probable in any respect. I will give it the title
of Nestroy's farce: On the Ground-Floor and
in the Mansion. Suppose that a caretaker is
living on the ground-floor of a house, while
the owner, a rich and well-connectedman, lives
above. They both have children, and we will
assume that the owner's little girl is permitted
to play freely without supervision with the
child of lower social standing. It may then
very easily happen that their games become
"naughty," that is, take on a sexual character:
that they play "father and mother," watch each
other in the performance of intimate acts, and
stimulate each other's genital parts. The care
taker's daughter may have played the temptress
in this, since in spite of her five or six years
she has been able to learn a great deal about
sexual matters. These occurrences, even though
they are only kept up for a short period, will
be enough to rouse certain sexual excitations
in both children which will come to expression
in the practice of masturbation for a few years,
after the games have been discontinued. There
is common ground so far, but the final result
will be very different in the two children. The
caretaker's daughter will continue masturba
tion, perhaps up to the onset of menstruation,
and then give it up without difficulty; a few

[594b]
to Psycho-Analysis
591
years later will find a lover, perhaps bear a
child; choose this or that path in life, perhaps
become a popular actress and end as an aristo
crat. Probably her career will turn out less
brilliantly, but in any case she will be unharmed
by the premature sexual activity, free from
neurosis, and able to live her life. Very differ
ent is the result in the other child. She will very
soon, while yet a child, acquire a sense of hav
ing done wrong; after a fairly short time she
will give up
the
masturbatory satisfaction,
though perhaps only with a tremendous strug
gle, but will nevertheless retain an inner feeling
of subdued depression. When later on as a
young girl she comes to learn something of
sexual intercourse, she will turn from it with
inexplicable horror and wish to remain ignorant.
Probably she will then again suffer a fresh ir
resistible impulse to masturbation about which
she will not dare to unburden herself to any
one. When the time comes for a man to choose
her as a wife the neurosis will break out and
cheat her out of marriage and the joy of life.
If analysis makes it possible to obtain an in
sight into this neurosis, it will be found that
this well-brought-up, intelligent and idealistic
girl has completely repressed her sexual desires;
but that they are, unconsciously, attached to
the few little experiences she had with the
childish play-mate.
The differences which ensue in these two
destinies in spite of the common experiences
undergone, arise because in one girl the ego has
sustained a development absent in the other.
To
the
caretaker's daughter sexual activity
seemed as natural and harmless in later years
as in childhood. The gentleman's daughter had
been "well-brought-up" and had adopted the
standards of her education. Thus stimulated,
her ego had formed ideals of womanly purity
and absence of desire that were incompatible
with sexual acts; her intellectual training had
caused her to depreciate the feminine role for
which she is intended. This higher moral and
intellectual development in her ego has brought
her
into
conflict
with
the
claims
of
her
sexuality.
I will explore one more aspect of the devel
opment of the libido today, both because it
leads out upon certain wide prospects, and also
because it is well-suited to justify the sharp,
and not immediately obvious, line of demarca
tion we are wont to draw between go-instincts
and sexual instincts. In considering the two
developments undergoneby the ego and by the

[595a]
592
Sigmund Freud

[595b]
moulded; for in the beginning they do not
know any lack of objects. Since they are con
nected parasitically, as it were, with the other
physical functions and at the same time can be
auto-erotically gratified on their own body,
they are at first isolated from the educative in
fluence of real necessity; and in most people
they retain throughout life, in some respect or
other, this character of obstinacy and inacces
sibility to influence which we call unreason
ableness. Moreover, the educability of a young
person as a rule comes to an end when sexual
desire breaks out in its final strength. Educa
tors know this and act accordingly; but per
haps they will yet allow themselves to be in
fluenced by the results of psycho-analysis so
that they will transfer the main emphasis in
education to the earliest years of childhood,
from the suckling period onward.
The little
human being is frequently a finished product
in his fourth or fifth year, and only gradually
reveals in later years what lies buried in him.
To appreciate the full significance of this
difference between the two groups of instincts
we must digress some distance, and include one
of those aspects which deserve to be called eco
nomic; we enter here upon one of the most:
important, but unfortunately one of the most
obscure, territories of psycho-analysis. We may
put the question whether a main purpose isj
discernible in the operation of the mental ap-j
paratus; and our first approach to an answer
is that this purpose is directed to the attain
ment of pleasure. It seems that our entire
psychicalactivity is bent upon procuring pleas
ure and avoiding pain, that it is automatically
regulated by the Pleasure-principle. Now of
all things in the world we should like to know
what are the conditions giving rise to pleasure
and pain, but that is just where we fall short.
We may only venture to say that pleasure is in
some way connected with lessening, lowering,
or
extinguishing the amount
of
stimulation
present in the mental apparatus; and that pain
involves a heightening of the latter. Considera
tion of the most intense pleasure of which man
is capable, the pleasure in the performance of
the sexual act, leaves little doubt upon this
point. Since pleasurable processes of this kind
are bound up with the distribution of quanti
ties of mental excitation and energy, we term
considerations of this kind economic ones. It
appears that we can describe the tasks and per
formances of the mental apparatus in another

[596a]
TWENTY-THIRD LECTURE
The Paths of Symptom-Formation
In the eyes of the general public, the symp
toms are the essence of a disease, and to them
a cure means the removal of the symptoms. In
medicine, however, we find it important to dif
ferentiate between symptoms and disease, and
state that the disappearance of the symptoms is
by no means the same as the cure of the dis
ease. The only tangible element of the disease
that remains after the removal of the symp
toms, however, is the capacity to form new

[596b]
adopt the lay point of view and regard a knowl
edge of the foundation of the symptoms as
equivalent to understanding the disease.
The symptoms—of course we are here deal
ing with mental (or psychogenic) symptoms,
and mental disease—are activities which are
detrimental, or at least useless, to life as a
whole; the person concerned frequently com
plains of them as obnoxious to him or they
involve distress and suffering for him. The prin
cipal injury they inflict lies in the expense of
mental energy they entail and, besides this, in
the energy needed to combat them. Where the
symptoms are extensively developed, these two
kinds of effort may exact such a price that the
person suffers a very serious impoverishment
in available mental energy, which consequently
disables him for all the important tasks of life.
This result depends principally upon the amount
of energy taken up in this way, therefore you
will see that illness
is essentially a practical
conception. But if you look at the matter from
a theoretical point of view and ignore
this
question of degree you can very well say that
we are all ill, i.e., neurotic; for the conditions
required for symptom-formation are demon
strable also in normal persons.
Of neurotic symptoms we already know that
they are the result of a conflict arising when a
new form
of satisfaction of libido is sought.
The two powers which have entered into oppo
sition meet together again in the symptom and
become reconciled by means of the compro
mise contained in symptom-formation. That is
why the symptom is capable of such resistance;
it is sustained from both sides. We also know
that one of the two partners to the conflict is
the unsatisfied libido, frustrated by reality and
now forced to seek other paths to satisfaction.
If reality remains inexorable, even when the
libido is prepared to take another object in
place of that denied, the libido will then finally
be compelled to resort to regression, and to
seek satisfaction in one of the organizations it
had already surmounted or in one of the ob
jects it had relinquished earlier. The libido is
drawn into the path of regression by the fixa
tions it has left behind it at these places in its
development.
Now the path of perversion branches off
sharply from that of neurosis. If these regres
sions do not call forth a prohibition on the
part of the ego, no neurosis results; the libido
succeeds in obtaining a real, although not a

[597a]
594
Sigmund
normal satisfaction. But if the ego, which con
trols not merely consciousness but also the ap
proaches to motor innervation and hence the
realization in actuality of mental impulses, is
not in agreement with these regressions, con
flict ensues. The libido is blocked, as it were,
and must seek an escape by which it can find
an outlet for its cathexis (charge of energy) in
conformity with the demands of the pleasureprinciple: it must elude, eschew the ego. The
fixations upon the path of development now regressively traversed—fixations against
which
the ego had previously guarded itself by re
pressions—offer just such an escape. In stream
ing backward and re-cathecting these repressed
positions, the libido withdraws itself from the
ego and its laws; but it also abandons all the
training acquired under the influence of the
ego. It was docile as long as satisfaction was
in sight; under the double pressure of external
and internal frustration it becomes intractable
and harks back to former happier days. That is
its essential unchangeable character. The ideas
to which the libido now transfers its cathexis
belong to the unconscious system and are sub
ject to the special processes characteristic of
that system—namely,
condensation and dis
placement. Conditions are thus set up which cor
respond exactly with those of dream-formation.
Just as the latent dream, first formed in the
unconscious out of the thoughts proper, and
constituting the fulfilment of an unconscious
wish-phantasy, meets with some (pre)conscious
activity which exerts a censorship upon it and
permits, according to its verdict, the forma
tion of a compromise in the manifest dream, so
the ideas to which the libido is attached (libi
do-representatives)
in the unconscious have
still to contend with the power of the precon
scious ego. The opposition against it in the ego
follows it as an anti-cathexis (counter-charge)
and forces it to adopt a form of expression by
which the opposing forces can at the same time
express themselves. In this way the symptom
then comes into being, as a derivative, distorted
in manifold ways, of the unconscious libidinal
wish-fulfilment, as a cleverly chosen ambiguity
with two completely contradictory
significa
tions. In this last point alone is there a differ
ence between dream-formation and symptomformation;
for the
preconscious purpose in
dream-formation is merely to preserve sleep
and to allow nothing that would disturb it to
penetrate consciousness; it does not insist upon
confronting the unconscious wish-impulse with
a sharp prohibiting "No, on the contrary." It

[597b]
Freud
can be more tolerant because a -sleeping person
is in a less dangerous position; the condition of
sleep is enough in itself to prevent the wish
from being realized in actuality.
You see that this escape of the libido under
the conditions of conflict is rendered possible
by the existence of fixations. The regressive
cathexis (with libido) of these fixations leads
to a circumventing of the repressions and to a
discharge—or a satisfaction—of the libido, in
which the conditions of a compromise have
nevertheless to be maintained. By this detour
through the unconscious and the old fixations
the libido finally succeeds in attaining to a real
satisfaction,
though
the satisfaction is
cer
tainly of an exceedingly restricted kind and
hardly recognizable as such. Let me add two
remarks on this outcome. First, will you notice
how closely connected the libido and the uncon
scious, on the one hand, and the ego, conscious
ness, and reality, on the other, show themselves
to be, although there were no such connections
between them originally; and secondly, let me
tell you that all I have said and have still to
say on this point concerns the neurosis of hys
teria only.
Where does the libido find the fixations it
needs in order to break through the repressions?
In the activities and experiences of infantile
sexuality, in the component-tendencies and the
objects of childhood which have been relin
quished and abandoned. It is to them, there
fore, that the libido turns back. The signifi
cance of childhood is a double one; on the one
hand the congenitally determined instinct-dis
positions are first shown at that time, and sec
ondly, other instincts are then first awakened
and activated by external influences and acci
dental events experienced. In my opinion we
are quite justified in laying down this dichoto
my. That the innate predisposition comes to
expression will certainly not be disputed; but
analytic observation even requires us to assume
that purely accidental experiences in childhood
are capable of inducing fixations of libido. Nor
do I see any theoretical difficulty in this. Con
stitutional predispositions are undoubtedly the
after-effects of the experiences of an earlier an
cestry; they also have been at one time ac
quired; without such acquired characters there
would be no heredity. And is it conceivable that
the acquisition of characters which will be trans
mitted further should suddenly cease in the gen
eration which is being observed today? The im
portance of the infantile experiences should not,
however, be entirely overlooked, as so often

[598a]
General Introduction
happens, in favour of ancestral experiences or of
experiences in adult life; but on the contrary
they should be particularly appreciated. They
are all the more pregnant with consequences be
cause they occur at a time of uncompleted de
velopment, and for this very reason are likely
to have a traumatic effect. The work done by
Roux and others on the mechanism of develop
ment has shown that a needle pricked into an
embryonic cell-mass undergoing division re
sults in serious disturbances of the develop
ment; the same injury to a larva or a fullgrown animal would be innocuous.
The libido-fixation of an adult, which we
have referred to as representing the constitu
tional factor in the aetiology of the neuroses,
may therefore now be divided into two further
elements: the inherited predisposition and the
predisposition acquired in early childhood. Since
a schematic mode of presentation is always ac
ceptable to a student, let us formulate these
relations as follows:
Causation of Neurosis=
Predisposition
Accidental
resulting from
+
(traumatic)
Libido-fixation
Experiences
Sexual Constitution
(Ancestral experiences)
Infantile Experiences
The hereditary sexual constitution provides a
great variety of predispositions, according as
this or that component-impulse, alone or in
combination with others, is specially strongly
accentuated. Together with the infantile ex
periences the sexual constitution forms another
complemental series, quite similar to that al
ready described as being formed out of the
predisposition and accidental experiences of an
adult. In each series similar extreme cases are
met with, and also similar degrees and rela
tionships between the factors concerned. It
would be appropriate at this point to consider
whether the more striking of the two kinds of
libido-regression (that which reverts to earlier
stages of sexual organization) is not predomi
nantly conditioned by the hereditary constitu
tional factor; but the answer to this question
is best postponed until a wider range of forms
of neurotic disease can be considered.
Now let us devote attention to the fact that
analytic investigation shows the libido of neu-

[598b]
to Psycho-Analysis
595
rotics to be attached to their infantile sexual
experiences.
In
this
light
these
experiences
seem to be of enormous importance in the lives
and illnesses of mankind. This importance re
mains undiminished in so far as the therapeu
tic work of analysis is concerned; but regarded
from another point of view it is easy to see
that there is a danger of a misunderstanding
here, one which might delude us into regarding
life too exclusively from the angle of the situa
tion in neurotics. The importance of the infan
tile experiences is after all diminished by the
reflection that the libido reverts regressively to
them after it has been driven from its later po
sitions. This would lead us towards the oppo
site conclusion, that the libido-experiences had
no importance at the time of their occurrence,
but only acquired it later by regression. You
will remember that we discussed- a similar al
ternative before, in dealing with the Oedipus
complex.
To decide this point is again not difficult.
The statement is undoubtedly correct that re
gression greatly augments the cathexis of the
infantile experiences with libido—and with that
their pathogenic significance; but it would be
misleading to allow this alone to become de
cisive. Other considerations must be taken into
account as well. To begin with, observation
shows in a manner excluding all doubt that in
fantile experiences have their own importance
which is demonstrated already during child
hood. There are, indeed, neuroses in children
too; in their neuroses the factor of displace
ment backwards in time is necessarily much di
minished, or quite absent, the outbreak of ill
ness following immediately upon a traumatic
experience. The study of infantile neuroses
guards us from many risks of misunderstand
ing the neuroses of adults, just as children's
dreams gave us the key to comprehension of
the dreams of adults. Neurosis in children is
very common, far more common than is usu
ally supposed. It is often overlooked, regarded
as a manifestation of bad behaviour or naughti
ness, and often subdued by the authorities in
the
nursery; but in retrospect it is always
easily recognizable. It appears most often in
the form of anxiety-hysteria; we shall learn
what that means on another occasion. When a
neurosis breaks out in later life analysis invari
ably reveals it to be a direct continuation of
that infantile neurosis, which had perhaps been
expressed in a veiled and incipient form only;
as has been said, however, there are cases in
which the childish nervousness is carried on

[599a]
596
Sigmund Freud
into lifelong illness without a break. In a few
instances we have been able to analyse a child
actually in a condition of neurosis; far more
often we have had to be satisfied with the
retrospective insight into a childhood-neurosis
that can be gained through someone who has
fallen ill in mature years, a situation in which
due corrections and precautions must not be
neglected.
In the second place, it would certainly be in
explicable that the libido
should regress so
regularly to the time of childhood if there had
been nothing there which could exert an attrac
tion upon it. The fixation upon certain stages
of development, which we assume, only has
meaning if we regard it as attaching to itself a
definite amount of libidinal energy. Finally, I
may point out that a complemental relation
ship
exists here
between
the intensity and
pathogenic importance of the infantile and of
the later experiences, again a similar relation
ship to that found in the other two series we
have already studied. There are cases in which
the whole accent of causation falls on the sex
ual experiences in childhood; cases in which
these impressions undoubtedly had a traumatic
effect, nothing more than the average sexual
constitution and its immaturity being required
to supplement them. Then there are others in
which all the accent lies on the later conflicts,
and the analytic emphasis upon the childhoodimpressions seems to be the effect of regres
sion alone. There exist, therefore, the two ex
tremes—inhibited development and regression
—and between them every degree of combi
nation of the two factors.
This state of things has a certain interest for
those looking to pedagogy for the prevention
of neuroses by early intervention in the matter
of the child's sexual development. As long as
attention is directed mainly to the infantile
sexual experiences one would think everything
in the way of prophylaxis of later neurosis
could be done by ensuring that this develop
ment should be retarded and the child secured
against this kind of experience. But we know
that the conditions causing neurosis are more
complicated than this and that they cannot be
influenced in a general way by attending to one
factor only.
Strict supervision in childhood
loses value because it is helpless against the
constitutional factor; more than this, it is less
easy to carry out than specialists in education
imagine; and it entails two new risks, which
are not to be lightly disregarded. It may accom
plish too much; in that it favours an exag

[599b]
gerated degree of sexual repression which is
harmful in its effects, and it sends the child into
life without power to resist the urgent demands
of his sexuality that must be expected at pu
berty. It therefore remains most doubtful how
far prophylaxis in childhood can go with ad
vantage, and whether a changed attitude to
actuality would not constitute a better point of
departure for attempts to forestall the neuroses.
Let us return to consideration of the symp
toms. They yield a satisfaction in place of one
lacking in reality; they achieve this by means,
of a regression of the libido to a previous time
of life, with which regression is indissolubly
connected, a reversion to earlier phases in thej
object-choice or in the organization. We learnedsome time ago that the neurotic is in some way
tied to a period in his past life; we know now;
that this period in the past is one in which his
libido could attain satisfaction, one in which he
was happy. He looks back on his life-story,
seeking some such period, and goes on seeking
it, even if he must go back to the time when he
was a suckling infant to find it according to his
recollection or his imagination of it under later
influences. In some way the symptom repro
duces that early infantile way of satisfaction,
disguised though it is by censorship implicit
in the conflict, converted as it usually is into
a sensation of suffering, and mingled with ele
ments drawn from the experiences leading up
to the outbreak of the illness. The kind of sat
isfaction which the symptom brings has much
about it which estranges us, quite apart from
the fact that the person concerned is unaware
of the satisfaction and perceives this that we
call satisfaction much more as suffering, and,
complains of it. This transformation belongs to:
the mental conflict, by the pressure of which
the symptom had to be formed; what was at
one time a satisfaction must today arouse re
sistance or horror in him. We are familiar with
a simple but instructive instance of such a
change of feeling: the same child that sucked
milk with voracity from its mother's breast
often shows, some years later, a strong dislike
of milk which can with difficulty be overcome
by training; this dislike is intensified to the
point of horror if the milk or any other kind
of liquid containing it has a skin formed upon
it. It is possible that the skin calls up re
verberations of a memory of the mother's
breast, once so ardently desired; it is true that
the traumatic experience of weaning has inter
vened meanwhile.
There is still something else which makes the

[600a]
General Introduction
symptoms seem remarkable and inexplicable as
a means of libidinal satisfaction. They so en
tirely fail to remind us of all that we are ac
customed normally to connect with satisfaction.
They are mostly quite independent of an ob
ject and thus have given up a relation to ex
ternal reality. We understand this as a conse
quence of the rejection of the reality-principle
and the return to the pleasure-principle; it is
also, however, a return to a kind of amplified
auto-erotism, the kind which offered the sexual
instinct its first gratifications. In the place of
effecting a change in the outer world they set
up a change in the body itself; that is, an in
ternal action instead of an external one, an
adaptation instead of an activity—from a phylogenetic point of view again a very significant
regression. We shall understand this better
when we consider it in connection with a new
factor yet to be learnt from amongthose which
analytic research has yielded in regard to symp
tom-formation. Further, we remember that in
symptom-formation the same unconscious proc
esses are at work as in dream-formation, name
ly, condensation and displacement. Like the
dream, the symptom represents something as
fulfilled, a satisfaction infantile in character;
but by the utmost condensation this satisfac
tion can be compressed into a single sensation
or innervation, or by farthest displacement can
be whittled away to a tiny detail out of the en
tire libidinal complex. It is no wonder that we
often find it difficult to recognize in the symp
tom the libidinal satisfaction which we suspect
and can always verify in it.
I have indicated that we have still to learn
of a new element; it is really something most
surprising and bewildering. Youknowthat from
analysisof symptomswe arrive at a knowledge
of the infantile experiences to which the libido
is fixated and out of which the symptoms are
made up. Now the astonishing thing is that
these scenes of infancy are not always true. In
deed, in the majority of cases they are untrue,
and in some cases they are in direct opposition
to historical truth. You will see that this dis
covery is more likely than any other to dis
credit either the analysis which leads to such
results, or the patient, upon whose testimony
the analysis and comprehension of the neuroses
as a whole is built up. There is besides this still
something utterly bewildering about it. If the
infantile experiences brought to light by the
anafysis were in every case real we should have
the feeling that we were on firm ground; if
they were invariably falsified and found to be

[600b]
to Psycho-Analysis
597
inventions and phantasies of the patient's we
should have to forsake this insecure foothold
and save ourselves some other way. But it is
neither one thing nor the other; for what we
find is that the childhood-experiences recon
structed or recollected in analysis are on some
occasions undeniably false, while
others are
just as certainly quite true, and that in most
cases truth and falsehood are mixed up. So the
symptoms are thus at one minute reproductions
of experiences which actually took place and
which one can credit with an influence on the
fixation of the libido; and at the next a repro
duction of phantasies of the patient's to which,
of course, it is difficult to ascribe any aetiologi
cal significance. It is hard to find one's way
here. We may perhaps find our first clue in a
discovery of a similar kind, namely, that the
meagre childish recollections which people have
always, long before analysis, consciously pre
served can be falsified in the same way, or at
least can contain a generous admixture of
truth and falsehood; evidence of error in them
is nearly always plainly visible, and so we have
at least the reassurance that not the analysis,
but the patient in some way, must bear the re
sponsibility for this unexpected disappointment.
After a little reflection we can easily under
stand what it is that is so bewildering in this
matter. It is the depreciation of reality, the neg
lect of the difference between reality and phan
tasy; we are tempted to be offended with the
patient for taking up our time with invented
stories. According to our way of thinking
heaven and earth are not farther apart than
fiction from reality, and we value the two quite
differently. The patient himself, incidentally,
takes the same attitude when he is thinking
normally. When he brings forward the material
that leads us to the wished-for situations (which
underlie the symptoms and are formed upon
the childhood experiences), we are certainly in
doubt at first whether we have to deal with
reality or with phantasies. Decision on this
point becomes possible later by means of cer
tain indications, and we are then confronted
with the task of making this result known to
the patient. This is never accomplished without
difficulty. If we tell him at the outset that he
is now about to bring to light the phantasies in
which he has shrouded the history of his child
hood, just as every race weavesmyths about its
forgotten early history, we observe to our dis
satisfaction that his interest in pursuing the
subject
further
suddenly
declines—he also
wishes to find out facts and despises what is

[601a]
598
Sigmund Freud
called imagination. But if we leave him to be
lieve until this part of the work has been car
ried through that we are investigating the real
events of his early years, we run the risk of
being charged with the mistake later and of
being laughed at for our apparent gullibility.
It takes him a long time to understand the
proposal that phantasy and reality are to be
treated alike and that it is to begin with of no
account whether the childhood-experiences un
der consideration belong to the one class or to
the other. And yet this is obviously the only
correct attitude towards these products of his
mind. They have indeed also a kind of reality;
it is a fact that the patient has created these
phantasies, and for the neurosis this fact is
hardly less important than the other—if he had
really experienced what they contain. In con
trast to material reality these phantasies pos
sess psychical reality, and we gradually come to
understand that in the world of neurosis psy
chical reality is the determining factor.
Among the occurrences which continually
recur in the story of a neurotic's childhood, and
seem hardly ever absent, are some of particular
significance which I therefore consider worthy
of special attention. As models of this type I
will enumerate: observation of parental inter
course, seduction by an adult, and the threat of
castration. It would be a great mistake to sup
pose that they never occur in reality; on the
contrary, they are
often confirmed beyond
doubt by the testimony of older relatives. Thus,
for example, it is not at all uncommon for a
little boy, who is beginning to play with his
penis and has not yet learnt that he must
conceal such activities, to be threatened by
parents or nurses that his member or his of
fending hand will be cut off. Parents will often
admit the fact on being questioned, since they
imagine that such intimidation was the right
course to take; many people have a clear con
scious recollection of this threat, especially if it
took place in later childhood. If the mother or
some other woman makes the threat she usually
shifts the execution of it to someone else, in
dicating that the father or the doctor will per
form the deed. In the famous Struwelpeter by
the Frankfort physician for children,
Hoff
mann, which owes its popularity precisely to
his undertanding of the sexual and other com
plexes of children, you will find the castration
idea modified and replaced by cutting off the
thumbs as a punishment for stubborn sucking
of them. It is, however, highly improbable that
the threat of castration has been delivered as

[601b]
often as would appear from the analysis of a
neurotic. We are content to understand that
the child concocts a threat of this kind out of
its knowledge that auto-erotic satisfactions are
forbidden, on the basis of hints and allusions,
and influenced by the impression received on
discovering the female genital organ. Similarly,
it is not at all impossible that a small child,
credited as he is with no understanding and no
memory, may be witness of the sexual act on
the part of his parents or other adults in other
families besides those of the proletariat; and
there is reason to think that the child can
subsequently understand the impression re
ceived and react to it. But when this act of in
tercourse is described with minute details which
can hardly have been observed, or when it ap
pears, as it most frequently does, to have been
performed from behind, more ferarum,1 there
can be little doubt that this phantasyhasgrown
out of the observation of copulating animals
(dogs) and that its motive force lies in the un
satisfied skoptophilia (gazing-impulse) of the
child during puberty. The greatest feat achieved
by this kind of phantasy is that of observing
parental intercourse while still unborn in the
mother's womb.
The phantasy of seduction has special inter
est, because only too often it is no phantasy
but a real remembrance; fortunately, however,
it is still not as often real as it seemed at first
from the results of analysis. Seduction by chil
dren of the same age or older is more frequent
than by adults; and when girls who bring for
ward this event in the story of their childhood
fairly regularly introduce the father as the
seducer, neither the phantastic character of this
accusation nor the motive actuating it can be
doubted. When no seduction has occurred, the
phantasy is usually employed to cover the child
hood period of auto-erotic sexual activity; the
child evades feelings of shame about onanism
by retrospectively attributing in phantasy a
desired object to the earliest period. Do not
suppose, however, that sexual misuse of chil
dren by the nearest male relatives is entirely
derived from the world of phantasy; most
analysts will have treated cases in which such
occurrences actually took place and could be
established beyond doubt; only even then they
belonged to later years of childhood and had
been transposed to an earlier time.
All this seems to lead to but one impression,
that childhood experiences of this kind are in
some way necessarily required by the neurosis,
1 In the manner of animals.—Ed.

[602a]
General Introduction
that they belongto its unvarying inventory. If
they can be found in real events,welland good;
but if reality has not supplied them they will
be evolved out of hints and elaborated by phan
tasy. The effectis the same, and even today we
have not succeeded in tracing any variation in
the results according as phantasy or reality
plays the greater part in these experiences.
Here again is one of those complemental series
so often referred to already; it is certainly the
strangest of all those we have encountered.
Whence comes the necessity for these phanta
sies, and the material for them? There can be
no doubt about the instinctual sources; but
how is it to be explained that the same phanta
sies are always formed with the same content?
I have an answer to this which I know will
seem to you very daring. I believe that these
primal phantasies (as I should like to name
these, and certainly some others also) are a
phylogenetic possession. In them theindividual,
wherever his own experience has become in
sufficient, stretchesout beyondit to the experi
ence of past ages. It seems to mequite possible
that all that today is narrated in analysis in
the form of phantasy, seduction in childhood,
stimulation of sexual excitement upon obser
vation of parental coitus, the threat of castra
tion—or rather, castration itself—was in pre
historic periods of the human family a reality;
and that the child in its phantasy simply fills
out the gaps in its true individual experiences
with true prehistoric experiences. We have
again and againbeen led to suspect that more
knowledge of the primordial forms of human
development is stored up for us in the psy
chology of the neuroses thanin any other field
we may explore.
Now these things that we have been discuss
ing require us to consider more closely the
origin and meaning of that mental activity
called phantasy-making. In general, as you
know, it enjoyshigh esteem, although its place
in mental life has not been clearly understood.
I can tell you as much as this about it. You
know that the ego in man is gradually trained
by the influence of external necessity to appre
ciate reality and to pursue the reality-principle,
and that in so doing it must renounce tempo
rarily or permanently various of the objects
and aims—not only sexual—of its desire for
pleasure. But renunciation of pleasure has al
ways been very hard to man; he cannot ac
complish it without some kind of compensa
tion. Accordingly he has evolved for himself a
mental activity in which all these relinquished

[602b]
to Psycho-Analysis
599
sources of pleasure and abandoned paths of
gratification are permitted to continue their ex
istence, a form of existence in which they are
free from the
demands of reality and from
what we call the exercise of testing reality. Ev
ery longing is soon transformed into the idea
of its fulfilment; there is no doubt that dwell
ing upon a wish-fulfilment in phantasy brings
satisfaction, although the knowledge that it is
not reality remains thereby unobscured. In
phantasy, therefore, man can continueto enjoy
a freedom from the grip of the external world,
one which he has long relinquished in actuality.
He has contrived to be alternately a pleasureseeking animal and a reasonable being; for the
meagre satisfaction that- he can extract from
reality leaves him starving. "There is no doing
without
accessory constructions," said Fontane. The creation of the mental domain of
phantasy has a complete counterpart in the
establishment of reservations and nature-parks
in places where the inroads of agriculture, traf
fic, or industry threaten to change the original
face of the earth rapidly into something un
recognizable. The reservation is to maintain the
old condition of things which has been regret
fully sacrificed to necessity everywhere else;
there everything may grow and spread as it
please^ including what is useless and even
what is harmful. The mental realm of phantasy
is also such a reservation reclaimed from the
encroaches of the reality-principle.
The best-knownproductions of phantasy have
already been met by us; they are called day
dreams, and are imaginary gratificationsof am
bitious, grandiose, erotic wishes, dilating the
more extravagantlythe more realityadmonishes
humility and patience. In them is shown un
mistakably the essence of imaginary happiness,
the return of gratification to a condition in
which it is independent of reality's sanction.
We know that these day-dreams are the ker
nels and models of night-dreams; fundamen
tally the night-dream is nothing but a day
dream distorted by the nocturnal form of
mental activity and made possible by the noc
turnal freedom of instinctual excitations. We
are already familiar with the idea that a day
dream is not necessarily conscious, that uncon
scious day-dreams also exist; such unconscious
day-dreams are therefore just as much the
source of night-dreams as of neurotic symptoms.
The significance of phantasy for symptomformation will become clear to you in what
follows. We said that, under frustration, the
libido regressively invests the positions it had

[603a]
6oo
Sigmund Freud
left but to which nevertheless some
portions
of its energy had remained attached. We shall
not retract or correct this statement, but we
shall have to interpolate a connecting-link in
it. How does the libido find its way back to
these fixation-points? Now
the objects and
channels which have been forsaken by the libido
have not been forsaken in every sense; they,
or their derivatives, are still retained to some
degree of intensity in the conceptions of phan
tasy. The libido has only to withdraw on to the
phantasies in order to find the way open to it
back to all the repressed fixations. These phan
tasies had enjoyed a certain sort of toleration;
no conflict between them and the ego had de
veloped, however sharp an opposition there was
between them, as long as a certain condition was
preserved—a condition of a quantitative na
ture, now disturbed by the return of the libidostream on to the phantasies. By this accession,
the cathexis of the phantasies with energy be
comes so much augmented that they become
assertive and begin to press towards realiza
tion; then, however, conflict between them and
the ego becomes unavoidable. Although previ
ously they were preconscious or conscious, now
they are subject to repression from the side of
the ego and are exposed to the attraction ex
erted from the side of the unconscious. The
libido travels from the phantasies, now un
conscious, to their sources in the unconscious
—back to its own fixation-points again.
The return of the libido on to phantasy is an
intermediate step on the way to symptom-for
mation which well deserves a special designa
tion. C. G. Jung has coined for it the very ap
propriate name of introversion, but inappro
priately he uses it also to describe other things.
We will adhere to the position that introversion
describes the deflection of the libido away from
the possibilities of real satisfaction and its ex
cessive accumulation upon phantasies previ
ously tolerated as harmless. An
introverted
person is not yet neurotic, but he is in an un
stable condition; the next disturbance of the
shifting forces will cause symptoms to develop,
unless he can yet find other outlets for his pentup libido. The unreal character of neurotic sat
isfaction and the disregard of the difference
between phantasy and reality are already de
termined by the arrest at this stage of intro
version.
You will doubtless have noticed that in these
last remarks I have introduced a new factor
into the concatenation of the aetiologicalchain
—namely, the quantity, the magnitude of the

[603b]
energies concerned; we must always take this
factor into account as well. A purely qualita
tive analysis of the aetiological conditions does
not suffice; or, to put it in another way, a
purely dynamic conception of these processes
is insufficient, the economic aspect is also re
quired. We have to realize that the conflict be
tween the two forces in opposition does not
break out until a certain intensity in the de
gree of investment is reached, even though the
substantive conditions have long been in exist
ence. In the same way, the pathogenic signifi
cance of the constitutional factor is determined
by the preponderance of oneof the componentinstincts in excess over anotherin the disposi
tion; it is even possible to conceive disposition
as qualitatively the same in all men and only
differentiated by this quantitative factor. No
less important is this quantitative factor for the
capacity to withstand neurotic illness; it de
pends upon the amount of undischarged libido
that a person can hold freely suspended, and
upon how large a portion of it he can deflect
from the sexual to a nonsexual goal in subfimation. The finalaim of mental activity, which
can be qualitatively described as a striving to
wards pleasure and avoidance of pain,is repre
sented economically in the task of mastering
the distribution of the quantities of excitation
(stimulus-masses) present in the mental ap
paratus, and in preventing the accumulation of
them which gives rise to pain.
I set out to tell you as much as this about
symptom-formation in the neuroses. Yes, but J
must not neglect to mention once more that
everything said today relates onlyto symptomformation in hysteria. Even the obsessional neu
rosis shows great differences, although the es
sentials are the same. The counter-charges from
the ego against the demands made by instincts
for satisfaction, mentioned already in connec
tion with hysteria, are more strongly marked
in the obsessional neurosisand governthe clini
cal picture in the form of what we call reac
tion-formations. Similar and more extensive
deviationsstill are found in the other neuroses,
in which field researches into the mechanisms
of symptom-formation are not yet complete in
any direction.
Before you leave today I should like to direct
your attention for a moment to a side of phan
tasy-life of very general interest. There is, in
fact, a path from phantasy back again to re
ality, and that is—art. The artist has also an
introverted disposition and has not far to go
to become neurotic. He is one who is urged

[604a]
on by instinctual needs which are too clamor
ous; he longs to attain to honour, power, riches,
fame, and the love of women; but he lacks the
means of achieving these gratifications. So, like
any other with an unsatisfied longing, he turns
away from reality and transfers all his inter
est, and all his libido too, on to the creation of
his wishes in the life of phantasy, from which
the way might readily lead to neurosis. There
must be many factors in combination to pre
vent this becoming the whole outcome of his
development; it is well known how often ar
tists in particular suffer from partial inhibition
of their capacities through neurosis. Probably
their constitution is endowed with a powerful
capacity for sublimation and with a certain
flexibility in the repressions determining the
conflict. But the way back to reality is found
by the artist thus: He is not the only one who
has a life of phantasy; the intermediate world
of phantasy is sanctioned by general human
consent, and every hungry soul looks to it for
comfort and consolation. But to those who are
not artists the gratification that can be drawn
from the springs of phantasy is very limited;
their inexorable repressions prevent the enjoy
ment of all but the meagre day-dreams which
can become conscious. A true artist has more
at his disposal. First of all he understands how
to elaborate his day-dreams, so that they lose
that personal note which grates upon strange
ears and become enjoyable to others; he knows
too how to modify them sufficiently so that
their origin in prohibited sources is not easily
detected. Further, he possesses the mysterious
ability to mould his particular material until it
expresses the ideas of his phantasy faithfully;
and then he knows how to attach to this reflec
tion of his phantasy-life so strong a stream of
pleasure that, for a time at least, the repres
sions are
out-balanced and dispelled by it.
When he can do all this, he opens out to others
the way back to the comfort and consolation of
their own unconscious sources of pleasure, and
so reaps their gratitude and admiration; then he
has won—through his phantasy—what before
he could only win in phantasy: honour, power,
and the love of women.
TWENTY-FOURTH LECTURE
Ordinary Nervousness
After such a difficult piece of work as we got
through in our last lecture I shall leave the sub
ject for a time and turn to my audience.
For I know that you are dissatisfied. You

[604b]
General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis
601
imagined that A General Introduction to Psy
cho-Analysis would be something quite differ
ent. You expected illustrations from life in
stead of theories; you will tell me that the story
of the two children, on the ground-floor and
in
the mansion, revealed something of the
causation of neurosis to you, except that it
ought to have been an actual fact instead of
an invention of my own. Or you will say that,
when at the beginning I described two symp
toms to you (not also imaginary, let us hope),
and unfolded the solution of them and their
connection with the lives of the patients, it
threw some light on the meaning of symptoms,
and you had hoped I would continue in the
same way. Instead of doing so I gave you longdrawn-out and very obscure theories which
were never complete, and to which I was con
stantly adding something; I dealt with concep
tions which I had not yet introduced to you;
I let go of descriptive explanation and took up
the dynamic aspect and dropped this again for
a so-called economic one; made it difficult for
you to understand how many of these technical
terms mean the same thing and are only ex
changed for one another on account of eu
phony; I let vast conceptions, such as those of
the pleasure and reality principles, and the in
herited residue of phylogenetic development,
appear, and then instead of explaining anything
to you I let them drift away before your eyes
out of sight.
Why did I not begin the introduction to the
study of the neuroses with what you all know
of nervousness, a thing that has long roused
your interest, or with the peculiar nature of
nervous persons, their incomprehensible reac
tions to human intercourse and external influ
ences, their excitability, their unreliability, and
their inability to do well in anything? Why not
lead you step by step from an explanation of
the simple every-day forms of nervousness to
the problems of the enigmatic extreme mani
festations?
Indeed, I cannot deny any of this or say
that you are wrong. I am not so much in love
with my powers of presentation as to imagine
that every blemish in it is a peculiar charm. I
think myself that I might with advantage to
you have proceeded differently, and, indeed,
such was my intention. But one cannot always
carry through a reasoned scheme; something in
the material itself often intervenes and takes
possession of one and turns one from one's first
intentions. Even such an ordinary task as the
arrangement of familiar material is not en-

[605a]
002
Stgmund Freud
tirely subject to the author's will; it comes out
in its own way and one can but wonder after
wards why it happened so and not otherwise.
One of the reasons probably is that my
theme, an introduction to psycho-analysis, no
longer covers this section dealing with the sub
ject of the neuroses. The introduction to psy
cho-analysis lies in the study of errors and of
dreams; the theory of neurosis is psycho-analy
sis itself. I do not think that in such a short
time I could have given you any knowledge of
the material contained in the theory of the
neuroses except in this very concentrated form.
It was a matter of presenting to you in their
proper context the sense and meaning of symp
toms, together with the external and internal
conditions and mechanisms of symptom-forma
tion. This I attempted to do; it is more or less
the core of what psycho-analysis is able to
offer today. In conjunction with it there was
much to be said about the libido and its de
velopment, and something about that of the
ego. You were already prepared by the pre
liminary lectures for the main principles of our
method and for the broad aspects involved in
the conceptions of the unconscious and of re
pression (resistance). In one of the following
lectures you will learn at what point the work of
psycho-analysis finds its organic continuation.
So far I have not concealed from you that all
our results proceed from the study of one single
group only of nervous disorders—namely, the
transference neuroses;
and even so I
have
traced out the mechanism of symptom-forma
tion only in the hysterical neurosis. Though you
will probably have gained no very thorough
knowledge and have not retained every detail,
yet I hope that you have acquired a general
idea of the means with which psycho-analysis
works, the problems it has to deal with, and the
results it has to offer.
I have ascribed to you a wish that I had be
gun the subject of the neuroses with a descrip
tion of the neurotic's behaviour, and of the
ways in which he suffers from his disorder, pro
tects himself against it and adapts himself to it.
This is certainly a very interesting subject, well
worth studying, and not difficult to treat: nev
ertheless there are reasons against beginning
with this aspect. The danger is that the un
conscious will be overlooked, the great impor
tance of the libido ignored, and that everything
will be judged as it appears to the patient's own
ego. Now it is obvious that his ego is not a re
liable and impartial authority. The ego is, after
all, the force which denies the existence of the

[605b]
unconscious and has subjected it to repres
sions; how then can we trust its good faith
where
the
unconscious
is
concerned?
That
which has been repressed consists first and fore
most of the repudiated claims of the sexuality;
it is perfectly self-evident that we shall never
learn their extent and their significance from
the ego's view of the matter. As soon as the
nature of repression begins to dawn upon us
we are advised not to allow one of the two con
tending parties, and certainly not the victori
ous one, to be judged in the dispute. We are
forewarned against being misled by what the
ego tells us. According to its evidence it would
appear to have been the active force through
out, so that the symptoms arise by its will and
agency; we know that to a large extent it has
played a passive part, a fact which it then en
deavours to conceal and to gloss over. It is true
that it cannot always keep up this pretence—
in the symptoms of the obsessional neurosis it
has to confess to being confronted by some
thing alien which it must strenuously resist.
It is certainly plain sailing enough for any
one who does not heed these warnings against
taking the falsifications of the ego at their
face-value; he will escape all the opposition
which psycho-analysis has to encounter in ac
centuating the unconscious, sexuality, and the
passivity of the ego. He can agree with Alfred
Adler that the nervous character is the cause
of the neurosis, instead of the result; but he
willnot be in a position to accountfor a single
detail of symptom-formationor a singledream.
You will ask: "May it not be possible to do
justice to the part played by the ego in ner
vousness and in symptom-formation without
absolutely glaring neglect of the other factors
discovered by psycho-analysis?" I reply: Cer
tainly it must be possible, and some time or
other it will be done; but the work which lies
at hand for psycho-analysis is not suited for a
beginning at this end. One can, no doubt, pre
dict the point at which this task also will be in
cluded. There are neuroses, called by us the
narcissistic neuroses, in which the ego is far
more deeply involved than in those we have
studied; analytic investigation of these disor
ders will enable us to estimate impartially and
reliably the share taken by the ego in neurotic
disease.
One of the relations the ego bears to its neu
rosis is, however, so conspicuous that it was
quite appreciable from the beginning. It never
seems to be absent; but it is most clearly dis
cernible in a form of disorder which we are far

[606a]
General Introduction
from understanding, the
traumatic neurosis.
You must know that in
the
causation and
mechanism of all the various different forms
of neurosis the same factors are found at work
over and over again, only that in one type this
factor and in another type that factor is of
greatest significance in symptom-formation. It
is just the same as with the personnel of a the
atrical company, where every member plays a
special type of part—hero, confidant, villain,
etc.; each of them will choose a different piece
for his own benefit-performance. Hence, the
phantasies which are transformed into the
symptoms are nowhere so manifest as in hys
teria; the counter-charges (anti-cathexes) or re
action-formations of the ego dominate the pic
ture in the obsessional neurosis; the mechanism
which in dreams we called secondary elabo
rationis the prominent feature in the delusions
of paranoia, and so on.
In the traumatic neuroses, especially in those
arising from the terrors of war, we are partic
ularly impressed by a self-seeking, egoistic
motive, a straining towards protection and
self-interest; this alone perhaps could not pro
duce the disease, but it gives its support to the
latter and maintains it once it has been formed.
This tendency aims at protecting the ego from
the dangers which led by their imminence to
the outbreak of illness; nor does it permit of
recovery until a repetition of the dangers ap
pear to be no longer possible, or until some
gain in compensation for the danger undergone
has been received.
The ego takes a similar interest in the origin
and maintenance of all the other forms of neu
rosis; we have said already that the symptom
is supported by the ego because one side of it
offers a
satisfaction to
the
repressing egotendency. More than this, a solution of the
conflict by a symptom-formation is the most
convenient one, most in accordance with the
pleasure-principle; for it undoubtedly spares
the ego a severe and painful piece of internal
labour. There are indeed cases in which the
physician himself must admit that the solution
of a conflict by a neurosis is the one most
harmless and most tolerable socially. Do not
be astonished to hear then that the physician
himself occasionally takes sides with the illness
which he is attacking. It is not for him to con
fine himself in all situations in life to the part
of fanatic about health; he knows that there is
other misery in the world besides neurotic
misery—real unavoidable suffering—that ne
cessity may even demand of a man that he

[606b]
to Psycho-Analysis
603
sacrifice his health to it, and he learns that
such suffering in one individual may often
avert incalculable hardship for many others.
Therefore, although it may be said of every
neurotic that he has taken flight into illness,
it must be admitted that in many cases this
flight is fully justified, and the physician who
has perceived this state of things will silently
and considerately retire.
But let us continue our discussion without re
gard to these exceptional cases. In the ordinary
way it is apparent that by flight into neu
rosis the ego gains a certain internal advantage
through illness, as we call it;
under certain
conditions a tangible external advantage, more
or less valuable in reality, may be combined
with this. To take the commonest case of this
kind: a woman who is brutally treated and
mercilessly exploited by her husband fairly
regularly takes refuge in a neurosis, if her
disposition admits of it. This will happen if
she is too cowardly or too conventional to con
sole herself secretly with another man, if she
is not strong enough to defy all external reasons
against it and separate from her husband,if she
has no prospect of being able to maintain her
self or of finding a better husband, and last of
all, if she is still strongly attached sexually to
this
brutal
man.
Her
illness
becomes
her
weapon in the struggle against him, one that
she can use for her protection, or misuse for
purposes of revenge. She can complain of her
illness, though she probably dare not complain
of her marriage; her doctor is her ally; the
husband who is otherwise so ruthless is required
to spare her, to spend money on her, to grant
her absence from home and thus some freedom
from marital oppression. Whenever this
ex
ternal or accidental advantage through illness
is at all pronounced, and no substitute for it
can be found in reality, you need not look for
ward very hopefully to influencing the neurosis
by your therapy.
You will now say that what I have*just told
you about the advantage through illness is all
in favour of the view I have rejected, namely,
that the ego itself desires the neurosis and
creates it. But just a moment! Perhaps it means
merely this: that the ego is pleased to accept
the neurosis which it is in any case unable to
prevent, and that if there is anything at all to
be made out of it it makes the best of it. This
is only one side of the matter. In so far as
there is advantage in it the ego is quite happy
to be on good terms with a neurosis, but there
are also disadvantages to be considered. As a

[607a]
604
rule it is soonapparent that by acceptinga neu
rosis the ego has made a bad bargain. It has
paid too heavily for the solution of the conflict;
the sufferings entailed by the symptoms are
perhaps as bad as those of the conflict they
replace, and they may quite probably be very
much worse. The ego wishes to be rid of the
pain of the symptoms, but not give up its
advantage through illness; and
that is just
what it cannot succeed in doing. It appears,
therefore, that the ego was not quite so actively
concerned in the matter throughout as it had
thought, and we will keep this well in mind.
If, as physicians, you have much to do with
neurotics, you will soon cease to expect that
those
who complain most
bitterly of their
illness will be most ready to accept your help
and make least difficulty—quite the contrary.
You will at all events easily understand that
everything which contributes to the advantage
through illness reinforces the resistance arising
from the repressions, and increases the thera
peutic difficulties. And there is yet another
kind of advantage through illness, one which
supervenes
later
than
that
born
with
the
symptom, so to speak. When such a mental
organization as the disease has persisted for a
considerable time it seems finally to acquire
the character of an independent entity; it
displays something like a self-preservative in
stinct; it formsa kind of pact, a modus vivendi,
with the other forces in mental life, even with
those fundamentally hostile to it, and oppor
tunities can hardly fail to arise in which it
once more manifests itself as useful and ex
pedient, thus acquiring a secondary function
which again strengthens its position. Instead
of taking an example from pathology let us
consider a striking illustration in everyday life.
A capable working-man earning his living is
crippled by an accident in the course of his
employment; he can work no more, but he gets
a small periodical dole in compensation and
learns htfw to exploithis mutilation as a beggar.
His new life, although so inferior, nevertheless
is supported by the very thing which destroyed
his oldlife; if you wereto remove his disability
you would deprive him for a time of his means
of subsistence, for the question would arise
whether he would still be capable of resuming
his former work. When a secondary exploita
tion of the illness such as this is formed in a
neurosis we can range it alongside the first and
call it a secondary advantage through illness.
I should like to advise you in a general way
not to underestimate the practical importance

[607b]
Sigmund Freud
of the advantage through illness, and yet not to
be too much impressed by its theoretical sig
nificance. Apart from the exceptions previously
recognized, this factor always reminds one of
the illustrations of "Intelligence in Animals"
by Oberiander in Fliegende Blatter. An Arab
is riding a camel along a narrow path cut in
the side of a steep mountain. At a turn in the
path he suddenly finds himself confronted by
a lion ready to spring at him. There is no
escape; on one side the abyss, on the other the
sheer wall; retreat andflight areimpossible; he
gives himself up for lost. Not so the camel. He
takes one leap with his rider into the abyss—
and the lion is left a spectator. The remedies
provided by neurosis avail the patient no better
as a rule; perhaps because the solution of the
conflict by a symptom-formation is after all
an automatic process which may show itself
inadequate to meet the demands of life, and
involves man in a renunciation of his best and
highest powers. The more honourable choice,
if there bea choice, is to go down in fair fight
with destiny.
I still owe you a further explanation of my
motive in not taking ordinary nervousness as
my starting-point. Perhaps you think I avoided
doing so because it would have been more
difficult to bring in evidence of the sexual
origin of the neuroses in that way; but in this
you would be mistaken. In the transference
neuroses the symptoms have to be submitted
to interpretation before we arrive at this; but
in the ordinary forms of what are called the
actual neuroses the aetiological significance
of the sexual life is a crudely obvious fact
which courts notice. I became aware of it more
than twenty years ago, as one day I began to
wonder why, when we examine nervous pa
tients, we so invariably exclude from consider
ation all matters concerning their sexual life.
Investigations on this point led to the sacrifice
of my popularity with my patients, but in a
very short time my efforts had brought me to
this conclusion: that no neurosis—actual neu
rosis, I meant—is present where sexual life is
normal. It is true that this statement ignores
the individual differences in people rather too
much, and it also suffers from the indefinite
connotation inseparable fromthe wordnormal;
but as a broad outline it has retained its value
to this day. At that time I got so far as to be
able to establish particular connections between
certain forms of nervousness and certain in
jurious sexual conditions; I do not doubt that
I could repeat these observations today if I

[608a]
General Introduction
still had similar material for investigation. I
noticed often enough that a man who contented
himself with some kind of incomplete sexual
satisfaction, e.g., with manual masturbation,
would suffer from a definite type of actual neu
rosis, and that this neurosis would promptly
give way to another form if he adopted some
other equally unsatisfactory form of sexual
life. I was then in a position to infer the
change in his mode of sexual life from the
alteration in the patient's condition;
and I
learnt to abide stubbornly by my conclusions
until I had overcome the prevarications of my
patients and had compelled them to give me
confirmation. It is true that they then thought
it advisable to seek other physicians who would
not take so much interest in their sexual life.
It did not escape me at that time either that
sexuality was not always indicated as the cause
of a neurosis; one person certainly would fall
ill because of some injurious sexual condition,
but another because he had lost his fortune or
recently sustained a severe organic illness. The
explanation of these variations was revealed
later, when insight was obtained into the inter
relationships suspected between the ego and
the libido; and the further this subject was
explored the more satisfactory became our in
sight into it. A person only falls ill of a neurosis
when the ego loses its capacity to deal in some
way or other with the libido. The stronger the.
ego the more easilycan it accomplish this task;
every weakening of the ego, from whatever
cause, must have the same effect as an increase
in the demands of the libido; that is, make a
neurosis possible.There are yet other and more
intimate relations between the ego and the
libido,which I shall not go into now as we have
not yet come to them in the course of our dis
cussions. The most essential and most instruc
tive point for us is that the fund of energy
supporting the symptoms of a neurosis, in every
case and regardless of the circumstances induc
ing their outbreak, is provided by the libido,
which is thus put to an abnormal use.
Now I must point out to you the decisive
difference between the symptoms of the actual
neuroses and those of the psychoneuroses, with
the first group of which (the transference neu
roses) wehave hitherto been so much occupied.
In both the actual neuroses and the psycho
neuroses
the
symptoms
proceed
from
the
libido; that is, they are abnormal ways of using
it, substitutes for satisfaction of it. But the
symptoms of an actual neurosis—headache,
sensation of pain, an irritable condition of some

[608b]
to Psycho-Analysis
605
organ, the weakening or inhibition of some
function—have no meaning, no signification in
the
mind. Not merely are
they manifested
principally in the body, as also happens, for
instance with hysterical symptoms, but they
are in themselves purely and simply physical
processes; they arise without any of the com
plicated mental
mechanisms
we have
been
learning about. They really are, therefore, what
psychoneurotic symptoms were for
so long
held to be. But then, how can they be expres
sions
of the libido which we have come to
know as a force at work in the mind? Now,
really, the answer to that is very simple. Let
me resurrect one of the very first objections
ever made against psycho-analysis. It was said
that the theories were an attempt to account
for neurotic symptoms by psychology alone
and that the outlook was consequently hopeless,
since no illness could ever be accounted for by
psychological
theories.
These
critics
were
pleased to forget that the sexual function is
not a purely mental thing, any more than it is
merely a physical thing. It affects bodily life
as well as mental life. Having learnt that the
symptoms of the psychoneuroses express the
mental consequences of some disturbance in
this function, we shall not be surprised to find
that the actual neuroses represent the direct
somatic consequences of sexual disturbances.
Clinical
medicine gives
us
a useful hint
(recognized by many different investigators)
towards comprehension of the actual neuroses.
In the details of their symptomatology, and also
in the peculiarity by which all the bodily sys
tems and functions are affected together, they
exhibit an unmistakable similarity with patho
logical conditions resulting from the chronic
effect or the sudden removal of foreign toxins—
i.e., with states of intoxication or of abstinence.
The two groups of affections are brought still
closer together by comparison with conditions
like Basedow's disease1 that have also been
found to result from poisoning, not, however,
from poisons derived externally, but from such
as
arise in the internal metabolism. In my
opinion, these analogies necessitate our regard
ing the neuroses as the effects of disturbances
in the sexual metabolism, due either to more
of these sexual toxins being produced than the
person can dispose of, or else to internal and
even mental conditions which interfere with the
proper disposal of these substances. Assump
tions of this kind about the nature of sexual
desire have found acceptance in the mind of
1 i.e., Grave's disease, exophthalmic goitre.—TR.

[609a]
6o6
Sigmund Freud
the people since the beginning of time; love is
called an intoxication, it can be induced by
"potions"—in these ideas the agency at work
is to some extent projected on to the outer
world. We find occasion at this point to re
member the erotogenic zones, and to reflect
upon the proposition that sexual excitation may
arise in the most various-organs. Beyond this
the subject of sexual metabolism or the chem
istry of sexuality is an empty chapter: we know
nothing about it, and cannot even determine
whether to assume two kinds of sexual sub
stances, to be called male and female, or to
content ourselves with one sexual toxin as the
agent of the stimuli effected by the libido. The
edifice of psycho-analytic doctrine which we
have erected is in reality but a superstructure,
which will have to be set on its organic founda
tion at some time or other; but this foundation
is still unknown to us.
As a science, psycho-analysis is character
ized by the methods with which it works, not
by
the subject-matter with which it deals.
These methods can be applied without violating
their essential nature to the history of civili
zation,
to
the
science
of
religion,
and
to
mythology as well as to the study of the neu
roses.
Psycho-analysis aims at and achieves
nothing more than the discovery of the uncon
scious in mental life.
The problems of the
actual neuroses, in which the symptoms prob
ably arise through direct toxic injury, offer no
point of attack for
psycho-analysis; it
can
supply little towards elucidation of them and
must leave this task to biological and medical
research. Now perhaps you understand better
why I chose this arrangement of my material.
If I had intended an Introduction to the Study
of the Neuroses it would undoubtedly have
been correct to begin with the simple forms of
(actual) neuroses and proceed from them to
the more complicated psychical disorders re
sulting from disturbances of the libido. I should
have had to collect from various quarters what
we know or think we know about the former,
and
about the
latter psycho-analysis would
have been introduced as the most important
technical means of obtaining insight into these
conditions. An Introduction to Psycho-Analysis
was what I had undertaken and announced,
however; I thought it more important to give
you an idea of psycho-analysis than to teach
you something about the neuroses; and there
fore the actual neuroses which yield nothing
towards the study of psycho-analysis could not
suitably be put in the foreground. I think, too,

[609b]
that my choice was the wiser for you, since
the radical axioms and far-reaching connections
of psycho-analysis make it worthy of every
educated person's interest; the theory of the
neuroses, however, is a chapter of medicine
like any other.
However, you are justified in expecting that
we should
take some interest in the actual
neuroses; their close clinical connection with
the psycho-neuroses even necessitates this. I
will tell you then that we distinguish three pure
forms of actual neurosis: neurasthenia, anxietyneurosis and hypochondria. Even this classifi
cation
has
been
disputed;
the
terms
are
certainly all in use, but their connotation is
vague and unsettled. There are some medical
men who are opposed to all discrimination in
the confusing world of neurotic manifestations,
who object to any distinguishing of clinical
entities or types of disease, and do not even
recognize the difference between actual neu
roses and psychoneuroses; in my opinion they
go too far, and the direction they have chosen
does not lead to progress. The three kinds of
neurosis named above are occasionally found
in a pure form; more frequently, it is true,
they are combined with one another and with
a psychoneurotic affection. This fact need not
make
us
abandon
the
distinctions
between
them. Think of the
difference between
the
science of minerals and that of ores in miner
alogy: the minerals are classified individually,
in part no doubt because they are frequently
found as crystals, sharply differentiated from
their surroundings; the ores consist of mixtures
of minerals which have indeed coalesced, not
accidentally, but according to the conditions
at their formation. In the theory of the neu
roses
we
still understand too
little
of
the
process
of
their
development
to
formulate
anything similar to our knowledge of ores;
but we are certainly working in the right
direction in first isolating from the mass the
recognizable clinical elements, which are com
parable to the individual minerals.
A noteworthy connection between the symp
toms of the actual neuroses and the psycho
neuroses adds a valuable contribution to our
knowledge of symptom-formation in the latter;
the symptom of the actual neurosis is fre
quently the nucleus and incipient stage of the
psychoneurotic symptom. A connection of this
kind is most clearly observable between neu
rasthenia and the transference neurosis known
as conversion-hysteria, between the anxietyneurosis and anxiety-hysteria, but also between

[610a]
General Introduction
hypochondria and forms of a neurosis which
we shall deal with later on, namely, paraphrenia
(dementia praecox and paranoia). As an ex
ample, let us take an hysterical headache or
backache. Analysis shows that, by means of
condensation and displacement, it has become
a substitutive satisfaction for a whole series
of libidinal phantasies or memories; at one
time, however, this pain was real, a direct
symptom of a sexual toxin, the bodily expres
sion of a sexual excitation. We do not by any
means maintain that all hysterical symptoms
have a nucleus of this kind, but it remains true
that this very often is so, and that all effects
(whether normal or pathological) of the libidi
nal excitation upon the body are especially
adapted to serve the purposes of hysterical
symptom-formation. They play the part of the
grain of sand which the oyster envelops in
mother-of-pearl. The temporary signs of sexual
excitation accompanying the sexual act serve
the psychoneurosis in the same way, as the
most
suitable
and
convenient
material
for
symptom-formation.
There is a similar process of special diag
nostic and therapeutic interest. In persons who
are disposed to be neurotic without having yet
developed a neurosis on a grand scale, some
morbid organic condition—perhaps an inflam
mation, or an injury—very commonly sets the
work of symptom-formation in motion; so
that the latter process swiftly seizes upon the
symptom supplied by reality, and uses it to
represent those unconscious phantasies that
have only been lying in wait for some means
of expression. In such a case, the physician will
try first one therapy and then the other; will
either endeavour to abolish the organic foun
dation on which the symptom rests, without
troubling about the clamorous neurotic elab
oration of it; or will attack the neurosis which
this opportunity has brought to birth, while
leaving on one side the organic stimulus which
incited it. Sometimes one and sometimes the
other procedure will be found justified by
success; no general rules can be prescribed for
mixed cases of this kind.
TWENTY-FIFTH LECTURE
Anxiety
You will certainly have judged the information
that I gave you in the last lecture about
ordinary nervousness as the most fragmentary
and most inadequate of all my accounts. I
know that it was; and I expect that nothing

[610b]
to Psycho-Analysis
607
surprised you more than that I made no men
tion of the anxiety which most nervous people
complain of and themselves describe as their
most terrible burden. Anxiety or dread can
really develop tremendous intensity and
in
consequence be the cause of the maddest pre
cautions. But in this matter at least I wished
not to cut you short; on the contrary, I had
determined to put the
problem of nervous
anxiety to you as clearly as possible and to
discuss it at some length.
Anxiety (or dread) itself needs no descrip
tion; everyone has personally experienced this
sensation,
or
to
speak more
correctly this
affective condition at some time or other. But
in my opinion not enough serious consideration
has been given to the question why nervous
persons in particular suffer from anxiety so
much more intensely, and so much more al
together, than others. Perhaps it has been taken
for granted that they should; indeed, the words
nervous and anxious are used interchangeably,
as if they meant the same thing. This is not
justifiable, however; there are anxious people
who are otherwise not in any way nervous and
there are, besides, neurotics with numerous
symptoms who exhibit no tendency to dread.
However this may be, one thing is certain,
that the problem of anxiety is a nodal point,
linking up all kinds of most important ques
tions ; a riddle, of which the solution must cast
a flood of light upon our whole mental life. I
do not claim that I can give you a complete
solution; but you will certainly expect psycho
analysis to have attacked this problem too in
a different manner from that adopted by aca
demic medicine. Interest there centres upon the
anatomical processes
by which the
anxiety
condition
comes
about.
We
learn
that
the
medulla oblongata is stimulated, and the pa
tient is told that he is suffering from a neurosis
in the vagal nerve. The medulla oblongata is a
wondrous and beauteous object; I
well
re
member how much time and labour I devoted
to the study of it years ago. But today I must
say I know of nothing less important for the
psychological comprehension of anxiety than
a knowledge of the nerve-paths by which the
excitations travel.
One may consider anxiety for a long time
without giving a thought to nervousness. You
will understand me at once when I describe
this form of anxiety as Objective Anxiety;
in
contrast
to
neurotic
anxiety.
Now
real
anxiety or dread appears to us a very natural
and rational thing; we should call it a reaction

[611a]
6o8
Sigmund Freud
to the perception of an external danger, of an
injury which is expected and foreseen; it is
bound up with the reflex of flight, and may be
regarded as an expression of the instinct of
self-preservation. The occasions of it, i.e., the
objects and situations about which anxiety is
felt, will obviously depend to a great extent
upon the state of the person's knowledge and
feeling of power regarding the outer world. It
seems to us quite natural that a savage should
be afraid of a cannon or of an eclipse of the
sun, while a white man who can handle the
weapon and foretell the phenomenon remains
unafraid in the same situation. At other times,
it is knowledge itself which inspires fear, be
cause it reveals the danger sooner;
thus a
savage will recoil with terror at the sight of a
track in the jungle which conveys nothing to
an ignorant white man, but means that some
wild beast is near at hand; and an experienced
sailor will perceive with dread a httle cloud
on the horizon because it means an approaching
hurricane, while to a passenger it looks quite
insignificant.
The view that objective anxiety is rational
and expedient, however, will on deeper con
sideration be admitted to need thorough re
vision. In face of imminent danger the only
expedient behaviour, actually, would be first
a cool appraisement of the forces at disposal
as compared with the magnitude of the danger
at hand, and then a decision whether flight or
defence, or possibly attack, offered the best
prospect of a successful outcome. Dread, how
ever, has no place in this scheme; everything
to be done will be accomplished as well and
probably better if dread does not develop. You
will see, too, that when dread is excessive it
becomes in the highest degree inexpedient; it
paralyses every action, even that of flight. The
reaction to danger usually consists in a com
bination of the two things, the fear-affect and
the defensive action; the frightened animal is
afraid and flees, but the expedient element in
this is the flight, not the being afraid.
One is tempted therefore to assert that the
development of anxiety is never expedient;
perhaps a closer dissection of the situation in
dread will give us a better insight into it. The
first thing about it is the readiness for danger,
which expresses itself in heightened sensorial
perception and
in
motor tension.
This ex
pectant readiness is obviously advantageous;
indeed, absence of it may be responsible for
grave results. It is then followed on the one
hand by a motor action, taking the form pri

[611b]
marily of flight and, on a higher level, of
defensive action; and on the other hand by the
condition we call a sensation of anxiety or
dread. The more the development of dread is
limited to a flash, to a mere signal, the less does
it hinder the transition from the state of anx
ious readiness to that of action, and the more
expediently does the whole course of events
proceed. The anxious readiness therefore seems
to me the expedient element, and the develop
ment of anxiety the inexpedient element, in
what we call anxiety or dread.
I shall not enter upon a discussion whether
the words anxiety, fear, fright, mean the same
or different things in common usage. In my
opinion, anxiety relates to the condition and
ignores the object, whereas in the word fear
attention is directed to the object; fright does
actually seem to possess a special meaning—
namely, it relates specifically to the condition
induced when danger is unexpectedly encoun
tered without previous anxious readiness. It
might be said, then, that anxiety is a protection
again fright.
It will not have escaped you that a certain
ambiguity and indefiniteness exists in the use
of the word anxiety. It is generally understood
to mean the subjective condition arising upon
the
perception of what we have called
de
veloped anxiety; such a condition is called an
affect. Now what is an affect, in a dynamic
sense? It is certainly something very complex.
An affect comprises first of all certain motor
innervations or discharges; and, secondly, cer
tain sensations, which moreover are of
two
kinds—namely, the perceptions of the motor
actions which have been performed, and the
directly pleasurable or painful sensations which
give the affect what we call its dominant note.
But I do not think that this description pene
trates to the essence of an affect. With certain
affects one seems to be able to see deeper, and
to recognize that the core of it, binding the
whole complex structure together, is of the
nature of a repetition of some particular very
significant previous experience. This experience
could only have been an exceedingly early im
pression of a universal type, to be found in the
previous history of the species rather than of
the individual. In order to be better understood
I
might say that an
affective state is con
structed like an hysterical attack, i.e., is the pre
cipitate of a reminiscence. An hysterical attack
is, therefore, comparable to a newly formed
individual affect, and the normal affect to a
universalhysteria which has becomea heritage.

[612a]
General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis
609
us all the funny stories of the last midwives'
Do not imagine that what I am telling you
now about affects is the common property of
normal psychology. On the contrary,
these
conceptions have grown on the soil of psycho
analysis and are only indigenous there. What
psychology has to say about affects—theJamesLange theory, for instance—is utterly incom
prehensible to us psycho-analysts and imposable for us
to discuss. We do not however
regard what we know of affects as at all final;
it is a first attempt to take our bearings in this
obscure region. To continue, then: we believe
we know what this early impression is which
is reproduced as a repetition in the anxiety
affect. We think it is the experience of birth—
an experience which involves just such a con
catenation of painful feelings, of discharges of
excitation, and of bodily sensations, as to have
become a prototype for all occasions on which
life is endangered, ever after to be reproduced
again in us as the dread or anxiety condition.
The enormous increase in stimulation effected
by the interruption of the renewal of blood
(the internal respiration) was the cause of the
anxiety experience at birth—the first anxiety
was
therefore toxically induced.
The name
Angst (anxiety)—angustice, Enge, a narrow
place, a strait—accentuates the characteristic
tightening in the breathing which was then the
consequence of a real situation and is subse
quently repeated almost invariably with an
affect. It is very suggestive, too, that the first
anxiety state arose on the occasion of the
separation from the mother. We naturally be
lieve that the disposition to reproduce this first
anxiety condition has become so deeply in
grained in the organism, through countless
generations, that no single individual can escape
the anxiety affect; even though, like the legend
ary Macduff, he "was from his mother's womb
untimely ripped" and so did not himself ex
perience the act of birth. What the prototype
of the anxiety condition may
be for
other
animals than mammals we cannot say; neither
do we know what the complex of sensations in
them is which is equivalent to fear in us.
It may perhaps interest you to know how it
was possibleto«arrive at such an idea as this—
that birth is the source and prototype of the
anxiety affect. Speculation had least of all to
do with it; on the contrary, I borrowed a
thought from the naive intuitive mind of the
people. Many years ago a number of young
house-physicians, including myself, were sit
ting round a dinner-table, and one of the
assistants at the obstetrical clinic was telling

[612b]
examination. One of the candidates was asked
what it meant when the meconium (child's
excreta) was present in the waters at birth,
and promptly
replied:
"That the
child is
frightened." She was ridiculed and failed. But
I silently took her part and began to suspect
that the poor unsophisticated woman's unerring
perception
had
revealed
a
very
important
connection.
Now let us turn to neurotic anxiety; what
are the special manifestations and conditions
found in the anxiety of nervous persons? There
is a great deal to be described here. First of
all, we find a general apprehensiveness in them,
a free-floating anxiety, as we call it, ready to
attach itself to any thought which is at all
appropriate, affecting judgments, inducing ex
pectations, lying in wait for any opportunity
to find a justification for itself. We call this
condition expectant dread or anxious expecta
tion. People who are tormented with this kind
of anxiety always anticipate the worst of all
possible outcomes, interpret every chance hap
pening as an evil omen, and exploit every
uncertainty to mean the worst. The tendency
to this kind of expectation of evil is found as
a character-trait in many people who cannot
be described as ill in any other way, and we
call them over-anxious or pessimistic; but a
marked degree of expectant dread is an invari
able accompaniment of the nervous disorder
which I have called anxiety-neurosis and in
clude among the actual neuroses.
In contrast to this type of anxiety, a second
form of it is found to be much more circum
scribed in the mind, and attached to definite
objects and situations. This is the anxiety of
the extraordinarily various and often very pe
culiar phobias. Stanley Hall, the distinguished
American psychologist, has recently taken the
trouble to designate a whole series of these
phobias by gorgeous Greek titles; they sound
like the ten plagues of Egypt, except that there
are far more than ten of them. Just listen to
the things that can become the object or con
tent of a phobia:
darkness, open air, open
spaces, cats, spiders, caterpillars, snakes, mice,
thunder, sharp points, blood, enclosed places,
crowds, loneliness, crossing bridges, travelling
by land or sea, and so on. As a first attempt to
take one's bearings in this chaos we may divide
them into three groups. Many of the objects
and situations feared are.rather sinister, even
to us normal people they have some connection
with danger; and these phobias are not entirely

[613a]
6io
Sigmund Freud
incomprehensible to us, although their intensity
seems very much exaggerated. Most of us, for
instance, have a feeling of repulsion upon en
countering a snake. It may be said that the
snake-phobia is universal in mankind. Charles
Darwin has described most vividly how he
could not control his dread of a snake that
darted at him, although he knew that he was
protected from it by a thick plate of glass. The
second group consists of situations that still
have some relation to danger, but to one that
is usually belittled or not emphasized by us;
most situation-phobias belong to this group.
We know that there is more chance of meeting
with a disaster in a railway train than at home
—namely, a collision; we also know that a
ship may sink, whereupon it is usual to be
drowned; but we do not brood upon these
dangers and we travel without anxiety by train
and boat. Nor can it be denied that, if a bridge
were to break at the moment we are crossing
it, we should be hurled into the torrent, but that
only happens so very occasionally that it is
not a danger worth considering. Solitude too has
its dangers, which in certain circumstances we
avoid, but there is no question of never being
able to endure it for a moment under any con
ditions. The same thing applies to crowds,
enclosed spaces, thunderstorms, and
so on.
What is foreign to us in these phobias is not
so much their content as their intensity. The
anxiety accompanying a phobia is positively
indescribable! And we sometimes get the im
pression that neurotics are not really at all
fearful of those things which can, under certain
conditions, arouse anxiety in us and which they
call by the same names.
There remains a third group which is en
tirely unintelligible to us. When a strong fullgrown man is afraid to cross a street or square
in his own so familiar town, or when a healthy
well-developed woman becomes almost sense
less with fear because a cat has brushed against
her dress or a mouse has scurried through the
room, how can we
see the connection with
danger which is obviously present to
these
people? With this kind of animal-phobia it is
no question of an increased intensity of com
mon human antipathies; to prove the contrary,
there are numbers of people who, for instance,
cannot pass a cat without attracting and pet
ting it. A mouse is a thing that so many women
are afraid of, and yet it is at the same time a
very favourite pet name; many a girl who is
delighted to be called so by her lover will
scream with terror at the sight of the dainty

[613b]
little creature itself. The behaviour of the man
who is afraid to cross streets and squares only
suggests one thing to us—that he behaves like
a little child. A child is directly taught that
such situations are dangerous, and the man's
anxiety, too, is allayed when he is led by some
one across the open space.
The two forms of anxiety described, the
free-floating expectant dread and that attached
to phobias, are independent of each other. The
one is not the other at a further stage; they
are only rarely combined, and then as if for
tuitously. The most intense general apprehensiveness does not necessarily lead to a phobia;
people who have been hampered all their lives
by agoraphobia may be quite free from pes
simistic expectant dread. Many phobias, e.g.,
fear of open spaces, of railway travelling, are
demonstrablyacquired first in later life; others,
such as fear of darkness, thunder, animals,
seem to have existed from the beginning. The
former signify serious illness, the latter are
more of the nature of idiosyncrasies, peculiari
ties; anyone exhibiting one of theselatter may
be suspected of harbouring others similar to
it. I must add that we group all these phobias
under anxiety-hysteria, that is, we regard them
as
closely allied to the well-known disorder
called conversion-hysteria.
The third form taken by neurotic anxiety
brings us to an enigma; there is no visible
connection at all between the anxiety and the
danger dreaded. This anxietyoccurs in hysteria,
for instance, accompanying the hystericalsymp
toms; or under various conditions of excite
ment in which, it is true, we should expect
some affect to be displayed, but least of all
an anxiety-affect; or without reference to any
conditions, incomprehensible both to us and to
the patient, an unrelated anxiety-attack. We
may look far and wide without discovering a
danger or an
occasion which could even be
exaggerated to account for it. These spontane
ous attacks show, therefore, that the complex
condition which we describe as anxiety can be
split up into components. The whole attack
can be represented (as a substitute) by a single
intensively developed symptom—shuddering,
faintness, palpitation of the heart, inability to
breathe—and the general feeling which we rec
ognize as anxiety may be absent or may have
become unnoticeable. And yet
these states
Which are termed anxiety equivalents have the
same clinical and aetiological validity as anxi
ety itself.
Two questions arise now: Is it possible to

[614a]
General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis
6ii
bring neurotic anxiety, in which such a small
part or none at all is played by danger, into
relation with objective anxiety, which is essen
tially a reaction to danger? And, how is neu
rotic anxiety to be understood? We will at
present hold fast to the expectation that where
there is anxiety there must be something of
which one is afraid.
Clinical observation yields various clues to
the comprehension of neurotic anxiety, and I
will now discuss their significance with you.
(a) It is not difficult to see that expectant
dread or general apprehensiveness stands in
intimate relation to certain processes in the
sexual life—let us say, to certain modes of
libido-utilization. The simplest and most in
structive case of this kind arises in people who
expose themselves to what is called frustrated
excitation, i.e., when a powerful sexual excita
tion experiences insufficient discharge and is
not carried on to a satisfying termination. This
occurs, for instance, in men during the time of
an engagement to marry, and in women whose
husbands are not sufficiently potent, or who per
form the sexual act too rapidly or incompletely
with a view to preventing conception. Under
these conditions the
libidinal excitation dis
appears and anxiety appears in place of it, both
in the form of expectant dread and in that of
attacks and anxiety-equivalents. The precau
tionary measure of coitus interruptus, when
practised as a customary sexual regime, is so
regularly the cause of anxiety-neurosis in men,
and even more so in women, that medical prac
titioners would be wise to enquire first of all
into the possibility of such an aetiology in all
such cases. Innumerable examples show that
the anxiety-neurosis vanishes when the sexual
malpractice is given up.
So far as I know, the fact that a connection
exists between sexual restraint and anxiety con
ditions is no longer disputed, even by physi
cians who hold aloof
from psycho-analysis.
Nevertheless I can well imagine that they do
not neglect to invert the connection, and to put
forward the view that such persons are pre
disposed to apprehensiveness and consequently
practice cautionin sexualmatters. Against this,
however, decisive evidence is found in the re
actions in women, in whom the sexual function
is essentially passive, so that its course is de
termined by the treatment accorded by the
man. The more temperament, i.e., the more
inclination for sexual intercourse and capacity
for satisfaction, a woman has, the more cer
tainly will she react with anxiety manifesta

[614b]
tions to the man's impotence or to coitus inter
ruptus; whereas such abuse entails far less
serious results with anaesthetic women or those
in whom the sexual hunger is less strong.
Sexual abstinence, which is
nowadays so
warmly recommended by physicians, of course
only has the same significance for anxiety con
ditions when the libido which is denied a satis
factory outlet is correspondingly insistent, and
is not being utilized to a large extent in sub
limation. Whether or not illness will ensue is
indeed always a matter of the quantitative fac
tor. Even apart from illness, it is easy to see
in the sphere of character-formation that sex
ual restraint goes hand in hand with a certain
anxiousness and cautiousness, whereas fearless
ness and a boldly adventurous spirit bring with
them a free tolerance of sexual needs. However
these relations may be altered and complicated
by the manifold influences of civilization, it re
mains incontestible that, for the average hu
man being, anxiety is closely connected with
sexual restriction.
I have by no means told you all the observa
tions which point to this genetic connection
between libido and anxiety. There is, for in
stance, the effect upon anxiety states of certain
periods of life, such as puberty and the meno
pause, in which the production of libido is
considerably augmented. In many states of
excitement, too, the mingling of sexual excita
tion with anxiety may be directly observed as
well as the final replacement of the libidinal
excitation by anxiety. The impression received
from all this is a double one; first, that it is
a matter of an accumulation of libido, debarred
from its normal utilization; and secondly,,that
the question is one of somatic processes only.
How anxiety develops out of sexual desire is at
present obscure; we can only ascertain that
desire is lacking and anxiety is found in its
place.
(b) A second clue is obtained from analysis
of the psychoneuroses, in particular, of hys
teria. We have heard that anxiety frequently
accompanies the symptomsin this disease, and
that unattached anxiety may also be chronically
present or come to expression in attacks. The
patients cannot say what it is they fear; they
link it up by unmistakable secondary elabora
tion to the most convenient phobias: of dying,
of going mad, of havinga stroke, etc. When we
subject to analysis the situation in which the
anxiety, or the symptom accompanied by anxi
ety, arose, we can as a rule discover what
normal mental process has been checked in its

[615a]
6l2
Sigmund Freud
course and replaced by a manifestation of anxi
ety. To express it differently: we construe the
unconscious process as though it had not under
gone repression
and had gone through un
hindered into consciousness. This process would
have been accompanied by a particular affect
and now we discover, to our astonishment, that
this affect, which would normally accompany
the mental process through into consciousness,
is in every case replaced by anxiety, no matter
what particular type it had previously been. So
that when we have a hysterical anxiety condi
tion before us, its unconscious correlative may
be an excitation of a similar character, such as
apprehension, shame, embarrassment; or quite
as possibly a positive libidinal excitation; or
an antagonistic, aggressive one, such as rage or
anger. Anxiety is thus general current coin for
which all the affects are exchanged or can be
exchanged, when the corresponding ideational
content is under repression.
(c) A third observation is provided by pa
tients whose symptoms take the form of obses
sive acts, and who seem to
be remarkably
immune from anxiety. When we restrain them
from carrying out their obsessive performances,
their washing, their ceremonies, etc., or when
they themselves venture an attempt to abandon
one of their compulsions, they are forced by
an appalling dread to yield to the compulsion
and to carry out the act. We perceive that the
anxiety was concealed under the obsessive act
and that this is only performed to escape the
feeling of dread. In the obsessional neurosis,
therefore, the anxiety which would otherwise en
sue is replaced by the symptom-formation; and
when we turn to hysteria we find a similar
relation existing—as a consequence of the proc
ess of repression either a pure developed anxi
ety, or anxiety with symptom-formation, or
symptom-formation without anxiety. In an ab
stract sense, therefore, it seems correct to say
that symptoms altogether are formed purely
for the purpose of escaping the otherwise in
evitable development of anxiety. Thus anxiety
comes to the fore-front of our interest in the
problems of the neuroses.
We concluded from our observations on the
anxiety-neurosis that the diversion of the libido
away from its normal form of utilization, a
diversion which releases anxiety, took place on
the basis of somatic processes. The analyses of
hysterical and obsessional neuroses furnish the
additional conclusion that a similar diversion
with a similar result can follow from opposi
tion on the part of institutions in the mind. We

[615b]
know as much as this, therefore, about the
origin of neurotic anxiety; it still sounds rather
indefinite. But for the moment I know of no
path which will take us further. The second task
we undertook, that of establishing a connection
between neurotic anxiety (abnormally utilized
libido) and objective anxiety ( which corre
sponds with the reaction to danger), seems
even more difficult to accomplish. One would
think there could be no comparison between
the two things, and yet there are no means by
which the sensations of neurotic anxiety can
be distinguished from those of real anxiety.
The desired connection may be found with
the helpof the antithesis, so oftenput forward,
between the ego and the libido. As we know,
the development of anxiety is the reaction of
the ego to danger and the signal preparatory
to flight; it is, then, not a great step to imagine
that in neurotic anxiety also the egois attempt
inga flight, from the demands of its libido, and
is treating this internal danger as if it were an
external one. Then our expectation, that where
anxiety is present there must be something of
which one is afraid, would be fulfilled. The
analogy goes further than this, however. Just
as the tension prompting the attempt to flee
from external danger is resolved into holding
one's ground and taking appropriate defensive
measures, so the development of neurotic anxi
ety yields to a symptom-formation, which en
ables the anxiety to be "bound."
Our difficulty in comprehension now lies else
where. The anxiety which signifies the flight of
the ego from its libido is nevertheless supposed
to have had its source in that libido. This is
obscure, and we are warned not to forget that
the libido of a given person is fundamentally
part of that person and cannot be contrasted
with him as if it were something external. It is
the question of the topographical dynamics of
anxiety-development that is still obscure to us
—what kind of mental energies are being ex
pended and to what systems do they belong?
I cannot promise you to answer this question
also; but we will not neglect to follow up two
other clues, and in so doing will again summon
direct observation and analytic investigation to
aid our speculation. We will turn to the sources
of anxiety in children, and to the origin of the
neurotic anxiety which is attached to phobias.
Apprehensiveness is very common among
children, and it is difficult enough to decide
whether it is objective or neurotic anxiety. In
deed the very value of this distinction is called
in question by the attitude of children them-

[616a]
General Introduction
selves. For on the one hand we are not sur
prised that children are afraid of strangers, of
strange objects and situations, and we account
for this reaction to ourselves very easily by
reflecting on their
weakness and ignorance.
Thus we ascribe to the child a strong tendency
to objective anxiety and should regard it as
only practical if this apprehensiveness had been
transmitted by inheritance. The child would
only be repeating the behaviour of prehistoric
man and of primitive man today who, in con
sequence of his ignorance and helplessness, ex
periences a dread of anything new and strange,
and of much that is familiar to him, none of
which any longer inspires fear in us. It would
also correspond to our expectations if the
phobias of children were, at least in part, such
as might be attributed to those primeval pe
riods of human development.
On the other hand, it cannot be overlooked
that children are not all equally apprehensive,
and that the very children who are more than
usually timid in the face of all kinds of objects
and situations are just those who later become
neurotic. The neurotic disposition is, therefore,
betrayed, amongst other signs, by a marked
tendency to objective anxiety; apprehensive
ness rather than nervousness appears to be
primary; and we arrive at the conclusion that
the child, and later the adult, experiences a
dread of the strength of his libido simply be
cause he is afraid of everything. The derivation
of anxiety from the libido itself would then be
discarded; and investigation of the conditions
of real anxiety would logically lead to the view
that consciousness of personal weakness and
helplessness—inferiority, as A. Adler calls it—
when it is able to maintain itself into later life
is the final cause of neurosis.
This sounds so simple and plausible that it
has a claim on our attention. It is true that it
would involve shifting the point of view from
which we regard the problem of nervousness.
That such feelings of inferiority do persist into
later life—together with a disposition to anxi
ety and symptom-formation—seems so well es
tablished that much more explanation is re
quired when, in an exceptional case, what we
call health is the outcome. But what can be
learnt from the close observation of apprehen
siveness in children? The small child is first
of all afraid of strange people; situations be
come important only on account of the people
concerned in them, and objects always much
later. But the child is not afraid of these strange
people because he attributes evil intentions to

[616b]
to Psycho-Analysis
613
them, comparing their strength with his weak
ness and thus recognizing in them a danger to
his existence, his safety, and his freedom from
pain. Such a conception of a child, so suspi
cious and terrified of an overpowering aggressivity in the world, is a very poor sort of
theoretical construction. On the contrary, the
child starts back in fright from a strange figure
because is used to—and therefore expects—
a beloved and
familiar figure, primarily his
mother. It is his disappointment and longing
which are transformed into dread—his libido,
unable to be expended, and at that time not to
be held suspended, is discharged through being
converted into dread. It can hardly be a co
incidence, too, that in this situation, which is
the prototype of childish anxiety, the condition
of the primary anxiety state during birth, a
separationfrom the mother,is againreproduced.
The first phobias of situations in children
concern darkness and loneliness; the former is
often retained throughout life;
common to
both is the desire for the absent attendant, for
the mother, therefore. I once heard a child who
was afraid of the darkness call out: "Auntie,
talk to me, I'm frightened." "But what good
will that do? You can't see me"; to which the
child replied: "If someonetalks, it gets lighter."
The longing felt in the darkness is thus trans
formed
into fear of the darkness. Far from
finding that neurotic anxiety is only secondary
and a special case of objective anxiety, we see
on the contrary that there is something in the
small child which behaves like real anxiety and
has an essential feature in common with neu
rotic anxiety—namely, origin in undischarged
libido. Of genuine objective anxiety the child
seems to bring very little into the world. In
all those situations which can become the con
ditions of phobias later, on heights, on narrow
bridges over water, in trains and boats, the
small child shows no fear—the less it knows
the less it fears. It is much to be wished that
it inherited more of these life-preserving in
stincts; the task of lookingafter it and prevent
ing it from exposing itself to one danger after
another would have been very much lightened.
Actually, you see, a child overestimates his
powers, to begin with, and behaves without
fear because he does not recognize dangers. He
will run along the edge of the water, climb
upon the window-sill, play with sharp things
and with fire, in short, do anything that in
jures him and alarms his attendants. Since he
cannot be allowed to learn it himself through
bitter experience, it is entirely due to train-*

[617a]
614
Sigmund Freud
ing that real anxiety does eventually awake in
him.
Now if some children embrace this training
in apprehensiveness very readily, and then find
for themselves dangers which they have not
been warned against, it is explicable on the
ground that these children have inherently a
greater amount of libidinal need in their con
stitution than others, or else that they have
been spoiled early with libidinal gratifications.
It is no wonder if those
who later become
nervous also belong to this type as children;
we know that the most favourable circumstance
for the development of a neurosis lies in the
inability to tolerate a considerable degree of
pent-up libido for any length of time. You will
observe now that here the constitutional factor,
which we have never denied, comes into its
own. We protest only when others emphasize
it to the exclusion of all other claims, and when
they introduce the constitutional factor even
where according to the unanimous findingsboth
of observation and of analysis, it does not
belong, or only plays a minor part.
Let us sum up the conclusions drawn from
the observation of apprehensiveness in chil
dren : Infantile dread has very little to do with
objective anxiety (dread of real danger), but
is, on the other hand, closely allied to the neu
rotic anxiety of adults. It is derived, like the
latter, from
undischarged libido, and it sub
stitutes some other external object or some
situation for the love-object which it misses.
Now you will be glad to hear that the anal
ysis of phobias has little more to teach us than
we have learnt already. The same thing hap
pens in them as in the anxiety of children;
libido that cannot be discharged is continuously
being converted into an apparently objective
anxiety, and so an insignificant external danger
is taken as a representative of what the libido
desires. The agreement between the two forms
of anxiety is not surprising; for infantile pho
bias are not merely prototypes of those which
appear later in anxiety-hysteria, but they are
a direct preliminary condition and prelude of
them. Every hysterical phobia can be traced
back to a childish dread, of which it is a con
tinuation, even if it has a different content and
must be called by a different name. The differ
ence between the two conditions lies in their
mechanism. In order that the libido should be
converted into anxiety in the adult, it is no
longer sufficient that the libido should be mo
mentarily unable to be utilized. The adult has
long since learned to maintain such libido sus

[617b]
pended, or to apply it in different ways. But,
when the libido is attached to a mental excita
tion which has undergone repression, conditions
similar to those in the child, in whom there is
not yet any distinction between conscious and
unconscious, are re-established; and, by a re
gression to the infantile phobia, a bridge, so
to speak, is provided by which the conversion
of libido into anxiety can be conveniently ef
fected. As you will remember, we have treated
repression at some length, but in so doing we
have been concerned exclusivelywith the fate
of the idea to be repressed; naturally, because
this was easier to recognize and to present. But
we have so far ignored the question of what
happened to the affect attached to this idea,
and now we learn for the first time that it is
the immediate fate of the affect to be con
verted into anxiety, no matter what quality of
affect it would otherwise have been had it run
a normal course. This transformation of affect
is, moreover, by far the more important effect
of the process of repression. It is not so easy
to present to you; for we cannot maintain the
existence of unconscious
affects in the same
sense as that of unconscious ideas. An idea
remains up to a point the same whether it is
conscious
or unconscious;
we can
indicate
something that corresponds to an unconscious
idea. But an affectis a process involving a dis
charge of energy, and it is to be regarded quite
differently from an idea; without searching ex
amination and clarification of our hypotheses
concerning mental processes, we cannot tell
what corresponds with it in the unconscious—
and that cannot be undertaken here. However,
wewill preserve the impressionwe have gained,
that the development of anxiety is closely con
nected with the unconscious system.
I said that conversion into anxiety, or better,
discharge in the form of anxiety, was the im
mediate fate of libido which encounters repres
sion; I must add that it is not the only or the
final fate of it. In the neuroses, processes take
place which are intended to prevent the devel
opment of anxiety, and which succeed in so
doing by various means. In the phobias, for
instance, two stages in the neurotic process
are clearly discernible. The first effects the re
pressions and conversion of the libido into anx
iety which is then attached to some external
danger. The second consists in building up all
those precautions and safeguards by which all
contact with this externalized danger shall be
avoided. Repression is an attempt at flight on
the part of the ego from the libido, which it

[618a]
General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis
6i5
feels to be dangerous; the phobia may be com
pared to a fortification against the outer dan
ger, which now stands for the dreaded libido.
The weakness of this defensive system in the
phobias is, of course, that the fortress which
is so well guarded from without remains ex
posed to danger from within; projection ex
ternally of danger from libido can never be a
very successful measure. In the other neuroses,
therefore, other defensive systems are employed
against the possibility of the development of
anxiety; this is a very interesting part of the
psychology of the neuroses. Unfortunately it
would take us too far afield and also it would
require a thorough grounding in special knowl
edge of the subject. I will merely add this. I
have already spoken of the counter-charges that
are instituted by the ego upon repression, which
must be maintained so that the repression can
persist. It is the task of this counter-charge to
carry out the various forms of defence against
the development of anxiety after repression.
To return to the phobias: I may now hope
that you realize how inadequate it is to attempt
merely to explain their content, and to take no
interest in them apart from their derivation—
this or that object or situation which has been
made into a phobia. The content of the phobia
has an importance comparable to that of the
manifest dream—it is a fagade. With all due
modifications, it is to be admitted that among
the contents of the various phobias many are
found which, as Stanley Hall points out, are
specially suited by phylogenetic inheritance to
become objects of dread. It is even in agree
ment with this that many of these dreaded
things have no connection with danger, except
through a symbolic relation to it.
Thus we are convinced of the quite central
position which the problem of anxiety fills in
the psychology of the neuroses. We have re
ceived a strong impression of how the develop
ment of anxiety is bound up with the fate of
the libido and with the unconscious system.
There is only one unconnected thread, only
one gap in our structure, the fact, which after
all can hardly be disputed, that objective anx
iety must be regarded as an expression of the
ego's instinct for self-preservation.
TWENTY-SIXTH LECTURE
The Theory op the Libido:Narcissism
We have repeatedly, and again quite recently,
referred to the distinction between the sexual
and the ego-instincts. First of all, repression

[618b]
showed how they can oppose each other, how
the sexual instincts are then apparently brought
to submission, and required to procure their
satisfaction
by
circuitous
regressive
paths,
where in their impregnability they obtain com
pensation, for their defeat. Then it appeared
that from the outset they each have a different
relation to the task-mistress Necessity, so that
their developments are different and they ac
quire different attitudes to the reality-principle.
Finally we believe we can observe that the
sexual instincts are connected by much closer
ties with the affective state of anxiety than
are the ego-instincts—a conclusion which in one
important point only still seems incomplete.
In support of it we may bring forward the
further remarkable fact that want of satisfac
tion of hunger or thirst, the two most ele
mental of the self-preservative instincts, never
results in conversion of them into anxiety,
whereas
the
conversion of
unsatisfied libido
into anxiety is, as we have heard, a very wellknown and frequently observed phenomenon.
Our justification for distinguishing between
sexual and ego-instincts can surely not be con
tested; it is indeed assumed by the existence of
the sexual instinct as a special activity in the
individual. The only question is what signifi
cance is to be attached to this distinction, how
radical and decisive we intend to consider it.
The answer to this depends upon what we can
ascertain about the extent to which the sexual
instincts, both in their bodily and their mental
manifestations, conduct themselves differently
from the other instincts which we set against
them; and how important the results arising
from these
differences are found to be. We
have, of course, no motive for maintaining any
difference in the fundamental nature of the
two groups of instincts, and, by the way, it
would be difficult to apprehend any. They both
present themselves to us merely as descriptions
of the sources of energy in the individual, and
the discussion whether fundamentally they are
one, or essentially different, and if one, when
they became separated from each other, can
not be carried through on the basis of these
concepts alone, but must be grounded on the
biological facts underlying them. At present
we know too little about this, and even if we
knew more it would not be relevant to the task
of psycho-analysis.
We should clearly, also, profit very little by
emphasizing the primordial unity of all the in
stincts, as Jung has done, and describing all
the energies which flow from them as libido.

[619a]
6i6
Sigmund Freud
We should then be compelled to speak of sex
ual and asexual libido, since the sexual func
tion is not to be eliminated from the field of
mental life by any such device. The name libido,
however, remains properly reserved for the in
stinctual forces of the sexual life, as we have
hitherto employed it.
In my opinion, therefore, the question how
far the quite justifiable distinction between sex
ual and self-preservative instincts is to be car
ried has not much importance for psycho-analy
sis, nor is psycho-analysis competent to deal
with it. From the biological point of view, there
are certainlyvarious indications that the distinc
tion is important. For the sexual function is the
only function of a living organism which extends
beyond the individual and secures its connec
tion with its species. It is undeniable that the
exercise of this function does not always bring
advantage to the individual, as do his other
activities, but that, for the sake of an excep
tionally high degree of pleasure, he is involved
by this function in dangers which jeopardize
his life and often enough exact it. Quite pe
culiar metabolic processes, different from all
otherSj are probably required in order to pre
serve a portion of the individual's life as a
disposition for posterity. And finally, the indi
vidual organism that regards itself as first in
importance and its sexuality as a means like
any other to its own satisfaction is, from a
biological point of view, only an episode in a
series of generations, a short-lived appendage
to a germ-plasm which is endowed with virtual
immortality,
comparable
to
the
temporary
holder of an entail that will survive his death.
We are not concerned with such far-reaching
considerations, however, in the psycho-analytic
elucidation of the neuroses. By means of fol
lowing up the distinction between the sexual
and the ego-instincts we have gained the key
to comprehension of the group of transference
neuroses. We were able to trace back their ori
gin to a fundamental situation in which the
sexual instincts had come into conflict with the
self-preservative instincts, or—to express it bi
ologically, though at the same time less exactly
—in which the ego in its capacity of independ
ent individual organism had entered into oppo
sition with itself in its other capacity as a
member of a series of generations. Such a dis
sociation perhaps only exists in man, so that,
taken all in all, his superiority over the other
animals may come down to his capacity for
neurosis. The excessive development of
his
libido and the rich elaboration of his mental

[619b]
life (perhaps directly made possible by it)
seem to constitute the conditions which give
rise to a conflict of this kind. It is at any rate
clear that these are the conditions under which
man has progressed so greatly beyond what he
has in; common with the animals, so that his
capacity for neurosis would merely be the
obverse of his capacity for cultural develop
ment. However, these again are but specula
tions which distract us from the task in hand.
Our work so far has been conducted on the
assumption that the manifestations of the sex
ual and the ego-instincts can be distinguished
from one another. In the transference neuroses
this is possible without any difficulty. We called
the investments of energy directed by the ego
towards the object of its sexual desires libido,
and all the other investments proceeding from
the self-preservative instincts its interest; and
by following up the investments with libido,
their transformations, and their final fates, we
were able to acquire our first insight into the
workings of the forces in mental life. The trans
ference neuroses offered the best material for
this exploration. The ego, however—its compo
sition out of various organizations with their
structure and mode of functioning—remained
undiscovered; we were led to believe that analy
sis of other neurotic disturbances would be
required before light could be gained on these
matters.
The extension of psycho-analytic conceptions
on to these other affections was begun in early
days. Already in 1908, K. Abraham expressed
the view after a discussion with me that the
main characteristic of dementia praecox (reck
oned as one of the psychoses) is that in this
disease the investments of objects with libido
is lacking. (The Psycho-Sexual Differences be
tween Hysteria and Dementia Praecox). But
then the question arose: what happens to the
libido of dementia patients when it is diverted
from its objects? Abraham did not hesitate to
answer that it is turned back upon the ego,
and that this reflex reversion of it is the source
of the delusions of grandeur in dementia prae
cox. The delusion of grandeur is in every way
comparable to the well-known overestimation
of the object in a love-relationship. Thus we
come for the first time to understand a feature
of a psychotic affection by bringing it into re
lation to the normal mode of loving in life.
I will tell you at once that these early views
of Abraham's have been retained in psycho
analysis and have become the basis of our posi
tion regarding the psychoses. We became slowly

[620a]
General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis
617
accustomed to the conception that the libido,
which we find attached to certain objects and
which is the expression of a desire to gain some
satisfaction in these objects, can also abandon
these objects and set the ego itself in their
place; and gradually this view developed itself
more and more consistently. The name for this
utilization of the libido—Narcissism—we bor
rowed from a perversion described by P. Nacke,
in which an adult individual lavishes upon his
own body all the caresses usually expended only
upon a sexual object other than himself.
Reflection, then, at once disclosed that, if a
fixation of this kind to the subject's own body
and his own person can occur, it cannot be an
entirely exceptional or meaningless phenome
non. On the contrary, it is probable that this
narcissism is the universal original condition,
out of which object-love develops later with
out thereby necessarily effecting a disappear
ance of the narcissism. One also had to remem
ber the evolution of object-libido, in which to
begin with many of the sexual impulses are
gratified on the child's own body—as we say,
auto-erotically—and that this capacity for au
to-erotism accounts for the backwardness of
sexuality in learning to conform to the realityprinciple. Thus it appeared that auto-erotism
was the sexual activity of the narcissistic phase
of direction of the libido.
To put it briefly, we formed an idea of the
relation between the ego-libido and the objectlibido which I can illustrate to you by a com
parison taken from zoology. Think of the sim
plest forms of life consisting of a little mass of
only slightly differentiated protoplasmic sub
stances. They extend protrusions which are
called pseudopodia into which the protoplasm
overflows. They can, however, again withdraw
these
extensions
of themselves
and
re-form
themselves into a mass. We compare this ex
tending of protrusions to the radiation of libido
on to the objects, while the greatest volume of
libido may yet remain within the ego; we infer
that under normal conditions ego-libido can
transform itself into object-libido without dif
ficulty and that this can again subsequently be
absorbed into the ego.
With the help of these conceptions it is now
possible to explain a whole series of mental
states, or, to express it more modestly, to de
scribe in terms of the libido-theory conditions
that belong to normal life; for instance, the
mental attitude pertaining to the conditions of
"being in love," of organic illness, and of sleep.
Of the condition of sleep we assumed that it is

[620b]
founded upon a withdrawal from the outer
world and a concentration upon the wish to
sleep. We found that the nocturnal mental ac
tivity which is expressed in dreams served the
purpose of the wish to sleep, and, moreover,
that it was governed exclusively by egoistic
motives. In the light of the libido-theory we
may carry this further and say that sleep is a
condition in which all investments of objects,
the libidinal as well as the egoistic are aban
doned and withdrawn again into the ego. Does
not this shed a new light upon the recuperation
afforded by sleep and upon the nature of fa
tigue in general? The likeness we see in the
condition which the sleeper conjures up again
every night to the blissful isolation of the intra
uterine existence is thus confirmed and ampli
fied in its mental aspects. In the sleeper the
primal state of the libido-distribution is again
reproduced, that
of
absolute
narcissism,
in
which libido and ego-interests dwell together
still, united and indistinguishable in the selfsufficient self.
Two observations are in place here. First,
how is the concept narcissism distinguished
from egoism? In my opinion, narcissism is the
libidinal
complement of egoism. When one
speaks of egoism one is thinking only of the
interests of the person concerned, narcissism
relates also to the satisfaction of his libidinal
needs. It is possible to follow up the two sep
arately for a considerable distance as practi
cal motives in life. A man may be absolutely
egoistic and yet have strong libidinal attach
ments to objects, in so far as libidinal satisfac
tion in an object is a need of his ego: his ego
ism will then see to it that his desires towards
the object involve no injury to his ego. A man
may be egoistic and at the same time strongly
narcissistic (i.e., feel very little need for ob
jects), and this again either in the form taken
by the need for direct sexual satisfaction, or
in those higher forms of feeling derived from
the sexual needs which are commonly called
love, and as such are contrasted with sensual
ity. In all these situations egoism is the selfevident, the constant element, and narcissism
the variable one. The antithesis of egoism, al
truism, is not an alternative term for the in
vestment of an object with libido; it is distinct
from the latter in its lack of the desire for
sexual satisfaction in the object. But when the
condition of love is developed to its fullest in
tensity, altruism coincides with the investment
of an object with libido. As a rule, the sexual
object draws to itself a portion of the ego's

[621a]
6i8
Sigmund Freud
narcissism, which becomes apparent in what is
called the sexual overestimation of the object.
If to this is added an altruism directed towards
the object and derived from the egoism of the
lover, the sexual object becomes supreme; it
has entirely swallowed up the ego.
I think you will find it a relief if, after these
scientific phantasies, which are after all very
dry, I submit to you a poetic description of the
economic contrast between the
condition
of
narcissism and that of love in full intensity. I
take it from a dialogue between Zuleika and
her lover in Goethe's Westostliche Divan:
Zuleika
The slave, the lord of victories,
The crowd, with single voice, confess
In sense of personal being lies
A child of earth's true happiness.
There's not a life he need refuse
If his true self he does not miss:
There's not a thing he cannot lose
If he remains the man he is.
Hdtem
So it is held! so well may be!
But down a different track I come
Of all the bliss earth holds for me
I in Zuleika find the sum.
Does she expend her being on me,
Myself grows to myself of cost;
Turns she away, then instantly
I to my very self am lost.
And then with Hdtem all were over;
Though yet I should but change my state
Swift, should she grace some happy lover,
In him I were incorporate.1
The second observation is an amplification
of the theory of dreams. The way in which a
dream originates is not explicable unless we
assume that what is repressed in the uncon
scious has acquired a certain independence of
the ego, so that it does not subordinate itself
to the wish for sleep and maintains its invest
ments, although all the object-investments pro
ceeding from the ego have been withdrawn for
the purpose of sleep. Only this makes it possi
ble to understand how it is that this uncon
scious material can make use of the abroga
tion or diminution in the activities of the cen
sorship which takes place at night, and that it
knows how to mould the day's residue so as to
form a
forbidden dream-wish from the ma1 Taken,
with
very
slight
modifications,
from
Edward Dowden's translation.—TR.

[621b]
terial to hand in that residue. On the other
hand, some of the resistance against the wish
to sleep, and the withdrawal of libido thereby
induced, may have its origin in an association
already in existence between this residue and
the repressed unconscious material. This im
portant dynamic factor must, therefore, now
be incorporated into the conception of dreamformation
which
we
formed
in
our
earlier
discussions.
Certain conditions—organic illness, painful
accesses of stimulation, an inflammatory con
dition of an organ—have clearly the effect of
loosening the libido from its attachment to its
objects. The libido, which has thus been with
drawn, attaches itself again to the ego in the
form of a stronger investment of the diseased
region of the body. Indeed, one may venture
the assertion that in such conditions the with
drawal of the libido from its objects is moTe
striking than the withdrawal of the egoistic interests from their concerns in the outer world.
This seems to lead to a possibility of under
standing hypochondria, in which some organ,
without being perceptibly diseased, becomes in
a very similar way the subject of solicitude on
the part of the ego. I shall, however, resist the
temptation to
follow
this up, or to
discuss
other situations which become explicable or
capable of exposition on this assumption of a
return of the object-libido into the ego; for I
feel bound to meet two objections which I
know have all your attention at the moment.
First of all, you want to know why when I dis
cuss
sleep,
illness, and similar conditions, I
insist upon distinguishing between libido ancl
interests,
sexual
instincts
and
ego-instincts,
while the observations are satisfactorily ex
plained by assuming a single uniform energy
which is freely mobile, can invest either object
or ego, and can serve the purposes of the one
as well as of the other. Secondly, you will want
to know how I can be so bold as to treat the
detachment of the libido from its objects as
the origin of a pathological condition, if such
a transformation of object-libido into ego-libido
—or into ego-energy in general—is a normal
mental process repeated every day and every
night.
The answer is: Your first objection sounds a
good one.
Examination of the conditions of
sleep, illness, and falling in love would proba
bly never have led to a distinction between
ego-libido and object-libido, or between libido
and interests. But in this you omit to take into
account the investigations with which we start-

[622a]
from its objects and blocks the way back to
ed, in the light of which we now regard the
mental situations under discussion. The neces
sity of distinguishing between libido and in
terests,
between sexual and self-preservative
instincts, has been forced upon us by our in
sight into the conflict from which the trans
ference neuroses arise. We have to reckon with
this
distinction henceforth. The assumption
that object-libido can transform itself into egolibido, in other words, that we shall also have
to reckon with an ego-libido, appears to be the
only one capable of solving the riddle of what
are called the narcissistic neuroses, e.g., de
mentia praecox, or of giving any satisfactory
explanation of their likeness to hysteria and
obsessions and differences from them. We then
apply what we have found undeniably proved
in these cases to illness, sleep, and the condi
tion of intense love. We are at liberty to apply
them in any direction and see where they will
take us. The single conclusion which is not
directly based on analytical experience is that
libido is libido and remains so, whether it is
attached to objects or to the ego itself, and is
never transformed into egoistic interests, and
vice versa. This statement, however, is another
way of expressing the distinction between sex
ual instincts and ego-instincts which we have
already critically examined,and which we shall
hold to from heuristic motives until such time
as it may prove valueless.
Your second objection, too, raises a justifi
able question, but it is directed to a false issue.
The withdrawal of object-libido into the ego is
certainly not pathogenic; it is true that it
occurs every night before sleep can ensue, and
that the process is reversed upon awakening.
The protoplasmic animalcule draws in its pro
trusions and sends them out again at the next
opportunity. But it is quite a different matter
when a definite, very forcible process compels
the withdrawal of the libido from its objects.
The libido that has then become narcissistic
can no longer find its way back to its objects,
and this obstruction in the way of the free
movement of the libido certainly does prove
pathogenic. It seems that an accumulation of
narcissistic libido over and above a
certain
level becomes intolerable. We might well im
agine that it was this that first led to the
investment of objects, that the ego was obliged
to send forth its libido in order not to fall ill of
an excessive accumulation of it. If it were part
of our scheme to go more particularly into the
disorder of dementia praecox I would show
you that the process which detaches the libido

[622b]
General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis
619
them again is closely allied to the process of
repression, and is to be regarded as a counter
part of it. In any case you would recognize
familiar ground under your feet
when you
found that the preliminary conditions giving
rise to these processes are almost identical, so
far as we know at present, with those of re
pression. The conflict seems to be the same
and to be conducted between the same forces.
Since the outcome is so different from that of
hysteria, for instance, the reason can only lie
in some difference in the disposition. The weak
point in the libido-development in these pa
tients is found at a different phase of the de
velopment; the decisive fixation which, as you
will remember, enables the process of symp
tom-formation to break out is at another point,
probably at the stage of primary narcissism, to
which dementia praecox finally returns. It is
most remarkable that for all the narcissistic
neuroses we have to assume fixation-points of
the libido at very much earlier phases of de
velopment than those found in hysteria or the
obsessional neurosis. You have heard, however,
that the concepts we have elicited from the
study of the transference neuroses also suffice
to show us our bearings in the narcissistic neu
roses, which are in practice so much more se
vere. There is a very wide community between
them; fundamentally they are phenomena of
a single class. You may imagine how hopeless
a task it is for anyone to attempt to explain
these disorders (which properly belong to psy
chiatry)
without being first equipped with
the analytic knowledge of
the transference
neuroses.
The picture formed by the symptoms of de
mentia praecox, incidentally a very variable
one, is not determined exclusively by the symp
toms arising from the forcing of the libido back
from the objects and the accumulation of it
as narcissism in the
ego.
Other phenomena
occupy a large part of the field, and may be
traced to the efforts made by the libido to
reach its objects again, which correspond there
fore to attempts at restitution and recovery.
These are in fact the conspicuous, clamorous
symptoms; they exhibit a marked similarity to
those of hysteria, or more rarely of the obses
sional neurosis; they are nevertheless different
in every respect. It seems that in dementia
praecox the efforts of the libido to get back to
its objects, that is, to the mental idea of its
objects, do
really
succeed in conjuring up
something of them, something that at the same

[623a]
620
Sigmund Freud
time is only the shadow of them—namely, the
verbal images, the words, attached to them.
This is not the place to discuss this matter
further, but in my opinion this reversed pro
cedure on the part of the libido gives us an in
sight into what constitutes the real difference
between a conscious and an unconscious idea.
This has now brought us into the field where
the next advances in analytic work are to be
expected. Since the time^ when we resolved
upon our formulation of the conception of egolibido, the narcissistic neuroses have become
accessible to us; the task before us was to find
the dynamic factors in these disorders, and at
the same time to amplify our knowledge of
mental life by a comprehension of the ego. The
psychology of the ego, at which we are aim
ing, cannot be founded upon data provided by
our own self-perceptions; it must be based, as
is that of the libido, upon analysis of the dis
turbances and disintegrations of the ego. We
shall probably think very little of our present
knowledge of the fate of the libido, gained from
the study of the transference neuroses, when
that further, greater work has been achieved.
But as yet we have not got very far towards it.
The narcissistic neuroses can hardly be ap
proached at all by the method which has availed
for the transference neuroses; you shall soon
hear why this is. With these patients it always
happens that, after one has penetrated a little
way, one comes up against a stone wall which
cannot be surmounted. You know that in the
transference neuroses, too, barriers of resist
ance of this kind are met with, but that it is
possible bit by bit to pull them down. In the
narcissistic neuroses the resistance is insuper
able ; at the most we can satisfy our curiosity
by craning our necks for a glimpse or two at
what is going on over the wall. Our technique
will, therefore, have to be replaced by other
methods; at present we do not know whether
we shall succeed in finding a substitute. There
is no lack of material with these patients; they
bring forward a great deal, although not in
answer to our questions; at present all we can
do is to interpret what they say in the light of
the understanding gained from the study of the
transference neuroses. The agreement between
the two forms of disease goes far enough to
ensure us a satisfactory start with them. How
much we shall be able to achieve by this method
remains to be seen.
There are other difficulties, besides this, in
the way of our progress. The narcissistic dis
orders and the psychoses related to them can

[623b]
only be unriddled by observers trained in the
analytic study of the transference neuroses.
But our psychiatrists do not study psycho
analysis and we psycho-analysts see too little
of psychiatric cases. We shall have to develop
a breed of psychiatrists who have gone through
the training of psycho-analysis as a preparatory
science. A beginning in this direction is being
made in America, where several of the leading
psychiatrists lecture on psycho-analytic doc
trines to their students, and where medical
superintendents of institutions and asylums en
deavour to observe their patients in the light
of this theory. But all the same it has some
times been possible for us here to take a peep
over the wall of narcissism, so I will now pro
ceed to tell you what we think we have dis
covered in this way.
The disease of paranoia, a chronic form of
systematic insanity, has a very uncertain posi
tion in the attempts at classification made by
present-day psychiatry. There is no doubt, how
ever, that it is closely related to
dementia
praecox; I have in fact proposed that they
should both be included under the common
designation of paraphrenia. The forms taken
by paranoia are
described according to the
content of the delusion, e.g., delusions of gran
deur, of persecution, of jealousy, of being loved
(erotomania), etc. We do not expect attempts
at explanation from psychiatry; as an example,
an antiquated and not very fair example, I
grant, I will tell you the attempt which was
made to derive one of these symptoms from
another, by means of a piece of intellectual ra
tionalization: The patient who has a primary
tendency to believe himself persecuted draws
from this the conclusion that he must neces
sarily be a very important person and there
fore develops a delusion of grandeur. Accord
ing to our analytic conception, the delusion of
grandeur is the direct consequence of the in
flation of the ego by the libido withdrawn from
the investment of objects, a secondary narcis
sism ensuing as a return of the original early
infantile form. In the case of delusions of per
secution, however, we observed things which
led us to follow up a certain clue. In the first
place we noticed that in the great majority of
cases the persecuting person was of the same
sex as the persecuted one; this was capable of
a harmless explanation, it is true, but in cer
tain cases which were closely studied it ap
peared that the person of the same sex who had
been most beloved while the patient was nor
mal became the persecutor after the disease

[624a]
General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis
621
broke out. A further development of this be
comes possible through the well-known paths
of association by which a loved person may be
replaced by someone else, e.g., the father by
masters or persons in authority. From these
observations, which were continually corrobo
rated, we drew the conclusion that persecutory
paranoia is the means by which a person de
fends himself against a homosexual impulse
which has become too powerful. The conver
sion of the affectionate feeling into the hate
which, as is well-known, can seriously endanger
the life of the loved and hated object then cor
responds to
the conversion of
libidinal im
pulses into anxiety, which is a regular result of
the process of repression. As an illustration I
will quote the last case I had of this type. A
young doctor had to be sent away from the
place where he lived because he had threatened
the life of the son of a university professor
there who had previously been his greatest
friend. He imputed superhuman power and the
most devilish intentions to this friend; he was
to blame for all the misfortunes which had
occurred in recent years to the family of the
patient and for all his ill-luck in public and in
private. This was not enough, however; the
wicked friend and his father, the professor, had
caused the war and brought the Russians over
the border; he had ruined his life in a thou
sand ways; our patient was convinced that the
death of this criminal would be the end of all
evil in the world. And yet his old love for him
was still so strong that it had paralysed his
hand when he had an opportunity of shooting
his enemy at sight. In the short conversation
which I had with the patient it came to light
that this intimate friendship between the two
men went right back to their school-days; on at
least one occasion it had passed beyond the
boundaries of friendship, a night spent together
had been the occasion of complete sexual in
tercourse. The patient had never developed
any of the feeling towards women that would
have been natural at his age with his attractive
personality. He had been engaged to a hand
some, well-connected girl, but she had broken
off the engagement because her lover was so
cold. Years after, his disease broke out at the
very moment when he had for the first time
succeeded in giving full sexual gratification to
a woman; as she encircled him in her arms in
gratitude and devotion he suddenly felt a mys
terious stab of pain running like a sharp knife
round the crown of his head. Afterwards he de
scribed the sensation as being like that of the

[624b]
incision made at a post-mortem to bare the
brain; and as his friend was a pathological
anatomist he slowly came to the
conclusion
that he alone could have sent him this woman
as a temptation. Then his eyes began to be
opened about the other persecutions of which
he had been the victim by the machinations
of his former friend.
But how about those cases in which the per
secutor is of a different sex from that of the
persecuted one, and which appear therefore to
contradict our explanation of this disease as a
defence against homosexual libido? Some time
ago I had an opportunity of examining a case of
the kind, and behind the apparent contradic
tion I wasable to elicita confirmation. Ayoung
girl imagined herself persecuted by a man with
whom she had twice had intimate relations;
actually she had first of all cherished the de
lusions against a woman who could be recog
nized to
be
a
mother-substitute. Not until
after the second meeting with him did she
make the advance of transferring the delu
sional ideafrom the woman to the man; so that
in this case also the condition that the sex of
the persecutor is the same as that of the victim
originally held good also. In her complaint to
the lawyer and the doctor the patient had not
mentioned the previous phase of her delusion
and this gave rise to an apparent contradiction
of our theory of paranoia.
The homosexual choice of object is originally
more closely related to narcissism than the
heterosexual; hence, when a strong unwelcome
homosexual excitation suffers repudiation, the
way back to narcissism is especially easy to
find. I have so far had very little opportunity
in these lectures of speaking about the funda
mental plan on which the course of the loveimpulse during life is based, so far as we know
it; nor can I supplement it now. I will only se
lect this to tell you: that the choice of object,
the step forward in the development of the
libido which comes after the narcissistic stage,
can proceed according to two types. These are:
either the narcissistic type, according to which,
in place of the ego itself, someone as nearly as
possible resembling it is adopted as an object;
or the anaclitic type (Anlehnungstypus)1 in
which those persons who became prized on ac
count of the satisfactions they rendered to the
primal needs in life are chosen as objects by
the libido also. A strong libido-fixation on the
1 This name refers to the dependence of the sexual
instincts on
the self-preservative instincts
for
their
first object. i.e., the suckling mother.—TR.

[625a]
622
Sigmund Freud
narcissistic type of object-choice is also found
as a trait in the disposition of manifest homo
sexuals.
You will remember that in the first lecture
given this session I described to youa case of
delusional jealousy in a woman. Now that we
have so nearly reached the end you will cer
tainly want to know how we account for a
delusion psycho-analytically. I have less to say
about it than you would expect, however. The
inaccessibility of delusions to logical argu
ments and to actual experience is to be ex
plained, as it is with obsessions, by the con
nection they bear to the unconscious material
which is both expressed by, and held in check
by, the delusion or the obsession. The differ
ences between the two are based on the topo
graphical and dynamic differences in the two
affections.
- As with paranoia, so also with melancholia
(under which, by the way, very different clini
cal types are classified), it has been possible to
obtain a glimpse into the inner structure of the
disorder. We have perceived that the self-re
proaches with which these sufferers torment
themselves so mercilessly actually relate to an
other person, to the sexual object they have
lost or whom they have ceased to value on
account of some fault. From this we concluded
that the melancholic has indeed withdrawn his
libido from the object, but that by a process
which we must call narcissistic identification
he has set up the object within the ego itself,
projected it on to the ego. I can onlygive you
a descriptive representation of this process,
and not one expressed in terms of topography
and dynamics. The ego itself is then treated as
though it were the abandoned object; it suffers
all the revengeful and aggressive treatment
which is designed for the object. The suicidal
impulses of melancholies also becomemore in
telligible on the supposition that the bitterness
felt by the diseased mind concerns the ego
itself at the same time as, and equally with,
the loved and hated objects. In melancholia, as
in the other narcissistic disorders, a feature of
the emotional life which, after Bleuler, we are
accustomed to call ambivalence comes marked
ly to the fore; by this we mean a directing of
antithetical feelings (affectionate and hostile)
towards the same person. It is unfortunate that
I have not been able to say more about ambiv
alence in these lectures.
There is also, besides the narcissistic, an
hysterical form of identification which has long

[625b]
been known to us. I wish it were possible to
make the differences between them clear to
you in a few definite statements. I can tell you
something of the periodic and cyclic forms of
melancholia which will interest you. It is pos
sible
in
favourable
circumstances—I
have
twice achieved it—to prevent the recurrence of
the condition, or of its antithesis, by analytic
treatment during the lucid intervals between
the attacks. One learns from this that in melan
cholia and mania as well as other conditions a
special kind of solution of a conflict is going
on, which in all its pre-requisites agrees with
those of the other neuroses. You may imagine
how much there remains for psycho-analysis to
do in this field.
I also told you that, by analysis of the nar
cissistic disorders, we hoped
to
gain
some
knowledge of the composition of the ego and
of its structure out of various faculties and
elements. We have made a beginning towards
this at one point. From analysis of the de
lusion of observation we have come to the con
clusion that in the ego there exists a faculty
that incessantly watches, criticizes, and com
pares, and in this way is set against the other
part of the ego. In our opinion, therefore, the
patient reveals a truth which has not been ap
preciated as such when he complains that at
every step he is spied upon and observed, that
his very thought is known and examined. He
has erred only in attributing this disagreeable
power to something outside himself and for
eign to him; he perceives within his ego the
rule of a faculty which measures his actual ego
and all his activities by an ego-ideal, which he
has created for himself in the course of his
development. We also infer that he created
this ideal for the purpose of recovering thereby
the self-satisfaction bound up with the pri
mary infantile narcissism, which since those
days has suffered so many shocks and mortifi
cation. We recognize in this self-criticizing fac
ulty the ego-censorship, the conscience; it is
the same censorship as that exercised at night
upon
dreams,
from
which
the
repressions
against inadmissible wish-excitations proceed.
When this faculty disintegrates in the delusion
of being observed, we are able to detect its
origin and that it arose out of the influence of
parents and those who trained the child, to
gether with his social surroundings, by a proc
ess of identification with certain of these per
sons who were taken as a model.
These are some of the results yielded by the
application of psycho-analysis to the narcis-

[626a]
General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis
623
sistic disorders. They are still not very numer
ous, and many of them still lack that sharpness
of outline which cannot be achieved in a new
field until some degree of familiarity has been
attained. All of them have been made pos
sible by
employing the
conception
of egolibido,
or
narcissistic
libido,
by
means
of
which we can extend the conclusions estab
lished for the transference neuroses on to the
narcissistic neuroses. But now you will put the
question whether it is possible for us to bring
all the disorders of the narcissistic neuroses
and of the psychoses into the range of the libidotheory, for us to find the libidinal factor in
mental life always and everywhere responsi
ble for the development of disease, and for us
never to have to attribute any part in the cau
sation to the same alteration in the functions
of the self-preservative instincts. Well now, it
seems to me that decision on this point is not
very urgent, and above all that the time is not
yet ripe for us to make it; we may leave it
calmly to be decided by advance in the work
of science. I
should not be astonished if it
should prove that the
capacity to induce a
pathogenic effect were actually a prerogative
of the libidinal impulses, so that the theory of
the libido would
triumph all along the line
from the actual neuroses to the severest psy
chotic form of individual derangement. For
we know it to be characteristic of the libido
that it refuses to subordinate itself to reality
in life, to necessity. But I consider it extremely
probable that the ego-instincts are involved
secondarily and that disturbances in their func
tions may be necessitated by the pathogenic
affections of the libido. Nor can I see that the
direction taken by our investigations will be
invalidated if we should have to recognize that
in severe psychosis the ego-instincts themselves
are primarily deranged; the future will decide
—for you, at least.
Let me return for a moment to anxiety, in
order to throw light upon the one obscure point
we left there. We said that the relation be
tween anxiety and libido, otherwise so well de
fined, is with difficulty harmonized with the
almost indisputable assumption that objective
anxiety in the face of danger is the expression
of the self-preservative instincts. But how if
the anxiety-affect is provided, not by self-in
terest on the part of the ego-instincts, but by
the ego-libido? The condition of anxiety is
after
all
invariably
detrimental;
its
disad
vantage becomes conspicuous when it reaches
an intense degree. It then interferes with the

[626b]
action that alone wouldbe expedientand would
serve the purposes of self-preservation, whether
it be flight or self-defence. Therefore if we
ascribe the affective component of objective
anxiety to the ego-libido, and the action under
taken to the ego-preservative instincts, every
theoretical difficulty will be overcome. You will
hardly maintain seriously that we run away
because we perceive fear? No, we perceive fear
and we take to flight, out of the common
impulse that is roused by the perception of
danger. Men who have survived experiences of
imminent danger to life tell us that they did
not perceive any fear, that they simply acted—
for instance,pointed their gun at the oncoming
beast—which was undoubtedly the best thing
they could do.
TWENTY-SEVENTH LECTURE
Transference
Now that we are coming to the end of our dis
cussions you will feel a certain expectation
which must not be allowed to mislead you.
You are probably thinking that I surely have
not led you through all these complicated mazes
of psycho-analysis only to dismiss you at the
end without a word about the therapy, upon
which after all the possibility of undertaking
psycho-analytic work depends. As a matter of
fact I could not possibly leave out this aspect
of it; for some of the phenomena belonging to
it will teach you a new fact, without knowledge
of which you would be quite unable to assimi
late properly your understanding of the dis
eases we have been studying.
I know you do not expect directions in the
technique of practising analysis for therapeutic
purposes; you only want to know in a general
way by what means the psycho-analytic ther
apy works and to gain a general idea of what
it accomplishes. And you have an undeniable
right to learn this; nevertheless I am not going
to tell you—I am going to insist upon your
finding out for yourselves.
Think for a moment!
You have already
learnt everything essential, from the conditions
by which illness is provoked to all the factors
which take
effect within the diseased mind.
Where is the opening in all this for therapeutic
influence? First of all there is the hereditary
disposition—we do not often mention it be
cause it is so strongly emphasized in other
quarters and we have nothing new to say about
it. But do not suppose that we underestimate
it; as practitioners, we are well aware of its

[627a]
624
Sigmund Freud
power. In any event we can do nothing to
change it; for us also it is a fixed datum in
the problem, which sets a limit to our efforts.
Next, there is the influence of the experiences
of childhood, whichwe are accustomed in anal
ysis to rank as very important; they belongto
the past, we cannot undo them. Then there is
all that unhappiness in life which we have in
cluded under frustration in reality, from which
all the absence of love in life proceeds—name
ly, poverty, family strife, mistaken choice in
marriage, unfavourable social conditions, and
the severity of the demands by which moral
convention oppresses the individual. There is
indeed a wide opening for a very effective
treatment in all this; but it would have to
follow the course of the dispensations of Kaiser
Joseph in the Vienneselegend—thebenevolent
despotism of a potentate before whose will
men bow and difficulties disappear! But who
are we that we can exert such beneficence as a
therapeutic measure? Poor as we are and with
out influence socially, with our living to earn
by our medical practice, we are not even in a
position to extend our efforts to penniless folk,
as other physicians with other methods can do;
our treatment takes too much time and labour
for that. But perhaps you are still clinging on
to one of the factors put forward and believe
you see an opening for our influence there. If
the conventional restrictions imposed by soci
ety have had a part in the privations forced
upon the patient, the treatment could give him
the courage and even directly advise him to
defy these obstacles, and to seize satisfactions
and health for himself at the cost of failing to
achieve an ideal which, though highly esteemed,
is after all often set at naught by the world.
Health is to be won by "free living," then.
There would be this blot upon analysis, to be
sure, that it would not be serving general mo
rality; what it gave to the individual it would
take from the rest of the world.
But now, who has given you such a false
impression of analysis? It is out of the ques
tion that part of the analytic treatment should
consist of advice to "live freely"—if for no
other reason because we ourselves tell you that
a stubborn conflict is going on in the patient
between libidinal desires and sexual repression,
between sensual and ascetic tendencies. This
conflict is not resolved by helping one side to
win a victory over the other. It is true we see
that in neurotics ascetism has gained the day;
the result of which is that the suppressed sex
ual impulses have found a vent for themselves

[627b]
in the symptoms. If we were to make victory
possible to the sensual side instead, the dis
regarded forces repressing sexuality would have
to indemnify themselves by symptoms. Neither
of these measures will succeed in ending the
inner conflict; one side in either event will
remain unsatisfied. There are but few cases in
which the conflict is so unstable that a factor
like medical advice can have any effect upon
it, and these cases do not really require analytic
treatment. People who can be so easily influ
enced by physicians would have found their
own way to that solution without this influence.
After all, you know that a young man living
in abstinence who makes up his mind to illicit
sexual intercourse, or an unsatisfied wife who
seeks compensation with a lover, does not as
a rule wait for the permission of a physician,
still less of an analyst, to do so.
In considering this question, people usually
overlook the essential point of the whole dif
ficulty—namely, that the pathogenic conflict in
a neurotic must not be confounded with a nor
mal struggle between conflicting impulses all
of which are in the same mental field. It is a
battle between two forces of which one has
succeeded in coming to the level of the pre
conscious and conscious part of the mind, while
the other has been confined on the unconscious
level. That is why the conflict can never have Ia
final outcome one way or the other; the antag
onists meet each other as little as the whale
and the polar bear in the well-known story. An
effective decision can be reached only when
they confront each other on the same ground.
And, in my opinion, to accomplish this is the
sole task of the treatment.
Besides this, I can assure you that you are
quite misinformed if you imagine that advice
and guidance concerning conduct in life forms
an integral part of the analytic method. On the
contrary, so far as possible we refrain from
playing the part of mentor; we want nothing
better than that the patient should find his
own solutions for himself. To this end we ex
pect him to postpone all vital decisions affect
ing his life, such as choice of career, business
enterprises, marriage or divorce, during treat
ment and to execute them only after it has
been
completed. Now confess that you had
imagined something very different. Only with
certain very young or quite helpless and de
fenceless persons is it impossible to keep within
such strict limitations as we should wish. With
them we have to combine the positions of phy
sician and educator; we are then well aware of

[628a]
General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis
625
our responsibility and act with the necessary
caution.
You must not be led away by my eagerness
to defend myself against the accusation that in
analytic treatment neurotics are encouraged to
"live a free life" and conclude from it that we
influence them in favour of conventional mo
rality. That is at least as far removed from
our purpose as the other. We are not reformers,
it is true; we are merely observers; but we
cannot avoid observing with critical eyes, and
we have found it impossible to give our support
to conventional sexual morality or to approve
highly of the means by which society attempts
to arrange the practical problems of sexuality
in life. We can demonstrate with ease that what
the world calls its code of
morals demands
more sacrifices than it is worth, and that its
behaviour is neither dictated by honesty nor
instituted with wisdom. We do not absolve our
patients from listening to these criticisms; we
accustom them to an unprejudiced considera
tion of sexual matters like all other matters;
and if after they have become independent by
the effect of the treatment they choose some
intermediate course between unrestrained sex
ual licence and unconditional asceticism, our
conscience is not burdened whatever the out
come. We say to ourselves that anyone who
has
successfully
undergone
the
training
of
learning and recognizing the truth about him
self is
henceforth strengthened
against
the
dangers of immorality, even if his standard of
morality should in some respect deviate from
the common one. Incidentally, we must beware
of overestimating the importance of abstinence
in affecting neurosis; only a minority of patho
genic situations due to frustration and the sub
sequent accumulation of libido thereby induced
can be relieved by the kind of sexual inter
course that is procurable without any difficulty.
So you cannot explain the therapeutic effect
of psycho-analysis by supposing that it permits
patients free sexual indulgence; you must look
round for something else.
I think that one of
the remarks I made while I was disposing of
this conjecture on your part will have put you
on the right track. Probably it is the substitu
tion of something conscious for something un
conscious, the transformation of the uncon
scious thoughts into conscious thoughts, that
makes our work effective. You are right; that
is exactly what it is. By extending the uncon
scious into consciousness the repressions are
raised, the conditions of symptom-formation
are abolished, and the pathogenic conflict ex

[628b]
changed for a normal one which must be de
cided one way or the other. We do nothing for
our patients but enable this one mental change
to take place in them; the extent to which it
is achieved is the extent of the benefit we do
them. Where there is no repression or mental
process analogous to it to be undone there is
nothing for our therapy to do.
The aim of our efforts may be expressed in
various formulas—making conscious the un
conscious, removing the repressions, filling in
the gaps in memory; they all amount to the
same thing. But perhaps you are dissatisfied
with this declaration; you imagined the recov
ery of a nervous person rather differently, that
after he had been subjected to the laborious
process of psycho-analysis he would emerge a
different person altogether, and then you hear
that the whole thing only amounts to his having
a little less that is unconscious and a little more
that is conscious in him than before. Well, you
probably do not appreciate the importance of
an inner change of this kind. A neurotic who
has been cured has really become a different
person, although at bottom of course he re
mains the same—that is, he has become his
best self, what he would have been under the
most favourable conditions. That, however, is
a great deal. Then when you hear of all that
has to be done, of the tremendous exertion
required to carry out this apparently trifling
change in his mental life, the significance at
tached to these differences between the various
mental levels will appear more comprehensible
to you.
I will digress a moment to enquire whether
you know what a causal therapy means? This
name is given to a procedure which puts aside
the manifestations of a disease and looks for
a point of attack in order to eradicate the
cause of the illness. Now is psycho-analysis a
causal therapy or not? The answer is not a sim
ple one, but it may give us an opportunity to
convince ourselves of the futility of such ques
tions. In so far as psycho-analytic therapy does
not aim immediately at removing the symptoms
it is conducted like a causal therapy. In other
respects you may say it is not, for we have
followed the causal chain back far beyond the
repressions to the instinctive predispositions,
their relative intensity in the constitution, and
the aberrations in the course of their develop
ment. Now suppose that it were possible by
some
chemical
means to
affect
this
mental
machinery, to increase or decrease the amount
of libido available at any given moment, or to

[629a]
626
Sigmund Freud
reinforce the strength of one impulse at the
expense of another—that would be a causal
therapy in the literal sense, and our analysis
would be the indispensable preliminary work
of reconnoitring the
ground.
As you know,
there is at present no question of any such
influence upon the processes of the libido; our
mental therapy makes its attack at another
point in the concatenation, not quite at the
place where we perceive the manifestations to
be rooted, but yet comparatively far behind
the symptoms themselves, at a place which be
comes
accessible to
us in very remarkable
circumstances.
What then have we to do in order to bring
what is unconscious in the patient into con
sciousness? At one time we thought that would
be very simple; all we need do would be to
identify this unconscious matter and then tell
the patient what it was. However, we know
already that that was a short-sighted mistake.
Our knowledge of what is unconscious in him is
not equivalent to his knowledge of it; when we
tell him what we know, he does not assimilate
it in placeof his own unconscious thoughts, but
alongside of them, and very little has been
changed. We have rather to regard this uncon
scious material topographically; we have to
look for it in his memory at the actual spot
where the repression of it originally ensued.
This repression must be removed, and then the
substitution of conscious thought for uncon
scious thought can be effected straightway. How
is a repression such as this to be removed? Our
work enters upon a second phase here; first, the
discovery of the repression, and then the re
moval of the resistance which maintains this
repression.
How can this resistance be got rid of? In the
same way: by finding it out and telling the
patient about it. The resistance, too, arises in
a repression, either from the very one which
we are endeavouring to dispel, or in one that
occurred earlier. It is set up by the counter
charge which rose up to repress the repellent
impulse. So that we now do just the same as
we were
trying to do before; we interpret,
identify, and inform the patient; but this time
we are doing it at the right spot. The counter
charge or the resistance is not part of the un
conscious, but of the ego which co-operates
with us, and this is so, even if it is not actually
conscious. We know that a difficulty arises here
in the ambiguity of the word unconscious, on
the one hand, as a phenomenon, on the other
hand, as a system. That sounds very obscure

[629b]
and difficult; but after all it is only a repetition
of what we have said before, is it not? We
have come to this point already long ago. Well
then, we expect that this resistance will be
abandoned, and the counter-charge withdrawn,
when we have made the recognition of them
possible by our work of interpretation. What
are the instinctive propelling forces at our dis
posal to make this possible? First, the patient's
desire for recovery, which impelled him to sub
mit himself to the work in co-operation with
us, and secondly, the aid of his intelligence
which
we
reinforce
by
our
interpretation.
There is no doubt that it is easier for the pa
tient to recognize the resistance with his intel
ligence, and to identify the idea in his uncon
scious which corresponds to it, if we have first
given him an idea which rouses his expectations
in regard to it. If I say to you: "Look up at
the sky and you will see a balloon," you will
find it much more quickly than if I merely tell
you to look up and see whether you can see
anything; a student who looks through a mi
croscope for the first time is told by the in
structor what he is to see; otherwise he sees
nothing, although it is there and quite visible.
And now for the fact! In quite a number of
the various forms of nervous illness, in the
hysterias, anxiety-conditions, obsessional neu
roses, our hypothesis proves sound. By seeking
out the repression in this way, discovering the
resistances, indicating the repressed, it is actu
ally possible to accomplish the task, to over
come the resistances, to break down the repres
sion, and to change something unconscious into
something conscious. As we do this we get Ia
vivid impression of how, as each individual
resistance is being mastered, a violent battle
goes on in the soul of the patient—a normal
mental struggle between two tendencies on the
same ground, between the motives striving to
maintain the counter-charge and those which
are ready to abolish it. The first of these are
the old motives which originally erected the
repression; among the second are found new
ones more recently acquired which it is hoped
will decide the conflict in our favour. We have
succeeded in revivifying the old battle of the
repression again, in bringing the issue, so long
ago decided, up for revision again. The new
contribution we make to it lies, first of all, in
demonstrating that the original solution led to
illness and in promising that a different one
would pave the way to health, and secondly,
in pointing out that the circumstances have all
changed immensely since the time of that orig-

[630a]
General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis
627
inal repudiation of these impulses. Then the
ego was weak, infantile, and perhaps had reason
to shrink with horror from the claims of the
libido as being dangerous to it. Today it is
strong and experienced and moreover has a
helper at hand in the physician. So we may
expect to lead the revived conflict through a
better outcome than repression; and, as has
been said, in hysteria, anxiety-neurosis, and the
obsessional neurosis success in the main justi
fies our claims.
There are other forms of illness, however,
with which our therapeutic treatment never is
successful, in spite of the similarity of the con
ditions. In them also there was originally a
conflict between ego and libido, leading to re
pression—although this conflict may be charac
terized by topographical differences from the
conflict of the transference neuroses; in them
too it is possible to trace out the point in the
patient's life at which the repressions occurred;
we apply the same method, are ready to make
the same assurances, offer the same assistance
by telling the patient what to look out for; and
here also the interval in time between the pres
ent and the point at which the repressions were
established is all in favour of a better outcome
of the conflict. And yet we cannot succeed in
overcoming one resistance or in removing one
of the repressions. These patients, paranoiacs,
melancholies, and those suffering from demen
tia praecox, remain on the whole unaffected,
proof against psycho-analytic treatment. What
can be the cause of this? It is not due to lack
of intelligence; a certain degree of intellectual
capacity must naturally be stipulated for anal
ysis, but there is no deficiency in this respect
in, for instance, the very quick-witted deduc
tive paranoiac. Nor are any of the other pro
pelling forces regularly absent: melancholies,
for instance, in contrast to paranoiacs, experi
ence a very high degree of realization that they
are ill and that their sufferings are due to this;
but they are not on that account any more
accessible to influence.
In this we are con
fronted with a fact that we do not understand,
and are therefore called upon to doubt whether
we have really understood all the conditions of
the success possible with the other neuroses.
When we keep to consideration of hysterical
and obsessional neurotics we are very soon con
fronted with a second fact, for which we were
quite unprepared. After the treatment has pro
ceeded for a while we notice that these patients
behave in a quite peculiar manner towards our
selves. We thought indeed that we had taken

[630b]
into account all the motive forces affecting the
treatment and had reasoned out the situation
between ourselves and the patient fully, so that
it balancedlike a sum in arithmetic; and then,
after all, something seems to slip in which was
quite left out of our calculation. This new and
unexpected feature is in itself many-sided and
complex; I will first of all describe some of
its more frequent and simpler forms to you.
We observe then that the patient, who ought
to be thinking of nothing but the solution of
his own distressing conflicts, begins to develop
a particular interest in the person of the phy
sician. Everything connected with this person
seems to him more important than his own
affairs and to distract him from his illness.
Relations with the patient then become for a
time very agreeable; he is particularly docile,
endeavours to show his gratitude wherever he
can, exhibits a fineness of character and other
good qualities which we had perhaps not an
ticipated in him. The analyst thus forms a very
good opinion of the patient and values his luck
in being able to render assistance to such an
admirable personality. If the physician has oc
casion to see the patient's relatives he hears
with satisfaction that this esteem is mutual.
The patient at home is never tired of praising
the analyst and attributing new virtues to him.
"He has quite lost his head over you; he puts
implicit trust in you; everything you say is
like a revelation to him," say the relatives.
Here and there, one among this chorus having
sharper eyes will say: "It is positively boring
the way he never speaks of anything but you:
he quotes you all the time."
We will hope that the physician is modest
enough to ascribe the patient's estimate of his
value to the hopes of recovery which he has
been able to offer to him, and to the widening
in the patient's intellectual horizon consequent
upon the surprising revelations entailed by the
treatment and their liberating influence. The
analysis too makes splendid progress under
these conditions, the patient understands the
suggestions offered to him, concentrates upon
the tasks appointed by the treatment, the ma
terial needed—his recollections and associations
—is abundantly available; he astonishes the
analyst by the sureness and accuracy of his
interpretations, and the latter has only to ob
serve with satisfaction how readily and will
ingly a sick man will accept all the new psycho
logical ideas that are so hotly contested by the
healthy in the world outside. A general im
provement in the patient's condition, objec-

[631a]
628
Sigmund Freud
tively confirmed on all sides, also accompanies
this harmonious relationship in the analysis.
But such fair weather cannot last for ever.
There comes a day when it clouds over. There
begin to be difficulties in the analysis; the pa
tient says he cannot think of anything more to
say. One has an unmistakable impression that
he is no longer interested in the work, and that
he is casually ignoring the injunction given him
to say everything that comes into his mind and
to yield to none of the critical objections that
occur to him. His behaviour is not dictated by
the situation of the treatment; it is as if he
had not made an agreement to that effect with
the physician; he is obviously preoccupied with
something which at the same time he wishes
to reserve to himself. This is a situation in
which the treatment is in danger. Plainly a
very powerful resistance has risen up. What
can have happened?
If it is possible to clear up this state of
things, the cause of the disturbance is found
to consist in certain intense feelings of affection
which the patient has transferred on to the
physician, not accounted for by the latter's
behaviour nor by the relationship involved by
the treatment. The form in which this affection
ate feeling is expressed and the goal it seeks
naturally depend upon the circumstances of
the situation between the two persons. If one
of them is a young girl and the other still a
fairly young man, the impression received is
that of normal love; it seems natural that a
girl should fall in love with a man with whom
she is much alone and can speak of very inti
mate things, and who is in the position of an
adviser with authority—we shall probably over
look the fact that in a neurotic girl some dis
turbance of the capacity for love is rather to
be expected. The farther removed the situation
between the two persons is from this supposed
example, the more unaccountable it is to find
that nevertheless the same kind of
feeling
comes to light in other cases. It may be still
comprehensible when a young woman who is
unhappily married seems to be overwhelmed
by a serious passion for her physician, if he is
still unattached, and that she should be ready
to seek a divorce and give herself to him, or,
where circumstances would prevent this,
to
enter into a secret love-affair with him. That
sort of thing, indeed, is known to occur outside
psycho-analysis. But in this situation girls and
women make the most
astonishing
confes
sions which reveal a quite peculiar attitude on
their part to the therapeutic problem: they had

[631b]
always known that nothing but love would cure
them, and from the beginning of the treatment
they had expected that this relationship would
at last yield them what life had so far denied
them. It was only with this hope that they had
taken such pains over the analysis and had
conquered all their difficulties
in
disclosing
their thoughts. We ourselves can add: "and
had understood so easily all that is usually so
hard to accept." But a confession of this kind
astounds us; all our calculations are blown to
the winds. Could it be that we have omitted
the
most
important element in
the
whole
problem?
And actually it is so; the more experience
we gain the less possible does it become for us
to contest this new factor, which alters the
whole problem and puts our scientific calcula
tions to shame. The first few times one might
think that the analytic treatment had stumbled
upon an obstruction in the shape of an acciden
tal occurrence, extraneous to its purpose and
unconnected with it in origin. But when it hap
pens that this kind of attachment to the physi
cian regularly evinces itself in every fresh case,
under the most unfavourable conditions, and
always appears, even in circumstances of a pos
itively grotesque incongruity—in elderly wom
en, in relation to grey-bearded men, even on
occasions when our judgment assures us that
no temptations exist—then we are compelled
to give up the idea of a disturbing accident
and to admit that we have to deal with a phe
nomenon in itself essentially bound up with the
nature of the disease.
The new fact which we are thus unwillingly
compelled to recognize, we call transference.
By this we mean a transference of feelings on
to the person of the physician, because we do
not believe that the situation in the treatment
can account for the origin of such feelings. We
are much more disposed to suspect that the
whole of this readiness to develop feeling origi
nates in another source; that it was previously
formed in the patient, and has seized the op
portunity provided by the treatment to transfer
itself on to the person of the physician. The
transference can express itself as a passionate
petitioning for love, or it can take less extreme
forms; where a young girl and an elderly man
are concerned, instead of the wish to be wife
or mistress, a wish to be adopted as a favourite
daughter may come to light, the libidinous de
sire can modify itself and propose itself as a
wish for an everlasting, but ideally platonic
friendship. Many women understand how to

[632a]
sublimate the transference and to mould it un
til it acquires a sort of justification for its
existence; others have to express it in its crude,
original, almost impossible form. But at bot
tom it is always the same, and its origin in the
same source can never be mistaken.
Before we enquire where we are to range
this new fact, we will amplify the description
of it a little. How is it with our male patients?
There at least we might hope to be spared the
troublesome element of sex difference and sex
attraction. Well, the answer is very much the
same as with women. The same attachment to
the physician, the same overestimation of his
qualities, the same adoption of his interests,
the same jealousy against all those connected
with him. The sublimated kinds of transfer
ence are the forms more frequently met with
between man and man, and the directly sexual
declaration more rarely, in the same degree to
which the manifest homosexuality of the pa
tient is subordinated to
the other ways by
which this component-instinct can express it
self. Also, it is in male patients that the analyst
more frequently observes a manifestation of
the transference which at the first glance seems
to controvert the description of it just given—
that is, the hostile or negative transference.
First of all, let us realize at once that the
transference exists in the patient from the be
ginning of the treatment, and is for a time the
strongest impetus in the work. Nothing is seen
of it and one does not need to trouble about it
as long as its effect is favourable to the work
in
which the two persons are
co-operating.
When it becomes transformed into a resistance,
attention must be paid to it; and then it ap
pears that the two different and contrasting
states of mind have supervened in it and have
altered its attitude to the treatment: first, when
the affectionate attraction has become so strong
and betrays signs of its origin in sexual desire
so clearly that it was bound to arouse an inner
opposition against itself; and secondly, when it
consists in antagonistic instead of affectionate
feeling. The hostile feelings as a rule appear
later than the affectionate and under cover of
them; when both occur simultaneously they
provide a very good exemplification of that
ambivalence in feeling which governs most of
our intimate relationships with other human
beings. The hostile feelings therefore indicate
an attachment of feeling quite similar to the
affectionate, just as defiance indicates a similar
dependence upon the other person to that be
longing to obedience, though with a reversed

[632b]
General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis
629
prefix. There can be no doubt that the hostile
feelings against the analyst deserve the name
of transference, for the situation in the treat
ment certainly gives no adequate occasion for
them; the necessity for regarding the negative
transference in this light is a confirmation of
our previous similar view of the positive or
affectionate variety.
Where the transference springs from, what
difficulties it
provides
for us, how we can
overcome them, and what advantage we can
finally derive from it, are questions which can
only be adequately dealt with in a technical
exposition of the analytic method; I can merely
touch upon them here. It is out of the question
thatwe should yield to the demands made by the
patient under the influence of his transference;
it would be nonsensical to reject them unkindly,
and still more so, indignantly. The transference
is overcome by showing the patient that his
feelings do not originate in the current situa
tion, and do not really concern the person of
the physician, but that he is reproducing some
thing that had happened to him long ago. In
this way we require him to transform his repe
tition into recollection. Then the transference
which, whether affectionate or hostile, every
time seemed the greatest menace to the cure
becomes its best instrument, so that with its
help we can unlock the closed doors in the soul.
I should like, however, to say a few words to
dispel the unpleasant effects of the shock that
this unexpected phenomenon must have been
to you. After all, we must not forget that this
illness of the patient's which we undertake to
analyse is not a finally accomplished and, as it
were, consolidated thing; but that it is growing
and continuing its development all the time
like a living thing. The beginning of the treat
ment puts no stop to this development; but,
as soon as the treatment has taken a hold upon
the patient, it appears that the entire produc
tivity of the illness henceforward becomes con
centrated in one direction—namely, upon the
relationship to the physician. The transference
then
becomes
comparable
to
the
cambium
layer between the wood and the bark of a tree,
from which proceeds the formation
of
new
tissue and the growth of the trunk in diameter.
As soon as the transference has taken on this
significance the work upon the patient's recol
lections recedes far into the background. It is
then not incorrect to say that we no longer have
to do with the previous illness, but with a
newly created and transformed neurosis which
has replaced the earlier one. This new edition

[633a]
630
Sigmund
of the old disease has been followed from its
inception, one sees it come to light and grow,
and is particularly familiar with it since one is
oneself its central object. All the
patient's
symptoms have abandoned their original sig
nificance and have adapted themselves to a
new meaning, which is contained in their re
lationship to the transference; or else only
those symptoms remain which were capable of
beingadapted in this way.The conquest of this
new artificiallyacquired neurosis coincides with
the removal of the illness which existed prior
to the treatment, that is, with accomplishing
the therapeutic task. The person who has be
come normal and free from the influence of
repressed instinctive tendencies in his relation
ship to the physician remains so in his own
life when the physician has again been removed
from it.
The transference has this all-important, ab
solutely central significance for the cure in
hysteria, anxiety-hysteria, and the obsessional
neurosis, which are in consequence rightly
grouped together as the transference neuroses.
Anyone who has grasped from analytic experi
ence a true impression of the fact of transfer
ence can never again doubt the nature of the
suppressed impulses which have manufactured
an outlet for themselves in the symptoms; and
he will require no stronger proof of their libid
inal character. We may say that our conviction
of the significance of the symptoms as a sub
stitutive gratification of the libido was only
finally and definitely established by evaluating
the phenomenon of transference.
Now, however, we are called upon to correct
our former dynamic conception of the process
of cure and to bring it into agreement with the
new discovery. When the patient has to fight
out the normal conflict with the resistances
which we have discovered in him by analysis,
he requires a powerful propelling force to in
fluence him towards the decision we aim at,
leading to recovery. Otherwise it might happen
that he would decide for a repetition of the
previous outcome, and allow that which had
been raised into consciousness to
slip back
again under repression. The outcome in this
struggle is not decided by his intellectual in
sight—it is neither strong enough nor free
enough to accomplish such a thing—but solely
by his relationship to the physician. In so far
as his transference bears the positive sign, it
clothes the physician with authority, transforms
itself into faith in his findings and in his views.
Without this kind of transference or with a

[633b]
Freud
negative one, the physician and his arguments
would never even be listened to. Faith repeats
the history of its own origin; it is a derivative
of love and at first it needed no arguments.
Not until later does it admit them so far as
to take them into critical consideration, if they
have been offered by someone who is loved.
Without this support, arguments have no weight
with the patient, never do have any with most
people in life. A human being is therefore on
the whole only accessible to influence, even on
the intellectual side, in so far as he is capable
of investing objects with libido; and we have
good cause to recognize, and to fear, in the
measure of his narcissism a barrier to his sus
ceptibility to influence, even by the best ana
lytic technique.
The capacity for the radiation of libido to
wards other persons in object-investment must,
of course, be ascribed to all normal people;
the tendency to transference in neurotics, so
called, is only an exceptional intensification of
a
universal
characteristic. Now it would be
very remarkable if a human character-trait of
this importance and universality had never been
observed and made use of. And this has really
been done. Bernheim with unerring perspicacity,
based the theory of hypnotic manifestations
upon the proposition that all human beings are
more or less open to suggestion, are suggestible.
What he called suggestibility is nothing else
but the tendency to transference, rather too
narrowly circumscribed so that the negative
transference did not come within its scope.
But Bernheim could never say what suggestion
actually was nor how it arises; it was an axi
omatic fact to him and he could give no ex
planation of its origin. He did not recognize
the dependence of suggestibility on sexuality,
on the functioning of the libido. And we have
to admit that we have only abandoned hypnosis
in our methods in order to discover suggestion
again in the shape of transference.
But now I will pause and let you take up
the thread. I observe that an objection is in
vading your thoughts with such violence that
it would deprive you of all power of attention
if it were not given expression. "So now at last
you have confessed that you too work with the
aid of suggestion like the hypnotists. We have
been thinking so all along. But then, what is
the use of all these round-about routes by way
of past experiences,
discovering the uncon
scious material, interpreting and retranslating
the distortions, and the enormous expenditure
of time, trouble, and money, when, after all,

[634a]
General Introduction
the only effective agent is suggestion? Why do
you not suggest directly against the symptoms,
as others do who are honest hypnotists? And
besides, if you are going to make out that by
these round-about routes you have made nu
merous
important
psychological
discoveries,
which are concealed in direct suggestion, who
is to vouch for their validity? Are not they too
the result of suggestion, of unintentional sug
gestion, that is? Cannot you impress upon the
patient what you please and whatever seems
good to you in this direction also?"
What you charge me with in this way is ex
ceedingly interesting and must be answered.
But I cannot do that today; our time is up.
Till next time, then. You will see that I shall
be answerable to you. Today I must finish what
I began. I promised to explain to you, through
the factor of transference, why it is that our
therapeutic efforts have no success in the nar
cissistic neuroses.
I can do it in a few words, and you will see
how simply the riddle is solved, and how well
everything fits together. Experience shows that
persons suffering from the narcissistic neuroses
have no capacity for transference, or only in
sufficient remnants of it. They turn from the
physician, not in hostility, but in indifference.
Therefore they are not to be influenced by
him; what he says leaves them cold, makes no
impression on them, and therefore the process
of cure which can be carried through with
others, the revivification of the pathogenic con
flict and the overcoming of the resistance due
to the repressions, cannot be effected with
them. They remain as they are. They have
often enough undertaken attempts at recovery
on their own account which have led to patho
logical results; we can do nothing to alter this.
On the basis of our clinical observations of
these patients, we stated that they must have
abandoned the investment of objects with li
bido and transformed object-libido into egolibido. By this we differentiated them from the
first group of neurotics (hysteria, anxiety, and
obsessional neurosis). Their behaviour during
the attempt to cure them confirms this suspi
cion. They produce no transference, and are,
therefore, inaccessible to our efforts, not to be
cured by us.
TWENTY-EIGHTH LECTURE
The Analytic Therapy
You know what we are going to discuss today.
When I
admitted that the influence of the

[634b]
to Psycho-Analysis
631
psycho-analytic therapy is essentially founded
upon transference, f.e., upon suggestion, you
asked me why we do not make use of direct
suggestion, and you linked this up with a doubt
whether, in view of the fact that suggestion
plays such a large part, we can still vouch for
the objectivity of our psychological discover
ies. I promised to give you a comprehensive
answer.
Direct suggestion is suggestion delivered di
rectly against the forms taken by the symp
toms, a struggle between your authority and
the motives underlying the disease.
In this
struggle you do not
trouble yourself about
these motives, you only require the patient to
suppress the manifestation of them in the form
of symptoms. In the main it makes no differ
ence whether you place the patient under hyp
nosis or not. Bernheim, with his characteristic
acuteness, repeatedly stated that
suggestion
was the essence of the manifestations of hyp
notism, and that hypnosis itself was already a
result of suggestion, a suggested
condition;
he preferred to use suggestion in the waking
state, which can achieve the same results in
hypnosis.
Now which shall I take first, the results of
experience or theoretical considerations?
Let us begin with experience. I sought out
Bernheim in Nancy in 1889 and became a pupil
of his; I translated his book on suggestion into
German. For years I made use of hypnotic
treatment, first with prohibitory suggestions
and later combined with Breuer's system of the
fullest inquiry into the patient's life;
I can
therefore speak from wide experience about
the results of the hypnotic or suggestive thera
py. According to an old medical saying, an
ideal therapy should be rapid, reliable and not
disagreeable to the patient; Bernheim's method
certainly fulfilled two of these requirements. It
was much more rapid, that is, incomparably
more rapid in its course than the analytic, and
it involved the patient in no trouble or dis
comfort. For the physician, it eventually be
came monotonous; it meant treating every case
in the same way, always employing the same
ritual to prohibit the existence of the most di
verse symptoms, without being able to grasp
anything of their meaning or significance. It
was a sort of mechanical drudgery—hodman's
work—not scientific work; it was reminiscent
of magic, conjuring, and hocus-pocus, yet in
the patient's interests one had to ignore that.
In the third desideratum, however, it failed; it
was not reliable in any respect. It could be

[635a]
632
Sigmund Freud
employed in certain cases only and not in
others; with some much could be achieved by
it, and with others very little, one never knew
why. But worse than its capricious nature was
the lack of permanence in the results; after a
time, if one heard from the patient again, the
old malady had reappeared or had been re
placed by another. Then one could begin to
hypnotize again. In the background there was
the warning of experienced men against rob
bing the patient of his independence by fre
quent repetitions of hypnosis, and against ac
customing him to this treatment as though it
were a narcotic. It is true, on the other hand,
that at times everything fell out just as one
could wish; one obtained complete and lasting
success with little difficulty; but the conditions
of this satisfactory outcome remained hidden.
In one' case, when I had completely removed a
severe condition by a short hypnotic treatment,
it recurred unchanged after the patient
(a
woman) had developed ill feeling against me
without just cause; then after a reconciliation
I was able to effect its disappearance again and
this time far more thoroughly; but it reap
peared again when she had a second time be
come hostile to me. Another time I had the
following experience: during the treatment of
an especially obstinate attack in a patient
whom I had several times relieved of nervous
symptoms, she suddenly threw her arms round
my neck. Whether one wished to do so or not,
this kind of thing finally made it imperative to
enquire into the problem of the nature and
source of one's suggestive authority.
So much for experience; it shows that in
abandoning direct suggestion we have given up
nothing irreplaceable. Now let us link on to
the facts a few comments. The exercise of the
hypnotic method makes as little demand for
effort on the part of the patient as it does on
the physician. The method is in complete har
mony with the view of the neuroses generally
accepted by the majority of medical men. The
practitioner says to the nervous person: "There
is nothing the matter with you; it is merely
nervousness, therefore a few words from me
will scatter all your troubles to the winds in
five minutes." But it is contrary to all our be
liefs about energy in general that a minimal
exertion should be able to remove a heavy load
by approaching it directly without the assist
ance of any suitably devised appliance. In so
far as the circumstances are at all compara
ble, experience shows that this trick cannot be
performed successfully with the neuroses. I

[635b]
know, however, that this argument is not unas
sailable; there are such things as explosions.
In the light of the knowledge we have ob
tained through psycho-analysis, the difference
between hypnotic and psycho-analytic sugges
tion may be described as follows: The hypnotic
therapy endeavours to cover up and as it were
to whitewash something going on in the mind,
the analytic to lay bare and to remove some
thing. The first works cosmetically, the second
surgically. The first employs suggestion to in
terdict the symptoms; it reinforces the repres
sions, but otherwise it leaves unchanged all the
processes that have led to symptom-formation.
Analytic therapy takes hold deeper down nearer
the roots of the disease, among the conflicts
from which the symptoms proceed; it employs
suggestion to change the outcome of these con
flicts. Hypnotic therapy allows the patient to
remain inactive and unchanged, consequently
also helpless in the face of every new incite
ment to illness. Analytic treatment makes as
great demands for efforts on the part of the
patient as on the physician, efforts to abolish
the inner resistances. The patient's mental life
is permanently changed by overcoming these
resistances, is lifted to a higher level of devel
opment, and remains proof against fresh possi
bilities of illness. The labour of overcoming the
resistances is the essential achievement of the
analytic treatment; the patient has to accom
plish it and the physician makes it possible for
him to do this by suggestions which are in the
nature of an education. It has been truly said
therefore, that psycho-analytic treatment is a
kind of re-education.
I hope I have now made clear to you the
difference between our method of employing
suggestion
therapeutically
and
the
method
which is the only possible one in hypnotic thera
py. Since we have traced the influence of sug
gestion back to the transference, you also under
stand the striking capriciousness of the effect
in hypnotic therapy, and why analytic therapy
is, within its limits, dependable. In employing
hypnosis, we are entirely dependent upon the
condition of the patient's transference and yet
we are unable to exercise any influence upon
this
condition itself.
The transference of
a
patient being hypnotized may be negative, or,
as most commonly, ambivalent, or he may have
guarded himself against his
transference by
adopting special attitudes; we gather nothing
about all this. In psycho-analysis we work upon
the
transference
itself,
dissipate
whatever
stands in the way of it, and manipulate the

[636a]
General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis
633
instrument which is to do the work. Thus it
becomes possible for us to derive entirely new
benefits from the power of suggestion; we are
able to control it; the patient alone no longer
manages his suggestibility according to his own
liking, but in so far as he is amenable to its
influence at all, we guide his suggestibility.
Now you will say that, regardless of whether
the driving force behind the analysis is called
transference or suggestion, the danger still re
mains that our influence upon the patient may
bring the objective certainty of our discoveries
into doubt; and that what is an advantage in
therapy is harmful in research. This is the ob
jection that has most frequently been raised
against psycho-analysis; and it must be ad
mitted that, even though it is unjustified, it
cannot be ignored as unreasonable. If it were
justified, psycho-analysis, after all, would be
nothing else but a specially well-disguised and
particularly effective kind of suggestive treat
ment; and all its conclusions about the experi
ences of the patient's past life, mental dy
namics, the unconscious, and so on, could be
taken very lightly. So our opponents think; the
significance of sexual experiences in particular,
if not the experiences themselves, we are sup
posed to have "put into the patient's mind,"
after having first concocted these conglomera
tions in our own corrupt minds. These accusa
tions are more satisfactorily refuted by the
evidence of experience than by the aid of the
ory. Anyone who has himself conducted psycho
analyses has been able to convince himself num
berless times that it is impossible to suggest
things to a patient in this way. There is no
difficulty, of course, in making him a disciple
of a particular theory, and thus making it pos
sible for him to share some mistaken belief
possibly harboured by the physician. He be
haves like anyone else in this, like a pupil; but
by this one has only influenced his intellect,
not his illness. The solving of his conflicts and
the overcoming of his resistances succeeds only
when what he is told to look for in himself
corresponds with what actually does exist in
him. Anything that has been inferred wrongly
by the physician will disappear in the course of
the analysis; it must be withdrawn and re
placed by something more correct. One's aim
is, by a very careful technique, to prevent tem
porary successes arising through suggestion; but
if they do arise no great harm is done, for we
are not content with the first result. We do not
consider the analysis completed unless all ob
scurities in the case are explained, the gaps in

[636b]
memory filled out, and the Original occasions
of the repressions discovered.
When results
appear prematurely, one regards them as obsta
cles rather than as furtherances of the analytic
work, and one destroys them again by continu
ally exposing the transference on which they
are founded. Fundamentally, it is this last fea
ture which
distinguishes
analytic
treatment
from that of pure suggestion, and which clears
the results of analysis from the suspicion of
being the results of suggestion. In every other
suggestive treatment, the transference is care
fully preserved and left intact; in analysis, it
is itself the object of the treatment and is con
tinually being dissected in all its various forms.
At the conclusion of the analysis the trans
ference itself must be dissolved; if success then
supervenes and is maintained it is not founded
on suggestion, but on the overcoming of the
inner resistances effected by the help of sug
gestion, on the inner change achieved within
the patient.
That which probably prevents single effects
of suggestion from arising during the treatment
is the struggle that is incessantly being waged
against the resistances, which know how
to
transform themselves into a negative (hostile)
transference. Nor will we neglect to point to
the evidence that a great many of the detailed
findings of analysis, which would otherwise be
suspected of being produced by suggestion, are
confirmed from other, irreproachable sources.
We
have unimpeachable witnesses on these
points, namely, dements and paranoiacs, who
are of course quite above any suspicion of be
ing influenced by suggestion. All that these
patients relate in the way of phantasies and
translations of symbols, which have penetrated
through into their consciousness, corresponds
faithfully with the results of our investigations
into the unconscious of transference neurotics,
thus confirming the objective truth of the in
terpretations made by us which are so often
doubted. I do not think you will find your
selves mistaken if you choose to trust analysis
in these respects.
We now need to complete our description
of the process of recovery by expressing it in
terms of the libido theory. The neurotic is in
capable of enjoyment or of achievement—the
first because his libido is attached to no real
object, the last because so much of the energy
which would otherwise be at his disposal is
expended in maintaining the libido under re
pression, and in warding off its attempts to
assert itself. He would be well, if the. conflict

[637a]
634
Sigmund Freud
between his ego and his libido came to an end,
and if his ego again had the libido at its dis
posal. The task of the treatment, therefore,
consists in the task of loosening the libido from
its previousattachments, which are beyond the
reach of the ego, and in making it againservice
able to the ego. Now where is the libido of a
neurotic? Easily found: it is attached to the
symptoms, which offer it the substitutive satis
faction that is all it can obtain as things are.
We must master the symptoms then, dissolve
them—just what the patient asks of us. In or
der to dissolve the symptoms it is necessary to
go back to the point at which they originated,
to review the conflict from which they proceed
ed, and with the help of propelling forces which
at that time were not available to guide it to
wards a new solution. This
revision of the
process of repression can only partially be ef
fected by means of the memory-traces of the
processes which led up to repression. The de
cisive part of the work is carried through by
creating—in the relationship to the physician,
in the transference—new editions of those early
conflicts,in which the patient strives to behave
as he originally behaved, while one calls upon
all the available forces in his soul to bring him
to another decision. The transference is thus
the battlefield where all the contending forces
must meet.
All the libido and the full strength of the
opposition against it are concentratedupon the
one thing, upon the relationship to the phy
sician; thus it becomes inevitable that the
symptoms should be deprived of their libido;
in place of the patient's originalillness appears
the artificially acquired transference, the trans
ference-disorder; in place of a variety of un
real objects of his libido appears the one object,
also phantastic, of the person of the physician.
This new struggle which arises concerning this
object is by means of the analyst's suggestions
lifted to the surface, to the higher mental
levels, and there worked out as a normal men
tal
conflict. Since a new repression is thus
avoided, the opposition between the ego and
the libido comes to an end; unity is restored
within the patient's mind. When the libido has
been detached from its temporary object in the
person of the physician, it cannot return to its
earlier objects, but is now at the disposal of
the ego. The forces opposing us in this struggle
during the therapeutic treatment are, on the one
hand, the ego's aversion against certain tend
encies on the part of the libido, which had ex
pressed itself in repressing tendencies; and, on

[637b]
the other hand, the tenacity or adhesiveness of
the libido, which does not readily detach itself
from objects it has once invested.
The therapeutic work thus falls into two
phases:
in the first, all the libido is forced
away from the symptoms into the transference
and there concentrated; in the second, the bat
tle rages round this new object and the libido
is made free from it. The change that is decisive
for a successful outcome of this renewed con
flict lies in the preclusion of repression, so that
the libido cannot again withdraw itself from the
ego by a flight into the unconscious. It is made
possible by changes in the ego ensuing as a
consequence of the analyst's suggestions. At
the expense of the unconscious, the ego becomes
wider by the work of interpretation which
brings the unconscious material into conscious
ness; through education it becomes reconciled
to the libido and is made willing to grant it a
certain degree of satisfaction; and its horror
of the claims of its libido is lessened by the
new capacity it acquires to expend a certain
amount of the libido in sublimation. The more
nearly the course of the treatment corresponds
with this ideal description the greater will be
the success of the psycho-analytic therapy. Its
barriers are found in the lack of mobility in
the libido, which resists being released from
its objects, and in the rigidity of the patient's
narcissism, which will not allow more than a
certain degree of objects-transference to
de
velop. Perhaps the dynamics of the process of
recovery will become still clearer if we describe
it by saying that, in attracting a part of it to
ourselves through transference, we gather in
the whole amount of the libido which has been
withdrawn from the ego's control.
It is as well here to make clear that the dis
tributions of the libido which ensue during and
by means of the analysis afford no direct in
ference of the nature of its disposition during
the previous illness. Given that a case can be
successfully cured by establishing and then re
solving a powerful father-transference to the
person of the physician, it would not follow
that the patient had previously suffered in this
way from an unconscious attachment of the
libido to his father. The father-transference is
only the battlefield on which we conquer and
take the libido prisoner; the patient's libido has
been drawn hither away from other positions.
The battlefield does not necessarily constitute
one of the enemy's most important strongholds;
the defence of the enemy's capital city need
not be conducted immediately before its gates.

[638a]
General Introduction
Not until after the transference has been again
resolved can one begin to reconstruct in im
agination the dispositions of the
libido that
were represented by the illness.
In the light of the libido theory there is a
final word to be said about dreams. The dreams
of a neurotic, like his errors and his free asso
ciations, enable us to find the meaning of the
symptoms and to discover the dispositions of
the libido. The forms taken by the wish-fulfil
ment in them show us what are the wish-im
pulses that have undergone repression, and
what are the objects to which the libido has
attached itself after withdrawal from the ego.
The interpretation of dreams therefore plays
a great part in psycho-analytic treatment, and
in many cases it is for lengthy periods the most
important instrument at
work.
We already
know that the condition of sleep in itself pro
duces a certain relaxation of the repressions.
By this diminution in the heavy pressure upon
it, the repressed desire is able to create for
itself a far clearer expression in a dream than
can be permitted to it by day in the symptoms.
Hence the study of dreams becomes the easiest
approach to a knowledge of the repressed un
conscious, which is where the libido which has
withdrawn from the ego belongs.
The dreams of neurotics, however, differ in
no essential from those of normal people; they
are indeed perhaps not in any way distinguish
able from them. It would be illogical to account
for the dreams of neurotics in a way that would
not also hold good of the dreams of normal
people. We have to conclude, therefore, that
the difference between neurosis and health pre
vails only by day; it is not sustained in dreamlife. It thus becomes necessary to transfer to
healthy persons a number of conclusions ar
rived at as a result of the connections between
the dreams and the symptoms of neurotics. We
have to recognize that the healthy man as well
possesses those factors in mental life which
alone can bring about the formation of a dream
or of a symptom, and we must conclude further
that the healthy also have instituted repressions
and have to expend a certain amount of energy
to maintain them; that their unconscious minds,
too, harbour repressed impulses which are still
suffused with energy, and that a part of the
libido is in them also withdrawn from the dis
posal of the ego. The healthy man, too, is there
fore virtually a neurotic, but the only symptom
that he seems capable of developing is a dream.
To be sure, when you subject his waking life
also
to a critical investigation, you discover

[638b]
to Psycho-Analysis
635
something that contradicts this specious con
clusion; for this apparently healthy life is per
vaded by innumerable trivial and practically
unimportant symptom-formations.
The difference between nervous health and
nervous illness (neurosis) is narrowed down
therefore to a practical distinction, and is de
termined by the practical result—how far the
person concerned remains capable of a sufficient
degree of capacity for enjoyment and active
achievement in life. The difference can proba
bly be traced back to the proportion of the
energy which has remained free relative to that
of the energy which has been bound by re
pression, i.e., it is a quantitative and not a
qualitative difference. I do not need to remind
you that this view provides a theoretical basis
for our conviction that the neuroses are essen
tially amenable to cure, in spite of their being
based on a constitutional disposition.
So much, therefore, in the way of knowledge
of the characteristics of health may be inferred
from the identity of the dreams dreamt by
neurotic and by healthy persons. Of dreams
themselves, however, a further inference must
be drawn—namely, that it is not possible to
detach them from their connection with neu
rotic symptoms; that we are not at liberty to
believe that their essential nature is exhausted
by compressing them into the formula of a
translation of thoughts into archaic forms of
expression; and that we are bound to conclude
that they disclose dispositions of the libido and
objects of desire which are actually in opera
tion and valid at the moment.
We have now come very nearly to the end.
Perhaps you are disappointed that, under the
heading of psycho-analytic therapy, I have lim
ited myself to theory and have told you noth
ing of the conditions under which the cure is
undertaken, or of the results it achieves. I omit
both, however:
the first,
because in fact I
never intended to give you a practical training
in the exercise of the analytic method; and the
last, because I have several motives against it.
At the beginning of these discussions I
said
emphatically that under favourable conditions
we achieve cures that are in no way inferior to
the most brilliant in other fields of medical
therapy; I may perhaps add that these results
could be achieved by no other method. If I
said more I should be suspected of wishing to
drown the depreciatory voices of our opponents
by
self-advertisement.
Medical "colleagues"
have, even at public congresses, repeatedly held

[639a]
636
Sigmund Freud
out a threat to psycho-analysts that by pub
lishing a collection of the failures and harmful
effects of analysis they will open the eyes of the
injured public to the worthlessness of this
method of treatment. Apart from the malicious,
denunciatory character of such a measure, how
ever, a collection of that kind would not even
be valid evidence upon which a correct esti
mate of the therapeutic results of analysis might
be formed. Analytic therapy, as you know, is
still young; it needed many years to elaborate
the technique, which could only be done in the
course of the work under the influence of in
creasing experience. On account of the difficul
ties of imparting instruction in the methods,
the beginner is thrown much more upon his
own resources for development of his capacity
than any other kind of specialist, and the re
sults of his early years can never be taken as
indicating the full possible achievements of
analytic therapy.
Many attempts at treatment made in the
beginning of psycho-analysis were failures be
cause they were undertaken with cases alto
gether unsuited to the procedure, which nowa
days we should exclude by following certain
indications. These indications, however, could
only be discovered by trying. In the beginning
we did not know that paranoia and dementia
praecox, when fully developed, are not amena
ble to analysis; we were still justified in trying
the method on all kinds of disorders. Most of
the failures of those early years, however, were
not due to the fault of the physician, or to the
unsuitability in the choice of subject, but to
unpropitious external conditions. I have spoken
only of the inner resistances, those on the part
of the patient, which are inevitable and can be
overcome. The external resistances which the
patient's circumstances and surroundings set up
against analysis have little theoretic interest
but the greatest practical importance. Psycho
analytic treatment is comparable to a surgical
operation and, like that, for its success it has
the right to expect to be carried out under the
most favourable conditions. You know the pre
liminary arrangements a surgeon is accustomed
to make—:a suitable room, a good light, expert
assistance, exclusion of the relatives, and so
on. Now ask yourselves how many surgical
operations would be successful if they had to
be conducted in the presence of the patient's
entire family poking their noses into the scene
of the operation and shrieking aloud at every
cut. In psycho-analytic treatment, the inter
vention of the relatives is a positive danger

[639b]
and, moreover, one which we do not know how
to deal with. We are armed against the inner
resistances of the patient, which we recognize
as necessary, but how can we protect ourselves
against these outer resistances? It is impossible
to get round the relatives by any sort of expla
nation, nor can one induce them to hold aloof
from the whole affair; one can never take them
into one's confidence, because then we run the
danger of losing the patient's trust in us, for he
—quite rightly, of course—demands that the
man he confides in should take his part. Any
one who knows anything of the dissensions
commonly splitting up family life will not be
astonished in his capacity of analyst to find that
those nearest to the patient frequently show less
interest in his recovery than in keeping him as
he is. When, as so often occurs, the neurosis is
connected with conflicts between different mem
bers of a family, the healthy person does not
make much of putting his own interest before
the patient's recovery. After all, it is not sur
prising that the husband does not favour a
treatment in which, as he correctly supposes,
his sins will all come to light; nor do we wonder
at this, but then we cannot blame ourselves
when our efforts remain fruitless and are pre
maturely broken off because the husband's re
sistance is added to that of the sick wife. We
had simply undertaken something which, under
the existing conditions, it was impossible to
carry out.
Instead of describing many cases to you I
will tell you of one only, in which I had to
suffer for the sake of professional conscientious
ness. I took a young girl—many years agOyfor analytic treatment; for a considerable time
previously she had been unable to go out of
doors on account of a dread, nor could she
stay at home alone. After much hesitation the
patient confessed that her thoughts had been
a good deal occupied by some signs of affection
that she had noticed by chance between her
mother and a well-to-do friend of the family.
Very tactlessly—or else very cleverly—she then
gave the mother a hint of what had been dis
cussed during the analysis; she did this by
altering her behaviour to her mother, by insist
ing that no one but her mother could protect
her against the dread of being alone, and by
holding the door against her when she at
tempted to leave the house. The mother herself
had formerly been very nervous, but had been
cured years before by a visit to a hydropathic
establishment—or, putting it otherwise, we may
say she had there made the acquaintance of the

[640a]
General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis
637
man with whom she had established a relation
ship that had proved satisfying in more than
one respect. Made suspicious by her daughter's
passionate demands, the mother suddenly un
derstood what the girl's dread signified. She
had become ill in order to make her mother a
prisoner and rob her of the freedom necessary
for her to maintain her relations with her lover.
The mother's decision was instantly taken;
she put an end to the harmful treatment. The
girl was sent to a home for nervous patients,
and for many years was there pointed out as
an "unhappy victim of psycho-analysis"; for
just as long I was pursued by damaging ru
mours about the unfortunate results of the
treatment. I maintained silence because I sup
posed myself bound by the rules of professional
secrecy. Years later I learned from a colleague
who had visited the home and there seen the
girl with agoraphobia that the intimacy be
tween the mother and the wealthy man was
common knowledge, and that in all probability
it was connived at by the husband and father.
To this secret the girl's cure had been sacrificed.
In the years before the war, when the influx
of patients from
many countries made me
independent of the goodwill or disfavour of my
native city, I made it a rule never to take for
treatment anyone who was not sui juris, inde
pendent of others in all the essential relations
of
life.
Every psycho-analyst
cannot make
these stipulations. Perhaps you will conclude
from
my warnings about relatives that one
should take the patient out of his family circle
in the interests of analysis, and restrict this
therapy to those living in private institutions.
I could not support this suggestion, however;
it is far more advantageous for the patients—
those who are not in a condition of severe pros
tration, at least—to remain during the treat
ment in those circumstances in which they have
to struggle with the demands that their ordi
nary life
makes on them. But the relatives
ought not to counteract this advantage by their
behaviour, and above all should not oppose
their hostility to one's professional efforts. But
how are you going to induce people who are
inaccessible to you to take up this attitude?
You will naturally also conclude that the social
atmosphere and degree of cultivation of the
patient's immediate surroundings have consid
erable influence upon the prospects of
the
treatment.
This is a gloomy outlook for the efficacy of
psycho-analysis as a therapy, even if we may
explain the overwhelming majority of our fail-

[640b]
ures by taking into account these disturbing
external factors! Friends of analysis have ad
vised us to
counter-balance
a
collection
of
failures by drawing up a statistical enumeration
of our successes. I have not taken up this sug
gestion either. I brought forward the argument
that, statistics would be valueless if the units
collated were not alike, and the cases which
had been treated were in fact not equivalent
in many respects. Further, the period of time
that could be reviewed was too short for one
to be able to judge of the permanence of the
cures; and of many cases it would be impossi
ble to give any account. They were persons
who had kept both their illness and their treat
ment secret, and whose recovery in consequence
had similarly to be kept secret. The strongest
reason against it, however, lay in the recogni
tion of the fact that, in matters of therapy,
humanity is in the highest degree irrational, so
that there is no prospect of influencing it by
reasonable arguments. A novelty in therapeutics
is either taken up with frenzied enthusiasm, as
for instance when Koch first published his re
sults with tuberculin; or else it is regarded with
abysmal distrust, as happened for instance with
Jenner's vaccination, actually a heaven-sent
blessing, but one which still has its implacable
opponents. A very evident prejudice against
psycho-analysis made itself apparent. When one
had cured a very difficult case one would hear:
"That is no proof of anything; he would have
got well of himself after all this time." And
when a patient who had already gone through
four cycles of depression and mania came to
me in an interval after the melancholia and
three weeks later again began to develop an
attack of mania, all the members of the family,
and also all the high medical authorities who
were called in, were convinced that the fresh
attack could be nothing but a consequence of
the attempted analysis. Against prejudice one
can do nothing, as you can now see once more
in the prejudices that each group of the na
tions at war has developed against the other.
The most sensible thing to do is to wait and
allow them to wear off with the passage of
time. A day comes when the same people regard
the same things in quite a different light from
what they did before; why they thought dif
ferently before remains a dark secret.
It is possible that the prejudice against the
analytic therapy has already begun to relax.
The continual spread of analytic doctrine and
the numbers of medical men taking up analytic
treatment in many countries seem to point in

[641a]
638
Sigmund
that direction. As a young man I was caught
in just such a storm of indignation roused in
the medical profession by the hypnotic sugges
tion-treatment, which nowadays is held up in
opposition to psycho-analysis by the "soberminded." As a therapeutic instrument, how
ever, hypnotism did not bear out the hopes
placed in it; we psycho-analysts may claim to
be its rightful heirs and should not forget how
much encouragement and theoretic enlighten
ment we owe to it. The harmful effects reported
of psycho-analysis are essentially confined to
transitory manifestations of an exacerbation of
the conflict, which may occur when the analysis
is clumsily handled, or when it is broken off
suddenly. You have heard an account of what
we do with our patients, and you can form your
own judgment whether our efforts are likely to
lead to lasting injury. Misuse of analysis is pos
sible in various ways: the transference especial
ly, in the hands of an unscrupulous physician,

[641b]
Freud
is a dangerous instrument.
But no medical
remedy is proof against misuse; if a knife will
not cut, neither will it serve a surgeon.
I have now reached the end. It is more than
a conventional formality when I say that I
myself am heavily oppressed by the many de
fects of the lectures I have delivered before
you. I regret most of all that I have so often
promised to return again in another place to a
subject that I had just touched upon shortly,
and that then the context in which I could keep
my word did not offer itself. I undertook to
give you an account of a thing that is still un
finished, still developing, and now my short
summary itself has become an incomplete one.
In many places I laid everything ready for
drawing a conclusion, and then I did not draw
it. But I could not aim at making you experts
in psycho-analysis; I only wished to put you
in the way of some understanding of it, and to
arouse your interest in it.

[642a]
In the psycho-analytical theory of the mind,
we take it for granted that the course of mental
processes is automatically regulated by
the
pleasure-principle: that is to say, we believe
that any given process originates in an unpleas
ant state of tension and thereupon determines
for itself such a path that its ultimate issue
coincides with a relaxation of this tension, i.e.,
with avoidance of "pain"2 or with production
of pleasure. When we consider the psychic
processes under observation in reference to such
a sequence we are introducing into our work
the economic point of view. In our opinion, a
presentation which seeks to estimate, not only
the topographical and dynamic, but also the
economic element, is the most complete that
we can at present imagine, and deserves to be
distinguished by the term metapsychological.
We are not interested in examining how far in
our assertion of the pleasure-principle we have
approached to or adopted any given philo
sophical system historically established. Our ap
proach to such speculative hypotheses is by
way of our endeavour to describe and account
for the facts falling within our daily sphere of
observation. Priority and originality are not
among the aims which psycho-analysis sets it
self, and the impressions on which the state
ment of this principle is founded are of so
unmistakable a kind that it is scarcely possible
to overlook them. On the other hand, we should
willingly acknowledge our indebtedness to any
philosophical or psychological theory that could
tell us the meaning of these feelings of pleasure
and "pain" which affect us so powerfully. Un
fortunately, no theory of any value is forth
coming. It is the obscurest and least penetrable
region of psychic life, and, while it is impossible
for us to avoid touching on it, the most elastic
hypothesis will be, to my mind, the best. We
have decided to consider pleasure and "pain"
in relation to the quantity of excitation present
in the psychic life—and not confined in any
way—along such lines that "pain" corresponds
with an increase and pleasure with a decrease
in this quantity. We do not thereby commit
1 Translated from the second German edition.—ED.
2 The word Unlust, as in the phrase "pleasure-pain
principle," has been translated as "pain"; pain without
quotation marks signifies Schmerz in the original.—TR.
639

[642b]
ourselves to a simple relationship between the
strength of the feelings and the changes cor
responding with them, least of all, judging from
psycho-physiological experiences, to any view
of a direct proportion existing between them;
probably the amount of diminution or increase
in a given time is the decisive factor for feel
ing. Possibly there is room here for experimen
tal work, but it is inadvisable for us analysts to
go further into these problems until we can be
guided by quite definite observations.
We cannot, however, profess the like indiffer
ence when we find that an investigator of such
penetration as G. Th. Fechner has advocated
a conception of pleasure and "pain," which in
essentials coincides with that forced upon us
by psycho-analytic work. Fechner's pronounce
ment is to be found in his short work, Einige
Ideen zur Schopfungs- und Entwicklungsgeschichte der Organismen, 1873 (Section XI,
note p. 94), and reads as follows: "In so far
as conscious impulses always bear a relation to
pleasure or 'pain,' pleasure or 'pain' may be
thought of in psycho-physical relationship to
conditions of stability and instability, and upon
this may be based the hypothesis I intend to
develop elsewhere:
viz., that every psycho
physical movement rising above the threshold
of consciousness is charged with pleasure in
proportion as it approximates—beyond a cer
tain limit—to complete equilibrium, and with
'pain' in proportion as it departs from it be
yond a certain limit; while between the two
limits which may be described as the qualita
tive thresholds of 'pain' or pleasure, there is a
certain area of aesthetic indifference."
The facts that have led us to believe in the
supremacy of the pleasure-principle in psychic
life also find expression in the hypothesis that
there is an attempt on the part of the psychic
apparatus to keep the quantity of excitation
present as low as possible, pr, at least, constant.
This is the same supposition only put into an
other form, for, if the psychic apparatus oper
ates in the direction of keeping down the quan
tity of excitation, all that tends to increase it
must be felt to be contrary to function, that is
to say, painful. The pleasure-principle is de
duced from the principle of constancy; in re
ality, the principle of constancy was inferred

[643a]
640
Sigmund Freud
from the facts that necessitated our assumption
of the pleasure-principle. On more detailed dis
cussion we shall find further that this tendency
on the part of the psychic apparatus postulated
by us may be classified as a special case of
Fechner's principle of the tendency towards sta
bility to which he has related the pleasure-pain
feelings.
In that event, however, it must be affirmed
that it is not strictly correct to speak of a
supremacy of the pleasure-principle over the
course of psychic processes. If such existed,
then the vast majority of our psychic processes
would necessarily be accompanied by pleasure
or would conduce to it, while the most ordinary
experience emphatically contradicts any such
conclusion. One can only say that a
strong
tendency towards the pleasure-principle exists
in the psyche, to which, however, certain other
forces or conditions are opposed, so that the
ultimate issue cannot always be in accordance
with the pleasure-tendency. Compare the com
ment
of
Fechner
in
a
similar
connection.
"Therewithal it is to be noted that the tendency
towards the goal does not imply the attainment
of it and that in general the goal is only ap
proximately attainable ..." xIf we now address
ourselves to the question of what circumstances
have the power to
frustrate the successful
carrying out of the pleasure-principle, we shall
be treading on safer and better-known ground,
and we can draw in abundant measure on our
analytical experiences for the answer.
The first case of such a check on the pleas
ure-principle is perfectly familiar to us in the
regularity of its occurrence. We know that the
pleasure-principle is
adjusted
to
a primary
mode of operation on the part of the psychic
apparatus, and that for the preservation of the
organism amid the difficulties of the external
world it is
ab initio useless and indeed ex
tremely dangerous. Under the influence of the
instinct of the ego for self-preservation, it is
replaced by the reality-principle, which, without
giving up the intention of ultimately attaining
pleasure, yet demands and enforces the post
ponement of satisfaction, the renunciation of
manifold possibilities of it, and the temporary
endurance of "pain" on the long and circuitous
road to pleasure. The pleasure-principle, how
ever, remains for a long time the method of
operation of the sex impulses, which are not so
easily educable, and it happens over and over
again that, whether acting through these im
pulses or operating in the ego itself, it prevails
x Op. cit., p. 90.

[643b]
over the reality-principle to the detriment of
the whole organism.
It is at the same time indubitable that the
replacement of the pleasure-principle by the
reality-principle can account only for a small
part, and that not the most intense, of painful
experiences. Another and no less regular source
of "pain" proceeds from the conflicts and dis
sociations in the psychic apparatus during the
development of the ego towards a more highly
co-ordinated organization. Nearly all the energy
with which the apparatus is charged,2 comes
from the inborn instincts, but not all of these
are allowed to develop to the same stage. On
the way, it over and again happens that partic
ular instincts, or portions of them, prove ir
reconcilable
in
their aims or
demands with
others which can be welded into the compre
hensive unity of the ego. They are, thereupon,
split off from this unity by the process of
repression, retained on lower stages of psychic
development, and for the time being cut off
from all possibility of gratification. If they
then succeed, as so easily happens with the
repressed sex-impulses, in fighting their way
through—along circuitous routes—to a direct
or a substitutive
gratification, this success,
which might otherwise have brought pleasure,
is experienced by the ego as "pain." In conse
quence of the old conflict which ended in re
pression, the pleasure-principle has been vio
lated anew, just at the moment when certain
impulses were at work on the achievement of
fresh pleasure in pursuance of the principle.
The details of the process by which repression
changes a possibility of pleasure into a source
of "pain" are not yet fully understood, or are
not yet capable of clear presentation, but it is
certain that all neurotic "pain" is of this kind,
is pleasurewhichcannot be experienced as such.
The two sources of "pain" here indicated
still do not nearly cover the majority of our
painful experiences, but as to the rest one may
say with a fair show of reason that their pres
ence does not impugn the supremacy of the
pleasure-principle. Most of the "pain" we ex
perience is of a perceptual order, perception
either of the urge of unsatisfied instincts or
of something in the external world which may
be painful in itself or may arouse painful an
ticipations in the psychic apparatus and is rec
ognized by it as danger. The reaction to these
2The word Besetzung (literally: "state of being
occupied"), as in the expressions Besetzungsenergie
and Energiebesetzung, has been rendered by the words
"investment" and "charge,"
the latter
being taken
from the analogy of electricity.—TR.

[644a]
claims of impulse and these threats of danger,
a reaction in which the real activity of the
psychic apparatus is manifested, may be guided
correctly by the pleasure-principle or by the
reality-principle which modifies this. It seems
thus unnecessary to recognize a still more farreaching limitation of the pleasure-principle,
and, nevertheless, it is precisely the investiga
tion of the psychic reaction to external danger
that may supply new material and new ques
tions in regard to the problem here treated.
II
After severe shock of a mechanical nature,
railway collision, or other accident in which
danger to life is involved, a condition may
arise which has long been recognized and to
which the name traumatic neurosis is attached.
The terrible war that is just over has been
responsible for an immense number of such
maladies and, at least, has put an end to the
inclination to explain them on the basis of
organic injury to the nervous system due to
the operation of mechanical force.1 The clinical
picture of traumatic neurosis approaches that
of hysteria in its wealth of similar motor symp
toms, but usually surpasses it in its strongly
marked signs of subjective suffering—in this,
resembling rather hypochondria or melancholia
—and in the evidences of a far more compre
hensive general weakening and shattering of
the mental functions. Neither the war neuroses
nor the traumatic neuroses of peace are as yet
fully understood. With the war neuroses some
light was contributed, but, also, on the other
hand, a certain confusion introduced, by the
fact that the same type of malady could oc
casionally occur without the interposition of
gross mechanical force. In the traumatic neu
roses, there are two outstanding features which
might serve as clues for further reflection: first,
that the chief causal factor seemed to lie in
the element of surprise, in the fright; and sec
ondly, that an injury or wound sustained at the
same time generally tended to prevent the oc
currence of the neurosis. Fright, fear, apprehen
sion are incorrectly used as synonymous expres
sions: in their relation to danger they admit of
quite clear distinction. Apprehension (Angst)
denotes a certain condition as of expectation of
danger and preparation for it, even though it
be an unknown one; fear (Furcht) requires a
definite object of which one is afraid; fright
1 Ferenczi,
Abraham,
Simmel, and
Ernest
Jones,
Psycho-Analysis and the War Neuroses, No. 2 of the
International Psycho-Analytical Library, 1921.

[644b]
Beyond the Pleasure Principle
641
(Schreck) is the name of the condition to which
one is reduced if one encounters a danger with
out being prepared for it; it lays stress on the
element of surprise. In my opinion, apprehen
sion cannot produce a traumatic neurosis; in
apprehension there is something which protects
against fright and therefore against the frightneurosis. We shall return later to this dictum.
The study of dreams may be regarded as the
most trustworthy approach to the exploration
of the deeper psychic processes. Now in the
traumatic neuroses the dream life has this pe
culiarity: it continually takes the patient back
to the situation of his disaster, from which he
awakens in renewed terror. This fact has caused
less surprise than it merits. The obtrusion on
the patient over and again, even in sleep, of
the impression made by the traumatic experi
ence is taken as being merely a proof of its
strength. The patient has, so to speak, under
gone a psychical fixation as to the trauma.
Fixations of this kind on the experience which
has
brought
about
the
malady have
long
been known to us in connection with hysteria.
Breuer and I stated in 1893 that hysterics suffer
for the most part from reminiscences. In the
war neuroses, observers, such as Ferenczi and
Simmel, have been able to explain a number of
motor symptoms as fixation on the factor of
the trauma.
But I am not aware that the patients suffer
ing from traumatic neuroses are much occupied
in waking life with the recollection of what
happened to them. They, perhaps, strive rather
not to think of it. To regard it as self-evident
that the dream at night takes them back to the
situation which has caused the trouble is to
misunderstand the nature of dreams. It would
be more in correspondence with that nature if
the patient were presented (in sleep) with im
ages from the time of his normal health or of
his hoped-for recovery. If we are not to go
thoroughly
astray as to the
wish-fulfilment
tendency of the dream in consequence of these
dreams of the shock neuroses, perhaps the ex
pedient is left us of supposing that in this
condition the dream function suffers dislocation
along with the others and is diverted from its
usual ends, or else we should have to think of
the enigmatic masochistic tendencies of the ego.
I propose now to leave the obscure and
gloomy theme of the traumatic neuroses and to
study the way in which the psychic apparatus
works in one of its earliest normal activities.
I refer to the play of children.
The different theories of child-play have

[645a]
642
Sigmund Freud
recently been collated by S. Pfeifer in Imago1
and their analytical value estimated; I may
here refer the reader to this work. These the
ories endeavour to conjecture the motives of
children's play, though without
placing any
special stress on the economic point of view,
i.e., consideration of the attainment of pleas
ure. Without the intention of making a com
prehensive study of these phenomena I availed
myself of an opportunity which offered of elu
cidating the first game invented by himself of
a boy eighteen months old. It was more than
a casual observation, for
I
lived
for
some
weeks under the same roof as the child and
his parents, and it was a considerable time
before the meaning of his puzzling and con
tinually repeated performance became clear
to me.
The child was in no respect forward in his
intellectual development; at eighteen months
he spoke only a few intelligible words, making,
besides, sundry significant sounds which were
understood by those about him. But he made
himself understood by his parents and the maid
servant, and had a good reputation for behav
ing "properly." He did not disturb his parents
at night; he scrupulously obeyed orders about
not touching various objects and not going into
certain rooms; and above all he never cried
when his mother went out and left him for
hours, together, although the tie to his mother
was a very close one: she had not only nour
ished him herself, but had cared for him and
brought him up without any outside help. Oc
casionally,
however, this well-behaved
child
evinced the troublesome habit of flinging into
the corner of the room or under the bed all the
little things he could lay his hands on, so that
to gather up his toys was often no light task.
He accompanied this by an expression of inter
est and gratification, emitting a loud longdrawn-out "0-0-0-oh" which, in the judgment
of the mother (one that coincided with my
own), was not an interjection but meant "go
away" (fort). I sawat last that this wasa game,
and that the child used all his toys only to
play "being gone" (fortsein) with them. One
day, I made an observation that confirmed my
view. The child had a wooden reel with a piece
of string wound round it. It never occurred to
him, for example, to drag this after him on the
floor and so play horse and cart with it, but he
kept throwing it with considerable skill, held
by the string, over the side of his little draped
cot, so that the reel disappeared into it, then
1Vol. V, 343, 1919.

[645b]
said his significant "0-0-0-oh" and drew the
reel by the string out of the cot again, greeting
its reappearance with a joyful "Da" (there).
This was, therefore, the complete game, dis
appearance and return, the first act being the
only one generally observed by the onlookers,
and the one untiringly repeated by the child
as a game for its own sake, although the greater
pleasure unquestionably attached to the second
act.2
The meaning of the game was then not far
to seek. It was connected with the child's re
markable cultural achievement—the foregoing
of the satisfaction of an instinct—as the result
of which he could let his mother go away with
out making any fuss. He made it right with
himself, so to speak, by dramatizing the same
disappearance and return with the objects he
had at hand. It is, of course, of no importance
for the affectivevalue of this game whether the
child invented it himself or adopted it from a
suggestion from outside. Our interest will at
tach itself to another point. The departure of
the mother cannot possibly have been pleasant
for the child, nor merely a matter of indiffer
ence. How then does it accord with the pleas
ure-principle that he repeats this painful ex
perience as a game? The answer will perhaps
be forthcoming that the departure must be
played as the necessary prelude to the joyful
return, and that in this latter lay the true pur
pose of the game. As against this, however,
there is the observation that the first act, the
going away, was playedby itself as a game and
far more frequently than the whole drama with
its joyful conclusion.
The analysis of a single case of this kind
yields no sure conclusion: on impartial con
sideration one gains the impression that it is
from another motive that the child has turned
the experience into a game. He was in the first
place passive, was overtaken bythe experience,
but now brings himself in as playing an active
part, by repeating the experience as a game in
spite of its unpleasing nature. This effort might
beascribed totheimpulse toobtain themastery
of a situation (the power instinct), which re
mainsindependent of any question of whether
'This interpretation was fully established by a
further observation. One day, when the mother had
been out for some hours she was greeted on her return
by the information "Baby 0-0-0-0" which at first re
mained unintelligible. It soon proved that during his
long, lonely hours he had found a method of bringing
about his own disappearance. He had discovered his
reflection in the long mirror which nearly reached to
the ground and had then crouched down in front of it,
so that the reflection was fort,
1

[646a]
Beyond the Pleasure Principle
643
the recollection was a pleasant one or not. But
another interpretation may be attempted. The
flinging away of the object so that it is gone
might be the gratification of an impulse of re
venge
suppressed
in
real life
but directed
against the mother for going away, and would
then have the defiant meaning: "Yes, you can
go, I don't want you, I am sending you away
myself." The same child, a year later than my
observations, used to throw on the floor a toy
which displeased him, and to say "Go to the
war!" He had been told that his absent father
was at the war, and he did not miss him at all,
giving the clearest indications that he did not
wish to be disturbed in the sole possession of
his mother.1 It is known of other children also
that they can give vent to similar hostile feel
ings by throwing objects away in place of peo
ple.2 Thus, one is left in doubt whether the
compulsion to work over in psychic life what
has made a deep impression, to make oneself
fully master of it, can express itself primarily
and independently of the pleasure-principle. In
the case discussed here, however, the child might
have repeated a disagreeable impression in play
only because with the repetition was bound up
a pleasure gain of a different kind but' more
direct.
Nor does the further pursuit of the question
of play resolve our hesitations between two
conceptions. We see that children repeat in
their play everything that has made a great
impression on them in actual life, that they
thereby ab-react the strength of the impression
and so to speak make themselves masters of
the situation. But on the other hand, it is clear
enough that all their play is influenced by the
dominant wish of their time of life: viz., to be
grown-up and to be able to do what grown-up
people do. It is also observable that the un
pleasing character of the experience does not
always prevent its being utilized as a game. If
a doctor examines a child's throat, or performs
a small operation on him, the alarming ex
perience will quite certainly be made the sub
ject of the next game, but in this the pleasure
gain from another source is not to be over
looked. In passing from the passivity of ex
perience to the activity of play the child applies
to
his playfellow the unpleasant occurrence
^•When the child was five and three-quarter years
old his mother died. Now, when she was really gone
(0-0-0), the boy showed no grief for her. A second
child had, it is true, been born in the meantime and
had aroused his strongest jealousy.
2 See
"A
Childhood-Memory
from
Dichtung und
Wahrheit," in Collected Papers, IV.

[646b]
that befell himself and so avenges himself on
the person of this proxy.
From this discussion, it is at all events evident
that it is unnecessary to assume a particular
imitation impulse as the motive of play. We
may add the reminder that the dramatic and
imitative art of adults, which differs from the
behaviour of children in being directed towards
the spectator, does not, however, spare the lat
ter the most painful impressions, e.g., in trag
edy, and yet can
be felt by him as highly
enjoyable. This convinces us that even under
the domination of the pleasure-principle there
are ways and means enough of making what is
in itself disagreeable the object of memory and
of psychic preoccupation. A theory of aesthet
ics with an economic point of view should deal
with these cases and situations ending in final
pleasure gain: for our purposes, they are of
no help, since they presuppose the existence
and supremacy of the pleasure-principle and
bear no witness to the operation of tendencies
beyond the pleasure-principle, that is to say,
tendencies which might be of earlier origin and
independent of this.
Ill
Five-and-twenty years of intensive work have
brought about a complete change in the more
immediate aims of psycho-analytic technique.
At first the endeavours of the analytic physi
cian were confined to divining the unconscious
of which his patient was unaware, effecting a
synthesis of its various components, and com
municating it at the right time. Psycho-analysis
was above all an art of interpretation. Since
the therapeutic task was not thereby accom
plished, the next aim was to compel the patient
to confirm the reconstruction through his own
memory. In this endeavour, the chief emphasis
was on the resistances of the patient; the art
now lay in unveiling these as soon as possible,
in calling the patient's attention to them, and
by human influence—here came in suggestion
acting as transference—teaching him to aban
don the resistances.
It then became increasingly clear, however,
that the aim in view, the bringing into con
sciousness of the unconscious, was not fully
attainable by this method either. The patient
cannot recall all of what lies repressed, perhaps
not even the essential part of it, and so gains
no conviction that the conclusion presented to
him is correct. He is obliged rather to repeat
as a current experience what is repressed, in
stead of, as the physician would prefer to see

[647a]
644
Sigmund Freud
him do, recollecting it as a fragment of the
past.1 This reproduction appearing with un
welcome fidelity always contains a fragment of
the infantile sex-life, therefore of the Oedipus
complex and its off-shoots, and is played regu
larly in the sphere of transference, i.e., the
relationship to the physician. When this point
in the treatment is reached, it may be said that
the earlier neurosis is now replaced by a fresh
one, viz., the transference-neurosis. The physi
cian makes it his concern to limit the scope of
this transference-neurosis as much as he can,
to force into memory as much as possible, and
to leave as little as possible to repetition. The
relation established between memory and re
production is different for every case. As a
rule, the physician cannot spare the patient
this phase of the cure; he must let him live
through a certain fragment of his forgotten
life, and has to see to it that some measure of
ascendency remains, in the light of which the
apparent reality is always recognized as a re
flection of a forgotten past. If this is success
fully accomplished, then conviction on the part
of the patient is attained, and with it the ther
apeutic result that depends on it.
In order to render more comprehensible this
repetition-compulsion
which
appears
in
the
psycho-analytic
treatment
of
neurotics,
we
must above all get entirely rid of the erroneous
idea that in this struggle with resistances we
are concerned with any resistance on the part
of the unconscious. The unconscious, i.e., the
repressed material, offers no resistance what
ever to the curative efforts; indeed it has no
other aim than to force its way through the
pressure weighing on it, either to consciousness
or to discharge by means of some real action.
The resistance in the treatment proceeds from
the same higher levels and systems in the psy
chic life that in their time brought about the
repression. But since the motives of the resist
ances, and indeed the resistances themselves,
are found in the process of the treatment to be
unconscious, we are well advised to amend an
inadequacy in our mode of expression. We es
cape ambiguity if we contrast not the conscious
and the unconscious, but the coherent ego and
the repressed. Much in the ego is certainly
unconscious itself, just what may be called the
kernel of the ego; only a part of it comes under
the category of preconscious. After thus replac
ing a purely descriptive method of expression
1 See "Further Recommendations in the Technique
of Psycho-Analysis, II:
Recollection, Repetition, and
Working-Through," Collected Papers, II.

[647b]
by a systematic or dynamic one, we may say
that the resistance on the part of the analysed
person proceeds from his ego, and then we at
once see that the repetition-comptdsion must be
ascribed to the repressed element in the un
conscious. It probably could not find expression
till the work of the treatment coming to meet
it had loosened the repression.
There is no doubt that the resistance of the
conscious and preconscious ego subserves the
pleasure-principle; it is trying to avoid the
upain" that would be aroused by the release of
the repressed material, and our efforts are di
rected to effecting an entry for such painful
feeling by an appeal to the reality-principle.
In what relation to the pleasure-principle, then,
does
the
repetition-compulsion
stand,
that
which expresses the force of what is repressed?
It is plain that most of what is revived by the
repetition-compulsion cannot but bring discom
fort to the ego, for it promotes the bringing to
light of the activities of repressed impulses;
but that is a discomfort we have already taken
into account and without subversion of the
pleasure-principle, since it is "pain" in respect
of one system and at the same time satisfaction
for the other. The new and remarkable fact,
however, that we have now to describe is that
the repetition-compulsion also revives experi
ences of the past that contain no potentiality
of pleasure, and which could at no time have
been
satisfactions,
even
of
impulses
since
repressed.
The effiorescense of infantile sex-life was, by
reason of the irreconcilability of its wishes with
reality and the inadequacy of the childhood
stage of development reached, destined to pass
away. It perished in most painful circumstances
and with feelings of a deeply distressing nature.
Loss and failure in the sphere of the affections
left behind on the ego-feeling marks of injury
comparable to a narcissistic scar, which, accord
ing to my experience and the exposition given
by Marcinowski,2 yields the most important
contribution to the inferiority complex common
among neurotics. The sex-quest to which the
physical development of the child set limits
could be brought to no satisfying conclusion;
hence the plaint in later life: "I can't do any
thing, I am never successful." The bonds of
tenderness linking the child more especially to
the parent of the opposite sex succumbed to
disappointment, to the vain expectation of sat2 Marcinowski, "Die erotischen Quellen der Minderwertigkeitsgejiihle," Zeitschrijt fiir Sexualwissenschaft.
1918, IV.

[648a]
Beyond the Pleasure Principle
645
isfaction, and to the jealousy aroused by the
birth of a new child, unmistakable proof as it
is of the faithlessness of the loved parent; the
child's attempt, undertaken with tragic serious
ness, to produce another such child himself
met with humiliating failure; while the partial
withdrawal of the tenderness lavished on the
little one, the more exacting demands of dis
cipline and education, severe words and an oc
casional punishment finally revealed to him the
whole extent of the disdain which is his portion.
Some few regularly recurring types are to be
found, according to the way in which the typ
ical love of this period was brought to an end.
All these undesired happenings and painful
affective situations are repeated by neurotics in
the transference stage and re-animated with
much ingenuity. They struggle to break off the
unfinished treatment, they know how to re
create the feeling of being disdained, how to
force the physician to adopt brusque speech
and a chilling manner towards them, they find
suitable objects for their jealousy, they substi
tute for the ardently desired child of early days
the promise of some great gift which becomes
as little real as that was. Nothing of all this
could ever have afforded any pleasure; one
would suppose it ought to bring somewhat less
"pain" if revealed as memory rather than if
lived through as a new experience. It is a ques
tion naturally of the action of impulses that
should lead to satisfaction, but the experience
that instead of this
they even then brought
"pain" has borne no result. The act is repeated
in spite of everything; a powerful compulsion
insists on it.
That which psycho-analysis reveals in the
transference phenomena
with
neurotics can
also be observed in the life of normal persons.
It here gives the impression of a pursuing fate,
a demonic trait in their destiny, and psycho
analysis has from the outset regarded such a
life history as in a large measure self-imposed
and determined by infantile influences. The
compulsion which thereby finds expression is
in no way different from the repetition-com
pulsion of neurotics, even though such persons
have never shown signs of a neurotic conflict
resulting in symptoms. Thus one knows people
with whom every human relationship ends in
the
same way:
benefactors whose
proteges,
however different they may otherwise have
been, invariably after a time desert them in
ill-will, so that they are apparently condemned
to drain to the dregs all the bitterness of in
gratitude; men with whom every friendship

[648b]
ends in the friend's treachery; others who in
definitely often in their lives invest some other
person with authority either in their own eyes
or generally, and themselves overthrow such
authority after a given time, only to replace it
by a new one; lovers whose tender relationships
with women each and all run through the same
phases and come to the same end, and so on.
We are less astonished at this "endless repeti
tion of the same" if there is involved a ques
tion of active behaviour on the part of the
person concerned, and if we detect in his char
acter an unalterable trait which must always
manifest itself in the repetition of identical
experiences. Far more striking are those cases
where the
person seems to be experiencing
something passively, without exerting any in
fluence of his own, and yet always meets with
the same fate over and over again. One may
recall, for example, the story of the woman
who married three men in succession, each of
whom fell ill after a short time and whom she
had to nurse till their death.1 Tasso gives a
singularly affecting poetical portrayal of such
a trend of fate in the romantic epic, Gerusalemme Liberia. The hero, Tancred, has un
wittingly slain Clorinda, the maiden he loved,
who fought with him disguised in the armour
of an enemy knight. After her burial he pene
trates into the mysterious enchanted wood, the
bane of the army of the crusaders. Here he
hews down a tall tree with his sword, but from
the gash in the trunk blood streams forth and
the voice of Clorinda, whose soul is imprisoned
in the trees, cries out to him in reproach that
he has once more wrought a baleful deed on
his beloved.
In the light of such observations as these,
drawn from the behaviour during transference
and from the fate of human beings, we may
venture to
make the assumption that there
really exists in psychic life a repetition-com
pulsion, whichgoesbeyond the pleasure-princi
ple. We shall now also feel disposed to relate
to this compelling force the dreams of shockpatients and the play-impulse in children, We
must, of course, remind ourselves that only in
rare cases can we recognize the workings of
this repetition-compulsion in a pure form, with
out the co-operation of other motives. As re
gards children's play, we have already pointed
out what other interpretations its origin per
mits.
The
repetition-compulsion and
direct
1 See the pertinent observations of C. G. Jung in
his
article,
"Die
Bedeutung
des
Vaters
fiir
das
Schicksal des Einzelnen," Jahrbuch fiir psychoanal. U*
psychopath. Forschungen, 1901, Vol. I.

[649a]
646
Sigmund Freud
pleasurable satisfaction of impulse seem there
to be inextricably intertwined. The transference
phenomena obviously subserve the purpose of
the resistance made by the ego persisting in its
repression: the repetition-compulsion is, as it
were, called to the aid of the ego, which is
resolved to hold fast to the pleasure-principle.
In what one might call the destiny-compulsion
much appears capable of rational explanation,
so that no need is felt to establish a new and
mysterious impulse. The least suspicious case
is perhaps that of the shock-dream, but on
closer examination it must be admitted that in
the other examples, too, the state of affairs is
not completely explained by the operation of
the motives known to us. There remains enough
over to justify the assumption of a repetitioncompulsion, and this seems to us more primi
tive, more elementary, more instinctive than
the pleasure-principle which is displaced by it.
But if there is such a repetition-compulsion in
psychic life, we should naturally like to know
with what function it corresponds, under what
conditions it may appear, and in what relation
it stands to the pleasure-principle, to which we
have heretofore ascribed the domination over
the course of the processes of excitation in the
psychic life.
IV
What follows now is speculation, speculation
often far-fetched, which each will, according to
his particular attitude, acknowledge or neglect.
Or one may call it the exploitation of an idea
out of curiosity to see whither it will lead.
Psycho-analytic speculation starts from the
impression gained on investigating unconscious
processes that consciousness cannot be the most
general characteristic of psychic processes, but
merely a special function of them. Metapsychologically expressed, it asserts that conscious
ness is the functioning of a particular system
which may be called Bw. Since consciousness
essentially yields
perceptions
of
excitations
coming fromwithout and feeling (Empfindungen) of pleasure and "pain" which can only be
derived from within the psychic apparatus, we
may allot the system W-Bw1 (= perceptual
consciousness) a position in space. It must lie
on the boundary between outer and inner, must
face towardsthe outer world, and must envelop
the other psychic systems. We then note that
in this assumption we have ventured nothing
new, but are in agreement with the localizing
xThus named after the German words Wahrnehmung (=perception)
and Bewusstsein (conscious
ness).—Tr.

[649b]
tendencies of cerebral anatomy, which places
the seat of consciousness in the cortical layer,
the outermost enveloping layer of the central
organ. Cerebral anatomy does not need to won
der why—anatomically speaking—consciousness
should be accommodated on the surface of the
brain, instead of being safely lodged some
where in the deepest recesses of it. Perhaps we
may carry matters a little further than this in
our deduction of such a position for our system
W-Bw.
Consciousness is not the only peculiar fea
ture that we ascribe to the processes in this
system. Our impressions gained by psycho
analytic experience lead us to the supposition
that all excitation processes in the other sys
tems leave in them permanent traces forming
the foundations of memory-records which have
nothing to do with the question of becoming
conscious. They are often strongest and most
enduring when the process that left them be
hind never reached consciousness at all. But
we find it difficult to believe that such lasting
traces of excitation are formed also in the sys
tem W-Bw itself.
If they remained perma
nently in consciousness, they would very soon
limit the fitness of the system for registration
of new excitations;2 on the other hand, if they
became unconscious, we should be confronted
with the task of explaining the existence of
unconscious processes in a system whose func
tioning is otherwise accompanied by the phe
nomenon of consciousness. We should, so to
speak, have gained nothing and altered nothing
by our supposition which relegates to a special
system
the
process
of becoming
conscious.
Though this may not be an absolutely binding
consideration, it may, at any rate, lead us to
conjecture that becoming conscious and leav
ing behind a memory-trace are processes in
compatible with each other in the same system.
We should thus be able to say: in the system
Bw, the process of excitation becomes con
scious, but it leaves behind no lasting trace;
all the traces of it on which memory relies
would come about in the next systems inwards
from the propagation of the excitation on to
them. It is on these lines that the scheme is
sketched which I inserted into the speculative
section of my Interpretation of Dreams in
1900. If one reflects how little we know from
other sources about the origin of consciousness,
the pronouncement that consciousness arises in
2Here I follow throughout J. Breuer's exposition
in the theoretical section of the Studien iiber Hysterie.
I89S.

[650a]
Beyond the Pleasure Principle
the place of the memory-trace must be con
ceded at least the importance of a statement
which is to some extent definite.
The system Bw would thus be characterized
by the peculiarity that the excitation process
does not leave in it, as it does in all other
psychic systems, a permanent alteration of its
elements, but is, as it were, discharged in the
phenomenon of becoming conscious and van
ishes. Such a departure from the general rule
requires an explanation on the ground of a fac
tor which comes into account in this one system
only: this factor which is absent from all other
systems might well be the exposed situation of
the Bw system—its immediate contact with the
outer world.
Let us imagine the living organism in the
simplest possible form as an undifferentiated
vesicle of sensitive substance: then its surface,
exposed as it is to the outer world, is by its
very position differentiated and serves as an
organ for receiving stimuli. Embryology, re
peating as it does the history of evolution,
does, in fact, show that the central nervous
system arises from the
ectoderm; the grey
cortex of the brain remains a derivative of the
primitive superficial layer and may have in
herited essential properties from this. It would
then be easily conceivable that, owing to the
constant impact of external stimuli on
the
superficies of the vesicle, its substance would
undergo lasting alteration to a certain depth,
so that its excitation process takes a different
course from that taken in the deeper layers.
Thus, a rind would be formed which would
finally have been so burned through by the ef
fects of stimulation that it presents the most
favourable
conditions
for
the
reception
of
stimuli and is incapable of any further modifi
cation. Applying this idea to the system Bw,
this would mean that its elements are not sus
ceptible of any further lasting alteration from
the passage of the excitation, because they are
already modified to the uttermost in that re
spect. But they are then capable of giving rise
to consciousness. In what exactly these modifi
cations of the substance and of the excitation
process in it consist many views may be held
which as yet cannot be tested. It may be as
sumed that the excitation has, in its transmis
sion from one element to another, to overcome
a resistance, and that this diminution of the
resistance itself lays down the permanent trace
of the excitation (a path) : in system Bw, there
would no longer exist any such resistance to
transmission from one element to another. We

[650b]
647
may associate with this conception Breuer's
distinction between quiescent (bound) and freemoving investment-energy in the elements of
the psychic systems;1 the elements of the sys
tem Bw would then convey no bound energy,
only free energy capable of discharge. In my
opinion, however, it is better for the present to
express oneself as to these conditions in the
least committal way. At any rate, by these
speculations we should have brought the origin
of consciousness into a certain connection with
the position of the system Bw and with the pe
culiarities of the excitation process to be as
cribed to this.
We have more to say about the living vesicle
with its receptive outer layer. This morsel of
living substance floats about in an outer world
which is charged with the most potent energies,
and it would be destroyed by the operation of
the stimuli proceeding from this world if it were
not furnished with a protection against stimu
lation (Reizschutz). It acquires this through
its outermost layer—which gives the structure
that belongs to living matter—becoming in a
measure inorganic, and this now operates as a
special integument or membrane that keeps off
the stimuli, i.e., makes it impossible for the
energies of the outer world to act with more
than a fragment of their intensity on the lay
ers immediately below which have preserved
their vitality. These are now able under cover
of the protecting layer to devote themselves to
the reception of those stimulus masses that
have been let through. But the outer layer has
by its own death secured all the deeper layers
from
a
like fate—at
least, so long as
no
stimuli present themselves of such a strength
as to break through the protective barrier. For
the living organism, protection against stimuli
is almost a more important task than recep
tion
of
stimuli;
the
protective
barrier
is
equipped with its own store of energy and
must above all endeavour to protect the special
forms of energy-transformations going on with
in itself from the equalising and, therefore,
destructive influence of the enormous energies
at work in the outer world. The reception of
stimuli serves above all the purpose of collect
ing information about the direction and nature
of the external stimuli, and for that it must
suffice to take little samples of the outer world,
to taste it, so to speak, in small quantities. In
highly developed organisms the receptive ex
ternal layer of what was once a vesicle has
long been withdrawn into the depths of the
1 J. Breuer and S. Freud, Studien uber Hysterie.

[651a]
648
Sigmund
body^ but portions of it have been left on the
surface immediately beneath the common pro
tective barrier'. These portions form the sense
organs,
which essentially
comprise
arrange
ments for the reception of specific stimuli, but
also possess special arrangements adapted for
a fresh
protection against an overwhelming
amount of stimulus, and for warding off unsuit
able kinds of stimuli. It is characteristic of
them that they assimilate only very small quan
tities of the outer stimulus, and take in only
samples of the outer world; one might compare
them to antennae which touch at the outer
world and then constantly withdraw from it
again.
At this point, I shall permit myself to touch
cursorily upon a theme which would deserve
the most thorough treatment. The
Kantian
proposition that time and space are necessary
modes of thought may be submitted to discus
sion today in the light of certain knowledge
reached
through
psycho-analysis.
We
have
found by experience that unconscious mental
processes are in themselves timeless. That is to
say, to begin with: they are
not arranged
chronologically, time alters nothing in them,
nor can the idea of time be applied to them.
These are negative characteristics, which can
be made plain only by instituting a comparison
with conscious psychic processes. Our abstract
conception of time seems rather to be derived
wholly from the mode of functioning of the
system W-Bw, and to correspond with a selfperception of it. In this mode of functioning of
the system, another form of protection against
stimulation probably comes into play. I know
that these statements sound very obscure, but
I must confine myself to these few hints.
So far we have got to the point that the liv
ing vesicle is equipped with a protection against
stimuli from the outer world. Before that, we
had decided that the cortical layer next to it
must be differentiated as the organ for recep
tion of external stimuli. But this sensitive layer
(what is later the system Bw) also receives ex
citations from within: the position of the sys
tem between outer and inner and the difference
in the conditions under which this receptivity
operates on the two sides become deciding fac
tors for the functioning of the system and of
the whole psychic apparatus. Towards the outer
world there is a barrier against stimuli, and the
mass of excitations coming up against it will
take effect only on a reduced scale; towards
what is .within, no protection against stimuli is
possible; ;.the :excitations of the deeper layers

[651b]
Freud
pursue their way direct and in uncfiminished
mass into the system, while certain character
istics of their course produce the
series of
pleasure-pain feelings.
Naturally, the excita
tions coming from within will, in conformity
with their intensity and other qualitative char
acteristics (or possibly their amplitude), be
more proportionate to the mode of operation of
the system than the stimuli streaming in from
the outer world. Two things are, however, de
cisively determined by these conditions: first,
the preponderance over all outer stimuli of the
pleasure and "pain" feelings, which are an index
for processes within the mechanism; and, sec
ondly, a shaping of behaviour towards such
inner excitations as bring with them an over
plus of "pain." There will be a tendency to
treat them as though they were acting not from
within but from without, in order for it to be
possible to apply against them the defensive
measures of the barrier against stimuli (Reiz
schutz). This is the origin of projection, for
which so important a part is reserved in the
production of pathological states.
i
I have the impression that by these last con
siderations we have approached nearer to a
comprehension of the supremacy of the pleas
ure-principle, but we have not attained to an
explanation of those cases which are opposed
to it. Let us, therefore, go a step further. Such
external excitations as are strong enough to
break through the barrier against stimuli we
call traumatic. In my opinion, the concept of
trauma involves such a relationship to an oth
erwise efficacious barrier. An occurrence such
as an external trauma will undoubtedly pro^
voke a very extensive disturbance in the work
ings of the energy of the organism, and will set
in motion every kind of protective measure.
But the pleasure-principle is, to begin with,
put out of action here. The flooding of the
psychic apparatus with large masses of stimuli
can no longer be prevented: on the contrary,
another task presents itself—to bring the stim
ulus under control, to bind in the psyche the
stimulus mass that has broken its way in, so
as to bring about a discharge of it.
Probably, the specific discomfort of bodily
pain is the result of some local breaking through
of the barrier against stimuli. From this point
in the periphery there stream to the central
psychic apparatus continual excitations such
as would otherwise come only from within.1
What are we to expect as the reaction of the
1 See the paper Instincts and their Vicissitudes, p. 412
above.

[652a]
Beyond the Pleasure Principle
649
psychic life to this invasion? From all sides
the charging energy is called on in order to
create all round the breach correspondingly
high charges of energy. An immense counter
charge is set up, in favour of whichall the other
psychic systems are impoverished, so that a
wide-spread paralysis or diminution of other
psychic activity follows. We endeavour to learn
from examples such as these to base our metapsychological conjectures on such prototypes.
Thus, from this behaviour we draw the con
clusion that even a highly charged system is
able to receive new energy streaming in, to
convert it into a quiescent charge, thus to bind
it psychically. The more intense is the intrinsic
quiescent charge, the greater is its binding
force: and, conversely, the lower the charge of
the system, the less capable is it of receiving
the energy that streams in, and so the more
violent are the consequences when the barrier
against stimuli is broken through. It is not a
valid objection to this view that the intensify
ing of the charges round the place of irruption
could be much more simply explained as the
direct action of the oncoming mass of excita
tion. If that were so, the psychic apparatus
would merely undergo an increase of its energy
charges, and the paralyzing character of pain,
with the impoverishment of all the other sys
tems, would remain without explanation. Nor
do the very violent discharge effects of pain
invalidate our explanation, for they happen in
a reflex manner, that is to say, they follow
without the interposition of the psychic ap
paratus. The indefinite nature of all the dis
cussions that we term metapsychological nat
urally comes from the fact that we know
nothing about the nature of the excitation proc
ess in the elements of the psychic systems and
do not feel justifiedin making any assumption
about it. Thus we are all the time operating
with a large X, whichwe carry over into every
new formula. That this process is accomplished
with energies which differ quantitatively is an
easily admissible postulate; that it also has
more than one quality (e.g., in the direction of
amplitude) may be regarded as probable: the
new
consideration
we
have
brought
in
is
Breuer's proposition that we have to do with
twoways in which a system may be filled with
energy, so that a distinction has to be made be
tween a charging of the psychic systems (or its
elements) that is free-flowing andstriving to be
discharged and one that is quiescent. Perhaps
we may admit the conjecture that the binding
of the.energy streaming into the psychic ap

[652b]
paratus consists in a translating of it from the
free-flowing to the quiescent state.
I think one may venture (tentatively) to
regard the ordinary traumatic neurosis as the
result of an extensive rupture of the barrier
against stimuli. In this way the old naive doc
trine of shock would come into its own again,
apparently in opposition to a later and psycho
logically more pretentious view which ascribes
aetiological significance not to the effect of the
mechanical force, but to the fright and the
menace to life. But these opposing views are
not irreconcilable, and the psycho-analytic con
ception of the traumatic neurosis is far from
being identical with the crudest form of the
shock theory. While the latter takes the essen
tial nature of the shock as residing in the di
rect injury to the molecular structure, or even
to the histological structure, of the nervous
elements, we seek to understand the effect of
the shock by considering the breaking through
of the barrier with which the psychic organ is
provided against stimuli, and from the tasks
with which this is thereby faced. Fright retains
its meaningfor us too. What conditionsit is the
failure of the mechanism of apprehension to
make the proper preparation, including the
over-charging of the systems first receivingthe
stimulus. In consequence of this lower degree
of charging, these systems are hardly in a posi
tion to bind the oncoming masses of excitation,
and the consequences of the breaking through
of the protective barrier appear all the more
easily. We thus find that the apprehensive
preparation, together with the over-charging of
the receptive systems, represents the last line
of defence against stimuli. For a great number
of traumata, the difference between the unpre
pared systems and those prepared by over
charging may turn the scale as to the outcome:
with a trauma beyond a certain strength, such
a difference may no longer be of any impor
tance. When the dreams of patients suffering
from traumatic neuroses so regularly take-them
back to the situation of the disaster, they ,do
not thereby, it is true, serve the purpose of
wish-fulfilment, the hallucinatory conjuring up
of which has, under the domination of the
pleasure-principle,
become the function
of
dreams. But we may assume that they thereby
subserve another purpose, which must be ful
filledbefore the pleasure-principle can begin its
sway. These dreams are attempts at restoring
control of the stimuli by developing apprehen
sion, the pretermission of which caused the
traumatic neurosis. They thus afford us. an in-

[653a]
650
Sigmund Freud
sight into a function of the psychic apparatus,
which without contradicting the pleasure-prin
ciple is nevertheless independent of it, and ap
pears to be of earlier origin than the aim of
attaining pleasure and avoiding "pain."
This is, therefore, the moment to concede for
the first time an exception to the principle that
the dream is a wish-fulfilment. Anxiety dreams
are no such exception, as I have repeatedly and
in
detail shown;
nor are the
punishment
dreams, for they merely put in the place of the
interdicted wish-fulfilment the punishment ap
propriate to it, and are thus the wish-fulfilment
of the sense of guilt reacting on the contemned
impulse. But the dreams mentioned above of
patients suffering from traumatic neuroses do
not permit of classification under the category
of wish-fulfilment, nor do the dreams occurring
during psycho-analysis that bring back the rec
ollection of the psychic traumata of childhood.
They obey rather the repetition-compulsion,
which in analysis, it is true, is supported by the
(not unconscious) wish to conjure up again
what has been forgotten and repressed. Thus,
the function of the dream, viz., to do away
with the motives leading to interruption of
sleep by presenting wish-fulfilments of the dis
turbing excitations, would not be its original
one; the dream could secure control of this
function only after the whole psychic life had
accepted the domination of the pleasure-prin
ciple. If there is a beyond the pleasure-princi
ple, it is logicalto admit a prehistoric past also
for the wish-fulfilling tendency of the dream,
though to do so is no contradiction of its later
function. Now, when this tendency is once
broken through, there arises the further ques
tion: are such dreams, which in the interests of
the psychical binding of traumatic impressions
follow the repetition-compulsion, not possible
apart from analysis? The answeris certainlyin
the affirmative.
With regard to the war neuroses, so far as
the term has any significance apart from a ref
erence to the occasion of the appearance of the
illness, I have explained elsewhere that they
might very well be traumatic neuroses which
have arisen the more easily on account of an
ego-conflict.1 The fact mentioned on page 641,
viz., that a severe injury inflicted at the same
time by the trauma lessens the chance of a
neurosis arising, is no longer difficult to under
stand if two circumstances emphasised by psy1 Psycho-Analysis and the War Neuroses, Intro
duction, International Psycho-Analytical Library, No.
#• 1921.

[653b]
cho-analytic research are borne in mind. First,
that mechanical concussion must be recognized
as one of the sources of sexual excitation;2
and, secondly, that a painful and feverish ill
ness exerts for the time it lasts a powerful
influence
on the
distribution of
the libido.
Thus,
the
mechanical
force
of the
trauma
would set free the quota of sexual excitation
which, in consequence of the lacking prepara
tion by apprehension, has a traumatic effect:
but, on the other hand, the contemporaneous
bodily injury would bind the surplus excitation
by the putting in of a claim to a narcissistic
over-charging of the injured part.8 It is also
known,thoughthe ideahasnot been sufficiently
made use of in the Libido theory, that dis
turbances in the distribution of the libido so
severe as those of melancholia may be re
moved for a time by an intercurrent organic
disease; in fact even the condition of a fully
developed dementia praecox is capable of a
transitory improvement in these circumstances.
V
The fact that the sensitive cortical layer has
no protective barrier against excitations ema
nating from within will have one inevitable
consequence: viz., that these transmissions of
stimuli acquire increased economic significance
and frequently give -rise to economic disturbj
ances comparable to the traumatic neuroses!
The most prolific sources of such inner excita
tions are the so-called instincts of the organism,
the representatives of all forces arising within
the body and transmitted to the psychic apr
paratus—the most important and most obscure
element in psychological research.
Perhaps we shall not find it too rash an as
sumption that the excitations proceeding from
the instincts do not conform to the type of the
bound but of the free-moving nerve processes
that are striving for discharge. The most trust
worthy knowledge we have of these processes
comes from the study of dreams. There we
found that the processes in theunconscious sys
tems are fundamentally different from those in
the (pre)conscious; that in the unconscious
charges may easily be completely transferred,
displaced or condensed, while if this happened
with preconscious material only defective re
sults would be obtained. This is the reason for
the well-known peculiarities of the manifest
dream, after the preconscious residues of the
2See the remarks: "The effects of swinging and
railway travelling,"
in
Three
Contributions
to
the
Theory of Sex.
8See On Narcissism: anIntroduction, p. 399 above.

[654a]
Beyond the Pleasure Principle
day before have undergone elaboration accord
ing to the laws of the unconscious. I termed this
kind of process in the unconscious the psychic
primary process in contradistinction to the sec
ondary process valid in our normal waking life.
Since the excitations of instincts all affect the
unconscious systems, it is scarcely an innova
tion to say that they follow the lines of the pri
mary process, and little more so to identify the
psychic primary process with the freely mobile
charge, the secondary process with changes in
Breuer's bound or tonic charge.1 It would then
be the task of the higher layers of the psychic
apparatus to bind the instinct-excitation that
reaches the primary process. The failure to ef
fect this binding would evoke a disturbance
analogous to the traumatic neuroses; it is only
after the binding had been successfully accom
plishedthat the pleasure-principle (and its mod
ification the reality-principle) would have an
vopportunity to assert its sway without hin
drance. Till then, the other task of the psychic
apparatus would take precedence, viz., to ob
tain control of or to bind the excitation, not in
opposition to the pleasure-principle but inde
pendently of it and,in part, without regard to it.
The expressions of a repetition-compulsion
which we have described, both in the early ac
tivities of infantile psychic life and in the ex
periences of psycho-analytic treatment, show
in a high degree an instinctive character, and,
where they come into contrast with the pleas
ure-principle, a demonic character. In the play
of children, we seem to arrive at the conclusion
that the child repeats even the unpleasant ex
periences because through his own activity he
gains a far more thorough mastery of the strong
impression than was possible by mere passive
experience. Every fresh repetition seems to
strengthen this mastery for which the child
strives; even with pleasurable experiences the
child cannot do enough in the way of repetition
and will inexorably insist on the identity of the
impression. This characteristic is destined later
to disappear. A witticism heard for the second
time will almost fail of effect; a theatrical per
formance will never make the same impression
the second time that it did on the first occasion;
indeed, it is hard to persuade the adult to read
again at all soon a book he has enjoyed. Nov
elty is always the necessary condition of enjoy
ment. The child, however, never gets tired of
demanding from a grown-up the repetition of
a game he has played with him before or has
1 See "Psychology of the Dream-Processes," Section
VII, in my Interpretation of Dreams (p. 340 above).

[654b]
651
shown him, till at last the grown-up refuses,
utterly worn out; similarly, if he has been told
a pretty story, he wants always to hear the
same story instead of a new one, insists inex
orably on exact repetition and corrects each
deviation which the narrator lets slip by mis
take, which, perhaps, he even thought to gain
new merit by inserting. Here, there is no con
tradiction of the pleasure-principle: it is evi
dent that the repetition, the rediscovery of the
identity, is itself a source of pleasure. In the
case of a patient in analysis, on the other hand,
it is plain that the compulsion to repeat in the
transference the occurrences of his infantile
life disregards in every way the pleasure-prin
ciple. The patient behaves in this respect com
pletely like a child, and thus makes it clear
to us that the repressed memory-traces of his
primitive experience are not present in a bound
form, are indeed, in a sense, not capable of the
secondary process. To this fact of their not
being bound they owe their power to weave a
wish-phantasy that will be represented in a
dream, by adhering to the residues from wak
ing experiences. We frequently encounter the
same repetition-compulsion as a therapeutic
obstacle, when at the end of the treatment we
wish to bring about complete detachment from
the physician; and it may be supposed that the
vague dread with which those who are unfa
miliar with it view analysis, as though they
feared to wake what they think is better left to
sleep, is at root a fear of the appearance of this
demonic compulsion.
In what way is the instinctive connected with
the compulsion to repetition? At this point, the
idea is forced upon us that we have stumbled
on the trace of a general and hitherto not clear
ly recognized—or at least not expressly em
phasized—characteristic of instinct, perhaps of
all organic life. According to this, an instinct
would be a tendency innate in living organic
matter impelling it towards the reinstatement
of an earlier condition, one which it had to
abandon under the influence of external dis
turbing forces—a kind of organic elasticity, or,
to put it another way, the manifestation of
inertia in organic life.2
This conception of
instinct strikes us
as
strange, since we are accustomed to see in in
stinct the factor urging towards change and de
velopment, and now we find ourselves required
to recognize in it the very opposite, viz., the
2 I have little doubt that similar conjectures about
the nature of instinct have been already repeatedly
put forward.

[655a]
652
Sigmund Freud
expression of the conservative nature of living
beings. On the other hand, we soon think of
those examples in animal life which appear to
confirm the idea of instinct having been his
torically conditioned. When certain fish under
take arduous journeys at spawning-time, in or
der to deposit the spawn in certain definite
waters far removed from their usual habitats,
according to the interpretation of many biolo
gists they are only seekingthe earlier homes of
their kind, which in course of time they have
exchanged for others. The same is said to be
true of the migratory flights of birds of pas
sage, but the search for further examples be
comes superfluous when we remember that in
the phenomena of heredity and in the facts of
embryology we have the most imposing proofs
of the organic compulsion to repetition. We
see that the germ cell of a living animal is
obligedto repeat in its development—although in
a fleeting and curtailed fashion—the structures
of all the forms from which the animal is de
scended, instead of hastening along the short
est path to its own final shape. A mechanical
explanation of this except in some trifling par
ticulars is impossible, and the historical ex
planation cannot be disregarded. In the same
way, we find extending far upwards in the ani
mal kingdom a power of reproduction whereby
a lost organ is replaced by the growth of a
new one exactly like it.
The obvious objection, that it may well be
that besides the
conservative instincts com
pelling repetition there are others which press
towards new formation and progress, should
certainly not be left unnoticed; it will be con
sidered at a later stage of our discussion. But
we may first be tempted to follow to its final
consequences the hypothesis that all instincts
have as their aim the reinstatement of
an
earlier condition. If what results gives an ap
pearance of profundity or bears a resemblance
to mysticism, still we know ourselves to be
clear of the reproach of having striven after
anything of the sort. We are in search of sober
results of investigation or of reflections based
upon it, and the only character we wish for in
these results is that of certainty.
If, then, all organic instincts are conserva
tive, historically acquired, and are directed to
wards
regression,
towards
reinstatement
of
something earlier, we are obliged to place all
the results of organic development to the credit
of external, disturbing, and distracting' influ
ences. The rudimentary creature would from
its very beginning not have wanted to change,

[655b]
would, if circumstances had remained the same,
have always merely repeated the same course
of existence. But in the last resort it must have
been the evolution of our earth, and its rela
tion to the sun, that has left its imprint on the
development of organisms. The conservative or
ganic instincts have absorbed every one of these
enforced alterations in the course of life and
have stored them for repetition; they thus pre
sent the delusive appearance of forces striving
after change and progress, while they are mere
ly endeavouring to reach an old goal by ways
both old and new. This final goal of all organic
striving can be stated too. It would be counter
to the
conservative nature of instinct if the
goal of life were a state never hitherto reached.
It must rather be an ancient starting point,
which the living being left long ago, and to
which it harks back again by all the circuitous
paths of development. If we may assume as
an experience admitting of no exception that
everything living dies from causes within itself,
and returns to the inorganic, we can only say
"The goal of all life is death" and, casting
back, "The inanimate was there
before the
animate."
At one time or another, by some operation of
force which still completely baffles conjecture,
the properties of life were awakened in lifeless
matter. Perhaps the process was a prototype
resembling that other one which later in a cer
tain stratum of living matter gave rise to con
sciousness. The tension then aroused in the pre
viously inanimate matter strove to attain an
equilibrium; the first instinct was present, that
to return to lifelessness. The living substance
at that time had death within easy reach; there
was probably only a short course of life to
run, the direction of which was determined by
the chemical structure of the young organism.
So through a long period of time the living
substance may have been constantly created
anew, and easily extinguished, until decisive ex
ternal influences altered in such a way as to
compel the still surviving substance to ever
greater deviations from the original path of life,
and to ever more complicated and circuitous
routes to the attainment of the goal of death.
These circuitous ways to death, faithfully re
tained by the conservative instincts, would be
neither more nor less than the phenomena of
life as we now know it. If the exclusively con
servative nature of the instincts is accepted as
true, it is impossible to.arrive at any other sup
positions with regard to the origin and goal of
fife.

[656a]
Beyond the Pleasure Principle
f>53
If these conclusions sound strangely in our
ears, equally so will those we are led to make
concerning the great groups of instincts which
we regard as lying behind the vital phenomena
of organisms. The postulate of the self-preser
vative instincts we ascribe to every living being
stands in remarkable contrast to the supposi
tion that the whole life of instinct serves the
one end of bringing about death. The theoretic
significanceof the instincts of self-preservation,
power, and self-assertion, shrinks to nothing,
seen in this light; they are part-instincts de
signed to secure the path to death peculiar to
the organism and to ward offpossibilities of re
turn to the inorganic other than the immanent
ones, but the enigmatic struggle of the organ
ism to maintain itself in spite of all the world,
a struggle that cannot be brought into connec
tion with anything else, disappears. It remains
to be added that the organism is resolved to
die only in its own way; even these watchmen
of Hfewere originally the myrmidons of death.
Hence, the paradox comesabout that the living
organism resists with all its energy influences
(dangers) which could help it to reach its lifegoal by a short way (a short circuit, so to
speak); but this is just the behaviour that
characterizes a pure instinct as contrasted with
an intelligent striving.
But we must bethink ourselves: this cannot
be the whole truth. The sexual instincts, for
which the theory of the neuroses claims a posi
tion apart, lead us to quite another point of
view. Not all organisms have yielded to the
external compulsion driving them to an ever
further development. Many have succeeded in
maintaining themselves on their low level up
to the present time: there are in existence to
day, if not all, at all events many forms of life
that must resemble the primitive stages of the
higher animals and plants. And, similarly, not
all the elementary organisms that make up the
complicated body of a higher form of life take
part in the whole path of evolution to the nat
ural end, i.e., death. Some among them, the re
productive cells, probably retain the original
structure of the living substance and, after a
given time, detach themselves from the parent
organism, charged as they are with all the in
herited and newly acquired instinctive disposi
tions. Possibly it is just those two features that
make their independent existence possible. If
brought under favourable conditions they begin
to develop, that is, to repeat the same cycle to
which they owe their origin, the end being that
again one portion of the substance carries

[656b]
through its development to a finish, while an
other part, as a new germinal core, again harks
back to the beginning of
the
development.
Thus, these reproductive cells operate against
the death of the living substance and are able
to win for it what must seem to us to be po
tential immortality, although perhaps it only
means a lengthening of the path to death. Of
the highest significance is the fact that the re
productive cell is fortified for this function, or
only becomes capable of it, by the mingling
with another like it and yet different from it.
There is a group of instincts that care for the
destinies of these elementary organisms which
survive the individual being, that concern them
selves with the safe sheltering of these organ
isms as long as they are defenceless against the
stimuli of the outer world, and finally bring
about their conjunction with other reproduc
tive cells. These are collectively the sexual in
stincts. They are conservative in the same sense
as the others are, in that they reproduce earlier
conditions of the living substance; but they are
so in a higher degree, in that they show them
selves specially resistant to external influences;
and they are more conservative in a wider sense
still, since they preserve life itself for a longer
time. They are the actual life-instincts; the fact
that they run counter to the trend of the other
instincts which lead towards death indicates a
contradiction between them and the rest, one
which the theory of neuroses has recognized as
full of significance. There is, as it were, an oscil
lating rhythm in the life of organisms; the one
group of instincts presses forward to reach the
final goal of life as quickly as possible, the other
flies back at a certain point on the way only to
traverse the same stretch once more from a
given spot and thus to prolong the duration of
the journey. Although sexuality and the distinc
tion of the sexes certainly did not exist at the
dawn of life, nevertheless, it remains possible
that the instincts which are later described as
sexual were active from the very beginning and
took up the part of opposition to the role of the
ego-instincts then, and not only at some later
time.
Let us now retrace our steps for the first
time, to ask whether all these speculations are
not, after all, without foundation. Are there
really, apart from the sexual instincts, no other
instincts than those which have as their object
the reinstatement of an earlier condition, none
that strive towards a condition never yet at
tained? I am not aware of any satisfactory ex
ample in the organic world running counter to

[657a]
654
Sigmund Freud
the characteristic I have suggested. The exist
ence of a general impulse towards higher de
velopment in the plant and animal world can
certainly not be established, though some such
line of development is as a fact unquestionable.
But, on the one hand, it is often merely a ques
tion of our own valuation when we pronounce
one stage of development to be higher than an
other, and, on the other hand, biology makes
clear to us that a higher development in one
particular is often purchased with, or balanced
by, retrogression in another. Then there are
plenty of animal forms the youthful stages
of which teach us that their development has
taken a retrograde character rather than other
wise. Higher development and
retrogression
alike might well be the results of external forces
impelling towards adaptation, and the part
played by the instincts might be confined in
both cases to retaining the enforced changes as
sources of pleasure.1
Many of us will also find it hard to abandon
our belief that in man himself there dwells an
impulse towards perfection, which has brought
him to his present heights of intellectual prow
ess and ethical sublimation, and from which it
might be expected that his development into
superman will be ensured. But I do not believe
in the existence of such an inner impulse, and
I see no way of preserving this pleasing illu
sion. The development of man up to now does
not seem to me to need any explanation differ
ing from that of animal development, and the
restless
striving
towards
further
perfection
which may be observed in a minority of hu
man beings is easily explicable as the result of
that repression of instinct upon which what is
most valuable in human culture is built. The
repressed instinct never ceases to strive after
its complete satisfaction, which would consist
in. the repetition of a primary experience of
satisfaction: all substitution- or reaction-for
mations and sublimations avail nothing towards
relaxing the continual tension; and out of the
excess of the satisfaction demanded over that
found is born the driving momentum which al
lows of no abiding in any situation presented
to it, but in the poet's words "urges ever for1 By a different route, Ferenczi has arrived at the
possibility of this conception. ("Stages of Develop
ment in the Sense of Reality," Ch. VIII of .his Con
tributions to Psycho-Analysis, 1916.) He writes: "By
following through this process of thought logically, one
is obliged to gain familiarity with the idea of a ten
dency to persistence or regression governing organic
life also, while the tendency to progress in develop
ment, adaptation, etc., is manifested only as against
external stimuli."

[657b]
ward, ever unsubdued."2 The path in the other
direction, back to complete satisfaction, is as a
rule barred by the resistances that maintain the
repressions, and thus there remains nothing for
it but to proceed in the other, still unobstructed
direction, that of development, without, how
ever, any prospect of being able to bring the
process to a conclusion or to attain the goal.
What occurs in the development of a neurotic
phobia, which is really nothing but an attempt
at flight from the satisfaction of an instinct,
gives us the prototype for the origin of this
ostensible "impulse towards perfection," which,
however, we cannot possibly ascribe to all
-human beings. The dynamic conditions are,
it is true,
quite generally present, but
the
economic relations seem only in rare cases to
favour the phenomenon.
VI
Our discussion so far results in the establishing
of a sharp antithesis between the ego-instincts
and the sexual instincts, the former impelling
towards death and the latter towards the pres
ervation of life, a result which we ourselves
must surely find in many respects far from
adequate. Further, only for the former can we
properly claim the
conservative—or, better,
regressive—character corresponding to a repeti1
tion-compulsion.
For,
according to our hy
pothesis,
the ego-instincts
spring from
the
vitalizing of inanimate matter, and have as
their aim the reinstatement of lifelessness. As
to the sexual instincts, on the other hand: it is
obvious that they reproduce primitive states
of the living being, but the aim they strive for
by every means is the union of two germ cells
which are specifically differentiated. If this
union does not take place, then the germ cell
dies like all other elements of the multicellular
organism. Only on this condition can the sexual
function prolong life and lend it the semblance
of immortality. Of what important happening,
then, in the process of development of the
living substance is sexual reproduction, or its
forerunner, the copulation of two individual
protozoa, the repetition? That question we do
not know how to answer, and therefore we
should feel relieved if the whole structure of
our arguments were to prove erroneous. The
opposition of ego- (or death-) instincts and
sexual (life-) instincts would then disappear,
and the repetition-compulsion would thereupon
2 Mephistopheles in Faust; Part I, "Faust's Study."

[658a]
Beyond the Pleasure Principle
655
also lose the significance we have attributed
to it.
Let us turn back, therefore, to one of the
assumptions we interpolated, in the expecta
tion that it will permit of exact refutation. We
built up further conclusions on the basis of the
assumption that all life must die from internal
causes. We made this assumption so light-heart
edly because it doesnot seem to us to be one.
We are accustomed so to think, and every poet
encourages us in the idea. Perhaps we have re
solved so to think because there lies a certain
consolation in this belief. If man must himself
die, after first losing his most beloved ones by
death,he would preferthat hislife be forfeitto
an
inexorable
law
of
nature,
the
sublime
'kvaynt),
than to a mere accident which per
hapscould havebeen in some wayavoided. But
perhaps this belief in the incidence of death as
the necessary consequence of an inner law of
being is also onlyoneof those illusions that we
have fashioned for ourselves "so as to endure
the burden of existence." It is certainly not a
primordial belief: the idea of a natural death
is alien to primitive races; they ascribe every
death occurring among themselves to the in
fluence of an enemy or an evil spirit. So let us
not neglect to turn to biological science to test
the belief.
If we do so, we may be astonished to find
how little agreement exists amongbiologists on
the question of natural death, that indeed the
very conception of death altogether eludes
them. The fact of a certain average length of
life, at least among the higher animals, is of
course an argument for
death from inner
causes, but the circumstance that certain large
animals and giant trees reach a very great age,
one not to be computed up to now, once more
removes this impression. According to the
grandiose conception of W. Fliess, all the vital
phenomena—and
certainly
also death—are
linked with the accomplishment of certain pe
riods of time, among which there finds expres
sion of the dependence of two living sub
stances, one male and one female, upon the
solar year. But observations of how easily and
extensively the influences of external forces
can alter vital manifestations, especially in the
plant world, as to their occurrence in time, can
hasten or retard them, militate against the ri
gidity of the formulae laid down by Fliess and
leaves at least doubtful the universality of the
laws he sought to establish.
The treatment of these themes, death and
the duration of life among organisms, in the

[658b]
works of A. Weismann1 possesses the greatest
interest for us. This investigator originated the
distinction of living substance into a mortal
and an immortal half; the mortal is the body
in the narrower sense, the soma, which alone
is subject to natural death; while the germ cells
are potentially immortal, in so far as they are
capable under certain favourable conditions of
developing into a new individual, or, expressed
otherwise, of surrounding themselves with a
new soma.2
What here arrests our attention is the unex
pected analogy with our conception developed
along so different a line of thought. Weismann,
who is considering living substance morpholog
ically, recognizes in it
a constituent which
is the prey of death, the soma, the body viewed
apart from sex or heredity elements, and, on
the other hand, an immortal part, the germplasm, which serves the purpose of preserva
tion of the species, of propagation. We have
fixed our attention not on the living matter,
but on the forces active in it, and have been
led to distinguish two kinds of instincts: those
the purpose of which is to guide life towards
death, and the
others, the sexual instincts,
which perpetually strive for, and bring about,
the renewal of life. This sounds like a dynamic
corollary to Weismann's morphological theory.
This appearance of an important correspond
ence vanishes as soon as we examine Weis
mann's
pronouncement
on the problem
of
death. For Weismann admits the differentiation
between the mortal soma and the immortal
germ-plasm only in relation to multicellular
organisms; with the unicellular beings, the in
dividual and the reproductive cell are still one
and the same.3 The unicellular he thus affirms
to be potentially immortal; death appears only
among the
metazoa, the multicellular.
This
death of the higher organisms is, it is true, a
natural one, a death from inner causes, but it
does not depend on an inherent quality of the
living substance,4 is not to be conceived as an
absolute necessity based on the nature of life.5
Death is rather a purposive contrivance, a phe
nomenon of adaptation to the external condi
tions of life, because after the differentiation
of the corporeal cells into soma and germ-plasm
the indefinite prolongation of the life of the
1 Uber
die
Dauer des
Lebens,
1882;
Uber Leben
und Tod, 2nd ed., 1892; Das Keimplasma, 1892, etc.
2 Uber Leben und Tod, 2nd ed., p. 20.
8 Uber die Dauer des Lebens, p. 38.
* Uber Leben und Tod, 2nd ed., p. 67.
6 Ube/ die Dauer des Lebens, p. 33.

[659a]
656
Sigmund Freud
individual would have become a quite inexpedi
ent luxury. With the appearance of this differ
entiation among multicellular organisms, death
became possible and expedient. Since then, the
soma of the higher organisms dies after a cer
tain time from internal causes; the protozoa,
however, remain immortal. Propagation, on the
other hand, was not first introduced with death;
it is, on the contrary, a primordial property of
living matter like
growth, in which it orig
inated, and life has gone on uninterruptedly
from its inception on the earth.1
It is easy to
see that to concede natural
death to the higher organisms does not greatly
help our case. If death is a late acquisition
of life, then death-instincts traceable to the be
ginning of life on this planet no longer come
into question. Multicellular organisms may con
tinue to die from internal causes, whether de
fect of differentiation or imperfections of their
metabolism; it possesses no interest for the in
quiry on which we are engaged. Such a concep
tion and derivation of death certainly more
nearly approaches the ordinary human view of
it than the unwonted assumption of death-in
stincts.
The
discussion
which
has
centred
round
Weismann's assertions has, in my opinion, had
no decisive result
in any direction.2 Many
writers have reverted to the standpoint of
Goethe (1883), who saw in death the direct
consequence of propagation. Hartmann does
not regard as the characteristic of death the
appearance of a corpse, a piece of living sub
stance which has died off, but defines it as the
"definitive end of individual development." In
this sense, protozoa are also subject to death;
with
them
death invariably
coincides with
propagation, but it is, so to speak, disguised by
the latter, for
the
whole substance of the
parent organism may be absorbed directly into
the new individuals.8
The interest of the inquiry was soon directed
towards testing experimentally the asserted im
mortality of living substance
in
unicellular
beings. An American, named Woodruff, insti
tuted a culture of a ciliated infusorium, a slip
per-animalcule, which reproduces itself by divi
sion into two individuals; each time, he isolated
one of the products and put it into fresh water.
He traced the propagation to the 3,029th gen1 Uber Leben und Tod, Conclusion.
2See Max Hartmann, Tod undFortpjlanzung, 1906;
Alex. Lipschiitz, "Warum wir sterben," Kosmosbucher,
1914; Franz Doflein, Das Problem des Todes und der
Unsterblichkeit bei den Pflanzen und Tieren, 1919.
3 Hartmann, op. cit., p. 29.

[659b]
eration, when he discontinued the experiment.
The last descendant of the first slipper-animal
cule was just as lively as its original ancestor,
without any sign of age or degeneration: if
such numbers are convincing, the immortality
of protozoa seemed thus experimentally de
monstrable.4
Other investigators have arrived at other re
sults. Maupas, Calkins, etc., found, in contra
diction to Woodruff, that even these infusoria,
after a certain number of divisions, become
weaker, decrease in size, lose a portion of their
organization, and finally die, if they do not en
counter certain invigorating influences. Accord
ing to this, protozoa die after a phase of senile
decay just like higher animals, in direct con
travention of what is maintained by Weismann^
who recognizes in death a late acquisition of
living organisms.
Taking the net result of these researches to
gether, we note two facts which seem to afford
us a firm foothold. First: if the animalculae, at
a time when they as yet show no signs of age,
have the opportunity of mingling with each
other, of conjugating—afterwards again sepa
rating—then they remain exempt from age,
they have been rejuvenated. This conjugation
is doubtless the prototype of sexual propaga
tion of higherorganisms: as yet, it has nothing
to do with multiplication, it is confined to the
mingling of the substances of both individuals
(Weismann's Amphimixis). The invigorating
influence of conjugation can also be replaced,
however, by certain modes of stimulation,
changes in the composition of the nutrient
fluid, raising of temperature, or shaking. The
famous experiment of J. Loeb will be recalled,
who, by the application of certain chemical
stimuli to the ova of sea-urchins, brought about
processes of division which usually take place
only after fertilization.
Secondly: it is, after all, probable that the
infusoria are broughtto a natural death through
their own vital process, for the contradiction
between Woodruff's findings and those of others
arises from Woodruff having placed each gen
eration in fresh nutrient fluid. When he re
frained from doingso, he observed, as did the
other investigators, that the generations showed
signs of age. He concluded that the animal
culae were injured by the products of metabo
lism which they gave off into the surrounding
fluid, and was then able to prove convincingly
that only the products of its own metabolism
*For this, and what follows, see Lipschiitz. op. cit.,
pp. 26 and 52 ff.

[660a]
Beyond the Pleasure Principle
657
had this effect in bringing about the death of
the generation. Forin a solution over-saturated
with waste products of a distantly related spe
cies, the very same animalculae throve excel
lently which when allowed to accumulate in
their own nutrient fluid inevitably perished.
Thus, left to itself, the infusorium dies a nat
ural death from the imperfect disposal of its
own metabolic products: perhapsall higherani
mals die ultimately from the same inability.
At this point, the doubt may then occur to
us whether any good purpose hasbeenserved in
looking for the answer to the question as to
natural death in the study of the protozoa. The
primitive organization of these forms of life
may conceal from us important conditions
which are present in them too, but can be rec
ognized only among the higher animals where
they have achieved for themselves a morpho
logical expression. If we abandon the morpho
logical point ofview forthedynamic, it may be
a matter of entire indifference to us whether
the natural death of the protozoa can be proved
or not. With them the substance later recog
nized as immortal has not yet separated itself
in anyway from the part subject to death. The
instinctive forces which endeavour to conduct
life to death might be active in them, too, from
the beginning and yet their effect might be so
obscured by that of the forces tending to pre
serve life that any direct evidence of their ex
istence becomes hard to establish. We have
heard, it is true, that the observations of biol
ogists allow ustoassume such death-ward tend
ing inner processes also among the protozoa.
But even if the protozoa prove to be immortal
in Weismann's sense, his assertion that death
is a late acquisition holds good only of the out
ward manifestations of death, and does not in
validate any hypothesis as to such processes as
impel towards death. Ourexpectation that biol
ogy would entirely put out of court any rec
ognition of the death-instincts has not been
fulfilled. It is open to us to occupy ourselves
further with this possibility, if we have other
reasons for doing so. The striking resemblance
between Weismann's separation of soma and
germ-plasm and our distinction between the
death and the life-instincts remains unshaken,
moreover, and retains its value.
Let us dwell for a moment on this exquisite
ly dualistic conception of the instinctive life.
According to E. Hering's theory of the proc
esses in living matter, there course through it
uninterruptedly two kinds of processes of op
positedirection, one anabolic, assimilatory, the

[660b]
other katabolic, disintegrating. Shall we venture
to recognize in these two directions of the vital
processes the activity of our two instinctive
tendencies, the life-instincts and the death-in
stincts? And we cannot disguise another fact
from ourselves, that we have steered unawares
into the haven of Schopenhauer's philosophy
for whom death is the "real result" of life,1
and, therefore, in so far its aim, while the sex
ual instinct is the incarnation of the will to live.
Let us boldly try to go a step further. Ac
cording to general opinion, the union of nu
merous cells into one vital connection, the
multicellularity of
organisms, has become a
means to the prolongation of their span of life.
One cell helps to preserve the life of the others,
and the cell-community can go on living even
if single cells have to perish. We have already
heard that also conjugation, the
temporary
mingling of two unicellular entities, has a pre
servative and rejuvenating effect on both. The
attempt might consequently be made to transfer
the libido theory yielded by psycho-analysis
to the relationship of the cells to one another
and to imagine that it is the vital or sexual in
stincts active in every cell that take the other
cells for their object, partially neutralize their
death-instincts, i.e., the processes stimulated
by these, and so preserve those cells in life,
while other cells do the same for them, and
still others sacrifice themselves in the exercise
of this
libidinous function. The germ
cells
themselves
would
behave
in
a
completely
narcissistic fashion, as we are accustomed to
describe it in the theory of the neuroses when
an individual concentrates his
libido on
the
ego, and gives out none of it for the charging
of objects. The germ cells need their libido—
the activity of their vital instincts—for them
selves as a provision for their later enormous
constructive activity. Perhaps the cells of the
malignant growths that destroy the organism
can also be considered to be narcissistic in the
same sense. Pathology is indeed prepared to
regard the kernels of them as congenital in
origin and to ascribe embryonal attributes to
them. Thus the libido of our sexual instincts
would
coincide with the Eros of poets and
philosophers, which holds together all things
living.
At this point, opportunity offers of reviewing
the gradual development of our hbido theory.
The
analysis
of
the
transference-neuroses
1 Uber die anscheinende Absichtlichkeit im Schicksale des Einzelnen (edited by Grand Duke Wilhelm
Ernst) Vol. IV, p. 268.

[661a]
658
Sigmund Freud
forced on our notice in the first
place the
opposition between sexual instincts, which are
directed towards an object, and other instincts
which we only imperfectly discerned and pro
visionally described as ego-instincts. Among the
latter, those which subserve the self-preserva
tion of the individual had the first claim for
recognition. What other distinctions were to
be made, it was impossible to say. No knowl
edge would have been so important for the
establishment of a sound psychology as some
approximate understanding of the common na
ture and possible differences of the instincts.
But in no department of psychology did one
grope more in the dark. Everyone posited as
many instincts or fundamental instincts as he
pleased, and contrived with them just as the
ancient Greek philosophers did with their four
elements: earth, air, fire, and water. Psycho
analysis, which could not dispense with some
kind of hypothesis as to the instincts, adhered,
to begin with, to the popular distinction, typi
cally represented by the phrase hunger and
love. It was at least no new arbitrary creation.
With this, one adequately covered a consider
able distance in the analysis of the psycho
neuroses. The conception of
sexuality—and
therewith that of a sexual instinct—certainly
had to be extended, till it included much that
did not come into the category of the function
of propagation, and this led to outcry enough
in a severe and superior or merely hypocritical
world.
The next step followed when psycho-analysis
was able to feel its way a little nearer to the
psychological ego, which was at first known
to us only as a repressing, censoring agency,
capable of constituting defences and reactionformations. Critical and other far-seeing minds
had indeed for a long time raised objections
to the narrowing of the libido concept down to
the energy of the sexual instinct as directed to
the object. But they omitted to say whence
they obtained this fuller comprehension, and
failed to deduce anything from it of value for
psycho-analysis. In the course of more deliber
ate advance, it came under psycho-analytic
observation how regularly libido is withdrawn
from the object and directed towards the ego
(introversion), and through the study of the
libido-development of the child in its earliest
phases it became clear that the ego is the true
and original reservoir of the libido, which is
extended to the object only from this. The ego
took its place as one of the sexual objects and
was immediately recognized as
the choicest

[661b]
among them. Where the libido thus remained
attached to the ego, it was termed narcissistic.1
This narcissistic libido was naturally also the
expression of the energy of sexual instincts in
the analytical sense which now had to be identi
fied with the instincts of self-preservation, the
existence of which was admitted from the first.
Whereupon, the original antithesis between the
ego-instincts and the sexual instincts became
inadequate. A part of the ego-instincts was
recognized as libidinous: in the ego, sexual
instincts were found to be active—probably in
addition to others; nevertheless, one is justified
in saying that the old formula, viz., that a
psychoneurosis arises out of a conflict between
the ego-instincts and the sexual instincts, con
tained nothing that we should have to reject
today. Only, the difference of the two kinds of
instincts which was supposed originally to be
in some kind of way qualitative has now to be
defined otherwise, namely on a topographical
basis. In particular, the transference-neurosis,
the real object of psycho-analytic study, is still
seen to be the result of a conflict between the
ego and libidinous investment of an object.
We are the more compelled now to accen
tuate the libidinous character of the self-pre
servative instincts, since we are venturing on
the further step of recognizing the sexual in
stinct as the Eros, the all-sustaining, and of
deriving the narcissistic libido of the ego from
the sum of the libidoquantities that bring about
the mutual adherence of the somatic cells. But
we now find ourselves suddenly confronted with
this question: If the self-preservative instincts
are also of a libidinous kind, then perhaps we
have no other instincts at all than libidinous
ones. There are at least no others apparent. In
that event, we must admit the critics to be in
the right who from the first have suspected
that psycho-analysis makessexuality the expla^
nation of everything, or the innovators, like
Jung, who, quickly making up their minds,
have used libido as a synonym for instinctive
force in general. Is that not so?
This result was at all events one not intended
by us. On the contrary, we took as our starting
point a sharp distinction between the egoinstincts
( = death-instincts)
and the sexual
instincts (= life-instincts). We were prepared,
indeed, to reckon even the alleged self-preser
vative instincts of the egoamongdeath-instincts,
a position which we have since corrected and
withdrawn from. Our standpoint was a dualistic
one from the beginning, and is so today more
1 See On Narcissism: an Introduction, p. 399 above.

[662a]
Beyond the Pleasure Principle
659
sharply than before, since we no longer call
the contrasting tendencies egoistic and sexual
instincts, but life-instincts and death-instincts.
Jung's libido theory, on the other hand, is a
monistic one; that he has applied the term
libido to his only instinctive energy was bound
to create confusion, but should not have any
further effect on us. We suspect that there are
in the ego other instincts than those of selfpreservation; only we ought to be in a position
to demonstrate them. Unfortunately, so little
progress has been made in the analysis of the
ego that this proof becomes extraordinarily
difficult of attainment. The libidinous instincts
of the ego may indeed be conjoined in a special
way with other ego-instincts of which we as yet
know
nothing. Before ever we had
clearly
recognized narcissism, the conjecture was al
ready present in the minds of psycho-analysts
that the
ego-instincts had
drawn
libidinous
components to themselves. But these are merely
vague possibilities which our opponents will
hardly take into account. It remains an awk
ward fact that analysis up to now has only
put us in the position of demonstrating libidi
nous impulses. The conclusion that therefore
there are no others is one to which we do not
assent.
In the obscurity that at present shrouds the
theory of instinct, we shall certainly not do
well to reject any idea that promises to throw
light. We have made the antithesis between the
life and death instincts our point of departure;
Object-love itself displays a second such polar
ity, that of love (tenderness) and hate (aggres
sion). What if we could succeed in bringing
these two polarities into relation with each
other, in tracing the one to the other! We have
long recognized a sadistic component of the
sexual instinct:1 it can, as we know, attain in
dependence, and as a perversion, dominate the
whole sexual trend of a person. In one of the
organizations which I have termed pregenital
it appears as a dominating part-instinct. But
how is one to derive the sadistic impulse, which
aims at the injury of the object, from the lifesustaining Eros!
Does not the
assumption
suggest itself that this sadism is properly a
death-instinct which is driven apart from the
ego by the influenceof the narcissistic libido, so
that it becomes manifest only in reference to
the object? It then enters the service of the
sexual function; at the oral stage of organi
zation of the libido, amorous possession is still
one and the same as annihilation of the object;
1 Three Contributions to the Theory of Sex.

[662b]
later, the sadistic impulse separates itself, and,
at last, at the stage of the genital primacy, it
takes over, with the aim of propagation, the
function of so far overpowering the sex-object
as the carrying out of the sexual act demands.
One might even say that the sadism expelled
from the ego has acted as guide to the libidinous
components of the sexual instinct; these later
press on towards the object. Where the original
sadism experiences no abatement or fusion, the
well-known hate-love ambivalence of the lovelife is set up.
If the above assumption is justifiable, then
we have met the challenge of demonstrating
an example of a death-instinct—though a dis
placed one. This conception, however, is far
from being evident, and creates a frankly mys
tical impression. We incur the suspicion of
having attempted at all costs to find a way out
of an impasse. We may appeal against this ver
dict by saying that the assumption is no new
one, that we have once before made it when
there was no question of an impasse. Clinical
observations forced upon us the view that the
part-instinct of masochism, the one comple
mentary to sadism, is to be understood as a
recoil of the sadism on to the ego itself.2 A
turning of the instinct from the object to the
ego is, however, essentially the same as a turn
ing from the ego to the object, which is just
now the new idea in question. Masochism, the
turning of the instinct against the self, would
then be in reality a return to an earlier phase
of this, a regression. The exposition I
then
gave of
masochism needs correction in
one
respect as being too exclusive: masochism may
also be what I was there concerned to deny,
primary.8
Let us return, however, to the life-sustaining
sexual instincts. We have already learned from
the investigation of the protozoa that the min
gling of two individuals without consequent
2 See Three Contributions to the Theory of Sex and
Instincts and their Vicissitudes, p. 412 above.
8 A considerable part of this speculation has been
anticipated in a work which is full of valuable matter
and ideas but is unfortunately not entirely clear to
me:
Sabina
Spielrein, "Die Destruktion als
Ursache
des Werdens," lahrbuch fur Psychoanalyse, IV, 1912.
She
designates the sadistic component as destructive.
In still another way. A. Starcke (Inleiding by de vertaling von S. Freud, De sexuele beschavingsmoral, etc.,
1914), has attempted to identify the libido concept
itself with
the
biological
concept of
an
impulsion
towards death which is
to be assumed on theoretical
grounds.
(See
also Rank, Der
Kiinstler.)
All
these
attempts, as the one in the text, indicate how much
the need is felt
for a clarification, in the theory of
instinct, which we
do not yet possess.

[663a]
66o
Sigmund Freud
partition, just as copulation between two in
dividuals which soon after separate, has a
strengthening
and
rejuvenating
effect
(see
above, Lipschiitz). There is no sign of degen
eration in their descendants, and they also seem
to have gained the capacity for withstanding
for a longer time the injurious results of their
own metabolism. I think that this one observ
ation may be taken as a prototype of the effect
of sexual intercourse also. But in what way
does the blending of two slightly different cells
bring about such a renewal of life? The ex
periment
which
substitutes
for
conjugation
among protozoa the effect of chemical or even
of mechanical stimuli1 admits of our giving a
reply with certainty: it comes about by the
introduction of new stimulus-masses. This is
in close agreement with the hypothesis that the
life-process of an individual leads, from internal
causes, to the equalizing of chemical tensions:
i.e., to death, while union with an individually
different living substance increases these ten
sions—so to speak, introduces new vital differ
entia, which then have to be again lived out.
For this difference between the two there must
naturally be one or more optima. Our recog
nition that the ruling tendency of psychic life,
perhaps of nerve life altogether, is the struggle
for reduction, keeping at a constant level, or
removal of the inner stimulus tension
(the
Nirvana-principle, as Barbara Low terms it)
—a struggle which comes to expression in the
pleasure-principle—is indeed one of our strong
est motives for believing in the existence of
death-instincts.
But the course of our argument is still dis
turbed by an uneasy feeling that just in the
case of the sexual instinct we are unable to
demonstrate that character of a repetitioncompulsion which first put us on the track of
the death-instincts. It is true that the realm of
embryonic developmental processes offers an
abundance of such repetition phenomena—the
two germ cells of sexual propagation and their
life-history are themselves only repetitions of
the beginning of organic life: but the essential
feature in the processes designed by the sexual
instinct is, nevertheless, the mingling of two
cells. Only by this is the immortality of the
living substance among the higher forms
of
life assured.
To put it in other words: we have to make
enquiry into the origin of sexual propagation
and the source of the sexual instincts in general,
a task before which the lay mind quails and
1 Loc. cit.

[663b]
which even specialists have not yet been able to
solve. Let us, therefore, make a condensed
selection from all the conflicting accounts and
opinions of whatever can be brought into re
lation with our train of thought.
One view deprives the problem of propa
gation of its mysterious attraction by repre
senting it as part of the phenomenon of growth
(multiplication by division, germination, bud
ding). The arising of propagation by means of
germ-cells
sexually differentiated might be
conceived, in accordance with the sober Dar
winian mode of thought, as a way of maintain
ing and utilizing for further development the
advantage of the amphimixis which resulted in
the first instance from the fortuitous conju
gation of two protozoa.2 Sex would not thus be
of very ancient origin and the extraordinarily
powerful instincts which aim at bringing about
sexual union would thereby repeat something
which once chanced to happen and since be
came established as being advantageous.
The same question now recurs as arose in
respect of death—namely, whether the protozoa
can becredited with anything beyond what they
exhibit, and whether we may assume that
forces and processes which become perceptible
only in the case of the higher animals did first
arise in the more primitive. For our purpose
the view of sexuality mentioned above helps
verylittle. The objectionmay be raisedagainst
it that it presupposes the existence of life-in
stincts as already operative in the simplest
forms of life, for otherwise conjugation, which
works against the expiration of life and makes
the task of dying harder, wouldnot have been
retained and elaborated, but would have been
avoided. If, then, we are not to abandon the
hypothesis of death-instincts maintained, we
must associate them with life-instincts from
the beginning. But we must admit that we are.
working here at an equation with two unknown
quantities. Anything else that science can tell
us of the origin of sexuality amounts to so
little that this problem may be likened to an
obscurity into which not even the ray of an
hypothesis has penetrated. In quite another
quarter, however, weencounter suchan hypoth
esis, but it is of so fantastic a kind—assuredly
a myth rather than a scientific explanation—
2Although Weismann (Das Keimplasma, 1892) de
nies even this advantage: "Fertilization in no way
signifies a rejuvenation or renewing of life—it is in no
way necessary for the prolongation of life; it is noth
ing but a device for making possible the blending of
two different inheritance tendencies." Still, he consid
ers an increase of variability in living organisms to be
the result of such blending.

[664a]
that I should not venture to bring it forward
if it did not exactly fulfil the one condition for
the fulfilment of which we are labouring. That
is to
say, it
derives
an instinct from the
necessity for the reinstatement of an earlier
situation.
I refer, of course, to the theory that Plato
in his Symposium puts into the
mouth of
Aristophanes and which deals not only with
the origin of the sexual instinct but also with
its most important variations in relation to the
object. "Human nature was once quite other
than now. Originally there were three sexes,
three
and not as
today
two:
besides the
male and the female there existed a third sex
which had an equal share in the two first. . . .
In these beings everything was double: thus,
they had four hands and four feet, two faces,
two genital parts, and so on. Then Zeus allowed
himself to be persuaded to cut these beings
in two, as one divides pears to stew them. . . .
When all nature was divided in this way, to
each human being came the longing for his own
other half, and the two halves embraced and
entwined their bodies
and desired to grow
together again."1
Are we to follow the clue of the poet-philos
opher and
make the daring assumption that
living substance was at the time of its animation
II
am
indebted
to
Prof.
Heinrich
Gomperz
of
Vienna for the following indications as to the origin
of the Platonic myth, which I repeat partly in his
own words: I should like to call attention to the fact
that essentially the same theory is also to be found in
the Upanishads. The Brihad-Aranyaka Upanishad I,
4, 3
(Deussen,
6o
Upanishads des
Veda, p. 393),
where the creation of the world from the Atman (the
self or ego) is described, has the following passage:
"Nor did he [the Atman, the self or ego! experience
any joy, and for that reason no one has joy when he
is alone. So he longed for a partner. He was as big as
a woman and a man together when they embrace. He
divided himself into two parts, which made a husband
and a wife. This body is,
therefore, one half of the
self,
according
to
Yajnavalkya. And
for
the
same
reason this empty space here becomes filled by the
woman."
The Brihad-Aranyaka Upanishad is
the oldest of
all
the Upanishads, and no expert authority would
date it later than 800 B.C. In opposition to the pre
vailing opinion, I should not like definitely to deny
the possibility of Plato having been dependent, even
though very indirectly, on these Indian thoughts, for
this possibility cannot be absolutely put aside even
for
the doctrine of
re-incarnation.
A dependence of
this sort, first conveyed through Pythagoras, would
scarcely detract from the significance of the coinci
dence in thought, for Plato would not have adopted
any such story conveyed in some way from Oriental
traditions, let alone have given it such an important
place, had he not himself felt the truth contained in
it to be illuminating.
In an article by K. Ziegler ("Menschen- und Weltwerden," Neue Jahrbucher fur das klassische Alterturn,
Vol. xxxi,
1913), which contains a systematic in
vestigation of the
thought in question, it
is traced
back to Babylonian ideas.

[664b]
Beyond the Pleasure Principle
66*
rent into small particles, which since that time
strive for reunion by means of the sexual in
stincts?
That
these
instincts—in which
the
chemical affinity of inanimate matter is con
tinued—passing
through
the
realm
of
the
protozoa gradually
overcome all
hindrances
set to their striving by an environment charged
with stimuli dangerous to life, and are impelled
by it to form a protecting covering layer? And
that these dispersed fragments of living sub
stance thus achieve a multicellular organization,
and finally transfer to
the germ-cells in a
highly concentrated form the instinct for re
union? I think this is the point at which to
break off.
But not without a few words of critical re
flection in conclusion. I might be asked whether
I am myself convinced of the views here set
forward, and if so how far. My answer would
be that I am neither convinced myself, nor am
I seeking to arouse conviction in others. More
accurately: I do not know how far I believe
in them. It seems to me that the affective
feature
conviction need not come into con
sideration at all here. One may surely give
oneself up to a line of thought, and follow it
up as far as it leads, simply out of scientific
curiosity,
or—if
you
prefer—as
advocatus
diaboli, without, however, making a pact with
the devil about it. I am perfectly aware that the
third step in the theory of instinct which I am
taking here cannot claim the same certainty
as the two former ones, viz., the extending of
the conception of sexuality and the establishing
of narcissism. These innovations were direct
translations of observation into theory, subject
to no greater sources of error than is inevitable
in anything of the kind. The assertion of the
regressive character of instinct rests also, it is
true, on observed material, namely, on the facts
of the
repetition-compulsion. But perhaps I
have overestimated their significance. At all
events there is no way of working out this idea
except by combining facts with pure imagina
tion many times in succession, and thereby de
parting far from observation. We know that the
final result becomes the more untrustworthy
the oftener one does this in the course of build-?
ing up a theory, but the precise degree of un
certainty is not ascertainable. One may thereby
have made a brilliant discovery or one may
have gone ignominiously astray. In such work
I trust little to so-called intuition: what I have
seen of it seems to me to be the result of a
certain impartiality of the intellect—only that
people, unfortunately, are seldom impartial

[665a]
662
Sigmund Freud
where they are concerned with the ultimate
things, the great problems of science and of
life. My belief is that there everyone is under
the sway of preferences deeply rooted within,
into the hands of which he unwittingly plays
as he pursues his speculation. Where there are
such good grounds for distrust, only a tepid
feeling of indulgence is possible towards the
results of one's own mental labours. But
I
hasten to add that such self-criticism does not
render
obligatory any special
tolerance
of
divergent opinions. One may inexorably reject
theories that are contradicted by the very first
steps in the analysis of observation and yet at
the same time be aware that those one holds
oneself have only a tentative validity. Were
we to appraise our speculations upon the lifeand death-instincts it would disturb us but
little that so many processes go on which are
surprising and hard to picture, such as one
instinct being expelled by others, or turning
from the ego to an object, and so on. This
comes only from our being obliged to operate
with scientific terms, i.e., with the metaphor
ical expressions peculiar to psychology
(or
more
correctly:
psychology
of
the
deeper
layers). Otherwise, we should not be able to
describe the corresponding processes at all,
nor, in fact, even to have remarked them. The
shortcomings of our description would probably
disappear if for the psychological terms we
could substitute physiological or chemical ones.
These, too, only constitute a metaphorical
language, but one familiar to us for a much
longer time and perhaps also simpler.
On the other hand, we wish to make it quite
clear that the uncertainty of our speculation is
enhanced in a high degree by the necessity of
borrowing from biological science. Biology is
truly a realm of limitless possibilities; we have
the most surprising revelations to expect from
it, and cannot conjecture what answers it will
offer in some decades to the questions we have
put to it. Perhaps, they may be such as to over
throw the whole artificial structure of hypoth
eses. If that is so, someone may ask why does
one undertake such work as the one set out in
this article, and why should it be communicated
to the world? Well, I cannot deny that some of
the analogies, relations and connections therein
traced appeared to me worthy of consideration.1
11 would here subjoin a few words to clarify our
nomenclature, one
which
has
undergone
a certain
development in
the course of
our discussion. What
sexual instincts are, we knew through their relation
to the sexes and to the function of propagation.
We
then retained this term when the findings of psycho-

[665b]
VII
If this attempt to reinstate an earlier con
dition really is so universal a characteristic of
the instincts, we should not find it surprising
that so many processes in the psychic life are
performed independently of the pleasure-prin
ciple. This characteristic would communicate
itself to every part-instinct and would in that
case concern a narking back to a definite point
on the path of development. But all that the
pleasure-principle has not yet acquired power
over is not therefore necessarily in opposition
to it, and we have not yet solved the problem
of determining the relation of the instinctive
repetition processes to the domination of the
pleasure-principle.
We have recognized that one of the earliest
and most important functions of the psychic
apparatus is to bindthe instreaming instinctive
excitations, to substitute the secondary process
for the primary process dominating them, and
to transform their freely mobile .energy-charge
into a predominantly quiescent (tonic) charge.
During this transformation, no attention can
bepaid to the development of the "pain," but
the pleasure-principle is not thereby annulled.
On the contrary, the transformation takes place
in the service of the pleasure-principle; the
binding is an act of preparation, which intro
duces and secures its sovereignty.
analysis compelled us to regard its relation to propa
gation as less close. With the discovery of narcissistic
libido, and the extension of the libido-concept to the
individual cells, the sexual instinct became for us
transformed into the Eros that endeavours to impel
the separate parts of living matter
to one another
and to hold them together; what is commonly called
the sexual instinct appears as that part of the Eros
that is turned towards the object. Our speculation then
supposes that this Eros is at work from the beginnings
of life, manifesting itself as the life-instinct in con
tradistinction to the death-instinct which developed
through the animation of the inorganic. It endeavours
to solve the riddle of life by the hypothesis of these
two instincts striving with each other from the very
beginning. The transformation which the concept of
the ego-instincts has undergone is perhaps harder to
review. Originally, we applied this term to all those
instinct-directions—now better known
to us—which
can be distinguished from
the sexual
instincts that
have the object as their aim, thus contrasting the egoinstincts with the sexual ones, the expression of which
is the libido. Later on, we approached the analysis of
the ego and saw that a part also of the ego-instincts
is of a libidinous nature, having taken its own self as
an object. These narcissistic instincts of self-preser
vation, therefore, had now to be reckoned to the libi
dinous sexual instincts. The contrast between egoistic
and sexual instincts was now converted into one be
tween
egoistic and
object-instincts,
both libidinous
in nature. In its place, however, arose a new contrast
between libidinous (ego and object)
instincts
and
others whose existence can be determined in the ego
and
can
perhaps be detected in
the
destruction-in
stincts. Speculation transforms this contrast into that
of life-instincts (Eros) and death-instincts.

[666a]
Let us distinguish function and tendency
more sharplythan we have hitherto done. The
pleasure-principle is, then, a tendency which
subserves a certain function—namely, that of
rendering the psychic apparatus as a whole
free from any excitation, or to keep the amount
of excitation constant or as low as possible.
We cannotyet decide with certaintyfor either
of these conceptions, but we note that the func
tion so defined would partake of the most
universal tendency of all living matter—to re
turn to thepeace of the inorganic world. Weall
know by experience that the greatest pleasure
it ispossible for us to attain,that of the sexual
act, is bound upwith the temporary quenching
of a greatly heightened state of excitation. The
binding of instinct-excitation, however, would
be a preparatory function, which would direct
the excitation towards its ultimate adjustment
in the pleasure of discharge.
In the same connection, the question arises
whether the sensations of pleasure and "pain"
can emanate as well from the bound as from
the unbound excitation-processes. It appears
quite beyond doubt that the unbound, the pri
mary, processes giverise to muchmore intense
sensations in both directions than the bound
ones, those of the secondary processes. The
primary processes are also the earlier in point
of time; at the beginning of mental life there
are no others, and we may conclude that if the
pleasure-principle were not already in action in
respect to them,it would not establish itself in
regard to the later processes. We thus arrive
at the result which at bottom is not a simple
one, that the searchfor pleasure manifests itself
with far greater intensity at the beginning of
psychic life than later on, but less unrestricted
ly: it has to put up with repeated breaches. At
a maturer age the dominance of the pleasureprinciple is very much more assured, though
this principle as little escapes limitations as
all the other instincts. In any case, whatever
it is in the process of excitation that engenders
the sensations of pleasure and "pain" must be
equallyin existence whenthe secondary process

[666b]
Beyond the Pleasure Principle
663
is at work as with the primary process.
This would seem to be the place to institute
further studies. Our consciousness conveys to
us from within not only the sensations of
pleasureand "pain," but also those of a peculiar
tension, which again may be either pleasurable
or painful initself. Now, is it the bound and
unbound energy processes that we have to dis
tinguish from each other by the help of these
sensations, or is the sensation of tension to be
related to the absolute quantity, perhaps to
the level of the charge, while the pleasure-pain
series refers to the changes in the quantity of
charge in the unit of time? We must also be
struck with the fact that the life-instincts have
much more to do with our inner perception,
since they make their appearance as disturbers
of the peace, and continually bring along with
them states of tension the resolution of which
is experienced as pleasure; while the deathinstincts, on the other hand, seem to fulfil their
function unostentatiously. The pleasure-prin
ciple seems directly to subserve the death-in
stincts; it keepsguard, of course, also over the
external stimuli, which are regarded as dangers
by both kinds of instincts, but in particular
over the inner increases in stimulation which
have for their aim the complication of the task
of living. At this point, innumerable other
questions arise to which no answer can yet be
given. We must be patient and wait for other
means and opportunities for investigation. We
must hold ourselves, too, in readiness to aban
don the path we have followed for a time, if it
should seem to lead to no good result. Only
such "true believers" as expect from science a
substitute
for
the
creed
they have
relin
quished will take it amiss if the investigator de
velops his views further or even transforms
them.
For the rest we may find consolation in the
words of a poet for the slow rate of progress
in scientific knowledge:
Whither we cannot fly, we must go limping.
The Scripture saith that limping is no sin.1
1 Riickert in the Makamen des Hariri.

[667a]
I. Introduction
The contrast between individual psychology
and social or group1 psychology, which at a
first glance may seem to be full of significance,
loses a great deal of its sharpness when it is
examined more closely. It is true that individ
ual psychology is concerned with the individual
man and explores the paths by which he seeks
to find satisfaction for his instincts; but only
rarely and under certain exceptional conditions
is individual psychology in a position to dis
regard the relations of this individual to others.
In the individual's mental life someone else is
invariably involved, as a model, as an object,
as a helper, as an opponent, and so from the
very first individual psychology is at the same
time social psychology as well—in this extended
but entirely justifiable sense of the words.
The relations of an individual to his parents
and to his brothers and sisters, to the object of
his love, and to his physician—in fact all the
relations which have hitherto been the chief
subject of psycho-analyticresearch—mayclaim
to be considered as social phenomena; and in
this respect they may be contrasted with cer
tain other processes, described by us as narcis
sistic, in which the satisfaction of the instincts
is partially or totally withdrawn from the in
fluence of other people. The contrast between
social and narcissistic—Bleuler would perhaps
call them autistic—mental acts therefore falls
wholly within the domain of individual psy
chology, and is not well calculated to differ
entiate it from a social or group psychology.
The individual in the relations which have
already been mentioned—to his parents and to
his brothers and sisters, to the person he is in
love with, to his friend, and to his physician—
comes under the influence of only a single per
son,or of a very smallnumber of persons, each
1"Group" is used throughout this translation as
equivalent to the rather more comprehensive German
Masse. The author uses
this
latter word to
render
both McDougalPs group, and also Le Bon's foule,
which would more naturally be translated crowd in
English. For the sake of uniformity, however, group
has been preferred in this case as well, and has been
substituted for
crowd even in
the extracts from the
English translation of Le Bon.—TR.

[667b]
Group Psychology and the
Analysis of the Ego
one of whom has become enormously important
to him. Now in speaking of social or group psy
chology it has become usual to leave these rela
tions On one side and to isolate as the subject of
Inquiry the influencing of an individual by a
large number of people simultaneously, people
with whom he is connected by something,
though otherwise they may in many respects
be strangers to him. Group psychologyis there
fore concerned with the individual man as a
member of a race, of a nation, of a caste, of
a profession, of an institution, or as a compo
nent part of a crowd of people who have been
organized into a group at some particular time
for some definite purpose. When once natural
continuity has been severed in this way, it is
easy to regard the phenomena that appear un
der these special conditions as being expressions
of a special instinct that is not further reduci
ble, the social instinct (herd instinct, group
mind), which does not come to light in any
other situations, But we may perhaps venture
to object that it seems difficult to attribute tp
the factor of number a significance so great as
to make it capable by itself of arousing in our
mental life a new instinct that is otherwise not
brought into play. Our expectation is therefore
directed towards two other possibilities: that
the social instinct may not be a primitive one
and insusceptible of dissection, and that it may
be possible to discover the beginnings of its
development in a narrower circle, such as that
of the family.
Although group psychology is only in its
infancy, it embraces an immense number of
separate
issues
and
offers to
investigators
countless problems which have hitherto not
even been properly distinguished from one an
other. The mere classification of the different
forms of group formation and the description
of the mental phenomena produced by them
require a great expenditure of observation and
exposition, and have already given rise to a
copious literature. Anyone who compares the
narrow dimensions of this little book with the
extent of group psychology will at once be able
to guess that only a few points chosen from
the whole material are to be dealt with here.
664

[668a]
Group Psychology and
And they will in fact only be a few questions
with which the depth-psychology of psycho
analysis is specially concerned.
II. Le Bon's Description op the Group Mind
Instead of starting from a definition, it seems
more useful to begin with some indication of
the range of the phenomena under review, and
to select from among them a few specially
striking and characteristic facts to which our
inquiry can be attached. We can achieve both
of these aims by means of quotation from Le
Bon's deservedly famous work, Psychologie
des Foules.1
Let us make the matter clear once again. If
a psychology, concerned with exploring the
predispositions, the instincts, the motives, and
the aims of an individual man down to his
actions and his relations with those who are
nearest to him, had completely achieved its
task, and had cleared up the whole of these
matters with their inter-connections, it would
then suddenly find itself confronted by a new
task which would lie before it unachieved. It
would be obliged to explain the surprising fact
that under a certain condition this individual
whom it had come to understand thought, felt,
and acted in quite a different way from what
would have been expected. And this condition
is his insertion into a collection of people which
has acquired the characteristic of a psychologi
cal group. What, then, is a group? How does it
acquire the capacity for exercising such a de
cisive influence over the mental life of the
individual? And what is the nature of the men
tal change which it forces upon the individual?
It is the task of a theoretical group psychol
ogy to answer these three questions. The best
way of approaching them is evidently to start
with the third. Observation of the changes in
the
individual's
reactions
is
what
provides
group psychology with its material; for every
attempt at an explanation must be preceded
by a description of the thing that is to be
explained.
I will now let Le Bon speak for himself. He
says: "The most striking peculiarity presented
by a psychological group2 is the following.
Whoever be the individuals that compose it,
however like or unlike be their mode of life,
their occupations, their character, or their in
telligence, the fact that they have been trans
formed into a group puts them in possession of
1 The Crowd: a Study of the Popular Mind (Fisher
Unwin, 12th Impression, 1920).
2 See
footnote page 664.—TR.

[668b]
Analysis of the Ego
665
a sort of collective mind which makes them
feel, think, and act in a manner quite different
from that in which each individual of them
would feel, think, and act were he in a state
of isolation. There are certain ideas and feel
ings which do not come into being, or do not
transform themselves into acts except in the
case of individuals forming a group. The psy
chological group is a provisional being formed
of heterogeneous elements, which for a mo
ment are combined, exactly as the cells which
constitute a living body form by their re
union a new being which displays characteris
tics very different from
those possessed by
each of the cells singly" (p. 29).3
We shall take the liberty of interrupting Le
Bon's exposition with glosses of our own, and
shall accordingly insert an observation at this
point. If the individuals in the group are com
bined into a unity, there must surely be some
thing to unite them, and this bond might be
precisely the thing that is characteristic of a
group. But Le Bon does not answer this ques
tion; he
goes on to
consider the alteration
which the individual undergoes when in a group
and describes it in terms which harmonize well
with the fundamental postulates of our own
depth-psychology.
"It is easy to prove how much the indi
vidual forming part of a group differs from the
isolated individual, but it is less easy to dis
cover the causes of this difference.
"To obtain at any rate a glimpse of them, it
is necessary in the first place to call to mind
the truth established by modern psychology,
that unconscious phenomena play an altogether
preponderating part not only in organic life,
but also in the operations of the intelligence.
The conscious life of the mind is of small im
portance in comparison with its unconscious
life. The most subtle analyst, the most acute
observer, is scarcely successful in discovering
more than a very small number of the conscious
motives that determine his conduct. Our con
scious acts are the outcome of an unconscious
substratum created in the mind in the main by
hereditary influences.
This substratum con
sists of the innumerable common characteris
tics handed down from generation to genera
tion, which constitute the genius of a race. Be
hind the avowed causes of our acts there un
doubtedly lie secret causes that we do not
avow, but behind these secret causes there are
many others more secret still, of which we
ourselves are ignorant. The greater part of our
3 References are to the
English translation.—Tr.

[669a]
666
Sigmund Freud
daily actions are the result of hidden motives
which escape our observation" (p. 30).
Le Bon thinks that the particular acquire
ments of individuals become obliterated in a
group, and that in this way their distinctive
ness vanishes. The racial unconscious emerges;
what is heterogeneous is submerged in what is
homogeneous. We may say that the mental su
perstructure, the development of which in in
dividuals shows such dissimilarities,is removed,
and that the unconscious foundations, which
are similar in everyone, stand exposed to view.
In this way individuals in a group would
come to show an average character. But Le
Bon believes that they also display new charac
teristics which they have not previously pos
sessed, and he seeks the reason for this in three
different factors.
"The first is that the individual forming part
of a group acquires, solely from numerical
considerations, a sentiment of invincible power
which allows him to yield to instincts which,
had he been alone, he would perforce have kept
under restraint. He will be the less disposed to
check himself from the consideration that, a
group being anonymous, and in consequence
irresponsible, the sentiment of responsibility
which always controls individuals disappears
entirely" (p. 33).
From our point of view we need not attrib
ute so much importance to the appearance of
new characteristics. For us it would be enough
to say that in a group the individual is brought
under conditions which allow him to
throw
off'the repressions of his unconscious instincts.
The apparently new characteristics which he
then displays are in fact the manifestations of
this unconscious, in which all that is evil in the
human mind is contained as a predisposition.
We can find no difficulty in understanding the
disappearance of conscience or of a sense of
. responsibility in these circumstances. It has
long been our contention that "dread of society"(soziale Angst) is the essence of what is
called conscience.1
"The second cause, which is contagion, also
intervenes to determine the manifestation in
1 There is some difference between Le Bon's view
and ours, owing to his concept of the unconscious not
quite coinciding with the one adopted by psycho-analy
sis. Le Bon's unconscious more especially contains the
most deeply buried features of the racial mind, which,
as a matter of fact, lies outside the scope of psycho
analysis. We do not fail to recognize, indeed, that the
ego's nucleus, which comprises the "archaic inherit
ance" of the human mind, is unconscious; but in addi
tion to this we distinguish the unconscious repressed,
which arose from a portion of that inheritance. This
concept of the repressed is not to be found in Le Bon.

[669b]
groups of their special characteristics, and at
the same time the trend they are to take. Con
tagion is a phenomenon of which it is easy to
establish the presence, but that it is not easy to
explain. It must be classed among those phe
nomena of a hypnotic order, which we shall
shortly study. In a group every sentiment and
act is contagious, and contagious to such a de
gree that an individual readily sacrifices his
personal interest to the collective interest. This
is an aptitude very contrary to his nature, and
of which a man is scarcely capable, except
when he makes part of a group" (p. 33).
We shall later on base an important conjec
ture upon this last statement.
"A third cause, and by far the most impor
tant, determines in the individuals of a group
special characteristics which are quite con
trary at times to those presented by the iso
lated individual. I allude to that suggestibility
of which, moreover, the contagion mentioned
above is only an effect.
"To understand this phenomenon it is neces
sary to bear in mind certain recent physiologi
cal discoveries. We know today that by various
processes an individual may be brought into
such a condition that, having entirely lost his
conscious personality, he obeys all the sugges
tions of the operator who has deprived him of
it,
and commits acts in utter contradiction
with his character and habits. The most care
ful investigations seem to prove that an indi
vidual immersed for some length of time in a
group in action soon finds himself—either in
consequence of the magnetic influence given
out by the group, or from some other cause
of which we are ignorant—in a special state,
which much resembles the state of fascination
in which the hypnotized individual finds him
self in the hands of the hypnotizer. . . . The
conscious personality has entirely vanished;
will and discernment are lost. All feelings and
thoughts are bent in the direction determined
by the hypnotizer.
"Such also is approximately the state of the
individual forming part
of a psychological
group. He is no longer conscious of his acts. In
his case, as in the case of the hypnotized sub
ject, at the same time that certain faculties are
destroyed, others may be brought to a high de
gree of exaltation. Under the influence of a
suggestion, he will undertake the accomplish
ment of certain acts with irresistible impetuos
ity. This impetuosity is the more irresistible in
the case of groups than in that of the hypno
tized subject, from the fact that, the suggestion

[670a]
Group Psychology and
being the same for all the individuals of the
group, it gains in strength by reciprocity"
(P- 34).
"We see, then, that the disappearance of the
conscious personality, the predominance of the
unconscious personality, the turning by means
of suggestion and contagion of feelings and
ideas in an identical direction, the tendency
immediately to transform the suggested ideas
into acts; these, we see, are the principal char
acteristics of the individual forming part of a
group. He is no longer himself, but has become
an automaton who has ceased to be guided by
his will" (p. 35).
I have quoted this passage so fully in order
to make it quite clear that Le Bon explains the
condition of an individual in a group as being
actually hypnotic, and does not merely make a
comparison between the two states. We have
no intention of raising any objection at this
point, but wish only to emphasize the fact that
the two last causes of an individual becoming
altered in a group
(the contagion
and the
heightened suggestibility) are evidently not on
a par, since the contagion seems actually to be
a manifestation of the suggestibility. Moreover
the effects of the two factors do not seem to
be sharply differentiated in the text of Le Bon's
remarks. We may perhaps best interpret his
statement if we connect the contagion with the
effects of the individual members of the group
upon one another, while we point to another
source for those manifestations of suggestion
in the group which are put on a level with the
phenomena of hypnotic influence. But to what
source? We cannot avoid being struck with a
sense of deficiency when we notice that one of
the chief elements of the comparison, namely
the person who is to replace the hypnotist in
the case of the group, is not mentioned in Le
Bon's exposition. But he nevertheless distin
guishes between this influence of fascination
which remains plunged in obscurity and the
contagious effect which the individuals exercise
upon one another and by which the original
suggestion is strengthened.
Here is yet another important consideration
for helping us to understand the individual in a
group: "Moreover, by the mere fact that he
forms part of an organized group, a man de
scends several rungs in the ladder of civiliza
tion. Isolated, he may be a cultivated individ
ual; in a crowd he is a barbarian—that is, a
creature acting by instinct. He possesses the
spontaneity, the violence, the ferocity, and also
the enthusiasm and heroism of primitive be-

[670b]
ANALYSIS OF THE EGO
667
ings" (p. 36). He then dwells especially upon
the lowering in intellectual ability which an
individual experiences when he becomes merged
in a group.1
Let us now leave the individual, and turn to
the group mind, as it has been outlined by Le
Bon. It shows not a single feature which a
psycho-analyst would find any difficulty in plac
ing or in deriving from its source. Le Bon him
self shows us the way by pointing to its similar
ity with the mental life of primitive people and
of children (p. 40).
A group is impulsive, changeable, and irrita
ble. It is led almost exclusivelyby the uncon
scious.2 The impulseswhich a group obeys may
according to
circumstances
be generous
or
cruel, heroic or cowardly, but they are always
so imperious that no personal interest, not even
that of self-preservation, can make itself felt
(p. 41). Nothing about it is premeditated.
Though it may desire things passionately, yet
this is never so for long, for it is incapable of
perseverance. It cannot tolerate any delay be
tween its desire and the fulfilment of what it
desires. It has a senseof omnipotence; the no
tion of impossibility disappears for the individ
ual in a group.8
A group is extraordinarily credulous and
open to influence, it has no critical faculty, and
the improbable does not exist for it. It thinks in
images, which call one another up by associa
tion (just as they arise with individuals in
states of free imagination), and whose agree
ment with reality is never checked by any
reasonable function (Instanz). The feelings of
a groupare always very simple and very exag
gerated. So that a group knows neither doubt
nor uncertainty.*
* Compare Schiller's couplet:
"Jeder, sieht man ihn einzeln, ist leidlich klug und
verstandig;
Sind sie in corpore, gleich wird euch ein Dummkopf daraus."
[Everyone, seen by himself, is passably shrewd and
discerning;
When they're in corpore, then straightway you'll
find he's an ass.]—Tr.
2 Unconscious is used here correctly by Le Bon in
the descriptive sense, where it does not only mean the
repressed.
8 Compare Totem and Taboo, III, "Animism, Magic,
and the Omnipotence of Thought."
* In the interpretation of dreams, to which, indeed,
we owe our best knowledge of unconscious mental life,
we follow a technical rule of disregarding doubt and
uncertainty
in
the narrative of the dream,
and
of
treating every element of the manifest dream as be
ing quite certain. We attribute doubt and uncertainty
to the influence of the censorship to which the dreamwork is subjected, and we assume that the primary
dream-thoughts
are
not acquainted with doubt and
uncertainty as critical processes. They may naturally

[671a]
668
Sigmund Freud
It goes directly to extremes; if a suspicion
is expressed, it is instantly changed into an
incontrovertible certainty; a trace of antipathy
is turned into furious hatred (p. 56).x
Inclined as it itself is to all extremes, a group
can only be excited by an excessive stimulus.
Anyone who wishes to produce an effect upon
it needs no logical adjustment in his arguments;
he must paint in the most forcible colours, he
must exaggerate, and he must repeat the same
thing again and again.
Since a group is in no doubt as to what con
stitutes truth or error, and is conscious, more
over, of its own great strength, it is as intoler
ant as it is obedient to authority. It respects
force and can only be slightly influenced by
kindness, which it regards merely as a form of
weakness. What it demands of its heroes is
strength, or even violence. It wants to be ruled
and oppressed and to fear its masters. Funda
mentally it is entirely conservative, and it has
a deep aversion from all innovations and ad
vances and an unbounded respect for tradition
(p. 62).
In order to make a correct judgment upon
the morals of groups, one must take into con
sideration the fact that when individuals come
together in a group all their individual inhibi
tions fall away and all the cruel, brutal, and
destructive instincts, which lie dormant in in
dividuals as relics of a primitive epoch, are
stirred up to find free gratification. But under
the influence of suggestion, groups are also ca
pable of high achievements in the shape of
abnegation, unselfishness, and devotion to an
ideal. While with isolated individuals personal
interest is almost the only motive force, with
groups it is very rarely prominent. It is possible
to speak of an individual having his moral
standards raised by a group (p. 6$). Whereas
the intellectual capacity of a group is always
far below that of an individual, its ethical conbe present, like everything else, as part of the con
tent of the day's residue which leads to the dream. See
The Interpretation of Dreams, p. 343 above.
1 The same extreme and unmeasured intensification
of every emotion is also a feature of the affective life
of children, and it is present as well in dream life.
Thanks to the isolation of the single emotions in the
unconscious, a slight annoyance during the day will
express itself in a dream as a wish for the offending
person's death, or a breath of temptation may give
the impetus to the portrayal in the dream of a crimi
nal action. Hanns Sachs has made an appropriate re
mark on this point: "If we try to discover in con
sciousness all that the dream has made known to us of
its bearing upon the present (upon reality), we need
not be surprised that what we saw as a monster under
the microscope of analysis now reappears as an in
fusorium." The Interpretation of Dreams, p. 386 above.

[671b]
duct may rise as high above his as it may sink
deep below it.
Some other features in Le Bon's description
show in a clear light how well justified is the
identification of the group mind with the mind
of primitive people. In groups the most contra
dictory ideas can exist side by side and tolerate
each other, without any conflict arising from
the logical contradiction between them. But
this is also the case in the unconscious mental
life of individuals, of children,and of neurotics,
as psycho-analysis has long pointed out.2
A group, further, is subject to the truly
magical power of words; they can evoke the
most formidable tempests in the group mind,
and are also capable of stilling them (p. 117).
"Reason and arguments are incapable of com
batingcertainwords and formulas. They are ut
teredwith solemnity in the presence of groups,
and as soon as they have been pronounced an
expression of respect is visible on every coun
tenance, and all heads are bowed. By many
they are considered as natural forces, as super
natural powers" (p. 117). It is only necessary
in this connection to remember the taboo upon
names among primitive peopleand the magical
powers which they ascribe to names and words.8
And, finally, groups have never thirsted after
truth. They demand illusions, and cannot do
without them. They constantly give what is
2In young children, for instance, ambivalent emo
tional attitudes towards those who are nearest to them
exist side by side for a long time, without either of
them interfering with the expression of the other and
contrary one. If eventually a conflict breaks out be
tween the two, it is often settledby the child making
a changeof object and displacing oneof the ambivalent
emotions on to a substitute. The history of the devel
opment of a neurosis in an adult will also show that a
suppressed emotion may frequently persist for a long |
time in unconscious or even in conscious phantasies,
the content of which naturally runs directly counter
to some predominant tendency, and yet that this an
tagonism does not result in any proceedings on the
part of the ego against what it has repudiated. The
phantasy is tolerated for quite a long time, until sud
denly one day, usually as a result of an increase in
the affective cathexis of the phantasy, a conflict breaks
out between it and the ego with all the usual conse
quences. In the process of a child's development into
a mature adult, there is a more and more extensive
integration of its personality, a co-ordination of the
separate instinctive feelings and desires which have
grown up in him independently of one another. The
analogous
process in the domain of sexual life has
long been known to us as the co-ordination of all the
sexual instincts into a definitive genital organization.
(Three Contributions to the Sexual Theory, Nervous
and Mental Disease Monograph Series, No. 7, 1910.)
Moreover, that the unification of the ego is liable, to
the same interferences as that of the libido is shown
by numerous familiar instances, such as that of men
of science who have preserved their faith in the Bible,
and the like.
3 See Totem and Taboo.

[672a]
Group Psychology and
unreal precedence over what is real; they are
almost as strongly influenced by what is un
true as by what is true. They have an evident
tendency not to distinguish between the two
(p. 77).
We have pointed out that this predominance
of the life of phantasy and of the illusion born
of an unfulfilled wish is the ruling factor in the
psychology of neuroses. We have found that
what neurotics are guided by is not ordinary
objective reality but psychological reality. A
hysterical symptom is based upon phantasy
instead of upon the repetition of real experi
ence, and the sense of guilt in an obsessional
neurosis is based upon the fact of an evil inten
tion which was never carried out. Indeed, just
as in dreams and in hypnosis, in the mental
operations of a group the function for testing
the reality of things falls into the background
in comparison with the strength of wishes with
their affective cathexis.
What Le Bon says on the subject of leaders
of groups is less exhaustive, and does not ena
ble us to make out an underlying principle so
clearly. He thinks that as soon as living beings
are gathered together in certain numbers, no
matter whether they are a herd of animals or
a collection of human beings, they place them
selves instinctively under the authority of a
chief (p. 134). A group is an obedient herd,
which could never live without a master. It has
such a thirst for obedience that it submits in
stinctively to anyone who appoints himself its
master.
Although in this way the needs of a group
carry it half-way to meet the leader, yet he too
must fit in with it in his personal qualities. He
must himself be held in fascination by a strong
faith (in an idea) in order to awaken the
group's faith; he must possess a strong and
imposing will, which the group, which has no
will of its own, can accept from him. Le Bon
then discusses the different kinds of leaders,
and the means by which they work upon the
group. On the whole, he believes that the
leaders make themselves felt
by
means
of
the ideas in which they themselves are fa
natical believers.
Moreover, he ascribes both to the ideas and
to the leaders a mysterious and irresistible pow
er, which he calls prestige. Prestige is a sort of
domination exercised over us by an individual,
a work or an idea. It entirely paralyzes our
critical faculty, and fills us with astonishment
and respect. It would seem to arouse a feeling
like that of fascination in hypnosis (p. 148).

[672b]
Analysis of the Ego
669
He distinguishes between acquired or artificial
and personal prestige. The former is attached
to persons in virtue of their name, fortune, and
reputation, and to opinions, works of art, etc.,
in virtue of tradition. Since in every case it
harks back to the past, it cannot be of much
help to us in understanding this puzzling influ
ence. Personal prestige is attached to a few
people, who become leaders by means of it, and
it has the effect of making everything obey
them as though by the operation of some mag
netic magic. All prestige, however, is also ^de
pendent upon success, and is lost in the event
of failure (p. 159).
We cannot feel that Le Bon has brought the
function of the leader and the importance of
prestige completely into harmony with his bril
liantly executed picture of the group mind.
III. Other Accounts of Collective
Mental Life
We have made use of Le Bon's description by
way of introduction, because it fits in so well
with our own psychology in the emphasis which
it lays upon unconscious mental life. But we
must now add that as a matter of fact none of
that author's statements bring forward any
thing new. Everything that he says to the detri
ment and depreciation of the manifestations of
the group mind had already been said by others
before him with equal distinctness and equal
hostility, and has been repeated in unison by
thinkers, statesmen, and writers since the earli
est periods of literature.1 The two theses which
comprise the most important of Le Bon's opin
ions, those touching upon the collective inhibi
tion of intellectual functioning and the height
ening of affectivity in groups, had been formu
lated shortly before by Sighele.2At bottom, all
that is left over as being peculiar to Le Bon
are the two notions of the unconscious and of
the comparison with the mental life of primi
tive people, and even these had naturally often
been alluded to before him.
But, what is more, the description and esti
mate of the group mind as they have been given
by Le Bon and the rest have not by any means
been left undisputed. There is no doubt that all
the phenomena of the group mind which have
just been mentioned have been correctly ob1 B. Kraskovic jun.: Die Psychologie der Kollektivitaten, translated (into German) from the Croatian by
Siegmund von Posavec, Vukovar, 1915. See the body
of the work as well as the bibliography.
2 See Walter Moede "Die Massen- und Sozialpsychologie
im
kritischen
Uberblick,"
Meumann
and
Scheibner's Zeitschrift fiir
padagogische Psychologie
und experimentelle Pddagogik, 1915, xvi.

[673a]
670
Sigmund Freud
served, but it is also possible to distinguish
the second as
other manifestations of the group formation,
which operate in a precisely opposite sense, and
from which a much higher opinion of the group
mind must necessarily follow.
Le Bon himself was prepared to admit that
in certain circumstances the morals of a group
can be higher than those of the individuals that
compose it, and that only collectivities are ca
pable of a high degree of unselfishness and de
votion. "While with isolated individuals per
sonal interest is almost the only motive force,
with
groups it
is
very
rarely
prominent"
(p. 65). Other writers adduce the fact that it is
only society which prescribes any ethical stand
ards at all for the individual, while he as a rule
fails in one way or another to come up to its
high demands. Or they point out that in excep
tional circumstances there may arise in com
munities the phenomenon of enthusiasm, which
has made the most splendid group achieve
ments possible.
As regards intellectual work, it remains a
fact, indeed, that great decisions in the realm
of thought and momentous discoveries and so
lutions of problems are only possible to an in
dividual, working in solitude. But even the
group mind is capable of genius in intellectual
creation, as is shown above all by language
itself, as well as by folk-song, folk-lore and the
like. It remains an open question, moreover,
how much the individual thinker or writer owes
to the stimulation of the group in which he
lives, or whether he does more than perfect a
mental work in which the others have had a
simultaneous share.
In face of these completely contradictory
accounts, it looks as though the work of group
psychology were bound to come to an ineffec
tual end. But it is easy to find a more hopeful
escape from the dilemma. A number of very
different formations have probably been merged
under the term group and may require to be
distinguished. The assertions of Sighele, Le Bon
and the rest relate to groups of a short-lived
character, which some passing interest has hast
ily agglomerated out of various sorts of indi
viduals. The characteristics of revolutionary
groups, and especially those of the great French
Revolution, have unmistakably influenced their
descriptions. The opposite opinions owe their
origin to
the
consideration
of
those stable
groups or associations in which mankind pass
their lives, and which are embodied in the in
stitutions of society. Groups of the first kind
stand in the same sort of relation to those of

[673b]
a high but choppy sea to a
ground swell.
McDougall, in his book on The Group Mind,1
starts out from the same contradiction that has
just been mentioned, and finds a solution for
it in the factor of organization. In the simplest
case, he says, the group possesses no organiza
tion at all, or one scarcely deserving the name.
He describes a group of this kind as a crowd.
But he admits that a crowd of human beings
can hardly come together without possessing
at all events the rudiments of an organization,
and that precisely in these simple groups many
of the fundamental facts of collective psychol
ogy can be observed with special ease (p. 22).
Before the members of a random crowd of
people can constitute something in the nature
of a group in the psychological sense of the
word, a condition has to be fulfilled; these in
dividuals must have something in common with
one another, a common interest in an object, a
similar emotional bias in some situation or
other, and ("consequently," I should like to in
terpolate) "some degree of reciprocal influence"
(p. 23). The higher the degree of "this mental
homogeneity," the more readily do the individ
uals form a psychological group, and the more
striking are the manifestations of a group mind.
The most remarkable and also the most im
portant result of the formation of a group is
the "exaltation or intensification of emotion"
produced in every member of it (p. 24). In
McDougalPs opinion, men's emotions are stirred
in a group to a pitch that they seldom or never
attain under other conditions; and it is a pleas
urable experience for those who are concerned
to surrender themselves so unreservedly to
their passions and thus to become merged in
the group and to lose the sense of the limits of
their individuality. The manner in which indi
viduals are thus carried away by a common
impulse is explained by McDougall by means
of what he calls the "principle of direct induc
tion of emotionby way of the primitive sympa
thetic response" (p. 25), that is, by means of
the emotional contagion with which we are al
ready familiar. The fact is that the perception
of the signs of an emotional state is calculated
automatically to arouse the same emotion in
the person who perceives them. The greater the
number of people in whom the same emotion
can be simultaneously observed, the stronger
does this automatic compulsion grow. The in
dividual loses his power of criticism and lets
himself slip into the same emotion. But in so
1 Cambridge University Press, 1920.

[674a]
Group Psychology and
doing he increases the excitement of the other
people, who had produced this effect upon him,
and thus the emotional charge of the individu
als becomes intensified by mutual interaction.
Something is unmistakably at work in the na
ture of a compulsion to do the same as the
others, to remain in harmony with the many.
The coarser and simpler emotions are the more
apt to spread through a group in this way
(P- 39).
This mechanism for the intensification of
emotion is favoured by some other influences
which emanate from groups. A group impresses
the individual with a sense of unlimited power
and of insurmountable peril. For the moment,
it replaces the whole of human society, which
is the wielder of authority, whose punishments
the individual fears, and for whose sake he has
submitted to so many inhibitions. It is clearly
perilous for him to put himself in opposition to
it, and it will be safer to follow the example of
those around him and perhaps even "hunt
with the pack." In obedience to the new au
thority he may put his former conscience out
of action, and so surrender to the attraction of
the increased pleasure that is certainly ob
tained from the removal of inhibitions. On the
whole, therefore, it is not so remarkable that
we should see an individual in a group doing
or approving things which he would have
avoided in the normal conditions of life; and
in this way we may even hope to clear up a
little of the mystery which is so often covered
by the enigmatic word suggestion.
McDougall does not dispute the thesis as to
the collective inhibition of intelligence in groups
(p. 41). He says that the minds of lower in
telligence bring down those of a higher order
to their own level. The latter are obstructed in
their activity, because in general an intensifica
tion of emotion creates unfavourable condi
tions for sound intellectual work, and, further,
because the individuals are intimidated by the
group and theirmental activity is not free, and
because there is a lowering in each individual
of his
sense
of
responsibility for
his
own
performances.
The judgment with which McDougall sums
up the psychological behaviour of a simple "un
organized" group is no more friendly than that
of Le Bon. Such a group "is excessively emo
tional, impulsive, violent, fickle, inconsistent,
irresolute, and extreme in action, displaying
only the coarser emotions and the less refined
sentiments; extremely suggestible, careless in
deliberation, hasty in judgment, incapable of

[674b]
Analysis of the Ego
671
any but the simpler and imperfect forms of
reasoning; easily swayed and led, lacking in
self-consciousness, devoid of self-respect and
of sense of responsibility, and apt to be carried
away by the consciousness of its own force, so
that it tends to produce all the manifestations
we have learnt to expect of any irresponsible
and absolute power. Hence its behaviour is like
that of an unruly child or an untutored passion
ate savage in a strange situation, rather than
like that of its average member; and in the
worst cases it is like that of a wild beast, rather
than like that of human beings" (p. 45).
Since McDougall contrasts the behaviour of
a highly organized group with what has just
been described, we shall be particularly inter
ested to learn in what this organization con
sists, and by what factors it is produced. The
author enumerates five "principal conditions"
for raising collective mental life to a higher
level.
The first and fundamental condition is that
there should be some degree of continuity of
existence in the group. This may be either ma
terial or formal: the former, if the same indi
viduals persist in the group for some time; and
the latter, if there is developed within the
group a system of fixed positions which are oc
cupied by a succession of individuals.
The second condition is that m theindividual
member of the group some definite idea should
be formed of the nature, composition, func
tions, and capacities of the group, so that from
this he may develop an emotional relation to
the group as a whole.
The third is that the group should be brought
into interaction (perhaps in the form of rival
ry) with other groups similar to it but differing
from it in many respects.
The fourth is that the group should possess
traditions, customs, and habits, and especially
such as determine the relations of its members
to one another.
The fifth is that the group should have a
definite structure, expressed in the specializa
tion and differentiation of the functions of its
constituents.
According to McDougall, if these conditions
are fulfilled, the psychological disadvantages of
the group formation are removed. The collec
tive lowering of intellectual ability is avoided
by withdrawing the performance of intellectual
tasks from the group and reserving them for
individual members of it.
It seems to us that the condition which
McDougall designates as the "organization" of

[675a]
672
Sigmund Freud
a group can with more justification be described
calls it "imitation"
in another way. The problem consists in how
to procure for the group precisely those fea
tures which
were characteristic of the indi
vidual and which are extinguished in him by
the formation of the group. For the individual,
outside the primitive group, possessed his own
continuity, his self-consciousness, his traditions
and customs, his own particular functions and
position, and kept apart from his rivals. Ow
ing to his entry into an "unorganized" group,
he had lost this distinctiveness for a time. If
we thus recognize that the aim is to equip the
group with the attributes of the individual, we
shall be reminded of a
valuable remark of
Trotter's,1 to the effect that the tendency to
wards the formation of groups is biologically a
continuation of the multicellular character of
all the higher organisms.
IV. Suggestion and Libido
We started from the fundamental fact that an
individual in a group is subjected through its
influence to what is often a profound alteration
in his mental activity. His emotions become
extraordinarily intensified, while his intellectual
ability becomes markedly reduced, both proc
esses being evidently in the direction of an
approximation to the other individuals in the
group; and this result can only be reached by
the removal of those inhibitions upon his in
stincts which are peculiar to each individual,
and by his resigning those expressions of his
inclinations which are especially his own. We
have heard that these often unwelcome con
sequences are to some extent at least prevented
by a higher "organization" of the group; but
this does not contradict the fundamental fact
of group psychology—the two theses as to the
intensification of the emotions and the inhibi
tion of the intellect in primitive groups. Our
interest is now directed to discovering the psy
chological explanation of this mental change
which is experienced by the individual in a
group.
It is clear that rational factors (such as the
intimidation of the individual which has al
ready been mentioned, that is, the action of
his instinct of self-preservation) do not cover
the observable phenomena. Beyond this, what
we are offered as an explanation by authorities
upon sociology and group psychology is always
the same, eventhoughit is givenvarious names,
and that is—the magic word suggestion. Tarde
1 Instincts of the Herd in Peace and War, Fisher
Unwin, 1916.

[675b]
but we cannot help agree
ing with a writer who protests that imitation
comes under the concept of suggestion, and is
in fact one of its results.2 Le Bon traces back
all the puzzling features of social phenomena
to two factors: the mutual suggestion of indi
viduals and the prestige of leaders. But pres
tige, again, is only recognizable by its capacity
for evoking suggestion. McDougall for a mo
ment gives us an impression that his principle
of "primitive induction of emotion" might en
able us to do without the assumption of sug
gestion. But on further consideration we are
forced to perceive that this principle says no
more than the familiar assertions about "imi
tation" or "contagion," except for a decided
stress upon the emotional factor. There is no
doubt that something exists in us which, when
we become aware of signs of an emotion in
someone else, tends to make us fall into the
same emotion; but how often do we not suc
cessfully oppose it, resist the emotion, and
react in quite an opposite way? Why, there
fore, do we invariably give way to this con
tagion when we are in a group? Once more we
should have to say that what compels us to
obey this tendency is imitation, and what in
duces the emotion in us is the group's suggest
tive influence.
Moreover, quite apart from
this, McDougall does not enable us to evade
suggestion; we hear from him as well as from
other writers that groups are distinguished by
their special suggestibility.
We shall therefore be prepared for the state
ment that suggestion (or more correctly sug
gestibility) is actually an irreducible, primitive
phenomenon, a fundamental fact in the mental
life of man. Such, too, was the opinion of Bern
heim, of whose astonishingarts I was a witness
in the year 1889. But I can remember even then
feeling a muffled hostility to this tyranny of
suggestion. When a patient who showed himself
unamenable was met with the shout: "What
are you doing? Vous vous contresuggestionnezl" I said to myself that this was an evident
injustice and an act of violence. For the man
certainly had a right to counter-suggestions if
they were trying to subdue him with sugges
tions. Later on, my resistance took the direction
of protesting against the view that suggestion,
which explained everything, was itself to be
preserved from explanation. Thinking of it, I
repeated the old conundrum:8
2 Brugeilles, "VEssence du phinomhte social:
la
suggestion," Revue philosophique, 1913, xxv.
8 Konrad Richter, "Der deutsche S. Ckrtetoph," Ber
lin, 1896, Acta Germanica, v, 1.

[676a]
Group Psychology and
Christoph trug Christum,
Christus trug die ganze Welt,
Sag' wo hat Christoph
Damals hin den Fuss gestellt?1
Christophorus Christum, sed Christus sustulit
orbem:
Constiterit pedibus die ubi Christophorus?
Now that I once more approach the riddle of
suggestion after having kept away from it for
some thirty years, I find there is no change in
the situation. To this statement I can discover
only a single exception, which I need not men
tion, since it is one which bears witness to the
influence of psycho-analysis. I notice that par
ticular efforts are being made to formulate the
concept of suggestion correctly, that is, to fix
the conventional use of the name.2 And this is
by no means superfluous, for the word is ac
quiring a more and more extended use and a
looser and looser meaning, and will soon come
to designateany sort of influence whatever, just
as in English, where "to suggest" and "sugges
tion" correspond to our nahelegen and Anregung. But there has been no explanation of the
nature of suggestion, that is, of the conditions
under which influence without adequate logical
foundation takes place. I should not avoid the
task of supporting this statement by an analysis
of the literature of the last thirty years, if I
were not aware that an exhaustive inquiry is
being undertaken close at hand which has in
view the fulfilment of this very task.
Instead of this, I shall make an attempt at
using the concept of libido for the purpose of
throwing light upon group psychology, a con
cept which has done us such good service in
the study of psychoneuroses.
Libidois an expression taken from the theory
of the emotions. We call by that name the
energy (regarded as a quantitative magnitude,
though not at present actually mensurable) of
those instincts which have to do with all that
may be comprised under the word love. The
nucleus of what we mean by love naturally con
sists (and this is what is commonlycalled love,
and what the poets sing of) in sexual love with
sexual union as its aim. But we do not separate
from this—what in any case has a share in the
name love—on the one hand, self-love, and on
the other, love for parents and children, friend
ship, and love for humanity in general, and also
1 Literally: "Christopher bore Christ; Christ bore
the whole world; Say, where did Christopher then put
his foot?"—TR.
2Thus, McDougall: "A Note on Suggestion," Jour
nal of Neurology and Psychopatkology, 1920, Vol. I,
No. 1.

[676b]
Analysis of the Ego
673
devotion to concrete objects and to abstract
ideas. Our justification lies in the fact that
psycho-analytic research has taught us that
all these tendencies are an expression of the
same instinctive activities; in relations between
the sexes these instincts force their way to
wards sexual union, but in other circumstances
they are diverted from this aim or are pre
vented from reaching it, though always pre
serving enough of their original nature to keep
their identity recognizable (as in such features
as the longing for proximity, and self-sacrifice).
We are of opinion, then, that language has
carried out an entirely justifiable piece of uni
fication in creating the word love with its nu
merous uses,and that we cannot do better than
take it as the basis of our scientific discussions
and expositions as well. By coming to this de
cision, psycho-analysis has let loose a stormof
indignation, as thoughit had been guilty of an
act of outrageous innovation. Yet psycho-analy
sis has done nothing original in taking love in
this "wider" sense. In its origin, function, and
relation to sexual love, the "Eros" of the phil
osopher Plato coincides exactly with the love
force, thelibido, of psycho-analysis, as has been
shown in detail by Nachmansohn and Pfister;3
and when the apostle Paul, in his famous epistle
to the Corinthians, prizes love above all else,
he certainlyunderstands it in the same "wider"
sense/ But this only shows that men do not
always take their great thinkers seriously, even
when they profess most to admire them.
Psycho-analysis, then, gives these love in
stincts the name of sexual instincts, a potiori
and by reason of their origin. The majority of
"educated" people have regarded this nomen
clature as an insult, and have taken their re
venge by retorting upon psycho-analysis with
the reproach of "pan-sexualism." Anyone who
considers sex as something mortifying and hu
miliating to human nature is at liberty to make
use of the more genteel expressions "Eros" and
"erotic." I might have done so myself from the
first and thus have spared myself much opposi
tion. But I did not want to, for I like to avoid
concessions to faint-heartedness. One can never
tell where that road may lead one; one gives
way first in words, and then little by little in
substance too. I cannot see any merit in being
8 Nachmansohn,
"Freuds
Libidotheorie
verglichen
mit der Eroslehre Platos," Internationale Zeitschrift
fur Psychoanalyse, 1915, Vol. Ill; Pfister, "Plato: a
Fore-Runner of Psycho-Analysis," International Jour
nal of Psycho-Analysis, 1922, Vol. in.
* "Though I speak with the tongues of men and of
angels, and have not love, I am become as sounding
brass, or a tinkling cymbal."

[677a]
674
Sigmund Freud
ashamed of sex; the Greek word Eros, which is
to soften the affront, is in the end nothing more
than a translation of our German word Liebe;
and finally, he who knows how to wait need
make no concessions.
We will try our fortune, then, with the sup
position that love relationships (or, to use a
more neutral expression, emotional ties) also
constitute the essence of the group mind. Let
us remember that the authorities make no men
tion of any such relations. What would corre
spond to them is evidently concealed behind
the shelter, the screen, of suggestion. Our hy
pothesis finds support in the first instance from
two passing thoughts. First, that a group is
clearly held together by a power of some kind:
and to what power could this feat be better as
cribed than to Eros, who holds together every
thing in the world? Secondly, that if an indi
vidual gives up his distinctiveness in a group
and lets its other members influence him by
suggestion, it gives one the impression that he
does it because he feels the need of being in
harmony with them rather than in opposition
to them—so that perhaps after all he does it
ihnen zu Liebe.1
V. Two Artificial Groups: the Church
and the Army
We may recall from what we know of the
morphology of groups that it is possible to
distinguish very different kinds of groups and
opposing lines in their development. There are
very fleeting groups and extremely lasting ones;
homogeneous ones, made up of the same sorts
of individuals, and unhomogeneous ones; nat
ural groups, and artificial ones, requiring an
external force to keep them together; primi
tive groups, and highly organized ones with a
definite structure. But for reasons which have
yet to be explained we should like to lay par
ticular stress upon a distinction to which the
authorities have rather given too little attenion; I refer to that between leaderless groups
and those with leaders. And, in complete oppo
sition to the usual practice, we shall not choose
a relatively simple group formation as our
point Of departure, but shall begin with highly
organized, lasting, and artificial groups. The
most interesting example of such structures are
churches—communities of believers—and ar
mies.
A church and an army are artificial groups,
1An idiom meaning "for their sake." Literally: "for
love of them."—TR.

[677b]
that is, a certain external force is employed to
prevent them from disintegrating and to check
alterations in their structure. As a rule a per
son is not consulted, or is given no choice, as
to whether he wants to enter such a group; any
attempt at leaving it is usually met with perse
cution or with severe punishment, or has quite
definite conditionsattached to it. It is quite out
side our present interest to enquire why these
associations need such special safeguards. We
are only attracted by one circumstance, namely
that certain facts, which are far more con^
cealed in other cases, can be observed very
clearly in those highly organized groups which
are protected from dissolution in the manner
that has been mentioned.
In a church (and we may with advantage
take the Catholic Church as a type) as well as
in an army, however different the two may be
in other respects, the same illusion holds good
of there being a head—in the Catholic Church
Christ, in an army its commander-in-chief—
who loves all the individuals in the group with
an equal love. Everything depends upon this
illusion; if it were to be dropped, then both
Church and army would dissolve, so far as the
external force permitted them to. This equal
lovewas expresslyenunciated by Christ: "Inas
much as ye have done it unto one of the least!
of these my brethren, ye have done it unto|
me." He stands to the individual members of
the group of believers in the relation of a kind
elder brother; he is their father surrogate. All
the demands that are made upon the individual
are derived from this love of Christ's. A demo
cratic character runs through the Church, for
the very reason that before Christ everyone is
equal, and that everyone has an equal share in
his love. It is not without a deep reason that
the similaritybetween the Christian community
and a family is invoked, and that believers call
themselves brothers in Christ, that is, brothers
through the love which Christ has for them.
There is no doubt that the tie which unites
each individual with Christ is also the cause
of the tie which unites them with one another.
The like holds good of an army. The comman
der-in-chief is a father who loves all his soldiers
equally, and for that reason they are comrades
among themselves. The army differs structural
ly from the Church in being built up of a series
of such groups. Every captain is, as it were,
the commander-in-chief and the father of his
company, and so is every non-commissioned
officer of his section. It is true that a similar

[678a]
Group Psychology and Analysis of the Ego
675
hierarchy has been constructed in the Church,
but it does not play the same part in it eco
nomically; for more knowledge and care about
individuals may be attributed to Christ than to
a human commander-in-chief.1
It is to be noticed that in these two arti
ficial groups each individual is bound by libidi
nal ties on the one hand to the leader (Christ,
the
commander-in-chief), and on the other
hand to the other members of the group. How
these two ties are related to each other, whether
they are of the same kind and the same value,
and how they are to be described psychologi
cally—these questions must be reserved for
subsequent enquiry. But we shall venture even
now upon a mild reproach against the authori
ties for not having sufficiently appreciated the
importance of the leader in the psychology of
the group, while our own choice of a first object
for investigation has brought us into a more
favourable position. It would appear as though
we were on the right road towards an explana
tion of the principal phenomenon of group psy
chology—the individual's lack of freedom in a
group. If each individual is bound in two direc
tions by such an intense emotional tie, we shall
find no difficulty in attributing to that circum
stance the alteration and limitation which have
been observed in his personality.
A-hint-tathe same elect, that the,essence of
a group lies in the libidinal ties existing in it,
is also to be found in the phenomenon of panic,
*An objection will
justly be
raised
against this
conception of
the libidinal structure of an army on
the ground that no place has been found in it for such
ideas as those of one's country, of national glory, etc.
which are of such importance in holding an army to
gether. The answer is that that is a different instance
of a group tie, and no longer such a simple one; for
the examples of great generals, like Caesar, Wallen
stein, or Napoleon, show that such ideas are not indis
pensable to the existence of an army. We shall pres
ently touch upon the possibility of a leading idea being
substituted for a leader and upon the relations between
the two. The neglect of this libidinal
factor in
an
army, even when it is not the only factor operative,
seems to be not merely a theoretical omission but also
a practical danger.
Prussian militarism, which
was
just as unpsychological as German science, may have
had
to suffer the consequences of this in the Great
War. We know that the war neuroses which ravaged
the German army have been recognized as being a
protest of the individual against the part he was ex
pected to play in the army; and according to the com
munication of E. Simmel (Kriegsneurosen und "Psychisches Trauma," Munich, 1918), the hard treatment
of the men by their superiors may be considered as
foremost among the motive forces of the disease. If the
importance of the libido's claims on this score had
been better appreciated, the fantastic promises of the
American President's fourteen points would probably
not have been believed so easily, and the splendid
instrument would not have broken in the hands of the
German leaders.

[678b]
which is best studied in military groups. A panic
arises if a group of that kind becomes disinte
grated. Its characteristics are that none of the
orders given by superiors are any longer listened
to, and that each individual is only solicitous on
his own account, and without any consideration
for the rest. The mutual ties have ceased to
exist,and a gigantic and senselessdread (Angst)
is set free. At this point, again, the objection
will naturally be made that it is rather the other
way round; and that the dread has grown so
great as to be able to disregard all ties and all
feelings of consideration for others. McDougall
has even (p. 24) made use of the case of panic
(though not of military panic) as a typical in
stance of that intensification of emotion by
contagion ("primary induction") upon which
he lays so much emphasis. But, nevertheless,
this rational method of explanation is here quite
inadequate. The very question that needs ex
planation is why the dread has become so gi
gantic. The greatness of the danger cannot be
responsible, for the same army which now falls
a victim to panic may previously have faced
equally great or greater danger with complete
success; it is of the very essence of panic that
it bears no relation to the danger that threat
ens, and often breaks out upon the most trivial
occasions. If an individual in panic dread be
gins to be solicitous only on his own account,
he^bears witness in so doing to the fact that
the emotional ties, which have hitherto made
the danger seem small to him, have ceased to
exist. Now that he is by himself in facing the
danger, he may surely think it greater. The fact
is, therefore, that panic dread presupposes a
relaxation in
the
libidinal structure of
the
group and reacts to it in a justifiable manner,
and the contrary view—that the libidinal ties
of the group are destroyed owing to dread in
the face of the danger—can be refuted.
The contention that dread in a group is in
creased to enormous proportions by means of
induction (contagion) is not in the least con
tradicted by these remarks. McDougall's view
meets the case entirely when the danger is a
really great one and when the group has no
strong emotional ties—conditions which are
fulfilled, for instance, when a fire breaks out in
a theatre or a place of amusement. But the
really instructive case and the one which can
be best employed for our purposes is that men
tioned above, in which a body of troops breaks
into a panic although the danger has not in
creased beyond a degree that is usual and has

[679a]
676
Sigmund Freud
often been previously faced. It is not to be
expected that the usage of the word panic
should be clearly and unambiguously deter
mined. Sometimes it is used to describe any
collective dread, sometimes even dread in an
individual when it exceeds all bounds, and often
the name seems to be reserved for cases in
which the outbreak of dread is not warranted
by the occasion. If we take the word panic in
the sense of collective dread, we can establish
a far-reaching analogy. Dread in an individual
is provoked either by the greatness of a danger
or by the cessation of emotional ties (libidinal
cathexes [Libidobesetzungen]);
the latter is
the case of neurotic dread.1 In just the same
way panic arises either owing to an increase of
the common danger or owing to the disappear
ance of the emotional ties which hold the group
together; and the latter case is analogous to
that of neurotic dread.2
Anyone who, like McDougall (op. cit.), de
scribes a panic as one of the plainest functions
of the "group mind," arrives at the paradoxical
position that this group mind does away with
itself in one of its most striking manifestations.
It is impossible to doubt that panic means the
disintegration of a group; it involves the cessa
tion of all the feelings of consideration which
the members of the group otherwise show one
another.
The typical occasion of the outbreak of a
panic is very much as it is represented in
Nestroy's parody of HebbeFs play about Judith
and Holofernes. A soldier cries out: "The gen
eral has lost his head!" and thereupon all the
Assyrians take to flight. The loss of the leader
in some sense or other, the birth of misgivings
about him, brings on the outbreak of panic,
though the danger remains the same; the mu
tual ties between the members of the group dis
appear, as a rule, at the same time as the tie
with their leader. The group vanishes in dust,
like a Bologna flask when its top is broken off.
The dissolution of a religious group is not so
easy to observe. A short time ago there came
into my hands an English novel of Catholic
origin, recommended by the Bishop of London,
with the title When It Was Dark. It gave a
clever and, as it seems to me, a convincing pic
ture of such a possibility and its consequences.
The novel, which is supposed to relate to the
present day, tells how a conspiracy of enemies
1 General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis, Lecture
xxv, p. 607 above.
2 Compare Bela v.
Felszeghy's interesting though
somewhat fantastic paper "Panik und Pankomplex,"
Imago, 1920, Vol. VI.

[679b]
of the figure of Christ and of the Christian
faith succeed in arranging for a sepulchre to be
discovered in Jerusalem. In this sepulchre is an
inscription, in which Joseph of Arimathaea con
fesses that for reasons of piety he secretly re
moved the body of Christ from its grave on the
third day after its entombment and buried it in
this spot. The resurrection of Christ and his
divine nature are by this means disposed of,
and the result of this archaeological discovery
is a convulsion in European civilization and an
extraordinary increase in all crimes and acts of
violence, which only ceases when the forgers'
plot has been revealed.
The phenomenon which accompanies the dis
solution that is here supposed to overtake a
religious group is not dread, for which the
occasion is wanting. Instead of it, ruthless and
hostile impulses towards other people make
their appearance, which, owingto the equal love
of Christ, they had previously been unable to
do.3 But even during the kingdom of Christ
those people who do not belong to the com
munity of believers, who do not love him, and
whom he does not love, stand outside this tie.
Therefore a religion, even if it calls itself the
religion of love, must be hard and unloving to
those who do not belong to it. Fundamentally^
indeed, every religion is in this same way a
religionof love for all those whom it embraces;
while cruelty and intolerance towards those
who do not belong to it are natural to every re
ligion. However difficult we may find it per
sonally, we ought not to reproach believers too
severely on this account; people who are unbe
lieving or indifferent are so much better off
psychologically in this respect. If today that
intolerance no longer shows itself so violent and
cruel as in former centuries, we can scarcely
conclude that there has been a softening in
human manners. The cause is rather to
be
found in the undeniable weakening of religious
feelings and the libidinal ties which depend
upon them. If another group tie takes the place
of the religious one—and the socialistic tie
seems to be succeeding in doing so—then there
will be the same intolerance towards outsiders
as in the age of the Wars of Religion; and if
differences between scientific opinions, could
ever attain a similar significance for groups,
the same result would again be repeated with
this new motivation.
3 Compare the
explanation of
similar phenomena
after the
abolition of the paternal authority of the
sovereign given in
P.
Federn's Die vaterlose GeselU
schaft, Vienna, Anzengruber-Verlag, 1919.

[680a]
Group Psychology and
VI. Further Problems and Lines of Work
We
have
hitherto
considered
two
artificial
groups and have found that they are dominated
by two emotional ties. One of these, the tie
with the leader, seems (at all events for these
cases) to be more of a ruling factor than the
other, which holds between the members of the
group.
Now much else remains to be examined and
described in the morphology of groups. We
should have to start from the ascertained fact
that a mere collection of people is not a group,
so long as these ties have not been established
in it; but we should have to admit that in any
collection of people the tendency to form a
psychological group may very easily become
prominent. We should have to give our atten
tion to the different kinds of groups, more or
less stable, that arise spontaneously, and to
study the conditions of their origin and of their
dissolution. We should above all be concerned
with the distinction between groups which have
a leader and leaderless groups. We should con
sider whether groups with leaders may not be
the more primitive and complete, whether in
the others an idea, an abstraction, may not be
substituted for the leader (a state of things
to which religious groups, with their invisible
head, form a transition stage), and whether a
common tendency, a wish in which a number
of people can have a share, may not in the same
way serve as a substitute. This abstraction,
again, might be more or less completely em
bodied in the figure of what we might call a sec
ondary leader, and interesting varieties would
arise from the relation between the idea and
the leader. The leader or the leading idea might
also, so to speak, be negative; hatred against a
particular person or institution might operate
in just the same unifying way, and might call
up the same kind of emotional ties as positive
attachment. Then the question would also arise
whether a leader is really indispensable to the
essence of a group—and other questions besides.
But all these questions, which may, more
over, have been dealt with in part in the litera
ture of group psychology, will not succeed in
diverting our interest from the fundamental
psychological problems that confront us in the
structure of a group. And our attention will
first
be attracted by a
consideration which
promises to bring us in the most direct way
to a proof that libidinal ties are what charac
terize a group.
Let us keep before our eyes the nature of the

[680b]
Analysis of the Ego
677
emotional relations which hold between men
in general. According to Schopenhauer's famous
simile of the freezing porcupines, no one can
tolerate a too intimate approach to his neigh
bour.1
The evidence of psycho-analysis shows that
almost every intimate emotional relation be
tween two people which lasts for some time—
marriage, friendship, the relations between par
ents and children2—leaves a sediment of feel
ings of aversion and hostility, which have first
to be eliminated by repression. This is less dis
guised in the common wrangles between busi
ness partners or in the grumbles of a subordi
nate at his superior. The same thing happens
when men come together in larger units. Every
time two families become connected by a mar
riage, each of them thinks itself superior to or
of better birth than the other. Of two neigh
bouring towns, each is the other's most jealous
rival; every httle canton looks down upon the
others with
contempt. Closely related races
keep one another at arm's length; the South
German cannot endure the North German, the
Englishman casts every kind of aspersion upon
the Scotchman, the Spaniard despises the Portu
guese. We are no longer astonished that greater
differences should lead to an almost insuperable
repugnance, such as the Gallic people feel for
the German, the Aryan for the Semite, and the
white races for the coloured.
When this hostility is directed against peo
ple who are otherwise loved, we describe it as
ambivalence of feeling; and we explain the
fact, in what is probably far too rational a
manner, by means of the numerous occasions
for conflicts of interest which arise precisely
in such intimate relations. In the undisguised
antipathies and aversions which people feel to
wards strangers with whom they have to do,
we may recognize the expression of self-love—
of narcissism. This self-love works for the selfassertion of the individual, and behaves as
X"A company of porcupines crowded themselves very
closely together one cold winter's day so as to profit
by one another's warmth and so save themselves from
being frozen to death. But soon they felt one another's
quills, which induced them to separate again. And now,
when the need
for
warmth brought them nearer to
gether again, the second evil arose once more. So that
they were driven backwards and
forwards from one
trouble to the other, until they had discovered a mean
distance at which they could most tolerably exist."
Parerga und Paralipomena, Part u, xxxi, "Gleichnisse und Parabeln."
2 Perhaps with the solitary exception of the relation
of a mother to her son, which is based upon narcis
sism, is not disturbed by subsequent rivalry, and is
reinforced by a rudimentary attempt at sexual objectchoke.

[681a]
678
Sigmund Freud
though the occurrence of any divergence from
his own particular lines of development involved
a
criticism of them and a demand for their
alteration. We do not know why such sensitive
ness should have been directed to just these
details of differentiation; but it is unmistakable
that in this whole connection men give evidence
of a readiness for hatred, an aggressiveness, the
source of which is unknown, and to which one
is tempted to ascribe an elementary character.1
But the whole of this intolerance vanishes,
temporarily or permanently, as the result of
the formation of a group, and in a group. So
long as a group formation persists or so far as
it extends, individuals behave as though they
were uniform, tolerate other people's peculiari
ties, put themselves on an equal level with
them, and have no feeling of aversion towards
them. Such a limitation of narcissism can, ac
cording to our theoretical views, only be pro
duced by one factor, a libidinal tie with other
people. Love for oneself knows only one bar
rier—love for others, love for objects.2 The
question will at once be raised
whether com
munity of interest in itself, without any addi
tion of libido, must not necessarily lead to the
toleration of other people and to considerateness for them. This objection may be met by
the reply that nevertheless no lasting limitation
of narcissism is effected in this way, since this
tolerance does not persist longer than the im
mediate advantage gained from the other peo
ple's collaboration. But the
practical impor
tance of the discussion is less than might be
supposed, for experience has shown that in
cases of collaboration libidinal ties are regu
larly formed between the fellow-workers which
prolong and solidify the relation between them
to a point beyond what is merely profitable. The
same thing occurs in men's social relations as
has become familiar to psycho-analytic re
search in the course of the development of the
individual libido. The hbido props itself upon
the satisfaction of the great vital needs, and
chooses as its first objects the people who have
a share in that process. And in the development
of mankind as a whole, just as in individuals,
love alone acts as the civilizing factor in the
sense that it brings a change from egoism to al
truism. And this is true both of the sexual love
for women, with all the obligations which it in1 In a recently published study, Beyond the Pleasure
Principle [p. 639 above], I have attempted to connect
the polarity of love and hatred with a hypothetical op
position between instincts of
life and death, and to
establish the sexual instincts as the purest examples of
the former, the instincts of life.
2 See On Narcissism: an Introduction, p. 399 above.

[681b]
volves of sparing what women are fond of, and
also of the desexualised, sublimated homosex
ual love for other men, which springs from work
in common.
If therefore in groups narcissistic self-love is
subject to limitations which do not operate out
side them, that is cogent evidence that the
essence of a group formation consists in a new
kind of libidinal ties among the members of
the group.
But our interest now leads us on to the press
ing question as to what may be the nature of
these ties which exist in groups. In the psycho
analytic study of neuroses we have hitherto
been occupied almost exclusively with ties that
unite with their objects those love instincts
which still pursue directly sexual aims. In groups
there can evidently be no question of sexual
aims of that kind. We are concerned here with
love instincts which have been diverted from
their original aims, though they do not operate
with less energy on that account. Now we have
already observed within the range of the usual
sexual object-cathexis (Objektbesetzung) phe
nomena which represent a diversion of the in
stinct from its sexual aim. We have described
them as degrees of being in love, and have rec
ognized that they involve a certain encroach
ment upon the ego. We shall now turn our at
tention more closely to these phenomena of be
ing in love, in the firm expectation of finding in
them conditions which can be transferred to
the ties that exist in groups. But we should also
like to know whether this kind of object-ca
thexis, as we know it in sexual life, represents
the only manner of emotional tie with other
people, or whether we must take other mecha
nisms of the sort into account. As a matter of
fact we learn from psycho-analysis that there
do exist other mechanisms for emotional ties,
the so-calledidentifications, insufficiently-known
processes and hard to describe, the investiga
tion of which will for some time keep us away
from the subject of group psychology.
VII. Identification
Identification is known to psycho-analysis as
the earliest expression of an emotional tie with
another person. It plays a part in the early his
tory of the Oedipus complex. A little boy will
exhibit a special interest in his father; he would
like to grow like him and be like him, and take
his place everywhere. We may say simply that
he takes his father as his ideal. This behaviour
has nothing to do with a passive or feminine
attitude towards his father (and towards males

[682a]
Group Psychology and
in general); it is on the contrary typically mas
culine. It fits in very-well with the Oedipus
complex, for which it helps to prepare the way.
At the. same time as this identification with
his father, or a little later, the boy has begun
to develop a true object-cathexis towards his
mother accordingto the anaclitic type. He then
exhibits, therefore, two psychologically distinct
ties: a straightforward sexual object-cathexis
towards his mother and a typical identification
towards his father. The two subsist side by
side for a time without any mutual influence
or interference. In consequence of the irresisti
ble advance towards a unification of mental
life, they come together at last; and the nor
mal Oedipus complex originates from their
confluence. The little boy notices that his father
stands in his way with his mother. His identifi
cation with his father then takes on a hostile
colouring and becomes identical with the wish
to replace his father in regard to his mother as
well. Identification, in fact, is ambivalent from
the very first; it can turn into an expression
of tenderness as easily as into a wish for some
one's removal. It behaves like a derivative of
the first oral phase of the organization of the
libido, in which the object that welongfor and
prize is assimilated by eatingand is in that way
annihilated as such. The cannibal, as we know,
has remained at this standpoint; he has a de
vouring affection for his enemies and only
devours people of whom he is fond.1
The subsequent history of this identification
with the father may easily be lost sight of. It
may happen that the Oedipus complex becomes
inverted, and that the father is taken as the
object of a feminine attitude, an object from
which the directly sexual instincts look for
satisfaction; in that event, the identification
with the father has become the precursor of
an object tie with the father. The same holds
good, with the necessary substitutions, of the
baby daughter as well.
It is easy to state in a formula the distinction
between an identification with the father and
the choice of the father as an object. In the
first case, one's father is what one would like
to be; and, in the second, he is what one would
like to have. The distinction, that is, depends
upon whether the tie attaches to the subject
or to the object of the ego. The former is there1 See Three Contributions to the Theory of Sex, and
Abraham's "Untersuchungen uber die fruheste prdgenitale Entwicklungsstufe der Libido," International Zeitschrift fiir Psychoanalyse, 1916, Vol. IV; also included
in his Klinische Beitrage zur Psychoanalyse (Interna
tionale Psychoanalytische Bibliothek, No. 10, 1921).

[682b]
Analysis of the Ego
679
fore already possible before any sexual objectchoice has been made. It is much more difficult
to givea clear metapsychological representation
of the distinction. We can only see that identi
fication endeavours to mould a person's own
ego after the fashion of the one that has been
taken as a model.
Let us disentangle identification as it occurs
in the structure of a neurotic symptom from
its rather complicated connections. Supposing
that a little girl (and we will keep to her for
the present) develops the same painful symp
tom as her mother—for instance, the same
tormenting cough. Now this may come about
in various ways. The identification may come
from the Oedipus complex; in that case it sig
nifies a hostile desire on the girl's part to take
her mother's place, and the symptom expresses
her object love towards her father, and brings
about a realization, under the influence of a
sense of guilt, of her desire to take her mother's
place: "You wanted to be your mother, and
now you are—anyhow as far as the pain goes."
This is the complete mechanism of the struc
ture of an hysterical symptom. Or, on the other
hand, the symptom may be the same as that
of the person who is loved—(so, for instance,
Dora in the "Fragment of an Analysis of a Case
of Hysteria,"2 imitated her father's cough);
in that case we can only describe the state of
things by saying that identification hasappeared
instead of
object-choice, and that objectchoice has regressed to identification. We have
heard that identification is the earliest and
original form of emotional tie; it often happens
that under the conditions in which symptoms
are constructed, that is, where there is repres
sion and where the mechanisms of the uncon
scious are dominant, object-choice is turned
back into identification—the ego, that is, as
sumes the characteristics of the object. It is
noticeable that in these identifications the ego
sometimes copies the person who is not loved
and sometimes the one who is loved. It must
also strike us that in both cases the identifi
cation is a partial and extremely limited one
and only borrows a single trait from the person
who is its object.
There is a third particularly frequent and
important case of symptom formation, in which
the identification leaves any object relation to
the person who is being copied entirely out of
account. Supposing, for instance, that one of
the girls in a boarding school has had a letter
from someone with whom she is secretly in
2 Collected Papers, m.

[683a]
68o
Sigmund Freud
love which arouses her jealousy, and that she
reacts to it with a fit of hysterics; then some
of her friends who know about it will contract
the fit, as we say, by means of mental infection.
The mechanism is that of identification based
upon the possibility or desire of putting oneself
in the same situation. The other girls would
like to have a secret love affair too, and under
the influence of a sense of guilt they also accept
the pain involved in it. It would be wrong to
suppose that they take on the symptom out of
sympathy. On the contrary, the sympathy only
arises out of the identification, and
this
is
proved by the fact that infection or imitation
of this kind takes place in circumstances where
even less pre-existing sympathy is to be as
sumed than usually exists between friends in
a girls' school. One ego has perceived a signifi
cant analogy with another upon one point—
in our example upon a similar readiness for
emotion; an identification is thereupon con
structed on this point, and, under the influence
of the pathogenic situation, is displaced on to
the symptom which the one ego has produced.
The identification by means of the symptom
has thus become the mark of a point of coin
cidence between the two egos which has to be
kept repressed.
What
we
have learned
from
these
three
sources may be summarized as follows. First,
identification is the original form of emotional
tie with an object; secondly, in a regressive
way it becomes a substitute for a libidinal ob
ject tie, as it were, by means of the introjection
of the object into the ego; and thirdly, it may
arise with every new perception of a common
quality shared with some other person who is
not an object of the sexual instinct. The more
important this common quality is, the more
successful may this partial identification be
come, and it may thus represent the beginning
of a new tie.
We already begin to divine that the mutual
tie between members of a group is in the nature
of an identification of this kind, based upon
an important emotional common quality; and
we may suspect that this common quality lies
in the nature of the tie with the leader. Another
suspicion may tell us that we are far from
having exhausted the problem of identification,
and that we are faced by the process which
psychology calls empathy
(Einfiihlung) and
which plays the largest part in our understand
ing of what is inherently foreign to our ego in
other people. But we shall here limit ourselves
to the immediate emotional effects of identifi

[683b]
cation, and shall leave on one side its signifi
cance for our intellectual life.
Psycho-analytic research, which has already
occasionally attacked the more difficult prob
lems of the psychoses, has also been able to
exhibit identification to us in some other cases
which are not immediately comprehensible. I
shall treat two of these cases in detail as ma
terial for our further consideration.
The genesisof male homosexualityin a large
class of cases is as follows. A young man has
been unusually long and intenselyfixated upon
his mother in the senseof the Oedipuscomplex.
But at last, after the end of his puberty, the
time comes for exchanging his mother for some
other sexual object. Things take a sudden turn:
the young man does not abandon his mother,
but identifies himself with her; he transforms
himself into her, and now looks about
for
objects which can replace his ego for him, and
on which he can bestow such love and care
as he has experienced from his mother. This
is a frequent process, which can be confirmed
as often as one likes, and which is naturally
quite independent of any hypothesis that may
be made as to the organic driving force and the
motives of the sudden transformation. A strik
ing thing about this identification is its ample
scale; it remoulds the ego in one of its im
portant features—in its sexualcharacter—upon
the model of what has hitherto been the object.
In this process the object itself is renounced—
whether entirely or in the sense of being pre
served only in the unconscious is a question
outside the present discussion. Identification
with an object that is renounced or lost as a
substitute for it, introjection of this object into
the ego, is indeed no longer a novelty to us. A
process of the kind may sometimes be directly
observedin small children. A short time ago an
observation of this sort was published in the
Internationale Zeitschrift fiir Psychoanalyse.
A child who was unhappy over the loss of a
kitten declared straight out that now he him
self was the kitten, and accordingly crawled
about on all fours, wouldnot eat at table, etc.*
Another such instance of introjection of the
object has been provided by the analysis of
melancholia, an affection which counts among
the most remarkable of its exciting causes the
real or emotional loss of a loved object. A lead
ing characteristic of these cases is a cruel selfdepreciation of the ego combined with relentless
* Marcuszewicz: "Beitrag zum autistischen Denken
bei Kindern," Internationale Zeitschrift fiir Psycho
analyse, (1920), Vol. VI.
-.,.,..

[684a]
Group Psychology and Analysis of the Ego
681
self-criticism and bitter self-reproaches. Analy
ses have shown that this disparagement and
these reproaches apply at bottom to the object
and represent the ego's revenge upon it. The
shadow of the object has fallen upon the ego,
as I have said elsewhere.1 The introjection of
the object is here unmistakably clear.
But these melancholias also show us some
thing else, which may be of importance for our
later discussions. They show us the ego divided,
fallen
into two pieces,
one of which rages
against the second. This second piece is the
one which has been altered by introjection and
which contains the lost object. But the piece
which behaves so cruelly is not unknown to us
either. It comprises the conscience, a critical
faculty (Instanz) within the ego, which even
in normal times takes up a critical attitude to
wards the ego, though never so relentlessly and
so unjustifiably. On previous occasions we have
been driven to the hypothesis2 that some such
faculty develops in our ego which may cut itself
off from the rest of the ego and come into con
flict with it. We have called it the ego ideal,
and by way of functions we have ascribed to
it self-observation, the moral conscience, the
censorship of dreams, and the chief influence
in repression. We have said that it is the heir
to the original narcissism in which the childish
ego
found
its
self-sufficiency;
it
gradually
gathers up from the influences of the environ
ment
the
demands
which
that
environment
makes upon the ego and which the ego cannot
always rise to; so that a man, when he cannot
be satisfied with his ego itself, may neverthe
less be able to find satisfaction in the ego ideal
which has been differentiated out of the ego.
In delusions of observation, as we have further
shown, the disintegration of this faculty has
become patent, and has thus revealed its origin
in the influence of superior powers, and above
all of parents.8 But we have not forgotten to
add that the amount of distance between this
ego ideal and the real ego is very variable from
one individual to another, and that with many
people this differentiation within the ego does
not go further than with children.
But before we can employ this material for
understanding
the
libidinal
organization
of
groups, we must take into account some other
examples of the mutual relations between the
object and the ego.4
1 "Mourning and Melancholia,"
Collected
Papers,
rv.—Tr.
2"On Narcissism: an Introduction" [p. 399 above],
"Mourning and Melancholia."
3 "On Narcissism: an Introduction,"
4 We
are
very well aware that we
have not ex-

[684b]
VIII. Being in Love and Hypnosis
Even in its caprices the usage of language re
mains true to some kind of reality. Thus it
gives the name of love to a great many kinds
of emotional relationship which we too group
together theoretically as love; but then again it
feels a doubt whether this love is real, true,
actual love, and so hints at a whole scale of
possibilities within range of the phenomena of
love. We shall have no difficulty in making the
same discovery empirically.
In one class of cases, being in love is nothing
more than object-cathexis on the part of the
sexual instincts with a view to directly sexual
satisfaction, a cathexis which expires, moreover,
when this aim has been reached; this is what
is called common, sensual love. But, as we
know, the libidinal situation rarely remains so
simple. It was possible to calculate with certain
ty upon the revival of the need which had just
expired; and this must no doubt have been the
first motive for directing a lasting cathexis upon
the sexual object and for loving it in the pas
sionless intervals as well.
To this must be added another factor derived
from the astonishing course of development
which is pursued by the erotic life of man. In
his first phase, which has usually come to an
end by the time he is five years old, a child has
found the first object for his love in one or
other of his parents, and all of his sexual in
stincts with their demand for satisfaction have
been united upon this object. The repression
which then sets in compels him to renounce the
greater number of these infantile sexual aims,
and leaves behind a profound modification in
his relation to his parents. The child still re
mains tied to his parents, but by instincts which
hausted the nature of identification with these exam
ples taken from pathology, and that we have conse
quently left part of
the
riddle of group
formations
untouched. A far more fundamental and comprehensive
psychological analysis would have to intervene at this
point. A
path leads
from
identification by way of
imitation to empathy, that is, to the comprehension of
the mechanism by means of which we are enabled to
take up
any attitude at all
towards another mental
life. Moreover there is still much to be explained in
the
manifestations
of
existing identifications. These
result among other things in a person limiting his ag
gressiveness towards those with whom he has identified
himself, and in his sparing them and giving them help.
The study of such identifications', like those, for in
stance, which lie at the root of clan feeling, led Robert
son Smith to the surprising result that they rest upon
the recognition of a common substance (Kinship and
Marriage, 1885), and may even therefore be brought
about by a meal eaten in common. This feature makes
it possible to connect this kind of identification with
the early history of the human family which I con
structed in Totem
and Taboo.

[685a]
682
Sigmund Freud
must be described as being "inhibited in their
aim [zielgehemmte']." The emotions which he
feels henceforward towards these objects of his
love are characterized as
tender. It is
well
known that the earlier sensual tendencies re
main more or less strongly preserved in the
unconscious, so that in a
certain sense the
whole of the original current continues to exist.1
At puberty, as we know, there set in new and
very strong tendencies with directly sexual aims.
In unfavourable cases they remain separate, in
the form of a sensual current, from the tender
emotional trends which persist. We are then
faced by a picture the two aspects of which
certain movements in literature take such de
light in idealizing. A man of this kind will show
a sentimental enthusiasm for women whom he
deeply respects but who do not excite him to
sexual activities, and he will only be potent
with other women whom he does not love but
thinks little of or even despises.2 More often,
however, the adolescent succeeds in bringing
about a certain degree of synthesis between the
unsensual, heavenly love and the sensual,
earthly love, and his relation to his sexual ob
ject is characterized by the interaction of un
inhibited instincts and of instincts inhibited in
their aim.The depth to whichanyoneis in love,
as contrasted with his purely sensual desire,
may be measured by the size of the share taken
by the inhibited instincts of tenderness.
In connection with this question of being in
love, we have always been struck with the phe
nomenon of sexual over-estimation—the fact
that the loved object enjoys a certain amount
of freedom from criticism, and that all its char
acteristics are valued more highly than those
of people who are not loved, or than its own
were at a time when it itself was not loved. If
the sensual tendencies are somewhat more ef
fectively repressed or set aside, the illusion is
produced that the object has come to be sen
sually loved on account of its spiritual merits,
whereas on the contrary these merits may
really only have been lent to it by its sensual
charm.
The tendency which falsifies judgment in this
respect is that of idealization. But this makes
it easier for us to find our way about. We see
that the object is being treated in the same
way as our own ego, so that when we are in
love a considerable amount of narcissistic li1 See Three Contributions to the Theory of Sex,
op. cit.
2 "The Most
Prevalent Form
of
Degradation in
Erotic Life," Collected Papers, IV.

[685b]
bido overflows on to the object. It is even ob
vious, in many forms of love choice, that the
object serves as a substitute for some unattained ego ideal of our own. We love it on
account of
the
perfections which we have
striven to reach for our own ego, and which we
should now like to procure in this roundabout
way as a means of satisfying our narcissism.
If the sexual over-estimation and the being
in love increase even further, then the interpre
tation of the picture becomes still more un
mistakable. The tendencies whose trend is to
wards directly sexual satisfaction may now be
pushed back entirely, as regularly happens, for
instance, with the young man's sentimental
passion; the ego becomes more and more un
assuming and modest, and the object more and
more sublime and precious, until at last it gets
possession of the entire self-love of the ego,
whose self-sacrifice thus follows as a natural
consequence. The object has, so to speak, con
sumed the ego. Traits of humility, of the limi
tation of narcissism, and of self-injury occur
in every case of being in love; in the extreme
case they are only intensified, and, as a result
of the withdrawal of the sensual claims, they
remain in solitary supremacy.
This happens especially easily with love that
is unhappy and cannot be satisfied; for, in spite
of everything, each sexual satisfaction always
involves a reduction in sexual over-estimation.
Contemporaneously with this devotion of the
ego to the object, which is no longer to be dis
tinguished from a sublimated devotion to an
abstract idea, the functions allotted to the ego
ideal entirely cease to operate. The criticism
exercised by that faculty is silent; everything
that the object does and asks for is right and
blameless. Conscience has no application to
anything that is done for the sake of the ob
ject; in the blindness of love, remorselessness
is carried to the pitch of crime. The whole situ
ation can be completely summarized in a for
mula: The object has taken the place of the
ego ideal.
It is now easy to define the distinction be
tween identification and such extreme develop
ments of being in love as may be described as
fascination or infatuation. In the former case,
the ego has enriched itself with the properties
of the object, it has introjected the object into
itself, as Ferenczi expresses it. In the second
case, it is impoverished, it has surrendered itself
to the object, it has substituted the object for
its most important constituent. Closer consid
eration soon makes it plain, however, that this

[686a]
kind of account creates an illusion of contra
distinctions that have no real existence. Eco
nomically there is no question of impoverish
ment or enrichment; it
is even possible to
describe an extreme case of being in love as a
state in which the ego has introjected the ob
ject into itself. Another distinction is perhaps
better calculated to meet the essence of the
matter. In the case of identification, the object
has been lost or given up; it is then set up
again inside the ego, and the ego makes a par
tial alteration in itself after the model of the
lost object. In the other case, the object is re
tained, and there is a hyper-cathexis of it by
the ego and at the ego's expense. But here
again a difficulty presents itself. Is it quite
certain that identification presupposes that ob
ject-cathexis has been given up? Can there be
no identification with the object retained? And
before we embark upon a discussion of this
delicate question, the perception may already
be beginning to dawn on us that yet another
alternative embraces the real essence of the
matter, namely, whether the object is put in
the place of the ego or of the ego ideal.
From being in love to hypnosis is evidently
only a short step. The respects in which the
two agree are obvious. There is the same hum
ble subjection, the same compliance, the same
absence of criticism, towards the hypnotist just
as towards the loved object. There is the same
absorption of one's own initiative; no one can
doubt that the hypnotist has stepped into the
place of the ego ideal. It is only that everything
is even clearer and more intense in hypnosis,
so that it would be more to the point to explain
being in love by means of hypnosis than the
other way round. The hypnotist is the sole ob
ject, and no attention is paid to any but him.
The fact that the ego experiences in a dream
like way whatever he may request or assert
reminds us that we omitted to mention among
the functions of the ego ideal the business of
testing the reality of things.1 No wonder that
the ego takes a perception for real if its reality
is vouched for by the mental faculty which
ordinarily discharges the duty of testing the
reality of things. The complete absence of tend
encies which are uninhibited in their sexual
aims contributes further towards the extreme
purity of the phenomena. The hypnotic relation
is the devotion of someone in love to an un
limited degree but with sexual satisfaction ex
cluded; whereas in the case of being in love
1 See "Metapsychological Supplement to the Theory
of Dreams," Collected Papers, IV.

[686b]
Group Psychology and Analysis of the Ego
683
this kind of satisfaction is only temporarily
kept back, and remains in the background as
a possible aim at some later time.
But, on the other hand, we may also say
that the hypnotic relation is (if the expression
is permissible) a group formation with two
members. Hypnosis is not a good object for
comparison with a group formation, because it
is truer to say that it is identical with it. Out
of the complicated fabric of the group it iso
lates one element for us—the behaviour of the
individual to the leader. Hypnosis is distin
guished from a group formation by this limita
tion of number, just as it is distinguished from
being in love by the absence of directly sexual
tendencies. In this respect it occupies a middle
position between the two.
It is interesting to see that it is precisely
those sexual tendencies that are inhibited in
their aims which achieve such lasting ties be
tween men. But this can easily be understood
from the fact that they are not capable of com
plete satisfaction, while sexual tendencies which
are uninhibited in their aims suffer an extraor
dinary reduction
through
the
discharge
of
energy every time the sexual aim is attained.
It is the fate of sensual love to become extin
guished when it is satisfied; for it to be able
to last, it must from the first be mixed with
purely tender components—with such, that is,
as are inhibited in their aims—or it must itself
undergo a transformation of this kind.
Hypnosis would solve the riddle of the libid
inal constitution of groups for us straight away,
if it were not that it itself exhibits some fea
tures which are not met by the rational expla
nation we have hitherto given of it as a state of
being in love, with the directly sexual tend
encies excluded. There is still a great deal in il
which we must recognize as unexplained and
mystical. It contains an additional element of
paralysis derived from the relation between
someone with superior power and someone who
is without power and helpless—which may af
ford a transition to the hypnosis of terror which
occurs in animals. The manner in which it is
produced and its relationship to sleep are not
clear; and the puzzling way in which some peo
ple are subject to it, while others resist it com
pletely, points to some factor still unknown
which is realized in it and which perhaps alone
makes possible the purity of the attitudes of
the libido which it exhibits. It is
noticeable
that, even when there is complete suggestive
compliance in other respects, the moral con
science of the person hypnotized may show

[687a]
684
Sigmund
resistance. But this may be due to the fact
that in hypnosis as it is usually practised some
knowledge may be retained that what is hap
pening is only a game, an untrue reproduction
of another situation of far more importance
to life.
But after the preceding discussionswe are quite
in a position to give the formula for the libidinal
constitution of groups: or at least of such
groups as we have hitherto considered, namely,
those that have a leader and have not been
able by means of too much organization to
acquire secondarily the characteristics of an
individual. A primary group of this kind is a
number of individuals who have substituted
one and the same object for their ego ideal and
have consequently identified themselves with
one another in their ego. This condition admits
of graphic representation:
IX. The Herd Instinct
We cannot for long enjoy the illusion that we
have solved the riddle of the group with this
formula. It is impossible to escape the immedi
ate and disturbing recollection that all we have
really done has been to shift the question on
to the riddle of hypnosis, about which so many
points have yet to be cleared up. And now an
other objection shows us our further path.
It might be said that the intense emotional
ties which we observe in groups are quite suf
ficient to explain one of their characteristics—
the lack of independence and initiative in their
members, the similarity in the reactions of all
of them, their reduction, so to speak, to the
level of group individuals. But if we look at
it as a whole, a group shows us more than this.
Some of its features—the weakness of intellec
tual ability, the lack of emotional restraint, the
incapacity for moderation and delay, the incli
nation to exceed every limit in the expression of
emotion and to work it off completely in the
form of action—these and similar
features,
which we find so impressively described in Le
Bon, show an unmistakable picture of a regres
sion of mental activity to an earlier stage such
as we are not surprised to find among savages

[687b]
Freud
or children. A regression of this sort is in par
ticular an essential characteristic of common
groups, while, as we have heard, in organized
and artificial groups it can to a large extent be
checked.
We thus have an impression of a state in
which an individual's separate emotion and
personal intellectual act are too weak to come
to anything by themselves and are absolutely
obliged to wait till they are reinforced through
being repeated in a similar way in the other
members of the group. We are reminded of
how many of these phenomena of dependence
are part of the normal constitution of human
society, of how little originality and personal
courage are to be found in it, of how much
every individual is ruled by those attitudes of
the group mind which exhibit themselves in
such forms as racial characteristics, class preju
dices, public opinion, etc. The influence of sug
gestion becomes a greater riddle for us when
we admit that it is not exercised only by the
leader, but by every individual upon every
other individual; and we must reproach our
selves with having unfairly emphasized the re
lation to the leader and with having kept the
other factor of mutual suggestion too much in
the background.
After this encouragement to modesty, we
shall be inclined to listen to another voice,
which promises us an explanation based upon
simpler grounds. Such a one is to be found in
Trotter's thoughtful book upon the herd in
stinct, concerning which my only regret is that
it does not entirely escape the antipathies that
were set loose by the recent Great War.1
Trotter derives the mental phenomena that
are described as occurring in groups from a
herd instinct (gregariousness), which is innate
in human beings just as in other species of
animals. Biologically this gregariousness is an
analogy to multicellularity and as it were a con
tinuation of it. From the standpoint of the li
bido theory, it is a further manifestation of
the inclination, which proceeds from the libido,
and which is felt by all living beings of the
same kind, to combine in more and more com
prehensive units.2 The individual feels incom
plete if he is alone. The dread shown by small
children would seem already to be an expression
of this herd instinct. Opposition to the herd
is as good as separation from it, and is there
fore
anxiously avoided. But the herd turns
1W. Trotter: Instincts of the Herd in Peace and
War Fisher Unwin, 1916.
2 See Beyond the Pleasure Principle, p. 639 above.

[688a]
Group Psychology and
away from anything that is new or unusual.
The herd instinct would appear to be some
thing primary, something which cannot be split
up.
Trotter gives as the list of instincts which
he considers as primary those of self-preserva
tion, of nutrition, of sex, and of the herd. The
last often comes into opposition with the oth
ers. The feelings of guilt and of duty are the
peculiar possessions of a gregarious animal.
Trotter also derives from the herd instinct the
repressive forces which psycho-analysis has
shown to exist in the ego, and from the same
sources accordingly the resistances which the
physician comes up against in psycho-analytic
treatment. Speech owes its importance to its
aptitude for mutual understanding in the herd,
and upon it the identification of the individuals
with one another largely rests.
While Le Bon is principally concerned with
typical transient group formations, and Mc
Dougall with stable associations, Trotter has
chosen as the centre of his interest the most
generalized form
of
assemblage in
which
man, that
frcoov woXltlkov,1 passedhis life, and
he gives us its psychological basis. But Trotter
is under no necessity of tracing back the herd
instinct, for he characterizes it as primary and
not further reducible. Boris Sidis's attempt, to
which he refers, at tracing the herd instinct
back to suggestibility is fortunately superflu
ous as far as he is concerned; it is an explana
tion of a familiar and unsatisfactory type, and
the converse proposition—that suggestibility is
a derivative of the herd instinct—would seem
to me to throw far more light on the subject.
But Trotter's exposition, with even
more
justice than the other's, is open to the objec
tion that it takes too little account of the lead
er's part in a group, while we incline rather to
the opposite judgment, that it is impossible to
grasp the nature of a group if the leader is
disregarded. The herd instinct leaves no room
at all for the leader; he is merely thrown in
along with the herd, almost by chance; it fol
lows, too, that no path leads from this instinct
to the need for a God; the herd is without a
herdsman. But besides this Trotter's exposition
can be undermined psychologically; that is to
say, it can be made at all events probable that
the herd instinct is not irreducible, that it is
not primary in the same sense as the instinct
of self-preservation and the sexual instinct.
It is naturally no easy matter to trace the
ontogenesis of the herd instinct. The dread
1 Political animal.—Ed.

[688b]
Analysis of the Ego
68 5
which is shown by small children when they
are left alone, and which Trotter claims as be
ing already a manifestation of the instinct,
nevertheless suggests more readily another in
terpretation. The dread relates to the child's
mother, and later to other familiar persons,
and it is the expression of an unfulfilled desire,
which the child does not yet know how to
deal with in any way except by turning it into
dread.2 Nor is the child's dread when it is alone
pacified by the sight of any haphazard member
of the herd, but on the contrary it is only
brought into existence by the approach of a
stranger of this sort. Then for a long time noth
ing in the nature of herd instinct or group feel
ing is to be observed in children. Something
like it grows up first of all, in a nursery con
taining many children, out of the children's
relation to their parents, and it does so as a
reaction to the initial envy with which the elder
child receives the younger one. The elder child
would certainly like to put its successor jeal
ously aside, to keep it away from the parents,
and to rob it of all its privileges; but in face
of the fact that this child (like all that come
later) is loved by the parents in just the same
way, and in consequence of the impossibility
of maintaining its hostile attitude without dam
aging itself, it is forced into identifying itself
with the other children. So there grows up in
the troop of children a communal or group
feeling, which is then further developed at
school. The first demand made by this reactionformation is for
justice, for equal treatment
for all. We all know how loudly and implacably
this claim is put forward at school. If one can
not be the favourite oneself, at all events no
body else shall be the favourite. This trans
formation—the
replacing
of
jealousy by
a
group feeling in the nursery and classroom—
might be considered improbable, if the same
process could not la£er on be observed again
in other circumstances. We have only to think
of the troop of women and girls, all of them
in love in an enthusiastically sentimental way,
who crowd round a singer or pianist after his
performance. It would certainly be easy for
each of them to be jealous of the rest; but,
in face of their numbers and the consequent
impossibility of their reaching the aim of their
love, they renounce it, and, instead of pulling
out one another's hair, they act as a united
group, do homage to the hero of the occasion
with their common actions, and would probably
2 See the remarks upon Dread in General Introduc
tion to Psycho-Analysis, Lecture XXV, p. 607 above.

[689a]
686
Sigmund Freud
be glad to have a share of his flowing locks.
Originally rivals, they have succeeded in identi
fying themselves with one another by means of
a similar love for the same object. When, as is
usual, a situation in the field of the instincts
is capable of various outcomes, we need not be
surprised if the actual outcome is one which
involves the possibility of a certain amount of
satisfaction, while another, even though in it
self more obvious, is passed over because the
circumstances of life prevent its attaining this
aim.
What appears later on in society in the
shape of Gemeingeist, esprit de corps, group
spirit, etc., does not belie its derivation from
what was originally envy. No one must want to
put himself forward, every one must be the
same and have the same. Social justice means
that we deny ourselves many things so that
others may have to do without them as well,
or, what is the same thing, may not be able to
ask for them. This demand for equality is the
root of social conscience and the sense of duty.
It reveals itself unexpectedly in the syphilitic's
dread of infecting other people, which psycho
analysis has
taught us to
understand. The
dread exhibited by these poor wretches corre
sponds to their violent struggles against the
unconscious wish to spread their infection on
to other people; for why should they alone be
infected and cut off from so much? Why not
other people as well? And the same germ is to
be found in the pretty anecdote of the judg
ment of Solomon.If one woman's child is dead,
the other shall not have a live one either. The
bereaved woman is recognized by this wish.
Thus social feeling is based upon the reversal
of what was first a hostile feeling into a posi
tively-toned tie of the nature of an identifica
tion. So far as we have hitherto been able to
follow the course of events, this reversal ap
pears to be effected und@r the influence of a
common tender tie with a person outside the
group. We do not ourselves regard our analysis
of identification as exhaustive, but it is enough
for our present purpose that we should revert
to this one feature—its demand that equaliza
tion shall be consistently carried through. We
have already heard in the discussion of the two
artificial groups, church and army, that their
preliminary condition is that all their members
should be loved in the same way by one person,
the leader. Do not let us forget, however, that
the demand for equality in a group applies only
to its members and not to the leader. All the
members must be equal to one another, but they

[689b]
allwant to be ruledby oneperson. Many equals,
who can identify themselves with one another,
and a single person superior to them all—that
is the situation that we find realized in groups
which are capable of subsisting. Let us venture,
then, to correct Trotter's pronouncement that
man is a herd animal and assert that he is
rather a horde animal, an individual creature
in a horde led by a chief.
X. The Group and the Primal Horde
In 1912 I took up a conjecture of Darwin's to
the effect that the primitive form of human so
ciety was that of a horde ruled over despoti
cally by a powerful male. I attempted to show
that the fortunes of this horde have left inde
structible traces upon the history of human
descent; and, especially, that the development
of totemism, which comprises in itself the be
ginnings of religion, morality, and social or
ganization, is connected with the killing of the
chief by
violence and the transformation of
the paternal horde into a community of broth
ers.1 To be sure, this is only a hypothesis, like
so many others with which archaeologists en
deavour to lighten the darkness of prehistoric
times—a "Just-So Story," as it was amusingly
called by a not unkind critic (Kroeger); but I
think it is creditable to such a hypothesis if
it proves able to bring coherence and under
standing into more and more new regions.
Human groups exhibit once again the famil
iar pictureof an individual of superior strength
among a troop of similar companions, a picture
which is also contained in our idea of the
primal horde. The psychology of such a group,
as we know it from the descriptions to which
we have so often referred—the dwindling of
the conscious individual personality, the focus
sing of thoughts and feelings into a common
direction, the predominance of the emotions
and of the unconscious mental life, the tend
ency to the immediate carrying out of inten
tions as they emerge—all this corresponds to a
state of regression to a primitive mental,activ
ity, of just such a sort as we should be inclined
to ascribe to the primal horde.2
1 Totem and Taboo.
2What we have just described in our general char
acterization of mankind must apply especially to the
primal horde. The
will of
the
individual
was
too
weak; he did not venture upon action. No impulses
whatever came into play except collective ones; there
was only a common will, there were no single ones.
An idea did not dare to turn itself into a volition un
less it felt itself reinforced by a perception of its
general diffusion. This weakness of the idea is to be
explained by the strength of the emotional tie which

[690a]
Thus the group appears to us as a revival of
the primal horde. Just as primitive man vir
tually survives in every individual, so the pri
mal horde may arise once more out of any
random crowd; in so far as men are habitually
under the sway of group formation, we recog
nize in it the survival of the primal horde. We
must conclude that the psychology of the group
is the oldest human psychology; what we have
isolated as individual psychology,by neglecting
all traces of the group, has only since come
into prominence out of the old group psychol
ogy, by a gradual process which may still, per
haps, be described as incomplete. We shall later
venture upon an attempt at specifying the point
of departure of this development.
Further reflection will show us in what re
spect this statement requires correction. Indi
vidual psychology must, on the contrary, be
just as old as group psychology, for from the
first there were two kinds of psychologies, that
of the individual members of the group and
that of the father, chief, or leader. The mem
bers of the group were subject to ties just as
we see them today, but the father of the primal
horde was free. His intellectual acts were strong
and independent even in isolation, and his will
needed no reinforcement from others. Consist
ency leads us to assume that his ego had few
libidinal ties; he loved no one but himself, or
other people only in so far as they served his
needs. To objects his ego gave away no more
than was barely necessary.
He, at the very beginning of the history of
mankind, was the Superman whom Nietzsche
only expected from the future. Even today the
members of a group stand in need of the illu
sion that they are equally and justly loved by
their leader; but the leader himself need love
no one else, he may be of a masterly nature,
absolutely narcissistic, but self-confident and
independent. We know that love puts a check
upon narcissism, and it would be possible to
show how, by operating in this way, it became
a factor of civilization.
The primal father of the horde was not yet
immortal, as he later became by deification: If
is shared by all members of the horde; but the simi
larity in the circumstances of their life and the absence
of any private property assist in determining the uni
formity of their individual mental acts. As we may
observe with children and soldiers, common activity
is not excluded even in the excremental functions. The
one great exception is provided by the sexual act, in
which a third person is at best superfluous and in the
extreme case is condemned to a state of painful ex
pectancy. As to the reaction of the sexual need (for
genital gratification) towards gregariousness, see below.

[690b]
Group Psychology and Analysis of the Ego
687
he died, he had to be replaced; his place was
probably taken by a youngest son, who had up
to then been a member of the group like any
other. There must therefore be a possibility of
transforming group psychology into individual
psychology; a condition must be discovered
under which such a transformation is easily
accomplished, just as it is possible for bees in
case of necessity to turn a larva into a queen
instead of into a worker. One can imagine only
one possibility: the primal father had pre
vented his sons from satisfying their directly
sexual tendencies; he forced them into absti
nence and consequently into the-emotional ties
with him and with one another which could
arise out of those of their tendencies that were
inhibited in their sexual aim. He' forced them,
so to speak, into group psychology. His sexual
jealousy and intolerance became, in the last
resort, the causes of group psychology.1
Whoever became his successor was also given
the possibility of sexual satisfaction, and was
by that means offered a way out of the condi
tions of group psychology. The fixation of the
libido to woman and the possibility of satisfac
tion without any need for delay or accumulation
made an end of the importance of those of
his sexual tendencies that were inhibited in
their.aim, and allowed his narcissism always to
rise to its full height. We shall return in a
postscript to this connection between love and
character formation.
We may further emphasize, as being specially
instructive, the relation that holds between the
contrivance by means of which an artificial
group is held together and the constitution of
the primal horde. We have seen that with an
army and a church this contrivance is the illu
sion that the leader loves all of the individuals
equally and justly. But this is simply an ideal
istic remodelling of the state of affairs in the
primal horde, where all of the sons knew that
they were equally persecuted by the primal
father, and feared him equally. This same re
casting upon which all social duties are built
up is already presupposed by the next form of
human society, the totemistic clan. The inde
structible strength of the family as a natural
group formation rests upon the fact that this
necessary presupposition of the father's equal
love can have a real application in the family.
But we expect even more of this derivation
1 It may perhaps also be assumed that the sons,
when they were driven out and separated from
their
father, advanced from identification with one another to
homosexual object love, and in this way won freedom
to kill their father.

[691a]
688
Sigmund Freud
of the group from the primal horde. It ought
also to help us to understand what is still in
comprehensible and mysterious in group for
mations—all that lies hidden behind the enig
matic words hypnosis and suggestion. And I
think it can succeed in this too. Let us recall
that hypnosis has something positively uncanny
about it; but the characteristic of uncanniness
suggests something old and familiar that has
undergone repression.1 Let us
consider how
hypnosis is induced. The hypnotist asserts that
he is in possession of a mysterious power which
robs the subject of his own will, or, which is
the same thing, the subject believes it of him.
This mysterious power
(which is even now
often described popularly as animal magnet
ism) must be the same that is looked upon by
primitive people as the source of taboo, the
same that emanates from kings and chieftains
and
makes
it dangerous to
approach them
(mana). The hypnotist, then, is supposed to be
in possession of this power; and how does he
manifest it? By telling the subject to look him
in the eyes; his most typical method of hypno
tizing is by his look. But it is precisely the sight
of the chieftain that is dangerous and unbear
able for primitive people, just as later that of
the Godhead is for mortals. Even Moses had to
act as an intermediary between his people and
Jehovah, since the people could not support the
sight of God; and when he returned from the
presence of God his face shone—some of the
mana had been transferred on to him, just as
happens with the intermediary among primitive
people.2
It is true that hypnosis can also be evoked
in other ways, for instance by fixing the eyes
upon a bright object or listening to a monoto
nous sound. This is misleading and has given
occasion to inadequate physiological theories.
As a matter of fact, these procedures merely
serve to divert conscious attention and to hold
it riveted. The situation is the same as if the
hypnotist had said to the subject: "Now con
cern yourself exclusively with my person; the
rest of the world is quite uninteresting." It
would of course be technically inexpedient for
a hypnotist to make such a speech; it would
tear the subject away from his unconscious
attitude and stimulate him to conscious opposi
tion. The hypnotist avoids directing the sub
ject's conscious thoughts towards his own in
tentions, and makes the person upon whom he
is experimenting sink into an activity in which
1 "The Uncanny," Collected Papers, TV.
2 See Totem and Taboo and the sources,there quoted.

[691b]
the world is bound to seem uninteresting to
him; but at the same time the subject is in
reality unconsciously concentrating his whole
attention upon the hypnotist, and is getting in
to an attitude of rapport, of transference on to
him. Thus the indirectmethods of hypnotizing,
like many of the technical procedures used in
making jokes, have the effect of checking cer
tain distributions of mental energy which would
interfere with the course of events in the un
conscious, and they lead eventually to the same
result as the direct methods of influence by
means of staring or stroking.8
Ferenczi has made the true discovery that
when a hypnotist gives the command to sleep,
which is often doneat the beginning of hypno
sis, he is putting himself in the place of the
subject's parents. He thinks that two sorts of
hypnosis are to be distinguished: one coaxing
and soothing, which he considers is modelled
upon the mother, and another threatening,
which is derived from the father.* Now the
command to sleep in hypnosis means nothing
more nor less than-,an order to withdraw all
interest from the world and to concentrate it
upon the person of the hypnotist. And it is so
understood by the subject; for in this with
drawal of interest from the outer world lies the
psychological characteristic of sleep, and the
kinship between sleep and the state of hypnosis
is based upon it.
j
By the measures that he takes, then, the hyp
notist awakens in the subject a portion of his
archaic inheritance which had also made him
compliant towards his parents and which had
experienced
an
individual
re-animation
in
his relation to his father; what is thus awak
enedis the idea of a paramountand dangerous
personality, towards whom only a passive3This situation, in which the subject's attitude is
unconsciously directed towards the hypnotist, while he
is consciously occupied with monotonous and uninter
esting perceptions, finds a parallel among the events
of psycho-analytic treatment, which
deserves to be
mentioned here. At least once in the course of every
analysis, a moment comes when the patient obstinately
maintains that just now positively nothing whatever
occurs to his mind. His free
associations come to
a
stop and the usual incentives for putting them
in
motion fail in their effect. As a result of pressure, the
patient is at last induced to admit that he is thinking
of the view from the consulting-room window, of the
wall-paper that he sees before him, or of the gaslamp hanging from the
ceiling. Then one knows at
once that he has gone off into the transference and
that he is engaged upon what are still unconscious
thoughts relating to the physician; and one sees the
stoppage
in the patient's associations
disappear, as
soon as he has been given this explanation.
4Ferenczi: "Introjektion und Vbertragung," Jahrbuck der Psychoanalyse, 1909, Vol. I (Contributions
to Psycho-Analysis. Boston, Badger, 1916, chapter n).

[692a]
masochistic attitude is possible, to whom one's
will has to be surrendered—while to be alone
with him, "to look him in the face," appears a
hazardous enterprise. It is only in some such
way as this that we can picture the relation of
the individual member of the primal horde to
the primal father. As we know from other re
actions, individuals have preserved a variable
degree of personal aptitude for reviving old
situations of this kind. Some knowledge that, in
spite of everything, hypnosis is only a game,
a deceptive renewal of these old impressions,
may however remainbehindand take care that
there is a resistance against any too serious
consequences of the suspension of the will in
hypnosis.
The uncanny and coercive characteristics of
group formations, which are shown in their
suggestion phenomena, may therefore with jus
tice be traced back to the fact of their origin
from the primal horde. The leader of the group
is still the dreaded primal father; the group
still wishes to be governed by unrestricted
force; it has an extreme passion for authority;
in Le Bon's phrase, it has a thirst for obedi
ence. The primal father is the group ideal,
which governs the ego in the place of the ego
ideal. Hypnosis has a good claim to being de
scribed as a group of two; there remains as a
definition for suggestion: a conviction which is
not based upon perception and reasoning but
upon an erotic tie.1
XI. A Differentiating Grade in
the Ego
If we survey the life of an individual man of
today, bearing in mind the mutually comple
mentary accounts of group psychology given
by the authorities, we may lose the courage, in
face of the complications that are revealed, to
attempt a comprehensive exposition. Each in
dividual is a
component part of numerous
groups, he is bound by ties of identification in
many directions, and he has built up his ego
ideal upon the most various models. Each in
dividual, therefore, has a share in numerous
group minds—thoseof his race, of his class, of
his creed, of his nationality, etc.—and he can
- It seems to
me worth emphasizing the fact that
the discussions in this section have induced us to give
up Bernheim's conception of hypnosis and go back to
the naif earlier one. According to Bernheim, all hyp
notic phenomena are to be traced to the factor of sug
gestion, which is not itself capable of further explana
tion. We have come to the conclusion that suggestion
is a partial manifestation of the state of hypnosis, and
that hypnosis is solidly founded upon a predisposition
which has survived in the unconscious from the early
history of the human family.

[692b]
Group Psychology and Analysis of the Ego
689
also raise himself above them to the extent of
having a scrap of independence and originality.
Such stable and lasting group formations, with
their uniform and constant effects, are less
striking to an observer than the rapidly formed
and transient groups from which Le Bon has
made
his
brilliant
psychological
character
sketch of the group mind. And it is just in these
noisy ephemeral groups, which are as it were
superimposed upon the others, that we are met
by the prodigy of the complete, even though
only temporary, disappearance of exactly what
we have recognized as individual acquirements.
We have interpreted this prodigy as mean
ing that the individual gives up his ego ideal
and substitutes for it the group ideal as em
bodied in the leader. And we must add, by way
of correction, that the prodigy is not equally
great in every case. In many individuals the
separation between the ego and the ego ideal
is not very far advanced; the two still coincide
readily; the ego has often preserved its earlier
self-complacency. The selection of the leader is
very much facilitated by this circumstance. He
need only possess the typical qualities of the
individuals concerned in a particularly clearly
marked and pure form, and need only give an
impression of greater force and of more free
dom of libido; and in that case the need for a
strong chief will often meet him half-way and
invest him with a predominance to which he
would otherwise perhaps have had no claim.
The other members of the group, whose ego
ideal would not, apart from this, have become
embodied in his person without some correc
tion, are then carried away with the rest by
suggestion, that is to say, by means of identifi
cation.
We are aware that what we have been able
to contribute towards the explanation of the
libidinal structure of groups leads back to the
distinction between the ego and the ego ideal
and to the double kind of tie which this makes
possible—identification, and substitution of
the object for the ego ideal. The assumption of
this kind of differentiating grade (Stufe) in
the ego as a first step in an analysis of the ego
must gradually establish its justification in the
most various regions of psychology. In my
paper, "Narcissism: an Introduction," I have
put together all the pathological material that
could at the moment be used in support of this
separation. But it may be expected that when
we penetrate deeperinto the psychology of the
psychoses its significance will be discovered to
be far greater. Let us reflect that the ego now

[693a]
690
Sigmund Freud
appears in the relation of an object to the ego
ideal which has been developed out of it, and
that all the interplay between an outer object
and the ego as a whole, with which our study of
the neuroses has made us acquainted, may pos
sibly be repeated upon this new scene of action
inside the ego.
In this place I shall only follow up one of
the consequences which seem possible from
this point of view, thus resuming the discussion
of a problem which I was obliged to leave un
solved elsewhere.1 Each of the mental differen
tiations that we have become acquainted with
represents a fresh aggravation of the difficulties
of mental functioning, increases its instability,
and
may become the starting-point for
its
breakdown, that is, for the onset of a disease.
Thus, by being born we have made the step
from an absolutely self-sufficient narcissism to
the perception of a changing outer world and to
the beginnings of the discovery of objects. And
with this is associated the fact that we cannot
endure the new state of things for long, that
we periodically revert from it, in our sleep, to
our former condition of absence of stimulation
and avoidance of objects. It is true, however,
that in this we are following a hint from the
outer world, which, by means of the periodical
change of day and night, temporarily with
draws the greater part of the stimuli that af
fect us. The second example, which is patho
logically more important, is not subject to any
such qualification! In the course of our devel
opment we have effected a separation of our
mental existence into a coherent ego and into
an unconscious and repressed portion which is
left outside it; and we know that the stability,
of this new acquisition is exposed to constant
shocks. In dreams and in neuroses what is thus
excluded knocks for admission at the gates,
guarded though they are by resistances; and in
our waking health we make use of special arti
fices for allowing what is repressed to circum
vent the resistances and for receiving it tem
porarily into our ego to the increase of our
pleasure. Wit and humour, and to some extent
the comic in general, may be regarded in this
light. Everyone acquainted with the psychology
of the neuroses will think of similar examples
of less importance; but I hasten on to the ap
plication I have in view.
It is quite conceivable that the separation of
the ego ideal from the ego cannot be borne for
long either, and has to be temporarily undone.
In all renunciations and limitations imposed
1"Mourning and Melancholia."

[693b]
upon the ego, a periodical infringement of the
prohibition is the rule; this indeed is shown
by the institution of festivals, which in origin
are nothing more nor less than excesses pro
vided by law and which owe their cheerful
character to the release which they bring.2 The
Saturnalia of the Romans and our modern car
nival agree in this essential feature with the
festivals of primitive people, which usually end
in debaucheries of every kind and the trans
gression of what are at other times the most
sacred commandments. But the ego ideal com*
prises the sum of all the limitations in which the
ego has to acquiesce, and for that reason the
abrogation of the ideal would necessarily be a
magnificent festival for the ego, which might
then once again feel satisfied with itself.8
There is always a feeling of triumph when
something in the ego coincides with the ego
ideal. And the sense of guilt (as well as the
sense of inferiority) can also be understood as
an expression of tension between the ego and
the ego ideal.
It is well known that there are people the
general colour of whose mood oscillates periodi
cally from an excessivedepression through some
kind of intermediate state to an exalted sense
of well-being. These oscillations appear in
very different degrees of amplitude, from what
is just noticeable to those extreme instances
which, in the shape of melancholia and mania,
make the most painful or disturbing inroads
upon the life of the person concerned. In typi
cal cases of this cyclical depression, outer ex
citing causes do not seem to play any decisive
part; as regards inner motives, nothing more
(or nothing different) is to be found in these
patients than in all others. It has consequently
become the custom to consider these cases as
not being psychogenic. We shall refer later on
to those other exactly similar cases of cyclical
depression which can nevertheless easily be
traced back to mental traumata.
Thus the foundation of these spontaneous
oscillations of mood is unknown; we are with
out insight into the mechanism of the displace
ment of a melancholia by a mania. So we are
free to suppose that these patients are people
in whom our conjecture might find an actual
application—their ego ideal might be tempo2 Totem and Taboo.
3Trotter traces repression back to the herd instinct
It is a translation of this into another form of ex
pression rather than a contradiction when I say in my
"On Narcissism: an Introduction" that, on the part of
the ego, the construction of an ideal is the condition
of repression [see p. 408 above].

[694a]
Group Psychology and
rarily resolved into their ego after having previ
ously ruled it with especial strictness.
Let us keep to what is clear: On the basis of
our analysis of the ego it cannot be doubted
that in cases of mania the ego and the ego ideal
have fused together, so that the person, in a
mood of triumph and self-satisfaction, dis
turbed by no self-criticism,
can
enjoy
the
abolition of his inhibitions, his feelings of con
sideration for others, and his self-reproaches.
It is not so obvious, but nevertheless very prob
able, that the misery of the melancholiac is the
expression of a sharp conflict between the two
faculties of his ego, a conflict in which the
ideal, in an excess of sensitiveness, relentlessly
exhibits its condemnation of the ego in delu
sions of inferiority and in self-depreciation. The
only question is whether we are to look for the
causes of these altered relations between the
ego and the ego ideal in the periodic rebellions,
which we have postulated above, against the
new institution, or whether we are to make
other circumstances responsible for them.
A change into mania is not an indispensable
feature of the symptomatology of melancholic
depression.
There
are
simple
melancholias,
some in single and some in recurring attacks,
which never show this development. On the
other hand, there are melancholias in which the
exciting cause clearly plays an aetiological part.
They are those which occur after the loss of a
loved object, whether by death or as a result of
circumstances
which
have
necessitated
the
withdrawal of the libido from the object. A
psychogenic melancholia of this sort can end
in mania, and this cycle can be repeated sev
eral times, just as easily as in a case which ap
pears to be spontaneous. Thus the state of
things is somewhat obscure, especially as only
a
few forms and cases of melancholia have
been submitted to psycho-analytical investiga
tion.1 So far we only understand those cases in
which the object is given up because it has
shown itself unworthy of love. It is then set up
again inside the ego, by means of identifica
tion, and severely condemned by the ego ideal.
The reproaches and attacks directed towards
the object come to light in the shape of melan
cholic self-reproaches.2
1 Cf. Abraham: "Ansdtze zur psychoanalytischen Erforschung
und
Behandlung
des
manisch-depressiven
Irreseins,"
1912, in
Klinische Beitrage zur Psycho
analyse, 1921.
2 To speak more accurately, they conceal themselves
behind the reproaches directed towards
the person's
own ego, and lend them the fixity, tenacity, and im
perativeness which characterize the self-reproaches of
a melancholiac

[694b]
Analysis of the Ego
691
A melancholia of this kind may also end
in a change to mania; so that the possibility
of this happening represents a feature which
is independent of the other characteristics in
the symptomatology.
Nevertheless I see no difficulty in assigning
to the factor of the periodical rebellion of the
ego against the ego ideal a share in both kinds
of melancholia, the psychogenic as well as the
spontaneous. In the spontaneous kind, it may
be supposed that the ego ideal is inclined to
display a peculiar strictness, which then results
automatically in its temporary suspension. In
the psychogenic kind, the ego would be incited
to rebellion by ill-treatment on the part of its
ideal—an
ill-treatment
which
it
encounters
when there has been identification with a re
jected object.
XII. Postscript
In the course of the enquiry which has just
been brought to a provisional end we came
across a number of side-paths which we avoided
pursuing in the first instance but in which there
was much that offered us promises of insight.
We propose now to take up a few of the points
that have been left on one side in this way.
A. The distinction between identification of
the ego with an object and replacement of the
ego ideal by an object finds an interesting il
lustration in the
two great artificial groups
which we began by studying, the army and the
Christian church.
It is obvious that a soldier takes his superior,
that is, really, the leader of the army, as his
ideal, while he identifies himself with his equals,
and derives from this community of their egos
the obligations for giving mutual help and for
sharing possessions which comradeship implies.
But he becomes ridiculous if he tries to identify
himself with the general. The soldier in Wallensteins Lager laughs at the sergeant for this very
reason:
Wie er rauspert und wie er spuckt.
Das habt ihr ihm gliicklich abgegucktl*
It is otherwise in the Catholic Church. Every
Christian loves Christ as his ideal and feels
himself united with all other Christians by the
tie of identification. But the Church requires
more of him. He has also to identify himself
with Christ and love all other Christians as
Christ loved them. At both points, therefore,
the Church requires that the position of the
libido which is given by a group formation
should be supplemented. Identification has to
3 How he clears his throat and how he spits, that
you have cleverly copied from him.—Tr.

[695a]
692
Sigmund Freud
be added where object-choice has taken place,
and object love where there is identification.
This addition evidently goes beyond the con
stitution of the group. One can be a good Chris
tian and yet be far from the idea of putting
oneself in Christ's place and of having like him
an all-embracing love for mankind. One need
not think oneself capable, weak mortal that one
is, of
the
Saviour's largeness
of soul
and
strength of love. But this further development
in the distribution of libido in the group is
probably the factor upon which Christianity
bases its claim to have reached a higher ethical
level.
B. We have said that it would be possible
to specify the point in the mental development
of man at which the advance from group to
individual psychology was also achieved by the
individual members of the group.1
For this purpose we must return for a mo
ment to the scientific myth of the father of the
primal horde. He was later on exalted into the
creator of the world, and with justice, for he
had produced all the sons who composed the
first group. He was the ideal of each one of
them, at once feared and honoured, a fact which
led later to the idea of taboo. These many in
dividuals banded themselves together, killed
him and cut him in pieces. None of the group
of victors could take his place, or, if one of
them did, the battles began afresh, until they
understood that they must all renounce their
father's heritage. They then formed the totemistic community of brothers, all with equal
rights
and united by the totem prohibitions
which were to preserve and to expiate the mem
ory of the murder. But the dissatisfaction with
what had been achieved still remained, and it
became the source of new developments. The
persons who
were united in
this group of
brothers gradually came towards a revival of
the old state of things at a new level. Man be
came once more the chief of a family, and
broke down the prerogatives of the gynaecocracy which had become established during the
fatherless period. As a compensation for this,
he may at that time have acknowledged the
mother deities, whose priests were castrated
for the mother's protection, after the example
that had been given by the father of the primal
horde. And yet the new family was only a
shadow of the old one; there were numbers of
fathers and each one was limited by the rights
of the others.
-
1 What follows at this point was written under the
influence of an exchange of ideas with Otto Rank.

[695b]
It was then, perhaps, that some individual,
in the exigency of his longing, may have been
moved to free himself from the group and take
over the father's part. He who did this was the
first epic poet; and the advance was achieved
in his imagination. This poet disguised
the
truth with lies in accordance with his longing.
He invented the heroic myth. The hero was a
man who by himself had slain the father—the
father who still appeared in the myth as a
totemistic monster. Just as the father had been
the boy's first ideal, so in the hero who aspires
to the father's place the poet now created the
first ego ideal. The transition to the hero was
probably afforded by the youngest son, the
mother's favourite, whom she had protected
from paternal jealousy, and who, in the era of
the primal horde, had been the father's succes
sor. In the lying poetic fancies of prehistoric
times the woman, who had been the prize of
battle and the allurement to murder, was prob
ably turned into the seducer and instigator to
the crime.
The hero claims to have acted alone in ac
complishing the deed, which certainly only the
horde as a whole would have ventured upon.
But, as Rank has observed, fairy tales have
preserved clear traces of the facts which were
disavowed. For we often find in them that the
hero who has to carry out some difficult task
(usually a youngest son, and not infrequently
one who has represented himself to the father
surrogate as being stupid, that is to say, harm
less)—we often find, then, that this hero can
carry out his task only by the help of a crowd
of small animals, such as bees or ants. These
would be the brothers in the primal horde, just
as in the same way in dream symbolism insects
or vermin signify brothers and sisters (con
temptuously, considered as babies). Moreover,
every one of the tasks in myths and fairy tales
is easily recognizable as a substitute for the
heroic deed.
The myth, then, is the step by which the
individual emerges from group psychology. The
first myth was certainly the psychological, the
hero myth, the explanatory nature myth must
have followed much later. The poet who had
taken this step and had in this way set himself
free from the group in his imagination, is never
theless able (as Rank has further observed)*to
find his way back to it in reality. For he goes
and relates to the group his hero's deeds which
he has invented. At bottom this hero is no one
but himself. Thus he lowers himself, to the level
of reality, and raises his hearers to the level .of

[696a]
Group Psychology and Analysis of the Ego
693
imagination. But his hearers understand the
poet, and, in virtue of their having the same
relation of longing towards the primal father,
they can identify themselves with the hero.1
The lie of the heroic myth culminates in the
deification of the hero. Perhaps the deified hero
may have been earlier than the Father God and
may have been a precursor to the return of the
primal father as a deity. The series of gods,
then, would run chronologically: Mother God
dess—Hero—Father God. But it is only with
the elevation of the never forgotten primal
father that the deity acquires the features that
we still recognize in him today.2
C. A great deal has been said in this paper
about directly sexual instincts and those that
are inhibited in their aims,
and
it may be
hoped that this distinction will not meet with
too much resistance. But a detailed discussion
of the question will not be out of place, even if
it only repeats what has to a great extent al
ready been said before.
The development of the libido in children has
made us acquainted with the first but also the
best example of sexual instincts which are
inhibited in their aims. All the feelings which
a child has towards its parents and those who
look after it pass by an easy transition into the
wishes which give expression to the child's sex
ual tendencies. The child
claims from these
objects of its love all the signs of affection
which it knows of;
it wants to kiss
them,
touch them, and look at them; it is curious to
see their genitals, and to be with them when
they perform their intimate excremental func
tions; it promises to marry its mother or nurse
—whatever it may understand by that; it pro
poses to itself to bear its father a child, etc.
Direct observation, as well as the subsequent
analytic investigation of the residue of child
hood, leave no doubt as to the complete fusion
of tender and jealous feelings and of sexual
intentions, and show us in what a fundamental
way the child makes the person it loves into the
object of all its incompletely centred sexual
tendencies.3
This first
configuration of the child's love,
1 Cf.
Hanns
Sachs:
"Gemeinsame
Tagtrdume"
a
summary made by the lecturer himself of a paper read
at the Sixth Psycho-analytical Congress, held at the
Hague
in
1920. Internationale
Zeitschrift
fiir
Psy
choanalyse,
1920, Vol.
VI.
("Day-Dreams
in
Com
mon,"
International
Journal
of
Psycho-Analysis,
1920, Vol. I.)
2 In this brief exposition, I have made no attempt
to bring forward any of the material existing in leg
ends, myths, iai?y tales, the history of manners, etc.,
in support of the construction.
3 See Three Contributions to the Theory of Sex.

[696b]
which in typical cases is co-ordinated with, the
Oedipus complex, succumbs, as we know, from
the beginning of the period of latency onwards,
to a wave of repression. Such of it as is left
over shows itself as a purely tender emotional
tie, which relates to the same people, but is no
longer to be described as sexual. Psycho-analy
sis, which illuminates the depths of mental life,
has no difficulty in showing that the sexual ties
of the earliest years of childhood also persist,
though repressed and unconscious. It gives us
courage to assert that wherever we come across
a tender feeling it is the successor to a com
pletely sensual object tie with the person in
question or rather with that person's prototype
(or imago). It cannot indeed disclose to us
without a special investigation whether in a
given case this former complete sexual current
still exists under repression, or whether it has
already been exhausted. To put it still more
precisely: it is quite certain that it is still there
as a form and possibility, and can always be
charged with
cathectic energy and put into
activity again by means of regression; the only
question is (and it cannot always be answered)
what degree of cathexis and operative force it
still has at the present moment. Equal care
must be taken in this connection to avoid two
sources of error—the Scylla of under-estimat
ing the importance of the repressed uncon
scious,
and
the
Charybdis
of
judging the
normal entirely by the standards of the patho
logical.
A psychology which will not or cannot pene
trate the depths of what is repressed regards
tender emotional ties as being invariably the
expression of tendencies which have no sexual
aim, even though they are derived from tend
encies which have such an aim.*
We are justified in saying that they have
been diverted from these sexual aims,
even
though there is some difficulty in giving a rep
resentation of such a diversion of aim which
will conform to the requirements of metapsychology. Moreover, those instincts which are
inhibited in their aims always preserve some
few
of
their original sexual aims; even an
affectionate devotee, even a friend or an ad
mirer, desires the physical proximity and the
sight of the person who is now loved only in
the "PauHne" sense. If we
choose, we may
recognize in this diversion of aim a beginning
of the sublimation of the sexual instincts, or,
4 Hostile feelings, which are a little more compli
cated in tjieir construction, offer no exception to this
rule.
^

[697a]
694
Sigmund
on the other hand, we may fix the limits of
sublimation at some more distant point. Those
sexual instincts which are inhibited in their
aims have a great functional advantage over
those which are uninhibited. Since they are not
capable of really complete satisfaction, they are
especially adapted to create permanent ties;
while those instincts which are directly sexual
incur a loss of energy each time they are
satisfied, and must wait to be renewed by a
fresh accumulation of sexual libido, so that
meanwhile the object may have been changed.
The inhibited instincts are capable of any de
gree of admixture with the uninhibited; they
can be transformed back into them, just as
they arose out of them. It is well known how
easily erotic wishes develop out of emotional
relations of a friendly character, based upon ap
preciation and admiration, (compare Moliere's
ltEmbrassez-moi pour Vamour du grec"1), be
tween a master and a pupil, between a per
former and a delighted listener, and especially
in the case of women. In fact, the growth of
emotional ties of this kind, with their purpose
less beginnings, provides a much frequented
pathway to sexual object-choice. Pfister, in his
Frommigkeit des Grafen von Zinzendorf* has
given an extremely clear and certainly not an
isolated example of how easily even an intense
religious tie can revert to ardent sexual excite
ment. On the other hand it is also very usual
for
directly sexual tendencies, short-lived in
themselves, to be transformed into a lasting
and purely tender tie; and the consolidation of
a
passionate love marriage rests to a large
extent upon this process.
We shall naturally not be surprised to hear
that the sexual tendencies that are inhibited in
their aims arise out of the directly sexual ones
when inner or outer obstacles make the sexual
aims unattainable. The repression during the
period of latency is an inner obstacle of this
kind—or rather one which has become inner.
We have assumed that the father of the primal
horde, owing to his sexual intolerance, com
pelled all his sons to be abstinent, and thus
forced them into ties that were Inhibited in their
aims, while he reserved for himself freedom of
sexual enjoyment and in this way remained
without ties. All the ties upon which a group
depends are of the character of instincts that
are inhibited in their aims. But here we have
approached the discussion of a new subject,
1 Embrace me for the love of the Greek.—Ed.
2 Schriften
zur
angewandten Seelenkuntfe. No.
8,
Vienna, Deuticke, 1910.—TR.

[697b]
Fkeud
which deals with the relation between directly
sexual instincts and the formation of groups.
D. The last two remarks will have prepared
us for finding that directly sexual tendencies
are unfavourable to the formation of groups.
In the history of the development of the family
there have also, it is true, been group relations
of sexual love (group marriages); but the more
important sexual love became for the ego, and
the more it developed the characteristics of
being in love, the more urgently it required to
be limited to two people—una cum uno—as is
prescribed by the nature of the genital aim.
Polygamous inclinations had to be content to
find satisfaction in a succession of changing
objects.
Two people coming together for the purpose
of sexual satisfaction, in so far as they seek for
solitude, are making a demonstration against
the herd instinct, the group feeling. The more
they are in love, the more completely they suf
fice for each other. The rejection of the group's
influence is manifested in the shape of a sense
of shame. The extremely violent feelings of
jealousy are summoned up in order to protect
the sexual object-choice from being encroached
upon by a group tie. It is only when the tender,
that is, the personal, factor of a love relation
gives place entirely to the sensual one, that it is
possible for two people to have sexual inter
course in the presence of others or for there to
be simultaneous sexual acts in a group as oc
curs at an orgy. But at that point a regression
has taken place to an early stage in sexual re
lations, at which being in love as yet played no
part, and all sexual objects were judged to be
of
equal
value,
somewhat in the
sense of
Bernard Shaw's malicious aphorism to the ef
fect that being in love means greatly exaggerat
ing the
difference between one woman and
another.
There are abundant indications that being in
love only made its appearance later on in the
sexual relations between men and women; so
that the opposition between sexual love and
group ties is also a late development. Now it
may seem as though this assumption were in
compatible with our myth of the primal family.
For it was after all by their love for their
mothers and sisters that the troop of brothers
was, as we have supposed, driven to parricide;
and it is difficult to imagine this love as being
anything but unbroken and primitive—that is,
as an intimate union of the tender and the
sensual. But further consideration resolves this
objection into a confirmation. One of the re-

[698a]
Group Psychology and Analysis of the Ego
695
actions to the parricide was, after all, the in
stitution of totemistic exogamy, the prohibition
of any sexual relation with those women of the
family who had been tenderly loved since
childhood. In this way a wedge was driven in
between a man's tender and sensual feelings,
one still firmly fixed in his erotic Hfe today.1
As a result of this exogamy, the sensual needs
of men had to be satisfied with strange and
unloved women.
In the great artificial groups, the church and
the army, there is no room for woman as a
sexual object. The love relation between men
and women remains outside these organiza
tions. Even where groups are formed which are
composed of both menand women, the distinc
tion between the sexes plays no part. There is
scarcely any sense in askingwhetherthe libido
which keeps groups together is of a homo
sexual or of a heterosexual nature, for it is not
differentiated according to the sexes, and par
ticularly shows a complete disregard for the
aims of the genital organization of the libido.
Even in a person who has in other respects
become absorbed in a group, the directly sex
ual tendencies preserve a little of his individual
activity. If they become too strong, they dis
integrate every group formation. The Catholic
Church had the best of motives for recommend
ing its followers to remain unmarried and for
imposing celibacy upon its priests; but falling
in love has often driven even priests to leave
the church. In the same way, love for women
breaks through the group ties of race, of na
tional separation, and of the socialclasssystem,
and it thus produces important effects as a
factor in
civilization. It seems certain that
homosexual love is far more compatible with
groupties, evenwhen it takes the shapeof un
inhibited sexual tendencies—a remarkable fact,
the explanation of which might carry us far.
The psycho-analytic investigation of the psy
choneuroses has taught us that their symptoms
are to be traced back to directly sexual tend
encies which are
repressed but still
remain
active. We can complete this formula by add
ing to it: or, to tendencies inhibited in their
aims, whose inhibition has not been entirely
successful or has made room for a return to
the repressed sexual aim. It is in accordance
with this that a neurosis should make its victim
asocial and should remove him from the usual
group formations. It may be said that a neu
rosis has the same disintegrating effect upon a
1 See "The Most Prevalent Form of Degradation in
Erotic Life."

[698b]
group as being in love. On the other hand, it
appears that where a powerful impetus has been
given to group formation neuroses may di
minish and, at all events, temporarily disap
pear. Justifiable attempts have also been made
to turn this antagonism between neuroses and
group formation to therapeutic account. Even
those who do not regret the disappearance of
religious illusions from the civilized world of
today will admit that so long as they were in
force they offered those who were bound by
them the most powerful protection against the
danger of neurosis. Nor is it hard to discern in
all the ties with mystico-religious or philosophico-religious sects and communitiesthe manifes
tation of distorted cures of all kinds of neu
roses. All of this is bound up with the contrast
between directly sexual tendencies and those
which are inhibited in their aims.
If he is left to himself, a neurotic is obliged
to replace by his own symptom formations the
great group formations from which he is ex
cluded. He creates his own world of imagina
tion for himself, his own religion, his own
system of delusions, and thus recapitulates the
institutions of humanity in a distorted way
which is clear evidence of the dominating part
playedby the directlysexual tendencies.2
E. In conclusion, we will add a comparative
estimate, from the standpoint of the libido
theory, of the states with which we have been
concerned, of being in love, of hypnosis, of
group formation, and of the neurosis.
Being in love is based upon the simultane
ous presence of directly sexual tendencies and
of sexual tendencies that are inhibited in their
aims, so that the object draws a part of the
narcissistic ego-libido to itself. It is a condition
in which there is only room for the ego and
the object.
Hypnosis resembles being in love in being
limited to these two persons, but it is based
entirely upon sexual tendencies that are in
hibited in their aims and substitutes the object
for the ego ideal.
The group multiplies this process; it agrees
with hypnosis in the nature of the instincts
which hold it together, and in the replacement
of the ego ideal by the object; but to this it
adds identification with other individuals, which
was perhaps originally made possible by their
having the same relation to the object.
Both states, hypnosis and group formation,
are an inherited deposit from the phylogenesis
2 See Totem and Taboo, towards the end of Part n,
"Totem and the Ambivalence of Emotions."

[699a]
696
o
Sigmund
of the human libido—hypnosis in the form of a
predisposition, and the group, besides this, as
a direct survival. The replacement of the di
rectly sexual tendencies by those that are in
hibited in their aims promotes in both states
a separation between the ego and the ego ideal,
a separation with which a beginning has al
ready been made in the state of being in love.
The neurosis stands outside this series. It also
is based upon a peculiarity in the development
of the human libido—the twice repeated start
made by the directly sexual function, with an
intervening period of latency.1 To this extent
it resembles hypnosis and group formation in
having the character of a regression, which is
absent from being in love. It makes its appear1 Compare Three Contributions to the Theory of
Sex.

[699b]
Freud
ance wherever the advance from directly sex
ual instincts to those that are inhibited in their
aims has not been completely successful; and
it represents a conflict between those instincts
which have been received into the ego after
having passed through this development and
those portions of the same instincts which, like
other instinctive desires that have been com
pletely repressed/strive, from the repressed un
conscious,
to attain direct satisfaction. The
neurosis is extraordinarily rich in content, for
it embraces all possible relations between the
ego and the object—both those in which the
object is retained and others in which it is
abandoned or erected inside the ego itself—and
also the conflicting relations between the ego
and its ego-ideal.

[700a]
The Ego and the Id
Introduction
In my essay. Beyond the Pleasure Principle,
published in 1920, I began the discussion of a
train of thought, my personal attitude towards
which, as I mentioned there, might be described
as a sort of benevolent curiosity; in the follow
ing pages this train of thought is developed
further.
I
have
taken up
those
ideas
and
brought them
into connection with various
facts observed in psycho-analysis and
have
endeavoured to draw fresh conclusions from
the combination; in the present work, however,
no further contributions are levied from
bi
ology, and it consequently stands in a closer
relation to psycho-analysis than does Beyond
the Pleasure Principle. The thoughts contained
in it are synthetic rather than speculative in
character and their aim appears to be an am
bitious one. I am aware, however, that they do
not go beyond the baldest outlines and I am
perfectly content to recognize their limitations
in this respect.
At the same time, the
train of thought
touches upon things not hitherto dealt with in
the work psycho-analysis has done, and it can
not avoid concerning itself with a number of
theories propounded by non-analysts or by
former analysts on their retreat from analysis.
I am, as a rule, always ready to acknowledge
my debts to other workers, but on this occasion
I feel myself under no such obligation. If there
are certain things to which hitherto psycho
analysis has not given adequate consideration,
that is
not because it has overlooked their
effects or wished to deny their significance, but
because it pursues a particular path which had
not yet carried it so far. And, moreover, now
that these things have at last been overtaken,
they appear to psycho-analysis in a different
shape from that in which they appear to the
other people.
I. Consciousness and the Unconscious
In this preliminary chapter there is nothing
new to be said and it will not be possible to
avoid repeating what has often been said before.
The division of mental Hfe into what is con
scious and what is unconscious is the funda
mental premise on which psycho-analysis is
based; and this division alone makes it possible
697

[700b]
for it to understand pathological mental proc
esses, which are as common as they are important, and to co-ordinate them scientifically.
Stated once more in a different way: psycho
analysis cannot accept the view that conscious
ness is the essence of mental life, but is obliged
to regard consciousness as one property of
mental life, which may co-exist along with its
other properties or may be absent.
If I were to allow myself to suppose that
every one interested in psychology would read
this book, I should still be prepared to find
that some of them would stop short even at
this point and go no further; for here we have
the
first
shibboleth
of
psycho-analysis.
To
most
people who have had
a philosophical
education, the idea of anything mental which
is not also conscious is so inconceivable that it
seems to them absurd and refutable simply by
logic. I believe this is only because they have
never studied the mental phenomena of hyp
nosis
and dreams, which—quite apart from
pathological
manifestations—necessitate
this
conclusion. Thus, their psychology of conscious
ness is incapable of solving the problems of
dreams and hypnosis.
The term conscious is, to start with, a purely
descriptive one, resting on a perception of the
most direct and certain character. Experience
shows, next, that a mental element (for in
stance, an idea) is not as a rule permanently
conscious. On the contrary, a state of
con
sciousness is characteristically very transitory;
an idea that is conscious now is no longer so a
moment later, although it can become so again
under certain conditions that are easily brought
about. What the idea was in the interval we
do not know. We can say that it was latent,
and by this we mean that it was capable of
becoming conscious at any time. Or, if we say
that it
was unconscious, we are giving
an
equally correct description. Thus, unconscious
in this sense of the word coincides with latent
and capable of becoming conscious. The phi
losophers would no doubt object: "No, the term
unconscious does not apply here; so long as
the idea was in a state of latency, it was not
a mental element at all." To contradict them
at this point would lead to nothing more profit
able than a war of words.

[701a]
698
Sigmund Freud
But we have arrived at the term or concept
of unconscious along another path, by taking
account of certain experiences in which mental
dynamics play a part. We have found, that is,
we have been obliged to assume, that very
powerful mental processes or ideas exist—here
a quantitative or economic factor comes into
question for the-first time—which can produce
in the mind all the effects that ordinary ideas
do (including effects that can in their turn be
come conscious as ideas) without themselves
becoming conscious. It is unnecessary here to re
peat in detail what has been explained so often
before. We need only say that this is the point
at which psycho-analytic theory steps in—with
the assertion that such ideas cannot become
conscious because a certain force is opposed to
them, that, otherwise, they could become con
scious, and that then one would see how little
they differ from other elements which are
admittedly mental. The fact that in the tech
nique of psycho-analysis a means has been
found by which the opposing force can be re
moved and the ideas in question made conscious
renders this theory irrefutable. The state in
which the ideas existed before being made con
scious is called by us repression, and we assert
that the force which instituted the repression
and maintains it is perceived as resistance dur
ing the work of analysis.
We obtain our concept of the unconscious,
therefore, from the theory of repression. The
repressed serves us as a prototype, of the un
conscious. We see, however, that we have two
kinds of unconscious—that which is latent but
capable of becoming conscious, and that which
is repressed and not capable of becoming con
scious in the ordinary way. This piece of insight
into mental dynamics cannot fail
to
affect
terminology and description. That which is
latent, and only unconscious in the descriptive
and not in the dynamic sense, we call precon
scious; the term unconscious we reserve for
the dynamically unconscious repressed, so that
we now have three terms,
conscious
(Cs),
preconscious (Pes), and unconscious
(Ucs),
which are no longer purely descriptive in sense.
The Pes is presumably a great deal closer to the
Cs than is the Ucs, and since we have called
the Ucs mental we shall with even less hesita
tion call the latent Pes-mental. But why do we
not choose, instead of this, to remain in agree
ment with the philosophers and, in a consistent
way, to distinguish the Pes as well as the Ucs
from what is conscious in the mind? The phi
losophers would propose that both the Pes and

[701b]
the Ucs should be described as two varieties or
levels
of psychoid, and
harmony would be
established. But endless difficulties in exposition
would follow; and the one important fact, that
the two kinds of psychoid, as thus defined,
coincide in almost every other respect with
what is admittedly mental, would be forced
into the background in the interests of a prej
udice dating from a period in which they, or
the most important part of them, were still
unknown.
We can now set to work comfortably with
our three terms, Cs, Pes, and Ucs, so long as
we do not forget that, while in the descriptive
sense there are two kinds of unconscious, in
the dynamic sense there is only one. For pur
poses of exposition this distinction can in many
cases be ignored, but in others it is, of course,
indispensable. At the same time, we have be
come more or less accustomed to these two
meanings of the term unconscious and have
managed pretty well with them. As far as I can
see, it is impossible to avoid this ambiguity;
the distinction, between conscious and uncon
scious is in. the last resort a question of a
perception which must be either affirmed or
denied, and the act of perception itself tells
us nothing of the reason why a thing is or is
not perceived. No one has a right to complain
because the actual phenomenon expresses the
underlying dynamic factors ambiguously.1
1This may be compared with my "Note on the Un
conscious in Psycho-Analysis"- (1912 ), Collected Pa
pers, rv.
A
new
turn
taken by criticisms of
the
unconscious deserves consideration at this point. Many
investigators, who do not refuse to recognize the facts
of psycho-analysis but who are unwilling to accept the
unconscious, find a way out of the difficulty in the
fact, which no one contests, that in consciousness
(regarded as a phenomenon)
it is possible to dis
tinguish a great variety of gradations in intensity or
clarity. Just as there are ideas which are very vividly,
keenly, and definitely conscious, so we also entertain
others which are but faintly, hardly even noticeably
conscious; those that are most faintly conscious are, it
is argued, the ones to which psycho-analysis wishes
to
apply
the
unsuitable name
unconscious. These,
however (the argument proceeds), are also conscious
or in consciousness just as much as the others, and can
be made
fully and
intensely conscious if
sufficient
attention is paid to them.
In so far as it is possible to influence by arguments
the decision of a question of this kind which is based
either on a convention or on emotional factors, we may
make the
following comments. The reference to gra
dations of clarity in consciousness is in no way con
clusive and has no more evidential
value than such
analogous statements as: "There are so many grada
tions in
illumination—from the brightest and most
dazzling light to the dimmest glimmer—that we may
conclude that there is no
such thing as darkness at
all", or, "There are varying degrees of vitality, con
sequently
there
is
no
such
thing
as
death."
Such
statements may, in a certain sense, have a meaning,
but for practical purposes they are worthless. This will
be
seen if one proceeds to
draw certain conclusions

[702a]
In
the further
course of. psycho-analytic
work, however, even these
distinctions have
proved to
be inadequate and,
for
practical
purposes, insufficient. This has become clear
in more ways than one; but the decisive in
stance is as follows. We have formulated the
idea that in every individual there is a coherent
organization of mental processes, which we call
his ego. This ego includes consciousness, and
it controls the approaches to motility, i.e., to
the discharge of excitations into the external
world; it is this institution in the mind which
regulates all its own constituent processes, and
which goes to sleep at night, though even then
it continues
to
exercise a
censorship upon
dreams. From this ego proceed the repressions,
too, by means of which an attempt is made to
cut off certain trends in the mind not merely
from consciousness but also from their other
forms of manifestation and activity. In analysis
these trends which have been shut out stand in
opposition to the ego and the analysis is faced
with the task of removing the resistances which
the ego displays against concerning itself with
the repressed. Now we find that, during analy
sis, when we put certain tasks before the pa
tient, he gets into difficulties; his associations
fail when they ought to be getting near the
repressed. We then tell him that he is domi
nated by a resistance; but he is quite unaware
of the fact, and, even if he guesses from his
feelings of discomfort that a resistance is now
at work in him, he does not know what it is
nor how to describe it. Since, however, there
can be no question but that this resistance
emanates from his ego and belongs to it, we
find ourselves in an unforeseen situation. We
from them, such as, "it is not necessary, therefore, to
strike a light," or, "therefore, all living things are
immortal."
Further, to
include what is unnoticeable
under the concept of what is conscious is simply to
play havoc with the one and only piece of direct and
certain knowledge that we have about the mind. And
after all, a consciousness of which one knows nothing
seems to me a good deal more absurd than an uncon
scious mind. Finally, this attempt to equate what is
unnoticed with what is unconscious is obviously made
without taking into account the dynamic conditions
involved, which were the decisive factors in formulating
the
psycho-analytic view. For it ignores two
facts:
first, that it is exceedingly difficult and requires very
great effort to concentrate enough attention on some
thing unnoticed of this kind; and secondly, that when
this has been achieved, the thought which was pre
viously unnoticed is not recognized by consciousness,
but often seems utterly alien and opposed to it and is
promptly disavowed by it. Escaping from the uncon
scious
in
this way and
taking
refuge
in
what
is
scarcely noticed or unnoticed is,
therefore, after all,
only an expression of the preconceived belief which
regards the identity of mental and conscious as settled
once and for all.

[702b]
The Ego and the Id
699
have come upon something in the ego itself
which is also unconscious, which behaves ex
actly like the repressed, that is, which produces
powerful effects without itself being conscious
and which requires special work before it can
be made conscious. From the point of view of
analytic practice, the consequence of this piece
of observation is that we land in endless con
fusion and difficulty if we cling to our former
way of expressing ourselves and try, for in
stance, to derive neuroses from a conflict be
tween the conscious and the unconscious. We
shall
have
to
substitute
for
this .antithesis
another, taken from our understanding of the
structural conditions of the mind, namely, the
antithesis between the organized ego and what
is repressed and dissociated from it.1
For our conception of the unconscious, how
ever, the consequences of our new observation
are even more important. Dynamic consider
ations caused us to make our first correction;
our knowledge of the structure of the mind
leads to the second. We recognize that the Ucs
does not coincide with what is repressed; it is
still true that all that is repressed is Ucs, but
not that the whole Ucs is repressed. A part of
the ego, too—and Heaven knows how important
a part—may be Ucs, undoubtedly is Ucs. And
this Ucs belonging to the ego is not latent like
the Pes; for if it were, it could not be activated
without becoming Cs, and the process of mak
ing it conscious would not encounter such great
difficulties. When we find ourselves thus con
fronted by the necessity of postulating a third
Ucs which is not repressed, we must admit
that the property of being..unconscious..begins
to lose significance for us. It becomes a quality
which can have many implications, so that we
are unable to make it, as we should have hoped
to do, the basis of far-reaching and inevitable
conclusions. Nevertheless, we must beware of
ignoring this property, for, in the last resort,
the quality of being conscious or not is the
single ray of light that penetrates the obscurity
of depth-psychology.
II. The Ego and the Id
Pathological
research has
centred our in
terest too exclusively on the
repressed. We
wish to know more about the ego, now that
we know that it, too, can be unconscious in the
proper sense of the word. Hitherto, the only
guide we have had while pursuing our investi
gations has been the distinguishing mark of
* See Beyond the Pleasure Principle, p. 639.above.

[703a]
700
Sigmund Freud
being conscious or unconscious; and in the end
we have come to see that this quality itself is
ambiguous.
Now, all our knowledge is invariably bound
up with consciousness. Even knowledge of the
Ucs can only be obtained by making it con
scious. But stop, how is that possible? What
does it mean when we say "making it con
scious"? How can that come about?
We already know the point from which we
have to start in this connection. We have said
that consciousness is the superficies of
the
mental apparatus; that is, we have allocated it
as a function to the system which is situated
nearest to the external world. Incidentally, on
this
occasion the
topographical
terminology
does not merely serve to describe the nature of
the function, but actually corresponds to the
anatomical facts.1 Our investigations too must
take this surface organ
of perception as a
starting-point.
All perceptions which are received from with
out
(sense-perceptions)
and
from
within—
what we call sensations and feelings—are Cs
from the start. But how is it with those internal
processes which we may—vaguely and inex
actly—sum up
under the name of thoughtprocesses} They represent displacements of
mental energy which are effected somewhere
in the interior of the apparatus as this energy
proceeds on its way towards action. Do they
advance towards the superficies, which then
allows of the development of consciousness?
Or does consciousness make its way towards
them? This is clearly one of the difficulties
that spring up when one begins to take the
spatial or topographical conception of mental
life
seriously.
Both
these
possibilities
are
equally unimaginable; there must be a third
contingency to meet the case.
I have already, in another place,2 suggested
that the real difference between a Ucs and a Pes
idea (thought) consists in this: that the former
is worked out upon some sort of material which
remains unrecognized, whereas the latter (the
Pes) has in addition been brought into con
nection with verbal images. This is the first
attempt to find a distinguishing mark for the
two systems, the Pes and the Ucs, other than
their relation to consciousness. It would seem,
then, that the question, "How does a thing
become conscious?" could be put more ad
vantageously thus: "How does a thing become
preconscious?" And the answer would be: "By
1 Beyond the Pleasure Principle, p. 639 above.
2 The Unconscious, p. 428 above.

[703b]
coming into connection with the verbal images
that correspond to it."
These verbal images are memory-residues;
they were at one time perceptions, and like all
memory-residues they can become conscious
again. Before we concern ourselves further with
their nature, it dawns upon us like a new dis
covery that only something which has once
been a Cs perception can become conscious,
and that anything arising from within (apart
from feelings) that seeks to become conscious
must try to transform itself into external per
ceptions: this can be done by way of memorytraces.
We conceive of memory-residues as contained
in systems which are directly adjacent to the
system Pcpt-Cs, so that the cathexes pertaining
to the memory-residues can readily extend out
ward on to the elements of the latter system.
We are immediately reminded of hallucinations
here, and of the fact that the most vivid mem
ory is always distinguishable both from a hallu
cination and from an external perception; but
it will also occur to us that when a memory is
revived the cathexisin the memory-system will
remain in force, whereas a hallucination which
is not distinguishable from a perception can
arise when the cathexis does not merely extend
over from the memory-trace to the Pcptelement, but passes over to it entirely.
j
Verbal residues are derived primarily from
auditory perceptions, so that the system Pes
has, as it were, a special sensory source. The
visual components of verbal images are second
ary, acquired through reading, and may, to
begin with, be left on one side; so may the
sensory-motor images of words, which, except
with deaf-mutes, play an auxiliary part. The
essence of a word is, after all, the memorytrace of a word that has been heard.
We must not be led away, in the interests of
simplification perhaps, into forgetting the im
portance of optical memory-residues—those of
things (as opposed to words)—or to deny that
it is possible for thought-processes to become
conscious through a reversion to visual residues,
and that in many people this seems to be a
favourite method. The study of dreams and
of preconscious phantasies
on the
lines
of
J. Varendonck's observations gives us an idea
of the special character of this visual thinking.
We learn that what becomes conscious is, as a
rule, only the concrete subject-matter of the
thought, and that the relations between the
various elements of this subject-matter, which
is what specially characterizes thought, cannot

[704a]
The Ego
be given visual expression. Thinking in pictures
is, therefore, only a very incomplete form of
becoming conscious. In some way, too, it ap
proximates more closely to unconscious proc
esses than does thinking in words, and it is
unquestionably older than the latter both ontogenetically and phylogenetically.
To
return to our argument: if, therefore,
this is the way in which something that is in
itself unconscious becomes preconscious, the
question how something that is repressed can
be made (pre)conscious would be answered as
follows. It is done by supplying through the
work of the analysis Pes connecting-links of
the kind we have been discussing. Consciousness
remains where it is, therefore; but, on the other
hand, the Ucs does not rise up into the Cs.
Whereas the relation between external per
ceptions and the ego is quite perspicuous, that
between internal perceptions and the ego re
quires special investigation. It gives rise once
more to a doubt whether we are really justified
in referring the whole of consciousness to the
single superficial system Pcpt-Cs.
Internal perceptions yield sensations of proc
esses arising in the most diverse and certainly
also in the deepest strata of the mental appara
tus. Very little is known about these sensations
and feelings; the best examples we have of
them are still those belonging to the pleasurepain series. They are more fundamental, more
elementary, than perceptions arising externally,
and they can come into being even when con
sciousness
is
clouded.
I
have
elsewhere ex
pressed my views about their great economic
significance and its metapsychological founda
tion. These sensations are multi-locular, like
external perceptions;
they may come
from
different places simultaneously and may thus
have different or even opposite qualities.
Sensations of a pleasurable nature are not
characterized by any inherently impelling qual
ity, whereas "painful" ones possess this quality
in a high degree. The latter impel towards
change, towards discharge, and that is why we
interpret "pain" as implying a heightening and
pleasure a lowering of energic cathexis. Suppose
we
describe what becomes conscious in the
shape of pleasure and "pain" as an undeter
mined quantitative and qualitative element in
the mind; the question then is whether that
element can become conscious where it actually
is, or whether it must first be transmitted into
the system Pcpt.
Clinical experience decides for the latter. It
shows us that this undetermined element be-

[704b]
and the Id
701
haves Hke a repressed impulse. It can exert
driving force without the ego noticing the com
pulsion. Not until there is resistance to the
compulsion, and blocking of the
dischargereaction, does the undetermined element in
stantly become conscious as "pain." In the
same way that tensions arising from physical
need can remain unconscious, so also can phys
ical pain—a thing intermediate between ex
ternal and internal perception, which acts like
an internal perception even when its source is
in the external world. It remains true again,
therefore, that sensations and feelings only be
come conscious through reaching the system
Pcpt; if the way forward is barred, they do not
come into being as sensations, although the
undetermined element corresponding to them
is the same as if they did. We then come to
speak, in a condensed and not entirely correct
manner, of unconscious feelings, keeping up an
analogy with unconscious ideas which is not
altogether justifiable. Actually the difference
is that, whereas with Ucs ideas connecting-links
must be forged before they can be brought
into the Cs, with feelings, which are themselves
transmitted directly, there is no necessity for
this. In other words: the distinction between
Cs and Pes has no meaning where feelings are
concerned; the Pes here falls out of account,
and feelings are either conscious or unconscious.
Even when
they are connected with verbal
images, their becoming conscious is not due to
that circumstance, but they become so directly.
The part played by verbal images now be
comes perfectly clear. By their interposition,
internal thought-processes are made into per
ceptions. It is like a demonstration of
the
theorem that all knowledge has its origin in
external perception. It may sometimes happen
that a hyper-cathexis of the process of thinking
takes place, in which case thoughts are per
ceived in the literal sense of the word—as if
they came from without—and are consequently
held to be true.
After this clarifying of the relations between
external and internal perception and the super
ficial system Pcpt-Cs, we can go on to work
out our conception of the ego. It clearly starts
out from its nucleus, the system Pcpt, and be
gins by embracing the Pes, which is adjacent
to the memory-residues. But the ego, as we
have learnt, is also unconscious.
Now I think we shall gain a great deal by
following the suggestion of a writer who, from
personal motives, vainly insists that he has
nothing to do with the rigours of pure science.

[705a]
702
Sigmund Freud
I am speaking of Georg Groddeck,
who is
never tired of pointing out that the conduct
through life of what we call our ego is essen
tially passive, and that, as he expresses it, we
are "lived" by unknown and uncontrollable
forces.1 We have all had impressions of the
same kind, even though they may not have
overwhelmed us to the exclusion of all others,
and we need feel no hesitation in finding a
place for Groddeck's discovery in the fabric
of science. I propose to take it into account by
calling the entity which starts out from the
system Pcpt and begins by being Pes the ego,
and by following Groddeck in giving to the
other part of the mind, into which this entity
extends and which behaves as though it were
Ucs, the name of Id (Es).2
We shall soon see whether this conception
affords us any gain in understanding or any
advantage for purposes of description. We shall
now look upon the mind of an individual as
an unknown and unconscious id, upon whose
surface rests the ego, developed from its nu
cleus the Pcpt-system. If we make an effort to
conceive of this pictorially, we may add that
the ego does not envelop the whole of the id,
but only does so to the extent to which the
system Pcpt forms its surface, more or less as
the germinal layer rests upon the ovum. The
ego is not sharply separated from the id; its
lower portion merges into it.
But the repressed merges into the id as well,
and is simply a part of it. The repressed is only
cut off sharply from the ego by the resistances
Pcpt-Cs
Fig. i.
of repression; it can communicate with the ego
through the id. We at once realize that almost
all the delimitations we have been led into out1G. Groddeck, Das Buch vom Es, Vienna, 1923.
2 Groddeck himself no doubt followed the example
of Nietzsche, who habitually used this
grammatical
term for whatever in our nature is impersonal and, so
to speak, subject to natural law.

[705b]
lining by our study of pathology relate only
to the superficiallevels of the mental apparatus
—the only ones known to us. The state of
things which we have been describing can be
represented diagrammatically (Fig. 1); though
it must be remarked that the form chosen has
no pretensions to any special applicability, but
is merely intended to serve for purposes of ex
position. We might add, perhaps, that the ego
wears an auditory lobe—on one side only, as
we learn from cerebral anatomy. It wears it
crooked, as one might say.
It is easy to see that the ego is that part of
the id which has been modified by the direct
influence of the external world acting through
the Pcpt-Cs: in a sense it is an extension of
the surface-differentiation. Moreover, the ego
has the task of bringing the influence of the
external world to bear upon the id and its tend
encies, and endeavours to substitute the realityprinciple for the pleasure-principle which reigns
supreme in the id. In the ego, perception plays
the part which in the id devolves upon instinct.
The ego represents what we call reason and
sanity, in contrast to the id which contains the
passions. All this falls into line with popular
distinctions which we are all familiar with; at
the same time, however, it is only to be re
garded as holding good in an average or "ideal"
case.
j
The functional importance of the
ego is
manifested in the fact that normally control
over the approaches to motility devolves upon
it. Thus in its relation to the id it is like a man
on horseback, who has to hold in check the
superior strength of the horse; with this dif
ference, that the rider seeks
to do so with
his own strength while the ego uses borrowed
forces. The illustration may be carried further.
Often a rider, if he is not to be parted from
his horse, is Obliged to guide it where it wants
to go; so in the same way the ego constantly
carries into action the wishes of the id as if
they were its own.
It seems that another factor, besides the in
fluence of the system Pcpt, has been at work
in bringing about the formation of the ego and
its differentiation from the id. The body itself,
and above all its surface, is a place from which
both external and internal perceptions may
spring. It is seen in the same way as any other
object, but to the touch it yields two kinds of
sensations, one of which is equivalent to an in
ternal perception. Psychophysiology has fully
discussed the manner in which the body attains
its special position among other objects in the

[706a]
The Ego and the Id
703
world of perception. Pain seems also to play
a part in the process, and the way in which we
gain new knowledge of our organs during pain
ful illnesses is perhaps a prototype of the way
by which in general we arrive at the idea of
our own body.
The ego is first and foremost a body-ego; it
is not merely a surface entity, but it is itself
the projection of a surface.1 If wewish to find
an anatomical analogy for it we can easily iden
tify it with the cortical homunadus of the
anatomists, which stands on its head in the cor
tex, sticksits heels into the air, facesbackwards
and, as we know, has its speech-area on the
left-hand side.
The relation of the ego to consciousness has
been gone into repeatedly; yet there are still
some important facts in this connection which
remain to be described. Accustomed as we are
to taking our social or ethical standard of val
ues along with us wherever we go, we feel no
surprise at hearing that the scene of the ac
tivities of the lower passions is in the uncon
scious; we expect, moreover, that the higher
any mental function ranks in our scale of val
ues, the more easily it will find access to
consciousness assured to
it.
Here, however,
psycho-analytic experience disappoints us. On
the one hand, we have evidence that even sub
tle and intricate intellectual operations which
ordinarily require strenuous concentration can
equally be carriedout preconsciously and with
out coming into consciousness. Instances of
this are quite incontestable; they may occur,
for instance, during sleep, as is shown when
some one finds, immediately after waking, that
he knows the solution of a difficult mathemat
ical or other problem with which he had been
wrestlingin vain the day before.2
There is another phenomenon, however, which
is far stranger. In our analyses we discover
that there are people in whom the faculties of
self-criticism and
conscience—mental activi
ties that is, that rank as exceptionally high
ones—are unconscious and unconsciously pro
duce effects of the greatest importance; the
example of resistances remaining unconscious
during
analysis
is
therefore
by
no
means
unique. But this new discovery, which compels
1I.e., the ego is ultimately derived from bodily
sensations, chiefly from those springing from the sur
face of the body. It may thus be regarded as a mental
projection of the surface of the body, besides, as we
have seen above, representing the superficies of the
mental apparatus.—Authorized note by the Translator.
2I was quite recently told an instance of this which
was, in fact, brought up as an objection against my
description of the "dream-work."

[706b]
us, in spite of our critical faculties, to speak
of an unconscious sense of guilt, bewilders us
far more than the other and sets us fresh prob
lems, especially when we gradually come to
see that, in a great number of neuroses, this
unconscious sense of
guilt plays a decisive
economic part and puts the most powerful ob
stacles in the way of recovery. If we come back
once more to our scale of values, we shall have
to say that not only what is lowest but also
what is highest in the ego can be unconscious.
It is as if we were thus supplied with a proof
of what we have just asserted of the conscious
ego: that it is first and foremost a body-ego.
III. The Ego and the Super-Ego
(Ego-Ideal)
If the ego were merely the part of the id that
is modified by the influence of the perceptual
system, the representative in the mind of the
real external world, we should have a simple
state of things to deal with. But there is a
further complication.
The considerations that led us to assume the
existence of a differentiating grade within the
ego, which may be called the ego-ideal or super
ego, have been set forth elsewhere.8 They still
hold good.4 The new proposition which must
now be gone into is that this part of the ego
is less closely
connected with consciousness
than the rest.
At this point, we must widen our range a lit
tle. We succeeded in explaining the painful dis
order of melancholia by supposing that, in
those suffering from it, an object which was
lost has been reinstated within the ego; that is,
that an object-cathexis has been replaced by
an identification.5 When this explanation was
first proposed, however, we did not appreciate
the full significance of the process and did not
know how common and how typical it is. Since
then we have come to understand that this
kind of substitution has a great share in de
termining the form taken on by the ego and
that it contributes materially towards building
up what is called its character.
sOn Narcissism:
an Introduction [p. 399 abovel;
and Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego
[p. 664 above].
* Except that I
seem
to have been
mistaken in
ascribing the function of testing the reality of things
to
this super-ego—a
point
which needs
correction.
The view that the testing of reality is rather one of
the
functions of the ego itself would fit in perfectly
with what we know of the relations of the ego to the
world of perception. Some earlier suggestions about a
"nucleus of the ego," never very definitely formulated,
also require to be put right, since the system Pcpt-Cs
alone can be regarded as the nucleus of the ego.
5"Mourning and Melancholia," (1917), Collected
Papers, rv.

[707a]
704
Sigmund Freud
At the very beginning, in the primitive oral
phase
of
the individual's
existence,
objectcathexis and identification are hardly to be
distinguished from each other. We can only
suppose that, later on, object-cathexes proceed
from the id, in which erotic trends are felt as
needs. The ego, which at its inception is still
far from robust, becomes aware of the objectcathexes, and either acquiesces in them or tries
to defend itself against them by the process
of repression.1
When it happens that a person has to give
up a sexual object, there quite often ensues a
modification in his ego which can only be de
scribed as a reinstatement of the object within
the ego, as it occurs in melancholia; the exact
nature of this substitution is as yet unknown
to us. It may be that, by undertaking this intro
jection, which is a kind of regression to the
mechanism of the oral phase, the ego makes it
easier for an object to be given up or renders
that process possible. It may even be that this
identification is the sole condition under which
the id can give up its objects. At any rate the
process, especially in the early phases of devel
opment, is a very frequent one, and it points
to the conclusion that the character of the ego
is a precipitate of abandoned object-cathexes
and that it contains a record of past objectchoices. It must, of course, be admitted from
the outset that there are varying degrees of
capacity for resistance, as shown by the extent
to which the character of any particular person
accepts or resists the influences of the erotic
object-choices through which he has lived. In
women who have had many love-affairs there
seems to be no difficulty in finding vestiges of
their object-cathexes in the traits of their char
acter. We must also take into consideration the
case of simultaneous object-cathexis and iden
tification, i.e., in which the alteration in char
acter occurs before the object has been given
up. In such a case, the alteration in character
would be able to survive the object-relation
and, in a certain sense, to conserve it.
From another point of view it may be said
that this transformation of an erotic object-
*An
interesting
parallel to
the
replacement of
object-choice by identification is to be found
in the
belief of primitive peoples, and in the taboos based
upon it,
that the
attributes of
animals
which
are
assimilated as nourishment survive as part
of
the
character of the persons who
eat them. As is
well
known, this belief is one of the roots of cannibalism,
and its effects can be traced throughout the series of
customs derived
from
the
totem
feast
down
to the
Holy Communion. The consequences ascribed by this
belief to oral mastery of the object do, in fact, follow
in the case of the later sexual object-choice.

[707b]
choice into a modification of the ego is also a
method by which the ego can obtain control
over the id and deepen its relations with it—
at the cost, it is true, of acquiescing to a large
extent in the id's experiences. When the ego
assumes the features of the object, it forces
itself, so to speak, upon the id as a love-object
and tries to make good the loss of that object
by saying, "Look, I am so like the object, you
can as well love me."
The transformation of object-libido into nar
cissisticlibido which thus takes place obviously
impliesan abandonment of sexualaims, a proc
ess of desexualization; it is consequently a kind
of sublimation.Indeed, the question arises, and
deserves careful consideration, whether this is
not always the path taken in sublimation,
whether all sublimation does not take place
through the agencyof the ego, whichbegins by
changing sexual object-libido into narcissistic
libido and then, perhaps, goes on to give it
another aim.2 We shall later on have to con
sider
whether
other
instinctual
vicissitudes
may not also result from this transformation,
whether, for instance, it may not bring about
a
defusion
of
the
instincts that are
fused
together.
Although it is a digression from our theme, we
cannot avoid giving our attention for a moment
longer to the ego's object-identifications. If
they obtain the upper hand and become too
numerous, unduly intense and incompatible
with one another, a pathological outcome will
not be far off. It may come to a disruption of
the ego in consequence of the individual identi
fications becoming cut off from oneanother by
resistances; perhaps the secret of the cases of
so-called multiple personality is that the vari
ous identifications seize possession of con
sciousness in turn. Even whenthings do not go
so far as this, there remains the question of
conflicts
between the different identifications
into which the ego is split up, conflicts which
cannot after all be described as purely patho
logical.
But, whatever.the character's capacity for
resisting the influences of abandoned objectcathexes may turn out to be in after years, the
effects of the first identifications in earliest
childhood will be profound and lasting. This
leads us backto the origin of the ego-ideal; for
2Now that we have distinguished between the ego
and the id, we must recognize the id as the great reser
voir of libido mentioned in my introductory paper
On Narcissism
^p. 399 above). The
libido which
flows into the ego owing to the identifications described
above brings about its "secondary narcissism."

[708a]
behind the latter there lies hidden the first and
most important identification of all, the identi
fication with the father,1 which takes place in
the prehistory of every person. This is appar
ently not in the first instance the consequence
or outcome of an object-cathexis; it is a direct
and immediate identification and takes place
earlier than any object-cathexis. But the ob
ject-choices belonging to the earliest sexual
period and relating to the father and mother
seem normally to find their outcome in an
identification
of
the
kind
discussed,
which
would thus reinforce the primary one.
The whole subject, however, is so compli
cated that is will be necessary to go into it
more minutely. The intricacy of the problem
is due to two factors: the triangular character
of the Oedipus situation, and the constitutional
bisexuality of each individual.
In its simplified form, the case of the male
child may be described as follows. At a very
early age the little boy develops an objectcathexis of his mother, which originally related
to the mother's breast and is the earliest in
stance of an
object-choice on the anaclitic
model; his father the boy deals with by identi
fying himself with him. For a time these two
relationships exist side by side, until the sexual
wishes in regard to the mother become more
intense and the father is perceived as an obsta
cle to them; this gives rise to the
Oedipus
complex.2 The identification with the father
then takes on a hostile colouring and changes
into a wish to get rid of the father in order
to take his place with the mother. Hencefor
ward the relation to the father is ambivalent;
it seems as if the ambivalence inherent in the
identification from the beginning had become
manifest. An ambivalent attitude to the father
and an object-relation of a purely affectionate
kind to the mother make up the content of the
simple positive Oedipus complex in the boy.
Along with the dissolution of the Oedipus
complex, the object-cathexis of
the mother
must be given up. Its place may be filled by
one of two things: either an identification with
1 Perhaps
it
would
be
safer
to
say "with
the
parents";
for before a child has arrived at definite
knowledge of the
difference
between the
sexes,
the
missing penis, it does not distinguish in value between
its father and its mother. I recently came across the
instance of a young married woman whose story showed
that, after noticing the lack of a penis in herself, she
had supposed it to be absent not in all women, but
only in those whom she regarded as inferior, and had
still supposed that her mother possessed one.
In order to simplify my presentment, I shall discuss
only identification with the father.
2Cf. Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego,
chap. VII [p. 678 above].

[708b]
The Ego and the Id
70S
the mother or an intensified identification with
the father. We are accustomed to regard the
latter outcome as the more normal; it permits
the affectionate relation to the mother to be
in a measure retained. In this way the passing
of the Oedipus complex would consolidate the
masculinity in the boy's character. In a pre
cisely analogous
way,
the
outcome
of
the
Oedipus attitude in the Httle girl may be an
intensification of the identification with her
mother (or such an identification may thus be
set up for the first time)—a result which will
stamp the child's character in the feminine
mould.
These identifications are not what our previ
ous statements would have led us to expect,
since they do not involve the absorption of the
abandoned object into the ego: But this alter
native outcome may also occur; it is more
readily observed in girls than in boys. Analysis
very often shows that a little girl, after she
has
had to relinquish her father as a loveobject, will bring her masculinity into promi
nence and identify herself with her father, that
is, with the object which has been lost, instead
of with her mother. This will clearly depend
on whether the masculinity in her disposition
—whatever that may consist
of—is
strong
enough.
It would appear, therefore, that in both sexes
the relative strength of the masculine and fem
inine sexual dispositions is what determines
whether the outcome of the Oedipus situation
shall be an identification with the father or
with the mother. This is one of the ways in
which bisexuality takes a hand in the subse
quent vicissitudes of the Oedipus complex. The
other way is even more important. For one
gets the impression that the simple Oedipus
complex is by no means its commonest form,
but rather represents a simplification or schematization which, to be sure, is often enough
adequate for practical purposes. Closer study
usually discloses the more complete Oedipus
complex, which is twofold, positive and nega
tive, and is due to the bisexuality originally
present in children: that is to say, a boy has
not merely an ambivalent attitude towards his
father and an affectionate object-relation to
wards his mother, but at the same time he also
behaves like a girl and displays an affectionate
feminine attitude to his father and a
corre
sponding
hostility and jealousy towards his
mother. It is this complicating element intro
duced by bisexuality that makes it so difficult
to obtain a clear view of the facts in connection

[709a]
706
Sigmund Freud
with the earliest object-choices and identifica
tions, and still more difficult to describe them
intelligibly. It may even be that the ambivalence
displayed in the relations to the parents should
be attributed entirely to bisexuality and that
it is not, as I stated just now, developed out
of an identification in consequence of rivalry.
In my opinion, it is advisable in general, and
quite especially where neurotics are concerned,
to assume the existence of the complete Oedipus
complex. Analytic experience then shows that
in a number of cases one or the other of its
constituents disappears, except for barely dis
tinguishable traces, so that a series can be
formed with the normal positive Oedipus com
plex at one end and the inverted negative one
at the other, while its intermediate members
will exhibit the complete type with one
or
other of its two constituents preponderating.
As the Oedipus complex dissolves, the four
trends of which it consists will group them
selves in such a way as to produce a fatheridentification and a mother-identification. The
father-identification will preserve the objectrelation to the mother which belonged to the
positive complex and will at the same time take
the place of the object-relation to the father
which belonged to the inverted complex: and
the same will be true mutatis mutandis,1 of
the mother-identification. The relative intensity
of the two identifications in any individual will
reflect the preponderance in him of one or
other of the two sexual dispositions.
The
broad general outcome of
the sexual
phase governed by the Oedipus complex may,
therefore, be taken to be the forming of a
precipitate in the ego, consisting of these two
identifications in some way combined together.
This modification of the ego retains its special
position; it stands in contrast to the other
constituents of the ego in the form of an egoideal or super-ego.
The super-ego is, however, not merely a
deposit left by the earliest object-choices of the
id; it also represents an energetic reactionformation against those choices. Its relation to
the ego is not exhausted by the precept: "You
ought to be such and such (like your father)";
it also comprises the prohibition: "You must
not be such and such (like your father); that
is, you may not do all that he does; many
things are his prerogative." This double aspect
of the ego-ideal derives from the fact that the
ego-ideal had the task of effecting the repres
sion of the Oedipus complex, indeed, it is to
1 The necessary changes being made —Ed.

[709b]
that revolutionary event that it owes its exist
ence. Clearly the repression of the Oedipus
complex was no easy task. The parents, and
especially the father, were perceived as the
obstacle to realization of the Oedipus wishes;
so the child's ego brought in a reinforcement
to
help in
carrying out
the
repression
by
erecting this same obstacle within itself. The
strength to do this was, so to speak, borrowed
from the father, and this loan was an extraor
dinarily momentous act.
The super-ego re
tains the character of the father, while the
more intense the Oedipus complex was and the
more rapidly it succumbed to repression (under
the influence of discipline, religious teaching,
schooling and reading), the more exacting later
on is the domination of the super-ego over the
ego—in the form of conscience or perhaps of
an unconscious sense of guilt. I shall later on
bring forward a suggestion about the source
of the power it employs to dominate in this
way, the source, that is, of its compulsive char
acter which manifests itself in the form of a
categorical imperative.
If we consider once more the origin of the
super-ego as we have described it, we shall
perceive it to be the outcome of two highly
important factors, one of them biological and
the other historical: namely, the lengthy dura
tion in man of the helplessness and dependence
belonging to childhood, and the fact of his
Oedipus complex, the repression of which we
have shown to be connected with the interrup
tion of libidinal development by the latency
periodand sowith the twofoldonset of activity
characteristic of man's sexual life.2 According
to the view of one psycho-analyst, the lastmentioned phenomenon, which seems to be
peculiar to man, is a heritage of the cultural
development necessitated by the glacial epoch.
We see, then, that the differentiation of the
super-ego from the egois no matter of chance;
it stands as the representative of the most
important events in the development both of
the individual and of the race; indeed, by giv
ing permanent expression to the influence of
the parents, it perpetuates the existence of the
factors to which it owes its origin.
Psycho-analysis has been reproached time
after time with ignoring the higher, moral,
spiritual side of human nature. The reproach
is doubly unjust, both historically and meth
odologically. For, in the first place, we have
2This sentence represents a slight modification of
the original text in accordance with direct instructions
from the author.—Tr.

[710a]
The Ego and the Id
7°7
ideal, even in the sensein whichwe have local
from the very beginning attributed the func-
.tion of instigating repression to the moral and
aesthetic tendencies in the ego; and secondly,
there has been a general refusal to recognize
that psycho-analytic researchcouldnot produce
a complete and finished body of doctrine, like
a philosophical system, ready-made, but had
to find its way step by step along the path
towards understanding the intricacies of the
mind by making an analytic dissection of both
normal and abnormal phenomena. So long as
the study of the repressed part of the mind was
our task, there was no need for us to feel any
agitated apprehensions about the existence of
the higher side of mental life. But now that we
have embarked upon the analysis of the ego,
we can give an answer to all those whose
moral sense has been shocked and who have
complained that there must surely be a higher
nature in man: "Very true," we can say, "and
here we have that higher nature, in this egoideal or super-ego, the representative of our
relation to our parents. When we were little
children we knew these higher natures, we ad
mired them and feared them;
and later we
took them into ourselves."
The ego-ideal, therefore, is the heir of the
Oedipus complex and thus it is also the expres
sion of the most powerful impulses and most
important vicissitudes experienced by the li
bido in the id. By setting up this ego-ideal,
the ego masters its Oedipus complex and at the
same time places itself in subjection to the id.
Whereas the ego is essentially the representa
tive of the external world, of reality, the super
ego stands in contrast to it as the representa
tive of the internal world, of the id. Conflicts
between the ego and the ideal will, as we are
now prepared to find, ultimately reflect the
contrast between what is real and what is men
tal between the external world and the internal
world.
Through the forming of the ideal, all the
traces left behind in the id by biological devel
opments and by the vicissitudes gone through
by the human race are taken over by the ego
and lived through again by it in each individual.
Owing to the way in which it is formed, the
ego-ideal has a great many points of contact
with the phylogenetic endowment of each indi
vidual—his archaic heritage. And thus it is
that what belongs to the lowest depths in the
minds of each one of us is changed, through
this formation of the ideal, into what we value
as the highest in the human soul. It would be
vain, however, to attempt to localize the ego-

[710b]
ized the ego, or to work it into any of those
analogies with the help of which we have tried
to picture the relation between the ego and
the id.
It is easy to show that the ego-ideal answers
in every way to what is expected of the higher
nature of man. In so far as it is a substitute
for the longing for a father, it contains the
germ from which all religions have evolved.
The self-judgment which declares that the ego
falls short of its ideal produces the sense of
worthlessness with which the religious believer
attests his longing. As a child grows up, the
office of father is carried on by masters and by
others in authority; the power of their injunc
tions and prohibitions remains vested in the
ego-ideal and continues, in the form of con
science, to exercise the censorship of morals.
The tension between the demands of conscience
and the actual attainments of the ego is ex
perienced as a sense of guilt. Social feelings
rest on the foundation of identifications with
others, on the basis of an ego-ideal in common
with them.
Religion, morality, and a social sense—the
chief elements of what is highest in man1—
were originally one and the same thing. Ac
cording to the hypothesis which I have put
forward in Totem and Taboo, they were ac
quired phylogenetically out of the father-com
plex: religion and moral restraint by the actual
process of
mastering the
Oedipus
complex.
itself, and social feeling from the necessity for
overcoming the rivalry that then remained
between the members of the younger genera
tion. It seems that the male sex has taken the
lead in developing all of these moral acquisi
tions; and that they have then been trans
mitted to women by cross-inheritance. Even
today the social feelings arise in the individual
as a superstructure founded upon impulses of
jealousy and rivalry against his brothers and
sisters. Since the enmity cannot be gratified,
there develops an identification with the for
mer rival. The study of mild cases of homo
sexuality confirms the suspicion that in this
instance, too, the identification is a substitute
for an affectionate object-choice which has suc
ceeded the hostile, aggressive attitude.3
With the mention of phylogenesis, however,
11 am at the moment putting science and art on
one side.
2 Cf.
Group
Psychology and
the
Analysis of the
Ego [p. 664 above];
and "Certain Neurotic Mecha
nisms
in
Jealousy,
Paranoia,
and
Homosexuality"
(1922), Collected Papers, H.

[711a]
708
Sigmund Freud
fresh problems arise, from which one is tempt
ed to shrink back dismayed. But there is no
help for it, the attempt must be made; in spite
of a fear that it will lay bare the inadequacy
of the whole structure that we have so ardu
ously built up. The question is: which was it,
the ego of primitive man or his id, that ac
quired religion and morality in those early days
out of the father-complex? If it was"his ego,
why do we not speak simply of these things
being inherited by the ego? If it was the id,
how does that agree with the character of the
id? Or are we wrong in carrying the differentia
tion between ego, super-ego, and id back into
such early times? Or should we not honestly
confess that our whole conception of the proc
esses within the ego is of no help in under
standing phylogenesis and cannot be applied
to it?
Let us answer first what is easiest to answer.
The differentiation between ego and id must be
attributed not only to primitive man but even
to much simpler forms of life, for it is the
inevitable expression of the influence of the
external world. The super-ego, according to our
hypothesis, actually originated from the experi
ences
that
led
to
totemism.
The
question
whether it was the ego or the id that experi
enced and acquired these things soon ceases to
have any meaning. Reflection at once shows us
that no external vicissitudes can be experienced
or undergone by the id, except by way of the
vego, which is the representative of the outer
world to the id. Nevertheless it is not possible
to speak of direct inheritance by the ego. It is
here that the gulf between the actual individual
and the conception of the species becomes evi
dent. Moreover, one must not take the differ
ence between ego and id in too hard-and-fast
a sense, nor forget that the ego is a part of the
id which has been specially modified. The ex
periences undergone by the ego seem at first to
be lost to posterity; but, when they have been
repeated often enough and with sufficient in
tensity in the successive individuals of many
generations, they transform themselves, so to
say, into experiences of the id, the impress of
which is preserved by inheritance. Thus in the
id, which is capable of being inherited, are
stored up vestiges of the existences
led by
countless former egos; and, when the ego forms
its super-ego out of the id, it may perhaps only
be reviving images of egos that have passed
away and be securing them a resurrection.
The way in which the super-ego came into
being explains how it is that the earlier con

[711b]
flicts of the ego with the object-cathexes of the
id can be carried on and continued in .conflicts
with their successor, the super-ego. If the ego
has not succeeded in mastering the Oedipus
complex satisfactorily, the energic cathexis of
the latter, springing from the id, will find an
outlet in the reaction-formations of the egoideal. The very free communication possible
between the ideal and these
Ucs instinctual
trends explains how it is that the ideal itself
can be to a great extent unconscious and inac
cessible to the ego. The struggle which once
raged in the deepest strata of the mind, and
was not brought to an end by rapid sublima
tion and identification, is now carried on in a
higher region, like the Battle of the Huns which
in Kaulbach's painting is being fought out in
the sky.
IV. The Two Classes of Instincts
We have already said that, if the differentiation
we have made of the mind into an id, an ego,
and a super-ego represents any advance in our
knowledge, it ought to enable us to understand
more thoroughly the dynamic relations within
the mind and to describe them more clearly.
We have also already reached the conclusion
that the ego is especially affected by percep
tion, and that, speaking broadly, perceptions
may be said to have the same significance for
the ego as instincts have for the id. At the same
time, the ego is subject to the influence of the
instincts, too, like the id, of which it is in
fact only a specially modified part.
I have lately developed a view of the in
stincts1 which I shall here hold to and take as
the basis of further discussions. According to
this view we have to distinguish two classes of
instincts, one of which, Eros or the sexual in
stincts, is by far the more conspicuous and
accessible to study. It comprises not merely
the uninhibited sexual instinct proper and the
impulses of a sublimated or aim-inhibited na
ture derived from it, but also the self-preserva
tive instinct, which must be assigned to the
ego and which at the beginning of our analytic
work we had good reason for setting in opposi
tion to the sexual object-instincts. The second
class of instincts was not so easy to define; in
the end we came to recognize sadism as its
representative. As a result of theoretical con
siderations, supported by biology, we assumed
the existence of a death-instinct, the task of
which is to lead organic matter back into the
1 Beyond the Pleasure Principle, p. 639 above.

[712a]
The Ego
inorganic state; on the other hand, we sup
posed that Eros aims at complicating life by
bringing about a more and more far-reaching
coalescence of the particles into which living
matter has been dispersed, thus, of course, aim
ing at the maintenance of life. Acting in this
way, both the instincts would be conservative in
the strictest sense of the word, since both would
be endeavouring to re-establish a state of things
that was disturbed by the emergence of life.
The appearance of life would thus be regarded
as the cause of the continuance of life and
also as the cause of the striving towards death;
and life itself would be a conflict and compro
mise between these two trends. The problem of
the origin of life would remain a cosmological
one; and the problem of the purpose and goal
of life would be answered dualistically.
On this view a special physiological process
(of anabolism or katabolism) would be asso
ciated with each of the two classes of instincts;
both instincts would be active in every particle
of living substance, although in unequal pro
portions, so that some one substance might be
the principal representative of Eros.
This hypothesis throws no light whatever
upon the manner in which the two classes of
instincts are fused, blended, and mingled with
each other; but that this takes place regularly
and very extensively is an assumption indis
pensable to our conception. It appears that, as
a result of the combination of unicellular or
ganisms into multicellular forms of life, the
death-instinct of the single cell can success
fully be neutralized and the destructive im
pulses be diverted towards the external world
through the instrumentality of a special organ.
This special organ would seem to be the muscu
lature; and the death-instinct would thus seem
to express itself—though probably only in part
—as an instinct of destruction directed against
the external world and other living organisms.
Once we have admitted the conception of a
fusion of the two classes of instincts with each
other, the possibility of a—more or less com
plete—defusion of them forces itself upon us.
The sadistic component of the sexual instinct
would be a classical example of instinctual fu
sion serving a useful purpose; and the per
version in which sadism has made itself inde
pendent would be typical of defusion, though
not of absolutely complete defusion. From this
point we obtain a new view of a great array of
facts which have not before been considered in
this light. We perceive that, for purposes of
discharge, the instinct of destruction is habitu-

[712b]
AND THE ID
709
ally enlisted in the service of Eros; we suspect
that the epileptic fit is a product and sign of
instinctual defusion; and we come to under
stand that defusion and the marked emergence
of the death-instinct are among the most note
worthy effects of many severe neuroses, e.g.,
the obsessional neuroses. Making a swift gen
eralization, we might conjecture that the es
sence of a regression of libido, e.g., from the
genital to the sadistic-anal level, would he in a
defusion of instincts, just as, conversely, the
advance from an earlier to the definitive genital
phase would be conditioned by an accession of
erotic components. The question also arises
whether ordinary ambivalence, which is so of
ten unusually strong in the constitutional dis
position to neurosis, should not be regarded as
the product of a defusion; ambivalence, how
ever, is such a fundamental phenomenon that
it more probably represents a state of incom
plete fusion.
It is natural that we should now turn with
interest to inquire whether there may not be
instructive connections to be traced between
the formations we have assumed to exist in the
mind—the ego, the super-ego, and the id—and
the
two classes of instincts;
and, further,
whether the pleasure-principle which dominates
mental processes can be shown to have any
constant relation both to the two classes of
instincts and to these differentiations which we
have drawn within the mind. But before we
discuss this, we must clear away a doubt which
arises concerning the terms of the problem it
self. There can be no doubt about the pleasureprinciple, and the
differentiations within the
ego have good clinical justification, but the
distinction between the two classes of instincts
does not seem sufficiently assured and it is pos
sible that facts of clinical analysis may be
found to conflict with it.
One such fact appears to exist. Instead of the
opposition between the two classes of instincts
let us consider the polarity of love and hate.
(There is no difficulty in finding a representa
tive of Eros; but we must be grateful that we
can find a representative of the elusive deathinstinct in the instinct of destruction, for which
hate points the way.) Now, clinical observa
tion shows not only that love is with unex
pected regularity accompanied by hate (ambi
valence),
and
not
only
that
in
human
relationships hate is frequently a forerunner of
love, but also that in many circumstances hate
changes into love and love into hate. If this
change is anything more than a mere succession

[713a]
710
Sigmund
in time, then clearly the ground is cut away
from under a distinction so fundamental as that
between erotic instincts and death-instincts,
one which presupposes the existence of physio
logical processes running counter to each other.
Now the case in which someone first loves
and then hates the same person (or the re
verse), because that person has given him cause
for doing so, has obviously nothing to do with
our problem. Nor has the other case in which
feelings of love that have not yet become mani
fest express themselves, to begin with, by
enmity and aggressive tendencies; for it may
be that here the destructive components in the
object-cathexis have outstripped the erotic and
are only later on joined by the latter. But we
know of several instances in the psychology of
the neuroses in which there are better grounds
for assuming that a transformation does take
place. In persecutory paranoia, the sufferer
takes a particular way of defending himself
against an unduly strong homosexual attach
ment to a given person, with the result that the
person he once loved most is changed into a
persecutor and then becomes the object of ag
gressive and often dangerous impulses on the
part of the patient. Here we have grounds for
interposing an intermediate phase in which the
love is transformed into hate. Analytic investi
gation has only lately revealed that the sources
of homosexuality and of desexualized social
feelings include very intense feelings of rivalry
giving rise to aggressive desires, which, after
they have been surmounted, are succeeded by
love for the object that was formerly hated
or by an identification with it. The question
arises whether in these instances we are to as
sume a direct transformation of hate into love.
It is clear that here the changes are purely
internal and an alteration in the behaviour of
the object plays no part in them.
There is another possible mechanism, how
ever, which we have come to know of by ana
lytic investigation of the processes concerned in
the change in paranoia. An ambivalent attitude
is present from the outset and the transforma
tion is effected by means of a reactive shifting
of cathexis, by which energy is withdrawn from
the erotic impulses and used to supplement the
hostile energy.
Not quite the same thing but something like
it happens when a hostile attitude of rivalry is
overcome and leads to homosexuality. The hos
tile attitude has no prospect of gratification;
consequently—i.e., as an economic measure—
it is replaced by a loving attitude for which

[713b]
Freud
there is more hope of satisfaction, that is, pos
sibility of discharge. So we see that we are not
obliged, in either of these cases to assume a
direct transformation of hate into love which
would be incompatible with a qualitative dis
tinction between the two classes of instincts.
It appears, however, that by including in
our calculations this other mechanism by means
of which love can be changed into hate, we
have tacitly made another assumption which
deserves to be formulated explicitly. We have
reckoned as though there existed in the mind—
whether in the ego or in the id—a displaceable
energy, which is in itself neutral, but is able to
join forces either with an erotic or with a de
structive impulse, differing qualitatively as
they do, and. augment its total cathexis. With
out assuming the existence of a displaceable
energy of this kind, we can make no headway.
The only question is where it comes from, what
it belongs to, and what it signifies.
The problem of the quality of instinctual im
pulses and of its persistence throughout their
vicissitudes is still very obscure and has hardly
been attacked up to the present. In the sexual
component-instincts, which are especially ac
cessible to observation, it is possible to perceive
the working of processes which are in the same
category as what we are discussing; e.g., we see
that some degree of communication exists be
tween the component instincts, that an instinct
deriving from one particular erotogenic source
can make over its intensity to reinforce another
component-instinct
originating
in
another
source, that gratification of one instinct can
take the place of gratification of another, and
many more facts of the same nature—all of
which must encourage us to venture upon cer
tain assumptions.
In the present discussion, moreover, I am
putting forward nothing but a supposition; I
have no proof to offer. It seems a plausible
view that this
neutral
displaceable energy,
which is probably active alike in the ego and
in the id, proceeds from the narcissistic reser
voir of libido, i.e., that it is desexualized Eros.
(The erotic instincts appear to be altogether
more plastic, more readily diverted and dis
placed than the destructive instincts.) From
this we can easily go on to assume that this
displaceable libido is employed in the service
of the pleasure-principle to obviate accumula
tions and to facilitate discharge. It is clear,
incidentally, that there is a certain indifference
about the path along which the discharge takes
place, so long as it takes place somehow. We

[714a]
ing instinctual trends. It has to acquiesce in
know this trait; it is characteristic of the cathetic processes in the id. It is found in erotic
cathexes, where a peculiar indifference in re
gard to the
object displays itself; and it is
especially evident in the transferences arising
in analysis, which develop inevitably no matter
who the analyst may be. Rank has recently
published some good examples of the way in
which neurotic acts of revenge can be directed
against the wrong people. Such behaviour on
the part of the unconscious reminds one of the
comic story of the three village tailors, one of
whom had to be hanged because the only vil
lage blacksmith had committed a capital of
fence. The penalty must be exacted even if it
does not fall upon the guilty. It was in studying
dream-work that we first came upon this kind
of looseness in the displacements brought about
by the primary process. In that case it was the
objects that were thus relegated to a position
of no more than secondary importance, just as
in the case we are now discussing it is the
paths of discharge. It would seem to be char
acteristic of the ego to be more particular both
about the choice of an object and about the
path of discharge.
If this displaceable energy is desexualized
libido, it might also be described as sublimated
energy; for it would still retain the main pur
pose of Eros—that of uniting and binding—in
so far as it helped towards establishing that
unity, or tendency to unity, which is particu
larly characteristic of the ego. If the intellectual
processes in the wider sense are to be classed
among these displacements, then the energy
for the work of thought itself must be supplied
from sublimated erotic sources.
Here we arrive again at the possibility, which
has already been discussed, that sublimation
may take place regularly through the mediation
of the ego. The other case will be recollected,
in which the ego deals with the first objectcathexes of the id (and certainly with later ones
too) by taking over the libido from them into
itself and binding it to the ego-modification
produced by means of identification. The trans
formation of erotic libido into
ego-libido of
course involves an abandonment of sexual aims,
a desexualization. In any case this throws light
upon an important function of the ego in its
relation to Eros. By thus obtaining possession
of the libido from the object-cathexes, setting
itself up as sole love-object, and- desexualizing
or sublimating the libido of the id, the ego is
working in opposition to the purposes of Eros
and placing itself at the service of the oppos-

[714b]
The Ego and the Id
711
some of the other object-cathexes of the id; it
has to go hand in hand with them, so to speak.
We shall come back later to another possible
consequence of this activity of the ego.
This would seem to imply an important am
plification of the theory of narcissism. At the
very beginning, all the libido is accumulated in
the id, while the ego is still in process of forma
tion or far from robust. Part of this libido is
sent out by the id into erotic object-cathexes,
whereupon the ego, now growing stronger, at
tempts to
obtain possession of this objectlibido and to force itself upon the id as a loveobject. The narcissism of the ego is thus seen
to be secondary, acquired by the withdrawal of
the libido from objects.
Over and over again we find on tracing in
stinctual impulses back that they disclose them
selves as derivatives of Eros. If it were not for
the considerations put forward in Beyond the
Pleasure Principle, and ultimately for the sadis
tic constituents which have attached themselves
to Eros, we should have difficulty in holding to
our fundamental dualistic point of view. But
since we cannot escape that view, we are driven
to
conclude that the death-instincts are by
their nature mute, and that the clamour of
life proceeds for the most part from Eros.1
And from the struggle against Eros! It can
hardly be doubted that the pleasure-principle
serves the id as a compass in its struggle against
the libido—the force that introduces such dis
turbances into the process of life. If it is true
that life is governed by Fechner's principle of
constant equilibrium, it consists of a continuous
descent towards death; but the falling of the
level is delayed, and fresh tensions are intro
duced, by the claims of Eros, of the sexual in
stincts, as expressed in instinctual needs. The
id, guided by the pleasure-principle, that is, by
the perception of "pain," guards itself against
these tensions in various ways. It does so in
the first place by complying as swiftly as pos
sible with the demands of the non-desexualized
libido, i.e., by striving for the gratification of
the directly sexual trends. But it does so fur
ther, and in a far more comprehensive fashion,
in relation to one particular form of gratifica
tion which subsumes all component claims—
that is, by discharge of the sexual substances,
which are saturated conductors, so to speak, of
the erotic tensions. The ejection of sexual sub1 In
fact, according to our view it is through the
agency of Eros that the destructive instincts that are
directed towards the external world have been diverted
from the self.

[715a]
7i2
Sigmund
stances in the sexual act corresponds in a cer
tain degree with the separation of soma and
germ-plasm. This accounts for the likeness be
tween dying and the condition that follows
complete sexual satisfaction, and for the fact
that death coincides with the act of copula
tion in some of the lower animals. These crea
tures die in the act of reproduction because,
after Eros has been eliminated through the
process of gratification, the death-instinct has
a free hand for accomplishing its purposes.
Finally, as we have seen, the ego, by sublimat
ing some of the libido for itself and its pur
poses, assists the id in its work of mastering
the tensions.
V. The Subordinate Relationships
of the Ego
The complexity of our subject-matter must be
an excuse for the fact that none of the chapterheadings of this book correspond entirely to
their contents, and
that, in turning to new
aspects of the problem, we constantly hark
back to matters that have already been dealt
with.
As has been
said
repeatedly, the
ego is
formed to a great extent out of identifications
taking the place of cathexes, on the part of
the id, which have been abandoned; the earli
est of these identifications always fulfil a spe
cial office in the ego and stand apart from the
rest of the ego in the form of a super-ego,
while later on, as it grows stronger, the ego
may become more able to withstand the effects
of identifications. The super-ego owes its spe
cial position in the ego, or in regard to the ego,
to a factor which must be considered from two
sides: to the fact that on the one hand it was
the first identification and one which took place
while the ego was still feeble, and that on the
other hand it was the heir to the Oedipus com
plex and thus incorporated into the ego objects
of far greater significance than any others. The
super-ego's relation to the subsequent modi
fications effected in the ego is roughly that of
the primary sexual period in childhood to fullgrown sexual activity after puberty. Although
it is amenable to every later influence, it pre
serves throughout life the character given to it
by its derivation from the father-complex,
namely, the capacity to stand apart from the
ego and to rule it. It is a memorial of the for
mer weakness and dependence of the ego, and
the mature ego remains subject to its domina
tion. As the child was once compelled to obey

[715b]
Freud
its parents, so the ego submits to the categori
cal imperative pronounced by its super-ego.
The descent of the super-ego from the first
object-cathexes of the id, from the Oedipus
complex, however, signifies even more for it.
This descent, as we have already described,
connects it with the phylogenetic acquisitions
of the id and makes it a reincarnation of for
mer ego-structures which have left their pre
cipitates behind in the id. Thus the super-ego
is always in close touch with the id and can
act as its representative in relation to the ego.
It reaches deep down into the id and is for that
reason farther from
consciousness
than
the
ego.1
We can best appreciate these relations by
turning our attention to certain clinical facts,
which have long since lost their novelty but
which still await theoretical discussion.
There are certain people who behave in a
quite peculiar fashion during the work of analy
sis. When one speaks hopefully to them or ex
presses satisfaction with the progress of the
treatment, they show signs of discontent and
their condition invariably becomes worse. One
begins by regarding this as defiance and as an
attempt to prove their superiority to the phy
sician, but later one comes to take a deeper
and truer view. One becomes convinced, not
only that such people cannot endure any praise
or appreciation, but that they react inversely
to the progress of the treatment. Every partial
solution that ought to result, and in other peo
ple does result, in an improvement or a tem
porary suspension of symptoms produces in
them for the time being an exacerbation of
their illness; they get worse during the treat
ment instead of getting better. They exhibit
the so-called negative therapeutic reaction.
There is no doubt that there is something in
these people that sets itself against their re
covery and dreads its approach as though it
were a danger. We are accustomed to say that
the need for illness has got the upper hand in
them over the desire for health. If we analyse
this resistance in the usual way—then, even
after we have subtracted from it the defiant
attitude towards the physician and the fixation
on the various kinds of advantage which the
patient derives from the illness, the greater
part of it is still left over; and this reveals
itself as the most powerful of all obstacles to
recovery, more powerful even than such fam1 It may-be said that the psycho-analytical or metapsychological ego stands on its head no less than the
anatomical ego—the cortical homunculus.

[716a]
An explanation of the normal conscious sense
iliar
ones as narcissistic inaccessibility, the
assumption of a negative attitude towards the
physician, or a clinging to the advantages of
the illness.
In the end we come to see that we are dealing
with what may be called a "moral" factor, a
sense of guilt, which is finding atonement in
the illness and is refusing to give up the penalty
of suffering. We are justified in regarding this
rather disheartening explanation as conclusive.
But, as far as the patient is concerned, this
sense of guilt is dumb; it does not tell him he
is guilty; he does not feel guilty, he simply
feels ill. This sense of guilt expresses itself
only as a resistance to recovery which it is
extremely difficult to overcome. It is also par
ticularly difficult to convince the patient that
this motive lies behind his continuing to be ill;
he holds fast to the more obvious explanation
that treatment by analysis is not the right
remedy for his case.1
The description we have given applies to the
most extreme instances of this state of affairs,
but in a lesser measure this factor has to be
reckoned with in very many cases, perhaps
in all severe cases of neurosis. In fact it may
be precisely this element in the situation, the
attitude of the ego-ideal, that determines the
severity of a neurotic illness. We shall not
hesitate, therefore, to discuss rather more fully
the way in which the sense of guilt expresses
itself under different conditions.
^^The battle with
the obstacle of an unconscious
sense of guilt is not madeeasy for the analyst. Nothing
can be done against it directly, and nothing indirectly
but the slow procedure of unmasking its unconscious
repressed roots, and of thus gradually changing it into
a conscious sense of guilt. One has a special opportu
nity for influencing it when this Ucs sense of guilt is a
"borrowed" one, i.e., when it is the product of an
identification with some other person who was once
the
object of an erotic cathexis. When the sense
of
guilt has been adopted in this way, it is often the sole
remaining trace of the
abandoned love-relation and
not at all easy to recognize as such.
(The likeness
between this process and what happens in melancholia
is
unmistakable.)
If
one
can
unmask
this
former
object-cathexis behind the
Ucs sense of
guilt,
the
therapeutic success is often brilliant, but otherwise
the outcome of one's efforts is by no means certain.
It depends principally on the intensity of the sense of
guilt; there is often no counteracting force
of similar
strength which the treatment can put in motion against
it. Perhaps it may depend, too, on whether the per
sonality of the analyst allows of the patient's putting
him in the
place of his ego-ideal, and this involves
a
temptation
for
the
analyst
to
play
the part
of
prophet, saviour, and redeemer to the patient. Since
the rules of analysis are diametrically opposed to the
physician's making use of his personality in any such
manner, it must be honestly confessed that here we
have another limitation to the effectiveness of analysis;
after all, analysis does not set out
to
abolish the
possibility of morbid reactions, but to give the patient's
ego freedom to choose one way or the other.

[716b]
The Ego and the Id
713
of guilt (conscience) presents no difficulties;
it is due to tension between the ego and the
ego-ideal and is the expression of a condem
nation of the ego pronounced by its criticizing
function. The feelings of inferiority so well
known in neurotics are presumably closely re
lated to it. In two very familiar maladies, the
sense of guilt is over-strongly conscious; in
them the ego-ideal displays particular severity
and often rages against the ego with the utmost
cruelty. The attitude of the ego-ideal in these
two
diseases,
the
obsessional neurosis
and
melancholia, presents, alongside of this sim
ilarity, differences that are no less significant.
In certain forms of the obsessional neurosis
the sense of guilt expresses itself loudly but
cannot justify itself to the ego. Consequently
the patient's ego rebels against this imputation
of guilt and seeks the physician's support in
repudiating it. It would be folly to acquiesce in
this, for to do so would have no effect. Analysis
shows that the super-ego is being influenced
by processes that have remained hidden from
the ego. It is possible to discover the repressed
impulses which really occasion the sense of
guilt. The super-ego is thus proved to have
known more than the ego about the unconscious
id.
In melancholia, the impression that the super
ego has obtained a hold upon consciousness is
even stronger. But in this case the ego ventures
no objection; it admits the guilt and submits
to the
punishment. The explanation of this
difference is plain. In the obsessional neurosis,
the reprehensible impulses which are being
criticized by the super-ego have never formed
part of the ego; while in melancholia, the object
of the super-ego's wrath has become part of the
ego through identification.
It is certainly not clear why the sense of
guilt reaches such an extraordinary intensity
in these two neurotic disorders; and indeed,
the main problem presented in this state of
affairs lies in another direction. We shall post
pone discussion of it until we have dealt with
the other cases—in which the sense of guilt
remains unconscious.
It is essentially in hysteria and in states of
an hysterical type that this condition is found.
The mechanism by which the sense of guilt is
kept
unconscious is
easy
to
discover.
The
hysterical type of ego defends itself from the
painful perception which the criticisms of its
super-ego threaten to produce in it by the same
means that it uses to defend itself from an

[717a]
714
unendurable
object-cathexis—by
an
act
of
repression. It is the ego, therefore, that is
responsible for the sense of guilt remaining
unconscious. We know that, as a rule, the ego
carries out repressions in the service and at the
behest of its super-ego; but this is a case in
which it has turned the same weapon against
its harsh taskmaster. In the obsessional neu
rosis, as we know, the phenomena of reactionformation
predominate;
but
here
the
ego
contents itself with keeping at a distance the
material to which the sense of guilt refers.
One may go further and venture the hypoth
esis that a great part of the sense of guilt
must normally remain unconscious, because
the origin of conscience is closely connected
with the Oedipus complex which belongs to
the unconscious. If any one were inclined to
put forward the paradoxical proposition that
the normal man is not only far more immoral
than he believes but also far more moral than
he has any idea of, psycho-analysis, which is
responsible for the first half of the assertion,
would have no objection to raise against the
second half.1
It was a surprise to find that exacerbation of
this Ucs sense of guilt could turn people into
criminals. But it is undoubtedly a fact. In
many criminals, especially youthful ones, it is
possible to detect a very powerful sense of
guilt which existed before the crime, and is
not therefore the result of it but its motive.
It is as if it had been a relief to be able to
fasten this unconscious sense of guilt on to
something real and immediate.
In all these situations, the super-ego displays
its independence of the conscious ego and the
closeness of its relations with the unconscious
id. And now, having regard to the importance
we ascribed to preconscious verbal residues in
the ego, the question arises whether the super
ego, if it is in part unconscious, can consist in
such verbal images, or, if not, in what it does
consist. Our answer, though it does not carry
us very far, will be that it cannot possibly be
disputed that the *super-ego, no less than the
ego, is derived from auditory impressions; it
is part of the ego and remains to a great extent
accessible to consciousness by way of these
verbal images (concepts, abstractions), but
the cathectic energy of these elements of the
super-ego does not originate from the auditory
t xThis proposition is only apparentiy a paradox; it
simply states that human nature has a far greater ca
pacity, both for good and for evil, than it thinks it has,
i.e., than it is aware of through the conscious percep
tions of the ego.

[717b]
Sigmund Freud
perceptions, instruction, reading, etc., but from
sources in the id.
The question which we postponed answering
runs thus: How is it that the super-ego mani
fests itself essentially as a sense of guilt (or
rather, as criticism—for the sense of guilt is
the perception in the ego which corresponds
to the criticism) and at the same time develops
such extraordinary harshness and severity to
wards the ego? If we turn to melancholia first,
we find that the excessively strong super-ego
which has obtained a hold upon consciousness
rages against the ego with merciless fury, as if
it had taken possession of the whole of the sad
ism available in the person concerned. Follow
ing our view of sadism, we should say that the
destructive component had
entrenched itself
in the super-ego and turned against the ego.
What is now holding sway in the super-ego is,
as it were, a pure culture of the death-instinct,
and in fact it often enough succeeds in driving
the egointo death, if the latter does not protect
itself from the tyrant in time by a revulsion
into mania.
The
reproaches
of
conscience
in
certain
forms of obsessional neurosis are just as pain
ful and tormenting, but here the situation is
less perspicuous. It is remarkable that the ob
sessional neurotic, in contrast to the melan
choliac, nevertakesthe step of self-destruction';
heis as if immune againstthe dangerof suicide,
and is far better protected from it than the
hysteric. We can see that what guarantees the
safety of the ego is the fact that the object
has been retained. In the obsessional neurosis
is has become possible, through a regression to
the pre-genital organization, for the
loveimpulses to transform themselves into impulses
of aggression against the object. Here again
the instinct of destruction has been set free and
it aims at destroying the object, or at least it
appears to have this aim. These tendencies have
not been adopted by the ego; it struggles
against them with reaction-formations and pre
cautionary measures, and they remain in the
id. The super-ego, however, behaves as if the
ego were responsible for them and shows by
its zeal in chastising these destructive intentions
that they are no mere semblance evoked by
regression, but an actual substitution of hate
for love. Helpless in either direction, the ego
defends itself vainly, alike against the instiga
tions of the murderous id and against the
reproaches of the punishing conscience. It suc
ceeds in holding in check at
least the most
brutal actions of both sides; the first outcome

[718a]
is interminable self-torment,
there follows a systematic torturing of the
object, in so far as it is within reach.
The activity of the dangerous death-instincts
within the individual organism is dealt with in
various ways; in part they are rendered harm
less by being fused with erotic components, in
part they are diverted towards the external
world in the form of aggression, while for the
most part they undoubtedly continue their
inner work unhindered. How is it then that in
melancholia the super-ego can become a kind
of gathering-place for the death-instincts?
From the point of view of morality, the con
trol and restriction of instinct, it may be said
of the id that it is totally non-moral, of the
egothat it strives to be moral, and of the super
ego that it can be hyper-moral and then be
comes as ruthless as only the id can be. It is
remarkable that the more a man checks his
aggressive tendencies towards others the more
tyrannical, that is aggressive, he becomes in
his ego-ideal. The ordinary view sees the situa
tion the other way round: the standard set up
by the ego-ideal seems to be the motive for the
suppression of aggressiveness. The fact re
mains, however, as we have stated it: the more
a man controls his aggressiveness, the more in
tense become the aggressive tendencies of his
ego-ideal against his ego. It is like a displace
ment, a turning round upon the self. But even
ordinary normal morality has a harshly re
straining, cruelly prohibiting quality. It is from
this, indeed, that the conception arises of an
inexorable higher being who metes out punish
ment.
I cannot go further in my consideration of
these questions without introducing a fresh
assumption. The super-ego arises, as we know,
from an identification with the father regarded
as a model. Every such identification is in the
nature of a desexualization or even of a sub
limation. It now
seems as though when a
transformation of this kind takes place there
occurs at the same time an instinctual defusion.
After sublimation, the erotic component no
longer has the power to bind the whole of the
destructive elements that were previously com
bined with it, and these are released in the
form of inclinations to aggression and destruc
tion. This defusion would be the source of the
general character of harshness and cruelty ex
hibited
by the
ideal—its dictatorial "Thou
shalt."
Let us again consider the obsessional neu
rosis for a moment. The state of affairs is

[718b]
The Ego and the Id
715
and eventually
different here. The defusion of love into aggres
siveness has not been effected by the agency of
the ego, but is the result of a regression which
has come about in the id. But this process has
extended beyond the id to the super-ego, which
now increases its tryanny over the innocent
ego. It would seem, however, that in this case
no less than in that of melancholia, the ego,
having gained possession of the libido by
means of identification, is punished for doing
so by the super-ego through the instrumentality
of the aggressiveness which had before been
mixed with the libido.
Our ideas about the ego are beginning to
clear, and its various relationships are gaining
distinctness. We now see the ego in its strength
and in its weaknesses. It is entrusted with im
portant functions. By virtue of its relation to
the perceptual system, it arranges the processes
of the mind in a temporal order and tests their
correspondence with reality. By interposing the
process of thinking it secures a postponement
of motor discharges and controls the avenues
to motility. This last office is, to be sure, a
question more of form than of fact, in the
matter of action the ego's position is like that
of
a
constitutional monarch, without whose
sanction no law can be passed but who hesitates
long before imposing a veto on any measure
put forward by Parliament. All the experiences
of life that originate from without enrich the
ego; the id, however, is another outer world
to it, which it strives to bring into subjection
to itself. It withdraws libido from the id and
transforms the object-cathexes of the id into
ego-constructions. With the aid of the super
ego, though in a manner that is still obscure
to us, it draws upon the experiences of past
ages stored in the id.
There are two paths by which the contents
of the id can penetrate into the ego. The one
is direct, the other leads by way of the egoideal ; which of these two paths they take may,
for many mental activities, be of decisive
importance. The ego develops from perceiving
instincts to controlling them, from
obeying
instincts to curbing them. In this achievement
a large share is taken by the ego-ideal, which,
indeed, is partly a reaction-formation against
the instinctual processes in the id. Psycho
analysis is an instrument to enable the ego to
push its conquest of the id further still.
From the other point of view, however, we
see this same ego as a poor creature owing
service
to
three
masters
and
consequently
menaced by three several dangers: from the

[719a]
7rcV
Sigmund-Freudexternal world, from the libido of the id, and
The
from the severity of the super-ego. Three kinds
of anxiety correspond to these three dangers,
since anxiety is the expression of a recoil from
danger. Like the dweller in a borderland that
it is, the ego tries to mediate between the world
and the id, to make the id comply with the
world's demands and, by means of muscular
activity, to accommodate the world to the id's
desires. In point of fact, it behaves like the
physician
during
treatment
by analysis;
it
offers itself to the id as a libidinal object in
view of its power of adaptation to the real
world, and aims at attaching the id's libido
to itself. It is not only the ally of the id; it is
also a submissive slave who courts the love of
his master. Whenever possible, it tries to re
main on good terms with the id; it draws the
veil of its Pes rationalizations over the id's Ucs
demands; it pretends that the id is showing
obedience to
the mandates of reality, even
when in fact it is remaining obdurate and im
movable; it throws a disguise over the id's
conflicts with reality and, if possible, over its
conflicts with the super-ego too. Its position
midway between the id and reality tempts it
only too often to become sycophantic, oppor
tunist, and false, like a politician who sees the
truth but wants to keep his place in popular
favour.
Towards the two classes of instincts the ego's
attitude is not impartial. Its work of identifica
tion and sublimation gives the death-instincts
in the id assistance in mastering the libido, but
in so doing it incurs the risk of itself becoming
the object of the death-instincts and of perish
ing. In order to be able to help in this way, it
has to become flooded with libido itself; it thus
becomes the representative of Eros and thence
forward desires to live and to be loved.
But since the ego's work of
sublimation
results in a defusion of the instincts and a
liberation of the aggressive instincts in the
super-ego, its struggle against the hbido ex
poses it to the danger of maltreatment and
death. In suffering under the attacks of the
super-ego or perhaps even succumbing to them,
the ego is meeting with a fate Hke that of the
protozoa which are destroyed by the products
of
disintegration that they themselves have
created. From the economic point of view, the
morality that functions in the super-ego seems
to be a similar product of disintegration.
Amongthe subordinaterelationshipsin which
the ego stands, that to the super-ego is per
haps the most interesting.

[719b]
ego is the
true
abode of anxiety.
Threatened by dangers from three directions,
it develops the flight-reflex by withdrawing its
own cathexis from the menacing perception or
from the equally dreaded process in the id, and
discharging it as anxiety. This primitive re
action is later replaced by the introduction of
protective cathexes
(the mechanism of the
phobias). What it is that the ego fears either
from an external or from a libidinal danger
cannot be specified; we know that it is in the
nature of an overthrow or of extinction, but it
is not determined by analysis. The ego is simply
obeying the warning of the pleasure-principle.
On the other hand, we can tell what lies hidden
behind the ego's dread of the super-ego, its
fear of conscience. The higher being which
later became the ega-ideal once threatened the
ego with castration, and this dread of castration
is probably the kernel round which the sub
sequent fear of conscience has gathered; it is
this dread that persists as the fear of conscience.
The high-sounding phrase, "Every fear is
ultimately the fear of death," has hardly any
meaning; at any rate, it cannot be justified. It
seems to me, on the contrary, perfectly correct
to distinguish the fear of death from dread of
an external object (objective anxiety) and from
neurotic libidinal anxiety. It presents a difficult
problem to psycho-analysis, for death is an
abstract concept with a negative content for
which no unconscious correlative can be found.
It would seem that the mechanism of the fear
of death can only be that the ego relinquishes
its narcissistic libidinal cathexis in a very large
measure, that is, that it gives up itself, just as
it gives up some external object in other cases
in which it feels anxiety. I believe that the
fear of death concerns an interplay between
the ego and the super-ego.
We know that the fear of death makes its
appearance under two conditions (which, more
over,
are
entirely
analogous
to
the
other
situations in which anxiety develops), namely,
as a reaction to an external danger and as an
internal process, as for instance in melancholia.
Once again a neurotic manifestation may help
us to understand a normal one.
The fear of death in melancholia only admits
of one explanation: that the ego gives itself up
because it feels itself hated and persecuted by
the super-ego, instead of loved. To the ego,
therefore, living means the same as being loved
—being loved by the super-ego, which here
again appears as the representative of the id.
The super-ego fulfils the same function of pro-

[720a]
The Ego and the Id
717
tecting and saving that was fulfilled in earlier
days by the father and later by Providence or
destiny. But, when the ego finds itself in over
whelming danger of a real order which it be
lieves itself unable to overcome by its own
strength, it is bound to draw the same conclu
sion. It sees itself deserted by all the forces of
protection and lets itself die. Here, moreover,
is once again the same situation as that which
underlay the first great anxiety-state of birth
and the infantile anxiety of longing for an
absent person—the anxiety of separation from
the protecting mother.
These considerations enable us to conceive
of the fear of death, like the fear of conscience,
as a development of the fear of castration. The
great significance which the sense of guilt has
in
the
neuroses
makes it
conceivable
that

[720b]
ordinary neurotic anxiety is reinforced in severe
cases by a development of anxiety between the
ego and the super-ego (fear of castration, of
conscience, of death).
The id, to which we finally come back, has
no means of showing the ego either love or
hate. It cannot say what it-wants; it has
achieved no unity of will. Eros and the deathinstinct struggle within it; we have seen with
what weapons the one group of instincts de
fends itself against the other.It would be pos
sible to picture the id as under the domination
of the mute but powerfuldeath-Instincts, which
desire to be at peace and (as the pleasureprinciple demands) to put Eros, the intruder,
to rest; but that would be to run' the risk
of valuing too cheaply the part played by
Eros.

[721a]
CHAPTER I
In describing pathological phenomena, we are
enabled by the ordinary usages of speech to dis
tinguish symptoms from inhibitions, without,
however, attaching much importance to the
distinction. Indeed, we might hardly think it
worthwhile to differentiate more exactly be
tween the two, were it not for the fact that we
meet with illnesses in which we observe the
presence of inhibitions but not of symptoms
and are curious to know the reason for this.
The two concepts are not upon the same
plane. Inhibition
has
a
special
relation to
function. It does not necessarily have a patho
logical implication. One can quite well call a
normal restriction of a function an inhibition
of it. A symptom, on the other hand, actually
denotes
the presence of
some pathological
process.
Thus,
an
inhibition
(among
other
things) may be a symptom. In ordinary speech,
we should use the word inhibition when there
is a simple lowering of function, and symptom
when a function has undergone some unusual
change or when a new phenomenon has arisen
out of it. Very often it seems to be quite an
arbitrary matter whether we emphasize the
positive side of a pathological process and call
its consequences a symptom, or its negative
side and call them an inhibition. But all this is
really of little interest; and the problem as we
have stated it does not carry us very far.
Since the
concept of inhibition is so in
timately associated with that of function, we
may perhaps proceed to examine the various
functions of the ego with a view to discovering
what forms any disturbance of those functions
will assume in each of the different neurotic
affections. Let us pick out for a comparative
study of this kind the sexual function and those
of eating, of locomotion, and of occupational
work.
(a) The sexual function Is liable to a great
number of disturbances, most of which exhibit
the characteristics of simple inhibitions. These
are classed together as psychical impotence.
The normal performance of the sexual function
can only come about as the result of a very
complicated process, and disturbances may ap

[721b]
Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety
pear at any point in it. In men the chief points
at which inhibition occurs are shown by: a
turning away of the libido at the very beginning
of the process (psychological unpleasure1); an
abridgment of the sexual act (ejaculatio prae
cox), an occurrence which might equally well
be regarded as a symptom; an arrest of the act
before it has reached its natural conclusion
(absence of ejaculation); or a non-appearance
of the psychological results (lack of pleasureJn
orgasm). Other disturbances arise from the
sexual function becoming dependent on special
conditions of a perverse or fetishistic nature.
That there is a relationship between inhibi
tion and
anxiety
is pretty evident.
Many
inhibitions obviously represent a relinquish
ment of a function whose exercise would pro
duce anxiety. Many women are openly afraid
of the sexual function. We class this anxiety
under hysteria, just as we do the defensive
symptom of disgust which, arising originally
as a deferred reaction to the experiencing of a
passive sexual act, appears later whenever the
idea of such an act is presented. Furthermore,
many obsessional acts turn out to be measures
of precaution and security against sexual ex
periences and are thus of a phobic character.
This is not very illuminating. We can only
note that disturbances of the sexual function
are brought about by a great variety of means,
(i) The libido may simply be turned away
(this seems most readily to produce what we
regard as an inhibition pure and simple); (2)
the function may be less well carried out; (3)
it
may be hampered by having conditions
attached to it, or modified by being diverted
to other aims;
(4) it may be prevented by
measures of security; (5) if it cannot be pre
vented from starting, it may be immediately
interrupted by the appearance of anxiety; and
(6), if it is nevertheless carried out, there may
be a subsequent reaction of protest against it
and an attempt to undo what has been done.
(b) The function of nutrition is most fre
quently disturbed by a disinclination to eat,
brought about by a withdrawal of libido. An
1Throughout this work, Unlust has been translated
by the constructed word "unpleasure," while reserving
"pain" for the German Schmerz—TR.
718

[722a]
increase in the desire to eat is also a not un
common thing. The compulsion to eat is at
tributed to a fear of starving; but this is a
subject which has been but little studied. The
hysterical defence against eating is known to
us in the symptom of vomiting. Refusal to eat
owing to anxiety is a concomitant of psychotic
states (delusions of being poisoned).
(c) In many neurotic conditions, locomotion
is inhibited by a disinclination to walk or a
weakness in walking. In hysteria, there will be
a paralysis of the motor apparatus, or this one
special
function
of
the
apparatus
will be
abolished (abasia). Especially characteristic are
the increased difficulties that appear in loco
motion owing to the introduction of certain
stipulations whose non-observance
results in
anxiety (phobia).
(d) In inhibition in work—a thing which we
so
often
have to
deal with as
an isolated
symptom in our therapeutic work—the subject
feels a decrease in his pleasure in it or becomes
less able to do it well; or he has certain reactions
to it, Hke fatigue, giddiness, or sickness, if he is
obliged to go on with it. If he is a hysteric he
will have to give up his work, owing to the
appearance of organic and functional impair
ments of activity which make it impossible for
him to carry it on. If he is an obsessional
neurotic, he will be perpetually being distracted
from his work or losing time over it owing to
delays and repetitions.
Our
survey might be
extended to
other
functions of the ego as well; but there would be
nothing more to be learned by doing so, for we
should not penetrate below the surface of the
phenomena presented to us. Let us then proceed
to describe inhibition in such a way as to leave
very little doubt about what is meant by it, and
say that inhibition is the expression of a restric
tion of an ego-function.
A restriction of this kind can itself have very
different causes. Many of the mechanisms in
volved in a renunciation of function are well
known to us, as is a certain general purpose
which runs through it. This purpose is more
easily recognizable in the specific inhibitions.
Analysis shows that, when activities, like play
ing the piano, writing, or even walking, undergo
neurotic inhibitions, it is because the physical
organs brought into play—the fingers
or the
feet—have become too strongly eroticized. It
has been discovered as a general fact that the
ego-function of an
organ is impaired if its
erotogenicity—its
sexual
significance—is
in
creased. It behaves, if I may be allowed a

[722b]
Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety
719
somewhat vulgar analogy, like a maid-servant
who
refuses to
go on
cooking because her
master has started a love-affair with her. As
soon as writing, which entails making a liquid
substance flow on to a piece of white paper,
assumes the significance of copulation, or as
soon as walking becomes a symbolic substitute
for treading upon the body of mother earth,
both writing and walking are stopped because
they represent the performance of a forbidden
sexual act. The ego renounces these functions,
which are within its sphere, in order not to have
to undertake fresh measures of repression—in
order to avoid coming into conflict with the id.
There
are
clearly also
inhibitions which
serve the purpose of self-punishment. This is
often the case in inhibitions of occupational
activities. The ego is not allowed to carry on
those
activities,
because
they
would
bring
success and gain, and these are things which the
severe super-ego has
forbidden. So the ego
gives them up too, in order to avoid coming
into conflict with the super-ego.
The more generalized inhibitions of the ego
obey a different mechanism of a simple kind.
When the ego is faced
with a particularly
difficult mental task, as occurs in mourning or
when there is some tremendous suppression of
affect or when
a
continual
flood
of
sexual
phantasies is being kept down, it loses so much
of the energy at its disposal that it has to cut
down the expenditure of it at many points at
once. It is in the position of a speculator whose
money has become tied up in various enter
prises. I came across an instructive example of
this kind of intense, though short-lived, general
inhibition. The patient, an obsessional neurotic,
used to be overcome by a paralysing fatigue
which lasted for one or more days whenever
something occurred
which should obviously
have thrown him into a rage. We have here a
point of departure from which we may hope to
reach an
understanding of
the condition of
general inhibition which characterizes states of
depression, including the gravest form of them,
melancholia.
As regards inhibitions, then, we may say in
conclusion that they are restrictions of
the
functions of the ego which have either been
imposed as a measure of precaution or brought
about as a
result of an impoverishment of
energy; and we can see without difficulty in
what
respect
an
inhibition
differs
from
a
symptom: for a symptom cannot be described
as a process that takes place within, or acts
upon, the ego.

[723a]
720
Sigmund
CHAPTER II
The main characteristics of the formation of
symptoms have long since been studied and, I
hope, established beyond dispute. A symptom
is a sign of, and a substitute for, an instinctual
gratification which has remained in abeyance;
it is a consequence of the process of repression.
Repression proceeds from the ego when the
latter—it may be at the behest of the super-ego
—refuses to associate itself with an instinctual
cathexis which has been aroused in the id. The
ego is able by means of repression to keep the
idea which is the vehicle of the reprehensible
impulse from
becoming conscious. Analysis
shows that the idea often persists as an un
conscious formation.
So far everything seems clear; but we soon
come upon difficulties which have not as yet
been solved. Up till now our account of what
occurs in repression has laid great stress on this
point of exclusion from consciousness. But it
has left other points open to uncertainty. One
question that arose was: what happened to the
instinctual impulse which had been actuated in
the id and which sought to be gratified? The
answer was an indirect one. It was that, owing
to the process of repression, the pleasure that
would have been expected from gratification
had been transformed into unpleasure. But we
were then faced with the problem of how the
gratification of an instinct could produce un
pleasure. The whole matter can be clarified, I
think, if we commit ourselves to the definite
statement that, as a result of repression, the
intended course of the excitatory process in the
id does not occur at all; the ego succeeds in
inhibiting or deflecting it. If this is so the prob
lem of transformation of affect under repres
sion disappears. At the same time, this view
implies that the ego can exert a very extensive
influence over processes in the id, and we shall
have to find out in what way it is able to de
velop such astonishing powers.
It seems to me that the ego obtains this
influence in virtue of its intimate connections
with the perceptual system—connections which,
as we know, constitute its essence and provide
the basis of its differentiation from the id. In
its function, the perceptual system, which we
have called Pcpt-Cs, is bound up with the
phenomenon of consciousness. It receives ex
citations not only from outside but from within
and endeavours, by means of the pleasure-unpleasure sensations which reach it from these
directions, to direct the course of every mental
event in accordance with the pleasure-principle.

[723b]
Freud
We are very apt to think of the ego as power
less against the id; but, when it is opposed to an
instinctual process, it has only to give a signal
of unpleasure in order to attain its: object with
the aid of that almost omnipotent institution^
the pleasure-principle. To take this situation by
itself for a moment, we can illustrate it by an
example from another field. Let us imagine a
country in which a certain small faction objects
to a proposed measure the passage of which
would have the support of the masses. This
minority obtains command of the press and by
its help manipulates the supreme arbiter, public
opinion, and so succeeds in preventing the
measure from being passed.
But this explanation opens up fresh problems.
Whence does the energy come which is em
ployed for giving the signal of unpleasure?
Here we may be assisted by the idea that a;j
defence against an unwelcome internal process
will be modelled upon the defence adopted
against an externalstimulus, that the ego wards
off internal and external dangers alike along
identical lines. In the case of external danger,
the organism has recourse to attempts at flight.
The first thing it does is to withdraw cathexis
from the perception of the dangerous object;
later on it discovers that it is a better plan to
perform muscular movements of such a sort
as will render perception of the dangerous ob-;
ject impossible, even in the absence of any
refusal to perceive it—that it is a better plan,
that is, to remove itself from the sphere of
danger. Repression is an equivalent of this at
tempt at flight. The ego withdraws its (pre
conscious) cathexis from the psychical repre
sentative of the impulse that is to be repressed
and uses that cathexis for the purpose of re
leasing unpleasure (anxiety). The problem of
how anxiety arises in connection with repres
sion may be no simple one; but we may
legitimately maintain the opinion that the ego
is the actual seat of anxiety and give up our
earlier view that the cathectic energy of a re
pressed impulse is automatically turned into
anxiety. If I expressed myself in the latter
sense on former occasions, I was giving a phenomenological description and not a metapsychological explanation of what was occurring.
This brings us to a further question: how is
it possible, from an economic point of view,
for a mere process of withdrawal and discharge,
like the withdrawing of a pre-conscious egocathexis, to produce unpleasure or anxiety,
seeing that, according to our assumptions, un
pleasure and anxiety can only arise as a result

[724a]
of an increase in cathexis? The reply is that
this causal sequence should not be explained
from an economic point of view. In repression,
anxiety is not newly created; it is reproduced
as an affective state on the. model of an already
existing memory picture. If we go further and
enquire into the origin of that anxiety—and of
affects in general—we shall be leaving the
realm of pure psychology and entering the
confines of physiology. Affective states have be
come incorporated in the mind as precipitates
of primeval traumatic experiences, and when a
similar situation occurs they are revived in the
form of memory symbols. I do not think I have
been wrong in likening them to the more recent
and individually acquired hysterical attack and
in regarding them as normal prototypes of it.
In man and the higher animals it would seem
that the act of birth, as the individual's first
experience of anxiety, has given the affect of
anxiety certain characteristic forms of expres
sion. But, while acknowledging this connection,
we must not lay undue stress on it nor over
look the fact that biological necessity demands
that a situation of danger should have an affec
tive symbol, so that a symbol of this kind
would have to be created in any case. More
over, I do not think that we are justified in
assuming that whenever there is an outbreak of
anxiety something like a reproduction of the
situation of birth goes on in the mind. It is not
even certain whether hysterical attacks, though
they were originally traumatic reproductions of
this sort,
permanently retain that character.
As I have shown elsewhere, most of the
repressions with which we have to deal in our
therapeutic work are cases of after-expulsion.
They presuppose the operation of earlier, pri
mal repressions which exert an attraction on
the more
recent situation. Far
too little is
known as yet about the background and pre
liminary stages of repression. There is a danger
of over-estimating the part played in repres
sion by the super-ego. We cannot at present
say, for instance, whether it is the emergence
of the super-ego which provides the line of
demarcation
between primal
repression and
after-expulsion. At any rate, the earliest out
breaks of anxiety, which are of a very intense
kind, occur before the super-ego has become
differentiated. It is highly probable that the
precipitating causes of primal repression are
quantitative factors such as an excessive degree
of excitation and the breaking through of the
protective barrier against stimuli.
This mention of the protective barrier sounds

[724b]
Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety
721
a note which recalls to us the fact that repres
sions occur in two different situations, namely,
when
an
undesirable
instinctual impulse
is
aroused by some external perception, and when
it arises internally without any such provoca
tion. We shall return to this difference pres
ently. But the protective barrier only exists in
regard
to external stimuli, not in regard to
internal instinctual demands.
So long as we direct our attention to the
ego's attempt at flight, we shall get no nearer
to the subject of symptom-formation. A symp
tom arises from an instinctual impulse which
has been prejudicially affected by repression.
If the ego, by making use of the signal of
unpleasure, attains its
object of completely
suppressing the instinctual impulse, we learn
nothing of how this has happened. We can only
find out about it from those cases in which
repression has to a greater or less extent failed.
In this event the position, generally speaking,
is that the instinctual impulse has found a
substitute in spite of repression, but a substi
tute which is very much reduced, displaced,
and inhibited, and which is no longer recog
nizable as a gratification. And when the im
pulse is carried out, there is no sensation of
pleasure;
its
carrying out has,
instead, the
quality of a compulsion.
In thus degrading a gratificatory process to
a symptom, repression displays its power in
a further respect. The substitutive process is
prevented, if possible, from finding discharge
through motility; and even if this cannot be
done the process is forced to expend itself in
making alterations in the subject's own body
and is not permitted to impinge upon the outer
world. It may not be transformed into action.
For, as we know, in repression the ego is oper
ating under the influence of external reality
and therefore it debars the substitutive process
from having any effect upon that reality.
Just as the ego controls the path to action in
regard to the outer world, so it controls access
to consciousness. In repression it displays its
power in both directions, acting, in the one
manner, upon the instinctual impulse itself and,
in the other, upon the psychical representative
of that impulse. At this point it is relevant to
ask how I can reconcile this acknowledgment
of the might of the ego with the description
of its position which I gave in The Ego and the
Id. In that book I drew a picture of its depend
ence upon the id and upon the super-ego which
revealed how powerless and apprehensive it
was in regard to both and with what an effort

[725a]
722
Sigmund
it maintained its superiority over them. This
view has been widely echoed in psycho-analytic
literature. A great deal of stress has been laid
on the weakness of the ego in relation to the
id and of our rational elements in the face of
the demonic forces within us; and there is a
strong tendency to make what I have said into
a foundation-stone of a psycho-analytic Welt
anschauung. Yet
surely
the psycho-analyst,
with his knowledge of the way in which repres
sion works, should, of all people, be restrained
from
adopting such
extreme and
one-sided
views.
I must confess that I am not at all partial
to the fabrication of Weltanschauungen. Such
activities may be left to philosophers, who
avowedly find it impossible to make their jour
ney through Hfe without a Baedeker of that
kind to tell them all about everything. Let us
humbly accept the contempt with which they
look down on us from the vantage-ground of
their superior needs. But since we too cannot
forego our narcissistic pride, we will draw com
fort from the reflection that such "Guides to
Life" soon grow out of date, and that it is
precisely short-sighted,
narrow,
and
finicky
work like ours which obliges them to appear in
new editions, and that even the most up-to-date
of them are nothing but attempts to find a
substitute for
the ancient, useful,
and allembracing catechism. We know well enough
how little light science has so far been able to
throw on the problems that surround us. But
however much ado the philosophers may make,
they cannot alter the situation. Only patient,
persevering research, in which everything is
subordinated to the one requirement of cer
tainty, can gradually bring about a change. The
benighted traveller may sing aloud in the dark
to deny his own fears; but, for all that, he will
not see an inch further beyond his nose.
CHAPTER III
To return to this problem about the ego. The
apparent contradiction is due to our having
taken abstractions too rigidly and attended ex
clusively now to the one side and now to the
other of what is in reality a complicated state
of affairs. We were justified, I think, in dividing
the ego from the id, for there were certain con
siderations which necessitated that step. On
the other hand, the ego is identical with the id,
and is merely a specially differentiated part of
it. If we regard this part by itself, in contra
distinction to the whole, or if a real split has
occurred between the two, the weakness of the

[725b]
Freud
ego becomes apparent. But if the ego remains
bound up with the id and indistinguishable
from it, then it displays its power. The same is
true of the relation between the ego and the
super-ego. In many situations, the two are
merged; and as a rule we can only distinguish
one from the other when there is a tension or
conflict between them. In repression, the de
cisive fact is that the ego is an organization and
the id is not. The ego is, indeed, the organized
portion of the id. We should be quite wrong
in picturing the ego and the id as two opposing
camps and in thinking that, when the ego tries
to suppress a part of the id by means of re
pression, the remainder of the id comes to the
rescue of the endangered part and measures its
strength with the ego. This may often be what
happens, but it is not the primary situation in
repression. As a rule, the instinctual impulse
which is to be repressed remains isolated. Al
though the act of repression demonstrates the
strength of the ego, in one particular it reveals
the ego's powerlessness and reveals, too, how
impervious to influence are the separate in
stinctual impulses of the id. For the mental
process, which has been turned into a symptom
owing to repression, maintains its existence out
side the organization of the ego and independ
ently of it. Indeed, it is not the process alone
but all its derivatives which enjoy, as it were,
the privilege of extra-territoriality; and when
ever they come into associative contact with a
part of the ego-organization, it is not at all cer
tain that they will not draw that part over to
themselves and thus enlarge themselves at the
expense of the ego. Long ago I compared a
symptom to a foreign body which was keeping
up
a constant succession of stimuli and re
actions in the tissue in which it was imbedded.
It does sometimes happen that the defensive
struggle against an unwelcome instinctual im
pulse is brought to an end with the formation
of a symptom. As far as can be seen, this is
most often possible in hysterical conversions.
But usually the outcome is different. The initial
act of repression is followed by tedious and
often interminable manoeuvres in which the
struggle against the instinctual impulse is pro
longed into a struggle against the symptom.
In this secondary defensive struggle, the ego
faces two ways. The one line of behaviour it
adopts springs from the fact that its very na
ture obliges it to make what must be regarded
as an attempt at restoration or reconciliation.
The ego is an organization. It is based upon
the maintenance of free intercourse and of

[726a]
Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety
723
the possibility of reciprocal influence between
all its parts. Its de-sexualized energy still shows
traces of its origin in its tendency to bind
together and unify, and this necessity to synthetize grows stronger in proportion as the
strength of the ego increases. It is therefore
only natural that the ego should try to prevent
symptoms from remaining isolated and foreign
by using every possible method to bind them
to itself in one way or another, and to incor
porate them in its organization by means of
those bonds. As we know, a tendency of this
kind is already operative in the very act of
forming a symptom. A classical instance of this
are those hysterical symptoms which have been
shown to be a compromise between the need
for gratification and the need for punishment.
Such symptoms participate in the ego from the
very beginning, since they fulfil a requirement
of the super-ego, while, on the other hand, they
represent positions occupied by the repressed
and points at which an irruption has been made
by it into the ego-organization. They are a kind
of
frontier-position
with
a
mixed
cathexis.
(Whether all primary hysterical symptoms are
constructed on these lines would be worth en
quiring into very carefully.) The ego now pro
ceeds to behave as though it recognized that
the symptom had come to stay and that the
only thing to do was to accept the situation in
good part and draw as much advantage from it
as possible. It makes an adaptation to the
symptom—to this piece of the internal world
which is alien to it—just as it normally does to
the objective, external world. It can always
find plenty of opportunities for doing so. The
presence of a symptom may entail a certain
impairment of the capacities of the individual,
and this can be exploited to appease some de
mand on the part of the super-ego or to refuse
some requirement coming from the external
world. In this way, the symptom gradually
grows to be the representative of important
interests; it is found to be useful for the main
tenance of the self and becomes more and more
closely merged with the ego and more and more
indispensable to it. It is only very rarely that
the physical process of healing round a foreign
body follows such a course as this. There is a
danger, too, of exaggerating the importance of
a secondary adaptation of this kind to a symp
tom, and of saying that the ego has created the
symptom merely in order to enjoy its advan
tages. It would be equally true to say that a
man who had lost his leg in the war had got it
shot away so that he might thenceforward live

[726b]
on his pension without having to work any
more.
In obsessional neurosis and paranoia, the
forms which the symptoms assume become
very valuable to the ego because they obtain
for it, not certain advantages, but a narcissistic
gratification which it would otherwise forgo.
The symptoms which the obsessional neurotic
constructs flatter his self-esteem by making
him feel that he is better than others because
he is specially cleanly or specially conscientious.
The delusional constructions of the paranoiac
offer to his acute perceptive and imaginative
powers a field of activity which he could not
easily find elsewhere.
All of this results in what is known as the
epinosic gain of a neurosis. This epinosic gain
comes to the assistance of the ego in its en
deavour to incorporate the symptom and in
creases the fixation of the latter. When the
analyst tries to help the ego in its struggle
against the symptom, he finds that these reconciliatory bonds between ego and symptom
operate on the side of the resistances and that
they are not easy to loosen.
The two lines of behaviour which the ego
adopts towards the symptom are in fact di
rectly opposed to each other. For the other
line is less friendly in character, since it con
tinues in the direction of repression. Neverthe
less the ego, it appears, cannot be accused of
inconsistency. Being of a peaceable disposition
it would like to incorporate the symptom in its
framework. It is from the symptom itself that
the trouble comes. For the symptom, being the
true substitute and derivative of the repressed
impulse, carries on the role of the latter; it
continually renews its demands for gratification
and thus obliges the ego in its turn to give the
signal of unpleasure and put itself in a posture
of defence.
The secondary defensive struggle against the
symptom is many-sided. It is fought out on
many fields and makes use of a multitude of
means. We shall not be able to say much about
it until we have made an enquiry into individu
al cases of symptom-formation. In doing this
we shall have an opportunity of going into the
problem of anxiety—a problem which has long
been looming in the background. The wisest
plan will be, I think, to start from the symp
toms produced by the hysterical neuroses; for
we are not as yet in a position to consider the
conditions in which the symptoms of obses
sional neurosis, paranoia, and other neuroses
are formed.

[727a]
724
Sigmund Freud
CHAPTER IV
Let us take as our first example an infantile
hysterical phobia of animals. We will select the
case of Little Hans,1 whose phobia of horses
was undoubtedly typical in all its main fea
tures. The first thing that is apparent is that
in a concrete case of neurotic illness the state
of affairs is much more
complex than one
would suppose so long as one was dealing with
abstractions. It takes some time to orientate
oneself and to decide which the repressed im
pulse is, what
substitutive symptom it has
found and where the motive for repression lies.
Little Hans refused to go out into the street
because he was afraid of horses. This is the raw
material of the case. Which part of it consti
tutes the symptoms? Is it his having the fear?
Is it his choice of an object for his fear? Is
it his giving up his freedom of
movement?
Or is it several of these combined? What is the
gratification which he renounces? And why
does he have to renounce it?
At a first glance one is tempted to reply that
the case is not so very obscure. Little Hans's
unaccountable fear of horses is the symptom,
and his inability to go out into the streets is
an inhibition, a restriction which his ego has
imposed on itself so as not to arouse the anxi
ety-symptom. The second point is clearly cor
rect; and in the discussion which follows I
shall not concern myself any further with this
inhibition. As regards what was presumably the
symptom, a superficial acquaintance with the
case does not even disclose its true formulation.
For further investigation shows that what he
was suffering from was not a vague fear of
horses but a quite definite apprehension that a
horse was going to bite him. This idea, indeed,
was endeavouring to withdraw from conscious
ness and get itself replaced by an undefined
phobia in which only the anxiety and its object
still appeared. Was it perhaps this idea which
was the nucleus of his symptom?
We shall not make any headway until we
have reviewed the little boy's psychological
situation as a whole as it came to light in the
course of analytic treatment. He was at that
time in the Oedipus position, with its attendant
feelings of jealousy and hostility towards his
father whom nevertheless—except in so far as
his mother was the cause of estrangement—he
dearly loved. Here, then, we have a conflict
due to ambivalence: a firmly rooted love and a
no less well grounded hatred directed against
1 Freud, "Analysis of a Phobia in a Five-Year-Old
Boy" (1909), Collected Papers, in.

[727b]
one and the same person. Little Hans's phobia
must be an attempt to solve this conflict. Con
flicts of this kind due to ambivalence are very
frequent and they can have another typical
outcome, in which one of the two conflicting
feelings (usually that of affection) becomes
enormously enhanced and the other vanishes.
Only the exaggerated degree and compulsive
character of the feeling that remains betray
the fact that it is not the sole one in existence
but is continually on the alert to keep the op
posite feeling under suppression, and enables
us to postulate the
operation of a process
which we call repression by means of reactionformation (in the ego). Cases HkeLittle Hans's
show no traces of a reaction-formation of this
kind. There are clearly different ways of egress
from a conflict of ambivalence.
Meanwhile we have been able to establish
another point with certainty. The instinctual
impulse which underwent repression in Little
Hans was a hostile one against his father. Proof
of this was obtained in his analysis while the
idea of the biting horse was being followed up.
Hans had seen a horse fall down and he had
also seen a playmate, with whom he was play
ing at horses, fall
down and hurt himself.
Analysis justified the inference that he had a
conative impulse that his father should fall
down and hurt himself as his playmate and
the horse had done. Moreover, his attitude
towards someone's departure on a certain oc
casion makes it probable that his wish that his
father should be out of the way found a less
hesitating expression. But a wish of this sort is
tantamount to an intention of putting the
father out of the way oneself—is tantamount,
that is, to the murderous impulse which is one
component of the Oedipus complex.
So far there seem to be no connecting links
between Little Hans's repressed instinctual im
pulseand the substitute for it whichwe suspect
is to be seen in his phobia of horses. Let us
simplify his psychological situation by setting
on one side the elements of infancy and ambi
valence. Let us imagine that he is a young
servant who is in love with the mistress of the
house and has received some tokens of her
favour. He
hates his master, who is more
powerful than he, and he would like to have
him out of the way. It wouldthen be eminently
natural for him to be afraid of his master and
to dread his vengeance—just as Little Hans
was frightened of horses. We cannot, therefore,
describe the anxiety belonging to this phobia
as a symptom. If Little Hans, being in love

[728a]
with his mother, had shown fear of his father,
we should have no right to say that he had a
•neurosis or a phobia. His emotional reaction
would have been entirely comprehensible. What
made it a neurosis was one thing alone: the
replacement of his father by a horse. It is this
displacement, then, which has a claim to be
called a symptom, and which, incidentally, con
stitutes the alternative mechanism which ena
bles a conflict due to ambivalence to be re
solved without the aid of a reaction-formation.
Such a displacement is made possible or facili
tated at Little Hans's early age because the
inborn traces of totemistic thought can still be
easily revived. Children do not as yet recognize
or, at any rate, lay such exaggerated stress
upon the gulf that separates human beings
from the animal world. In their eyes the grown
man, the object of their fear and admiration,
still belongs to the same category as the big
animal who has so many enviable attributes
but against whom they have been warned
because he may become dangerous. As we see,
the conflict of ambivalence is not dealt with in
relation to one and the same person; it is cir
cumvented, as it were, by one of the pair of
conflicting impulses being directed to a vicari
ous figure.
So far everything is clear. But the analysis
of Little Hans's phobia has been very dis
appointing in one respect. The distortion which
constituted the symptom-formation was not
applied to the psychical representative (the
ideational content) of the instinctual impulse
that was to be repressed; it was applied to a
quite different representative and one which
only corresponded to a reaction to the dis
agreeable instinct. It would be more in accord
ance with our expectations if Little Hans had
developed, instead of a fear of horses, an in
clination to ill-treat them and to beat them or
if he had expressed in strong terms a wish to
see them fall down or to be hurt or even die in
agony ("make a row with their feet"). Some
thing of the sort did in fact emerge in his
analysis, but it was not
by any means in
the forefront of his neurosis. And, curiously
enough, if he really had produced an animosity
of this sort not against his father but against
horses as his main symptom, we should not
have said that he was suffering from a neurosis.
There must be something amiss either with
our view of repression or with our definition of
a symptom. One thing strikes us at once: if
Xittle Hans had really behaved in such a way
to horses it would mean that repression had in

[728b]
Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety
725
no way altered the character of his objection
able and aggressive impulses themselves but
onlytheobjectagainst which theyweredirected.
Undoubtedly there are cases in which this is
all that repression does. But more than this has
happened in the development of Little Hans's
phobia—howmuch more can be guessed from
another analysis.
As we know, Little Hans alleged that what
he was afraid of was that a horse would bite
him. Now sometime later I was able to learn
something about the origin of another animal
phobia. In this instance the dreaded animal
was a wolf; it, too, had the significance of a
father-substitute.1
As a boy the patient in
question—a Russian whom I did not analyse
until he had reached his thirties—had had a
dream (whose meaning was revealed in analy
sis) and immediately after it had developed a
fear of being eaten up by a wolf, like the seven
little goats in the fairy tale. In the case of
Little Hans, the ascertained fact that his father
used to play at horses with him doubtless de
termined his choice of a horse as his anxietyanimal. In the same way it appeared at least
highly probable that the father of my Russian
patient used, when playing with him, to pre
tend to be a wolf and jokingly threaten to eat
him up. Since then I have come across a third
instance. The patient was a young American
who came to me for treatment. True, he had not
developed an actual animal phobia, but it was
precisely because of this omission that his case
helped to throw light upon the other two. As a
child he had been sexually excited by a fantas
tic children's story which had been read aloud
to him about an Arab chief who pursued a
gingerbread man so as to eat him up. He iden
tified himself with this edible person, and the
Arab chief was easily recognizable as a fathersubstitute. This phantasy formed the substrat
um of his auto-erotic phantasies.
The idea of being devoured by the father is
typical, age-old and common to all children.
It has familiar parallels in mythology
(the
myth of Cronos) and in the animal kingdom.
Yet in spite of this, such an idea is so strange
to us that we can hardly credit its existence in
a child.
Nor do we know whether it really
means what it seems to, and we cannot under
stand how it
can have become the subjectmatter of a phobia. Analytic observation sup
plies the requisite information. It shows that
the idea of being eaten by the father gives
1 Freud, "From the History of an Infantile Neu
rosis" (1918), Collected Papers, in.

[729a]
726
Sigmund Freud
expression, in a form that has undergone re
gressive degradation, to a passive, tender im
pulse to be loved by him in a genital-erotic
way.
Further research into the case-history of the
Wolf Man leaves no doubt of the correctness
of this explanation. The genital impulse, it is
true, betrays no sign of its tender inclination
when it is expressed in the language belonging
to that transition phase between the oral and
sadistic organization of the libido which has
been left behind. Besides, is it merely a ques
tion of the replacement of a particular psy
chical representative by a regressive form of
expression, or is it a question of the genuine
regressive degradation of a genitally orientated
impulse in the id? It is not at all easy to make
certain. The case-history of the Wolf Man
gives very definite support to the second, more
serious, view, for, from the time of the decisive
dream onward, the boy became naughty, tor
menting, and sadistic, and soon after developed
a regular obsessional neurosis. At any rate we
can see that repression is not the only means
which the ego can employ for the purpose of
defence against an unwelcome instinctual im
pulse. If it succeeds in making an instinct
regress, it will actually have done it much more
injury than it could have by repressing it.
Sometimes, indeed, after forcing an instinct to
regress in this way,-it goes on to repress it.
The case of the Wolf Man and the somewhat
less complicated one of Little Hans raise a
number of further considerations. But we al
ready learn two unexpected facts. There can
be no doubt that the instinctual impulse which
was repressed in both phobias was a hostile one
against the father. One might say that that im
pulse had been repressed by being reversed.
Instead of aggressiveness towards the father
there appeared aggressiveness from the father
in the shape of revenge. Since this aggressive
ness is in any case rooted in the sadistic phase
of the Hbido, a certain degree of degradation
of it is all that is needed to reduce it to the
oral stage. This stage, while only adumbrated
in Little Hans's fear of being bitten, was bla
tantly exhibited in the Wolf Man's terror of
being devoured. But, besides this, the analysis
has demonstrated, beyond a shadow of a doubt,
the presence of another instinctual impulse of
an opposite nature which had succumbed to
repression. This was a loving, passive impulse
directed towards the father, which had already
attained the genital (phallic) level of libidinal
organization. As regards the final outcome of

[729b]
the process of repression, this impulse seems,
indeed, to have been the more important of
the two; it underwent a more far-reaching re
gression and had a decisive influence upon the
content of the phobia. In following up a single
current of instinctual repression, we have thus
come upon a confluence of two. The two in
stinctual impulses that have been overtakenby
repression—sadistic aggressiveness towards the
father and passive affection for him—form a
pair of opposites. Furthermore, a full compre
hension of Little Hans's case shows that the
formation of his phobia had had the effect of
abolishing his affectionate object-cathexis of his
mother as well, though the actual content of
his phobia betrayed no sign of it. The process
of repression had attacked almost all the com
ponents of his Oedipus complex—both his hos
tile and his tender impulses towards his father
and his tender impulses towards his mother.
In my Russian patient, this state of affairs was
much less patent.
These are unwelcome complications, con
sidering that we only set out to study simple
cases of symptom-formation and with that in
tention selected the earliest and, to all appear
ances, most transparent neuroses of childhood.
Instead of a single repression we have found
a collection of them and have become involved
with regression into the bargain. Perhaps we
have added to the confusion by treating the
two cases of animal phobia at our disposal—
Little Hans and the Wolf Man—as thoughthey
were cast in the same mould. As a matter of
fact, certain differences between them stand
out. It is only with regard to Little Hans that
we can positively assert that what his phobia
disposed of were the two main impulses of the
Oedipus complex, viz., his aggressiveness to
wards his father and his over-fondness for his
mother. A tender feeling for his father was
undoubtedly there too and played a part in
repressing the opposite feeling; but we can
prove neither that it was strong enough to draw
repression upon itself nor that it subsided after
his phobia appeared. Hans seems, in fact, to
have been a normal boy with what is called a
positive Oedipus complex. It is possible that
those factors which seem not to have been
present were actually at work in him, but we
cannot demonstrate their existence. Even the
most exhaustive analysis has gaps in its data
and is insufficiently documented. In the case of
the Wolf Man something different is lacking.
His attitude to female objects had been dis
turbed by an early seduction, and his passive,

[730a]
feminine side was strongly developed. The
analysis Of his wolf-dream revealed very little
intentional aggressiveness towards his father,
but it brought forward unmistakable proof that
his passive tender attitude to his father had
been overtaken by repression. In his case, too,
the other factors may have been operative as
well; but they were not visible. Howis it that,
whereas
these
differences
between the
two
cases almost amount to an antithesis, the final
outcome—a phobia—was approximately the
same? The answer must be sought in another
quarter. I think it will be found in the second
fact which emerges from our brief comparative
examination. It seems to me that in both cases
we can detect what the motive force of the
repression was and can substantiate our view
of its nature from the line of development
which the two children subsequently pursued.
This motive force was identical in both. It was
the fear of impending castration. Little Hans
gave up his aggressiveness towards his father
from fear of being castrated. His fear that a
horse would bite him can easily be extended
into meaning a fear that a horse would bite
off his genitals, would castrate him. But it was
from fear of being castrated, too, that the
little Russian relinquished his desire to be
lovedby his father, for he thought that a rela
tion of that sort presupposed a sacrifice of his
genitals—of the organ which distinguished him
from women. As we see, both forms of the
Oedipus complex, the normal, active form and
the inverted one, are broken down by the cas
tration complex. The Russian boy's anxietyidea of being eaten up by a wolf contained, it
is true, no suggestion of castration, for the
oral regression it had undergone had removed
it too far from the phallic stage. But the analy
sis of his dream rendered further proof super
fluous. It was a triumph of repression that the
form in which his phobia was expressed should
no longer have contained any allusion to
castration.
So now we have made the unexpected dis
covery that in both patients the motive force
of the repression was a fear of castration. The
ideational content of their anxiety—being bit
ten by a horse and being eaten up by a wolf—
was a substitute by distortion for the idea of
being castrated by their father. It was this idea
which had undergone repression. In the Rus
sian boy the idea was an expression of a desire
which was not able to subsist in the face of his
masculine revolt; in Little Hans it was the
expression of a reaction in him which had

[730b]
Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety
727
turned his aggressiveness into its opposite. But
the affect of anxiety, which was the essence of
their phobia, came, not from the process of
repression, not from the libidinal cathexes of
the repressed impulses, but from the repressing
agency itself. The anxiety belonging to the
animal phobias was an untransformed fear of
castration. It was therefore an objective fear,
a fear of a danger which actually was immi
nent or believed to be so. It was anxiety which
produced repression, and not, as I formerly
believed, repression which produced anxiety.
I cannot deny the fact, though it is not
pleasant to recall it, that I have on many oc
casions asserted that in repression the psychical
representative of the instinct is distorted, dis
placed, etc., while the libido belonging to the
instinctual impulse is transformed into anxiety.
But now an examination of phobias, which
should be best able to provide confirmatory
evidence, fails to bear out my assertion. The
anxiety felt in animal phobias is the castration
anxiety of the ego; while the anxiety felt in
agoraphobia (a subject that has been less thor
oughlystudied) seemsto be a fear of incurring
sexual temptation—a fear which,after all, must
be connected in its origins with the fear of
castration. As far as can be seen at present,
the majority of phobias go back to an anxiety
of this kind felt by the ego in regard to the
demands of the libido. It is always the ego's
attitude of anxiety which is the primary thing
and which sets repression going. Anxiety never
arises from repressed libido. If I had formerly
been content to say that after the occurrence
of repression there appeared, in place of the
manifestation of libido that was to be expected,
a certain amount of anxiety, I should have
nothing to retract today. The descriptionwould
be correct; and there does undoubtedly exist a
correspondence of the kind asserted between
the strength of the impulse that has to be
repressed and the intensity of the resultant
anxiety. But I must admit that I thought I
was giving more than a mere description. I
believed I had put my finger on a metapsychological processof direct transformation of libido
into anxiety. I can nowno longer maintain this
view. And, indeed, I found it impossible at the
time to explain how a transformation of that
kind was carried out.
It may be asked how I arrived at this idea
of transformation in the first instance. It was
while I was studying the actual neuroses, at a
time when analysis was still a very long way
from distinguishing between processes in the

[731a]
728
Sigmund Freud
ego and processes in the id. I found that out
breaks of anxiety and a general state of anxietypreparedness were produced by certain sexual
practices such as coitus interruptus, undis
charged sexual excitement, or enforced absti
nence—that is, whenever sexual excitement was
inhibited, arrested, or deflected in its progress
towards gratification. Since sexual excitement
was an expression of libidinal instinctual im
pulses, it did not seem too rash to assume that
the libido was turned into anxiety through the
agency of these disturbances. The observations
which I made at the time still hold good.More
over, it cannot be denied that the libido be
longing to the id-processes is subjected to in
terruption at the instigation of repression. We
can still maintain, therefore, that in repression
anxiety is produced from the libidinal cathexes
of the instinctual impulses. But how can we
reconcile this conclusion with our other con
clusion that the anxiety felt in phobias is an
ego anxiety and arises in the ego, and that it
does not proceed out of repression but, on the
contrary, sets repression in
motion? There
seems to be a contradiction here which is not
at all simple to solve. It will not be easy to re
duce the two sources of anxiety to a single one.
We might attempt to do so by supposing that,
when coitus is disturbed or sexual excitement
interrupted or abstinence enforced, the ego
scents certain dangers to which it reacts with
anxiety. But this takes us nowhere. On the other
hand, our analysis of the phobias seems to ad
mit of no correction. Non liquet.1
CHAPTER V
We set out to study the formation of symptoms
and the secondary struggle waged by the ego
against symptoms. But in picking on the pho
bias for this purpose we have clearly made an
unlucky choice. The anxiety which predomi
nates in them appears to complicate and ob
scure the picture. There are plenty of neu
roses which exhibit no anxiety whatever. True
conversion-hysteria is one of these. Even in its
most severe symptoms no admixture of anxiety
is found. This fact alone ought to warn us
against making too close a connection between
anxiety and symptom-formation. The phobias
are so closely akin to conversion-hysteria in
every other respect that I have felt justified in
classing them with it under the name of anx
iety-hysteria. But no one has as yet been able
to say what it is that determines whether any
given case shall take the form of a conversion-
;1-It is not clear.—Ed.

[731b]
hysteria or a phobia—has been able, that is to
say, to establish how the production of anxiety
in hysteria is conditioned.
The commonest symptoms of conversionhysteria—motor paralyses, contractures, in
voluntary actions or discharges, pains, and hal
lucinations—are cathectic processes which are
either permanently maintained or intermit
tent. But this puts fresh difficulties in the way.
Not muchis actually known about thesesymp
toms. Analysis can show what the disturbed
excitatory process is which the symptoms re
place. It usually turns out that they themselves
have a share in that process. It is as though
they had concentrated in themselves the whole
energy of the process. For instance, it will be
found that the pains from which a patient suf
fers were present in the situation in which the
repression occurred; or that his hallucination
was, at that time, a perception; or that his
motor paralysis stands for a defence against an
action which he had meant to perform but
which had been inhibited; or that his contrac
ture is usually a displacement of an intended
innervation of the muscles in some other part
of his body; or that his convulsions are the
equivalent of an outburst of affect which has
been withdrawn from the normal control of the
ego. The sensation of unpleasure which ac
companies the appearance of the symptoms va
ries in a striking degree. In chronic symptoms
which have been displaced on to motility, like
paralyses and contractures, it is almost always
entirely absent; the ego behaves towards the
symptoms as though it had nothing to do with
them. In intermittent symptoms and in those
concerned with the sensory field, unpleasure is
as a rule distinctly felt; and in symptoms of
painit may reach an extreme degree. The pic
ture presented is so manifold that it is difficult
to discover the factor which permits of all
these variations andyet establishes a uniformity
in them. There is, moreover, little to be seenin
conversion-hysteria of the ego'sstruggle against
the symptom after it has been formed. It is
only when sensitivity to pain in some part of
the body constitutes the symptom that that
symptom is in a position to play a dual role. In
that case the symptom of pain will appear no
less regularly whenever the part of the body
concerned is touched from outside than when
the pathogenic situation which it represents is
associatively activated from within; and the
ego will take precautions to preventthe symp
tom from being aroused through external per
ceptions. Why the formation of symptoms in

[732a]
conversion-hysteria should be such a peculiarly
obscure thing I do not know; but the fact pro
vides us with a good reason for quitting such
an unproductive field of enquiry.
Let us turn to the obsessional neuroses in
the hope of learning more about the formation
of symptoms. The symptoms belonging to this
neurosis fall, in general, into two groups, each
having an opposite bias. They are either pro
hibitions, precautions and expiations—that is,
negative in character—or they are substitutive
gratifications often appearing in symbolic dis
guise. The negative, defensive group of symp
toms is the more primary of the two; but as
the illness is prolonged the gratificatory group,
overriding all defensive measures, gains the
upper hand. The symptom-formation scores a
triumph if it succeeds in combining the two
by joining to what was originally a defensive
command or prohibition the significance of a
gratification; and in order to achieve this end
it will often make use of the most ingenious
associative paths. Such an achievement demon
strates the tendency of the ego to synthetization which it has already been seen to possess.
In extreme cases the patient manages to make
most of his symptoms have, in addition to their
original meaning, a directly contrary one. This
is a tribute to the power of ambivalence, which,
no one knows why, plays such a large part in
obsessional neuroses. In the crudest instance
the symptom has two phases: an action which
carries out a certain injunction is immediately
succeeded by another action which stops or
undoes the first one, even if it does not go
quite so far as to carry out its opposite.
Two impressions at once emerge from this
brief survey of obsessional symptoms. The first
is that a ceaseless struggle is being waged
against the repressed, in which the repressing
forces steadily lose ground; the second is that
the
ego and the super-ego have a specially
large share in the formation of the symptoms.
Obsessional neurosis is unquestionably the
most interesting and repaying subject of ana
lytic research. But as a problem it has not yet
been mastered. It must be confessed that, if
we endeavour to penetrate more deeply into
its nature, we still have to rely upon doubtful
assumptions and unconfirmed suppositions. Ob
sessional neurosis originates, no doubt, in the
same situation as hysteria, namely, the neces
sity of warding off the libidinal demands of the
Oedipus complex. Indeed, every obsessional
neurosis seems to have a substratum of hys
terical symptoms that have been formed at a

[732b]
Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety
729
very early stage. But it is subsequently shaped
along quite different lines owing to a constitu
tional factor. The genital organization of the
libido turns out to be weak and insufficiently
resistant, so that when the ego begins its de
fensive actions the first thing it succeeds in
doing is to throw back, in part or altogether,
the genital organization (of the phallic phase)
on to the earlier sadistic-anal level. This phe
nomenon of regression is decisive for all that
follows.
Another possibility has to be
considered.
Perhaps regression is the result not of a con
stitutional factor but of a time-factor. It may
be that regression is rendered possible not be
cause the genital organization of the libido is
too weak, but because the opposition of the
ego begins too early, while the sadistic phase is
at its height. I am not prepared to express an
absolute opinion on this point, but I may say
that analytic observation does not
speak in
favour of such an assumption. It rather tends
to show that by the time an obsessional neurosis
begins to show itself the phallic stage has al
ready been attained. Moreover, the onset of
this neurosis belongs to a later time of life than
that of hysteria. It sets in in the second period
of childhood, with the latency period. In a
patient whose case I was able to study and who
was overtaken by this disorder at a very late
date, it became clear that the determining
cause of his regression and of the emergence of
his obsessional neurosis was a real occurrence
that impaired a genital life which had up till
then been intact.
As regards a metapsychological explanation
of regression I am inclined to find it in a defu
sion of instinct, in a detachment of the erotic
components which, at the
beginning
of the
genital stage, had become joined to the destruc
tive cathexes belonging to the sadistic phase.
In bringing regression about, the ego scores
the first point in its defensive struggle against
the demands of the libido. In this connection
we shall find it advantageous to distinguish the
more general notion of defence from repression.
Repression is only one of the mechanisms which
defence makes use of. It is perhaps in obses
sional cases more than in normal or hystericalones that we can most clearly recognize that the
motive force of defence is the castration com
plex and that what is being warded off are the
trends of the Oedipus complex. We are at pres
ent dealing with the beginning of the latency
period, a period which is characterized by the
passing away of the Oedipus
complex, the1

[733a]
730
Sigmund Freud
creation or consolidation of the super-ego and
the erection of ethical and aesthetic barriers in
the ego. In obsessional neuroses, these proc
esses are carried further than is normal. In
order to effect the destruction of the Oedipus
complex, a regressive degradation of the libido
takes place as well, the super-ego becomes ex
ceptionally severe and unkind, and the ego, in
obedience to the super-ego, produces strong re
action-formations in the shape of conscientious
ness, pity, and cleanliness. Implacable, though
not
therefore always successful, severity is
shown in putting down the temptation to con
tinue early infantile masturbation which is now
attached to regressive (sadistic-anal) ideational
images but which still represents the unsubjugated part of the phallic organization. There
is an inherent contradiction about this state of
affairs, in which, precisely in the interests of
masculinity (castration anxiety), every activity
belonging to masculinity is stopped. But here,
too, obsessional neurosis is only overdoing the
normal method of abolishing the Oedipus com
plex. We once more find an illustration of the
truth that every exaggeration contains the seed
of its own destruction. For, under the guise of
obsessional acts, the masturbation that has
been suppressed approaches ever more closely
to gratification.
The reaction-formations in the ego of the
obsessional neurotic, which we have recognized
as exaggerations of normal character-formation,
should be regarded, I think, as yet another
mechanism of defence and placed on the same
level as regression and repression. They seem
to be absent or very much weaker in hysteria.
Looking back, we can now get an idea of what
is peculiar to the defensive process in hysteria.
It seems that in it the process is limited to
repression alone. The ego turns away from the
disagreeable instinctual impulse and leaves it to
pursue its course in the unconscious, taking no
further part in its lot. This view cannot be
absolutely correct, for we are acquainted with
the case in which a hysterical symptom is at
the same time a fulfilment of a penalty im
posed by the super-ego; but it may describe a
general characteristic of the behaviour of the
ego in hysteria.
We can either simply accept it as a fact that
in obsessional neurosis a super-ego of this severe
kind emerges, or we can take the regression of
the libido as the fundamental characteristic of
the affection and attempt to relate the severity
of the super-ego to it. And indeed, the supersociate itself from the regression and defusion
of instinct whch have taken place there. We
cannot be surprised if it becomes harsher, unkinder, and more tormenting than where de
velopment has been normal.
The chief task during the latency period
seems to be the warding off of the temptation
to masturbate. This struggle produces a series
of symptoms which appear in a typical fashion
in
the most different individuals and which
bear the general character of ceremonial. It is
a great pity that no one has as yet collected
them and systematically analysed them. Being
the earliest products of the neurosis, they
should best be able to shed light on the mecha
nisms employed in its
symptom-formation.
They already exhibit those features which are
destined to cometo the fore so fatefully in the
serious illness that lies ahead—the manner in
which the symptoms are introduced into cer
tain procedures (which later on become almost
automatic) in connection with going to sleep,
washing, dressing, and walking about, as well
as the tendency to repetition and delay. Why
this should be so is at present not at all clear;
but the sublimation of anal-erotic components
plays an unmistakable part.
The advent of puberty opens a new chapter
in the history of an obsessional neurosis. The
organization at the genital level which has been
stopped in childhood starts afeain with great
vigour. But, as we know, the sexual develop
ment of the child determines what direction
this new start willtake. Not onlywillthe early
aggressive impulses be reawakened;
but a
greater or lesser proportion of the new libidinal
impulses—in bad cases the whole of them—
will have to follow the course prescribed for
them by regression and will emerge as aggres
siveand destructive tendencies. In consequence
of the erotic trends being disguised in this way
and owing to the powerful reaction-formations
in the ego, the struggle against sexuality will
henceforward be carried on under the banner
of ethical principles. The ego will recoil with
astonishment from promptings to cruelty and
violence which enter consciousness from the
id, and it has no notion that in them it is com
bating erotic wishes, including many which it
would otherwise not have taken exception to.
The super-ego, overstrict as it is, insists all the
more strongly on the suppression of sexuality,
seeing that the latter has assumed such repul
sive forms. Thus in obsessional neurosis the
conflict is aggravated in
two directions: the
ego, originating as it does in the id, cannot disdefensive forces become more intolerant and

[734a]
Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety
73i
the forces that are to be kept off more intoler
able. Both effects are due to one factor, namely,
regression of the libido.
Much of what has been said may be objected
to on the ground that the unpleasant obsessive
ideas are themselves conscious. But there is no
doubt that before becoming conscious they have
been through a process of repression. In most
of them the actual text of the aggressive in
stinctual impulse is altogether unknown to the
ego, and it requires a good deal of analytic
work to make it conscious. What does penetrate
into consciousness is usually only a distorted
substitute which is either of a vague, dream
like, and confused nature, or so travestied as
to be unrecognizable. Even where repression
has not encroached upon the content of the ag
gressive impulse, it has certainly abolished its
accompanying affective quality, with the result
that the aggressiveness appears to the ego not
to be an impulsion but, as the patients them
selves say, merely an idea which awakens no
feeling. But the remarkable thing is that this is
not the case. What happens is that the affect
which has been left out when the obsessional
idea is perceived appears in a different place.
The super-ego behaves as though repression
had not occurred and as though it knew the
real formulation and full affective quality of the
aggressive impulse, and it treats the ego accord
ingly. The ego which, on the one hand, knows
that it is innocent must, on the other, accept a
sense of guilt and carry a responsibility which
it cannot account for. This state of affairs is,
however, not so puzzling as it would seem at
first sight. The behaviour of the super-ego is
perfectly intelligible, and the contradiction in
the ego merely shows that it has shut out the
id by means
of repression while remaining
fully accessible to the influence of the super
ego.1 If it is asked why the ego does not also
attempt to withdraw itself from the painful
criticism of the super-ego, the simple answer is
that it does manage to do so in a great number
of instances. There are obsessional neuroses in
which no sense of guilt whatever is present. In
them, as far as can be seen, the ego has avoided
becoming aware of it by instituting a new set of
symptoms, penances, or restrictions of a selfpunishing kind. These symptoms represent at
the same time a gratification of masochistic
impulses which, in their turn, have been rein
forced by regression.
Obsessional neurosis presents such a vast
1 Cf.
Theodor
Reik, Gestandniszwang und Strafbedurfnis, 1925, p. 51.

[734b]
multiplicity of phenomena that we have never
yet succeeded in making a coherent synthesis of
all its variations. All we can do is to pick out
certain typical correlations; but there is always
the risk that we may have overlooked other
uniformities of a no less important kind.
I have already described the general tendency
of symptom-formation in obsessional neurosis.
It is to give ever greater room to substitutive
gratification
at
the
expense
of
frustration.
Symptoms
which once
stood for a
restric
tion of
the ego come later on to represent
gratifications as well, thanks to the ego's in
clination to synthetize, and it is quite clear that
this second meaning gradually becomes the
more important of the two. The result of this
process, which approximates more and more
to a complete failure of the original purpose of
defence, is an extremely restricted ego which is
reduced to
seeking gratification in the symp
toms. The displacement of the distribution of
forces in favour of gratification may have the
alarming outcome of paralysing the will of the
ego, so that in every decision that it has to make
it is almost as strongly impelled from the one
side as from the other. The acute conflict be
tween id and super-ego which has dominated
the illness from the very beginning may assume
such extensive proportions that the ego, unable
to carry out its office of mediator, can under
take nothing which is not drawn into the sphere
of that conflict.
CHAPTER VI
In the course of these struggles, two activities
of the ego of a symptom-forming kind are ob
servable, which deserve special attention be
cause they are obviously surrogates of repres
sion and therefore well suited to illustrate its
purpose
and technique. The
fact
that such
auxiliary and
substitutive techniques emerge
may argue that true repression has met with
difficulties in its functioning. If one considers
how much more the ego is the scene of action
of symptom-formation in obsessional neurosis
than it is in hysteria and with what tenacity it
clings to its relations to reality, employing all
its intellectual faculties to that end—so much
so that the very process of thinking becomes
hyper-cathected and eroticized—then one may
perhaps get a closer idea of the importance of
these variations of repression.
The two techniques I refer to are undoing
what has been done and isolating. The first of
these has a wide range of application and goes
back very far. It is, as it were, a negative magic,

[735a]
732
Sigmund
and endeavours, by means of motor symbolism,
to "blow away" not merely the consequence of
some
occurrence, experience,
or
impression,
but those very events themselves. I choose the
term "blow away" advisedly, so as to remind
the reader of the part played by this technique
not only in neuroses but in magical acts, popu
lar customs, and religious ceremonies as well.
In obsessional neurosis we first come across the
technique of undoing what has been done in
symptoms which occur in two phases—dichronous symptoms—in which one action is can
celled out by a second, so that it is as though
neither action had taken place,
whereas, in
reality, both have. This aim of undoing is the
second underlying motive of obsessional cere
monials, the first being to take precautions in
order to prevent the occurrence or recurrence
of some given event. The difference between
the two is easily seen: the precautionary meas
ures'are rational, whilst the measures taken
to abolish something by undoing it are irra
tional and magical. It is of course to be sus
pected that the latter is the earlier motive of
the two and proceeds from an animistic attitude
towards the environment. This endeavour to
undo shades off into normal behaviour in the
case in which a person decides to regard an
event as not having happened. But whereas he
will take no direct steps against the event, and
will simply look away from it and its conse
quences, the neurotic person will try to make
the past itself non-existent. He will try to re
press it by motor means. The same aim may
perhaps be present in and account for the
compulsion to repeat actions which is so fre
quently met with in obsessional neuroses and
which serves a number of contradictory pur
poses at once. When anything has not happened
in the desired way, it can be undone by being
repeated in a different way; and now all the
motives that exist for lingering over such rep
etitions come into play as well. As the neurosis
proceeds, we often find that one symptomforming motive of first-rate importance is the
endeavour to undo a traumatic experience. We
thus unexpectedly discover a new, motor tech
nique of defence, or (as we may say in this case
with less inaccuracy) of repression.
The second of these techniques that we are
setting out to describe for the first time, that
of isolation, is characteristic for obsessional
neurosis.
It, too,
takes place in
the motor
sphere. When the subject has done something
which has a significance for his neurosis, or
after something unpleasant has happened, he

[735b]
Freud
will interpolate an interval during which noth
ing further may happen—during which he may
perceive
nothing
and
do nothing. This be
haviour, which seems so strange at first sight,
is soon seen to have a relation to repression.
We know that in hysteria a traumatic-experi
ence is able to be overtaken by amnesia. In
obsessional
neurosis
this can often not
be
achieved. But, instead of being forgotten, the
experience is deprived of its affect, and its as
sociative connections are suppressed or inter
rupted so that it remains as though isolated
and is not reproduced in the ordinary processes
of thought. The effect of isolation is thus the
same as the effect of repression with amnesia.
This technique is, then, carried out in the isola
tions of obsessional neurosis. It is at the same
time reinforced in a magical sense from the
motor sphere. The elements that are held apart
in this way are precisely those which belong
together associatively. Motor isolation is meant
to ensure an interruption of the connection in
thought. The normal phenomenon of concen
tration provides a pretext for this kind of neu
rotic procedure. The normal person concentrates
on what seems to him important in the way of
an impression or a piece of work in order that
it shall not be interfered with by the intrusion
of any other mental processes or activities. But
even he uses concentration to keep away not
only what is irrelevant or unimportant to the
matter in hand, but, above all, what is unsuit
able because it is contradictory. He is most dis
turbed by those elements which once belonged
to it but which have been discarded in
the
course of his development—as, for instance, by
any manifestation of the ambivalence belong
ing to his father complex in his relation to
God, or by any impulses attached to his ex
cretory organs in his emotions of love. Thus,
in the normal course of things, the ego has a
great deal of isolating work to do in its function
of directing the current of thought. And, as we
know, in carrying out our analytic technique
we have to train it to relinquish that function,
eminently justified as it is in itself, for the
time being.
All analysts have found that it is especially
difficult for the obsessional neurotic to carry
out the fundamental rule of psycho-analytic
treatment. Probably his ego is more watchful
and makes sharper isolations because of the
high degree of tension due to conflict that exists
between his super-ego and his id. While his
thoughts are working, his ego has to keep off
too much in the way of an intrusion of uncon-

[736a]
Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety
733
scious phantasies or a manifestation of am
bivalent trends. It must not relax, but is con
stantly prepared for a struggle. It fortifies its
compulsion to concentrate and to isolate by the
helpvof those magical acts of isolation which,
in the form of symptoms, grow to be so notice
able and to have so much practical importance
for
the patient, but which are actually, of
course, useless and in the nature of ceremonials.
But in thus endeavouring to prevent associa
tions and connections of thought, the ego is
obeying one of the oldest and most fundamental
commands of obsessional neurosis, the taboo of
touching. If one asks oneself why the avoidance
of touching, contact, or contamination should
play such a large part in this neurosis and
should become the subject-matter of compli
cated systems, the answer is that touching and
physical contact are the immediate aim of the
aggressive as well as the loving object-cathexes.
Eros desires contact because it strives to make
the ego and the loved object one, to abolish all
barriers of distance between them. But the first
requisite of destructiveness, too, which (before
the invention of long-range weapons) can only
take effect at close quarters, is physical con
tact, a coming to grips. To touch a woman has
become a euphemism for using her as a sexual
object. No to touch one's genitals is the phrase
employed for forbidding auto-erotic gratifica
tion. Since obsessional neurosis begins by per
secuting touching in its erotic sense and then,
after regression has taken place, goes on to
persecute it in its new sense of aggressiveness,
nothing is so strongly proscribed in this illness
as touching nor so well suited to become the
central point of a system of prohibitions. Now,
to isolate a thing is to banish the possibility of
its being touched, to withdraw it from any
sort of contact. When a
neurotic isolates an
impression or an activity by interpolating an
interval, he lets it be understood symbolically
that he will not allow his thoughts about that
impression or activity to come into associative
contact with his other thoughts.
This is as far as our investigations into the
formation of symptoms take us. It is hardly
worth while summing them up, for the results
they have yielded are scanty and incomplete
and tell us scarcely anything that we do not
already know. It would be fruitless to turn our
attention to symptom-formation in other dis
orders
besides
phobias,
conversion-hysteria,
and obsessional neurosis, for too little is known
about them. But in reviewing those three neu
roses together we are brought up against a

[736b]
very serious problem the consideration of which
can no longer be put off. All three have as their
starting-point the destruction of the Oedipus
complex; and in all three the motive force of
the ego's opposition is, we believe, the fear of
castration. Yet it is only in the phobias that this
fear comes to the surface and is acknowledged
as such. What has become of it in the other two
neuroses? How has the ego spared itself this
fear? The problem becomes accentuated when
we recollect the possibility, already referred
to, that anxiety arises directly, by a kind of
fermentation, as it were, from a libidinal ca
thexis whose processes have been disturbed.
Furthermore, is it absolutely certain that fear
of castration is the only motive force of repres
sion or defence? If we think of neuroses in
women we are bound to doubt it. For though
we can with certainty establish in them the
presence of a castration complex, we can hardly
speak with
propriety of
castration
anxiety
where castration has already taken place.
CHAPTER VII
Let us go back again to infantile phobias of
animals; for we still know more about them
than any others. In animal phobias, then, the
ego has to oppose a libidinal object-cathexis
coming from the id—a cathexis that belongs
either to the positive or the negative Oedipus
complex—because it believes that to give way
to it would entail the danger of castration.
This question has already been discussed, but
there still remains a doubtful point to clear up.
In Little Hans's case—that is, in the case of a
positive Oedipus complex—was it his fondness
for his mother or was it his aggressiveness to
wards his father which called out the defence
of the ego? In practice it seems to make no
difference, especially as each set of feelings im
plies the other; but the question has a theoreti
cal interest, since it is only the feeling of
affection for the mother which can count as
a purely erotic one. The aggressive impulse
flows mainly from the instinct of destruction;
and we have always believed that in a neurosis
it is against the demands of the libido and not
against those of any other instinct that the ego
is defending itself. In point of fact we know
that, after Hans's phobia had been formed, his
tender attachment to his mother seemed to
disappear, having been completely disposed of
by
repression, while the symptom-formation
(substitutive formation) took place in relation
to his aggressive impulses. In the Wolf Man
the situation was simpler. The impulse that was

[737a]
734
Sigmund Freud
repressed was his feminine attitude towards
his father, and that attitude was a genuinely
erotic one. And it was in relation to that im
pulse, too, that the formation of his symptoms
took place.
It is almost humiliating that, after working
so long, we should still be having difficulty in
understanding the most fundamental facts. But
we are determined to simplify nothing and to
hide nothing. If we cannot see things clearly,
we will at least see clearly what the obscurities
are. What is hampering us here is evidently
some hitch in the development of our theory
of the instincts. We began by tracing the or
ganization of the libido through its successive
stages—from the oral through the sadistic-anal
to the genital—and in doing so placed all the
components of the sexual instinct on the same
footing. Later it appeared that sadism was the
representative of another instinct which was
opposed to Eros. This new view, that the in
stincts fell into two groups, seems to explode
the earlier view of
the successive stages of
libidinal organization. But we do not have to
break fresh ground in order to find a way out
of the difficulty. The solution has been at hand
for a long time and consists in the fact that
what we are concerned with are scarcely ever
pure instinctual impulses but mixtures in vari
ous proportions of the two groups of instincts.
If this is so, there is no need to revise our view
of the organizations of the libido. A sadistic
cathexis of an object may legitimately claim
to be treated as a libidinal one; and an aggres
sive impulse against the father can just as well
be subjected to repression as a loving impulse
towards the mother. Nevertheless we shall bear
in mind for future consideration the possibility
that repression is a process which has a special
relation to the genital organization of the libido
and that the ego resorts to other methods of
defence when it has to secure itself against the
libido on other levels of organization. A case
hke Little Hans's does not enable us to come
to any clear conclusion. It is true that in him
an aggressive impulse had been disposed of by
repression, but this happened after the genital
organization had been attained.
This time we will keep our attention on the
question of anxiety. We have said that as soon
as the ego recognized the danger of castration
it gave the signal of anxiety and inhibited
through the pleasure-unpleasure system (in a
way which we cannot as yet understand more
fully) the impending cathetic process in the id.
At the same time the phobia became formed;

[737b]
and now the castration anxiety was directed to
a different object and expressed in a distorted
form, so that the patient was afraid, not of
being castrated by his father, but of being
bitten by a horse or eaten by a wolf. This
substitutive formation
had two
obvious ad
vantages. In the first place it avoided a conflict
due to ambivalence (for the father had been a
loved object, too), and in the second place it
enabled
the ego to cease producing anxiety.
For the anxiety belonging to a phobia is con
ditional; it only emerges when the object of
it is perceived, and rightly so, since it is only
then that the danger-situation is present. There
is no need to be afraid of being castrated by a
father who is not there. On the other hand, one
cannot get rid of a father; he can appear when
ever he chooses. But if he is replaced by an
animal, all one has to do is to avoid the sight of
it—that is, its presence—in order to be free
from danger and anxiety. Little Hans, therefore,
imposed a restriction upon his ego. He produced
the inhibition of not leaving the house so as
not
to
come across
any horses.
The young
Russian had an even easier time of it, for it was
hardly a privation for him not to look at a
particular
picture-book
any
more.
If
his
naughty sister had not always been showing
him the book with the picture of the wolf
standing upright in it, he would have been able
to feel safe from his fears.
On a previous occasion I have stated that
phobias have the character of a projection, in
that they replace an internal, instinctual danger
by an external, perceptual one. The advantage
of doing this comes from the fact that the in
dividual can protect himself against external
dangers by fleeing from them and avoiding the
perception of them, whereas it is useless to try
to flee from dangers that arise from within.
This statement of mine was not incorrect, but
it did not go below the surface of things. For
an instinctual demand is, after all, not danger
ous in itself; it only becomes so inasmuch as it
entails a real external danger, the danger of
castration. Thus what happens in a phobia in
the last resort is merely that one
external
danger is replaced by another. The view that in
a phobia the ego is able to escape anxiety by
means of avoidance or inhibitory symptoms fits
in with the theory that that anxiety is only an
affective signal and that no alteration has taken
place in the economic situation.
The anxiety felt in animal phobias is, there
fore, an affective reaction on the part of the
ego to danger; and the danger which is being

[738a]
Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety
735
signalled in this way is the danger of castration.
This anxiety differs in no respect from the
anxiety which the ego normally feels in situa
tions of danger except that its content remains
unconscious and only becomes conscious in
the form of a distortion.
The same is true, I think, of the phobias of
grown-up persons, although the material that
undergoes modification in their neuroses is
much more abundant, and there are some ad
ditional factors in the formation of the symp
toms. Fundamentally the position is identical.
The agoraphobic patient imposes a restriction
upon his ego so as to escape a certain instinc
tual danger, namely, the danger of giving way
to his erotic desires. For, if he did so, the danger
of being castrated, or some similar danger,
would once more be conjured up as it was
in his childhood. I may cite as an instance
the case of a young man who became agora
phobic because he was afraidof yielding to the
solicitations of prostitutes and of contracting a
syphilitic infection fromthemas a punishment.
I am well aware that a great number of cases
exhibit a much more complicated structure and
that many other repressed instinctual impulses
can enter into a phobia. But they are only
tributary streams which have for the most part
joined the main current of the neurosis at a
later stage. The symptomatology of agora
phobia, for example, is complicated by the fact
that the egodoes not confine itself to making a
renunciation. In order to rob the situation of
danger it does more: it usually effects a tem
poral regression to infancy,or,in extremecases,
to pre-natal days, that is, to a time when the
individual
was in
his
mother's womb
and
protected against the dangers which beset him
in the present. A regression of this kind now
becomes a condition whose fulfilment exempts
the ego from making its renunciation. For
instance, an agoraphobicpatient may be able to
walk in the street provided he is accompanied,
like a small child, by someone he knows and
trusts; or, for the same reason,he may be able
to go out alone, provided he remains within a
certain distance of his own house and does not
go to places which are not familiar to him or
where people do not know him. What these
stipulations are will depend in each case upon
the
infantile
factors
which
dominate
him
through his neurosis.The phobia of being alone
is unambiguous in its meaning, irrespective of
any infantile regression: it is, ultimately, an
endeavour to avoid the temptation to indulge
in solitary masturbation. Naturally, infantile

[738b]
regression can only take place when the in
dividual is no longer a child.
A phobia generally sets in only after a first
anxiety attack has been experienced in specific
circumstances, such as in the street or in a
train or in solitude. Thereafter the anxiety is
held in ban by the phobia, but it re-emerges
whenever the protective stipulation cannot be
fulfilled. The mechanism of phobia does good
service as a means of defence and tends to be
very stable. A continuation of the defensive
struggle, in the shape of a struggle against the
symptom, occurs frequently but not invariably.
What has been said about anxiety in phobias
is true of obsessional neuroses as well. In this
respect it is not difficult for us to put obses
sional neuroses on a level with phobias. In the
former, the mainspring of all later symptomformation is clearly the ego's fear of the super
ego. The danger-situation from which the ego
must get away is the hostility of the super-ego.
There is no trace of projection here; the danger
is completely internalized. But if we ask our
selves what it is that the ego fears from the
super-ego, we cannot but think that the punish
ment threatened by the latter must be an
extension of the punishment of castration. Just
as the father has become depersonalized in the
shape of the super-ego, so has the fear of
castration at his hands become transformed into
an undefined social or moral anxiety. But this
anxiety is concealed. The ego escapes it by
obediently carrying out the behests, precau
tions, and penances that have been enjoined
on it. If it is impeded in doing so, it is at once
overtaken by an acute feeling of discomfort
which may, I think, be regarded as an equiva
lent of anxiety and which the patients them
selves liken to anxiety.
The conclusion we have come to, then, is
this. Anxiety is a reaction to a situation of
danger. It is obviated by the ego's doing some
thing to avoid that situation or to withdraw
from it. It might be said that symptoms are
created so as to prevent anxiety from emerging.
But this does not go deep enough. It would be
truer to say that symptoms are created so as to
avoid a danger-situation whose approach has
been signalled by the emergence of anxiety.
In the cases that we have discussed, the danger
concerned was the danger of castration or some
off-shoot of castration.
If anxiety is a reaction of the ego to danger,
we shall be tempted to regard the traumatic
neuroses, which so often follow upon a narrow
escapefrom death, asa direct result of a fear of

[739a]
736
Sigmund Freud
death (or fear for life) and to dismiss from our
minds the question of castration and the sub
ordinate relations of the ego. Most physicians
who
observed
the
traumatic
neuroses
that
occurred during the great war took this line
and triumphantly announced that proof was
now forthcoming that a threat to the instinct
of self-preservation could by itself produce
a neurosis without any admixture of sexual
factors and without requiring any of the com
plicated hypotheses of psycho-analysis. It is in
fact greatly to be regretted that not a single
analysis of a traumatic neurosis of any value is
extant. And it is to be regretted, not because
such an analysis would contradict the aetio
logical importance of sexuality—for any such
contradiction has long since been disposed of by
the introduction of the concept of narcissism,
which brings the libidinal cathexis of the ego
into line
with the cathexes of objects and
emphasizes the libidinal character of the in
stinct of self-preservation—but because, in the
absence of any analyses of this kind we have
lost a precious opportunity of making decisive
discoveries about the relations between anxiety
and the formation of symptoms. In view of all
that we know about the structure of the com
paratively simple neuroses of everyday life, it
would seem highly improbable that a neurosis
could come into being merely because of the
objective presence of danger without any par
ticipation of the deeper levels of the mental
apparatus. But the unconscious seems to con
tain nothing that would lend substance to the
concept of the annihilation of life. Castration
can be
pictured on
the
basis of
the daily
experience of the faeces being separated from
the body or on the basis of losing the mother's
breast
at
weaning.
But nothing resembling
death can ever have been experienced; or if it
has, as in fainting, it has left no observable
traces behind. I am therefore inclined to adhere
to the view that the fear of death should be
regarded as analogous to the fear of castration
and that the situation to which the ego is re
acting is one of being abandoned by the pro
tecting
super-ego—the powers
of
destiny—
so that it has no longer any safeguard against
all the dangers that surround it. In addition, it
must be remembered that in those experiences
which lead to a traumatic neurosis the pro
tective barrier against external stimuli has been
broken through and
over-great quantities of
excitation impinge upon the mental apparatus;
so that we have here the second possibility,
that anxiety is not only being signalled as an

[739b]
affect but is also being created anew out of the
economic conditions of the situation.
The statement I have just made, to the effect
that the
ego has been prepared to
expect
castration
by
having
undergone
constantly
repeated object-losses, places the question of
anxiety in
a new light.
We
have
hitherto
regarded it as an affective signal of danger.
But now, since the danger is so often one of
castration it appears to us as a reaction to a loss,
a separation. Even though many considerations
immediately arise which make against this view,
we cannot but be struck by one very remark
able correlation. The first experience of anxiety
through which the individual goes is (in the
case of human beings, at all events) birth, and,
objectively speaking, birth is a separation from
the mother. It can be compared to a castration
of the mother (by equating the child with a
penis). Now it would be very satisfactory if
anxiety, as a symbol of separation, were to
be repeated on every subsequent occasion on
which
a separation took
place.
But
unfor
tunately we are prevented from making use
of this correlation by the fact that birth is not
experienced subjectively as a separation from
the mother, since the foetus, being a completely
narcissistic creature, is totally unaware of her
existence as an object. Another adverse argu
ment is that we know what the affective re
actions to separation are: they are pain and
mourning, not anxiety. Incidentally, it may be
remembered that in discussing the question of
mourning1 we also failed to discover why it
should be such a painful thing.
CHAPTER VIII
The time has come to pause and reflect. What
we clearly want is some idea of what anxiety
really is, some criterion that will enable us to
distinguish true statements about it from false
ones. But this is not easy to get. Anxiety is not
so simple as all that. Up till now we have
arrived
at
nothing but
contradictory views
about it, none of which can, to the unprejudiced
eye,
be
given preference
over the other. I
therefore propose to .adopt a different pro
cedure.I propose to assemble,quite impartially,
all the facts that we do know about anxiety
and to give up the idea of making any im
mediate synthesis of them.
Anxiety, then, is in the first place something
that is felt. We call it an affective state, al
though we are also ignorant of what an affect
1 "Mourning and
Melancholia"
(1917), Collected
Papers, TV.

[740a]
Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety
737
is. As a feeling, anxiety has a very marked
quality of unpleasure. But that is not the whole
of its quality. Not every unpleasure is anxiety,
for there are other sensations, such as tension,
pain, or mourning, which have the quality of
unpleasure. Thus anxiety must have other
distinctive features besides this quality. Can we
succeed in finding out what the differences are
between these various unpleasurable affects?
We can at any rate note one or two things
about the feeling of anxiety. Its unpleasurable
quality seems to have a character of its own—
something not very obvious, whose presence
is difficult to prove yet which is in all likeli
hood there. But besides having this special char
acter which is difficult to isolate, we notice
that anxiety is accompanied by fairly definite
physical sensations which can be referred to
particular organs of the body. As we are not
concerned here with the physiology of anxiety,
we shall content ourselves with mentioning a
few examples of these sensations. The clearest
and most frequent ones are those connected
with the respiratory organs and with the heart.
They provideevidence that motor innervations,
i.e., processes of discharge, play a part in the
general phenomenon of anxiety.
Analysis of anxiety states therefore reveals
the existence of (i) a specific quality of un
pleasure, (2) acts of discharge, and (3) per
ceptions of those- acts. The two last points
indicate at once a difference between states of
anxiety and other similar states, like those of
mourning and pain. The latter do not have any
motor manifestation;
or if they have,
the
manifestation is not an integral part of the
whole state but is distinct from it as being a
result of it or a reaction to it. Anxiety, then, is
a special state of unpleasure, with acts of dis
charge alongparticular channels. In accordance
with our general views we should be inclined to
think that anxiety is based upon an increase of
excitation which, on the one hand, produces the
quality of unpleasure and, on the other, finds
relief through the channels of discharge men
tioned
above.
But
a
purely
physiological
account of this sort is scarcely sufficient. We
are tempted to assume the presence of a
historical factor which binds the sensations
of anxiety and its innervations firmly together;
in other words, that an anxiety state is the
reproduction of some experience which contains
the necessary conditions for such an increase of
excitation and
a discharge
along particular,
channels, and that from this circumstance the
unpleasure of anxiety receives its specific

[740b]
character. In man, birth is a prototypic ex
perience of this kind, and one is therefore
inclined to regard anxiety states as a reproduc
tion of the trauma of birth.
This does not imply that anxiety occupies a
different position from all the other affective
states. In my opinion, the other affects are also
reproductions of very early, perhaps even preindividual, experiences of vital importance; and
I should be inclined to regard them as universal,
typical,anil innate hysterical attacks, compara
ble with the recently and individually acquired
attacks which occur in hysterical neuroses and
whose origin and significance as memory sym
bols have been revealed by analysis. Of course
it
would
be very desirable to
be
able
to
demonstrate the truth of this view in a number
of such affects—a thing which is still very far
from being the case.
Certain immediate objections to this view
that anxiety goes back to the event of birth
have to be met. It may be argued that anxiety
is a reaction which, in all probability, is common
to every organism, certainly every organism of a
higher order, whereas birth is only experienced
by the mammals; and it is doubtful whether in
all of them, even, birth amounts to a trauma.
Therefore, there can be anxiety without the
prototype of birth. But this objection takes us
beyond the ^barrier that divides psychology
from biology. It may be precisely because
anxiety has an indispensable biologicalfunction
to fulfil as a reaction to a state of danger that
it is differently fashioned in different living
beings. We do not know, besides, whether
anxiety involves the same sensations and in
nervations in creatures far removed from man
as it does in man himself. Thus there is no
good argument here against the view that,
in man, anxiety is modelled upon the process
of birth.
If the structure and origin of anxiety are as
described, the next question is: what is the
function of anxiety and on what occasions is it
reproduced? The answer seems to be obvious
and convincing: anxiety arose originally as a
reaction to a state of danger, and it is repro
duced whenever a state of that kind recurs.
This answer, however, raises further con
siderations. The innervations involved in the
original state of anxiety probably had a meaning
and purpose, just as have the muscular move
ments
which accompany a
first
hysterical
attack. In order to understand an hysterical
attack, all onehas to do is to look for a situation
in which the movements in question would form

[741a]
738
Sigmund Freud
part of an appropriate and expedient action.
Thus in birth it is probable that the innerva
tions,
in
being directed
to
the respiratory
organs, are preparing the way for the activity
of the lungs, and that in accelerating the heart
beat they are helping to keep the blood free
from
toxic
substances. Naturally, when the
anxiety state is reproduced later on as an affect,
it will be lacking in any such expediency, just
as the repetitions of a hysterical attack are.
When the individual is placed in a new situation
of danger, it may well be quite inexpedient for
him to respond with an anxiety state (which
is a reaction to an earlier danger) instead of in
itiating a reaction which is appropriate to the
present danger. But his behaviour may become
expedient once more if he recognizes the dangersituation before it has actually overtaken him
and signals its approach by an outbreak of anx
iety. In that case, he can at once get rid of his
anxiety by having recourse to more suitable
measures. Thus we see that there are two ways
in which anxiety can emerge: in an expedient
way, when a new situation of danger has oc
curred, or in an expedient way, in order to give
a signal and prevent such a situation from
occurring.
But what is a danger? In the act of birth
there is a real danger to life. We know what
this means objectively; but what it means in a
psychological sense we have no idea. The
danger of birth has as yet no mental content
for the subject. One cannot possibly suppose
that the foetus has any sort of knowledge that
its life is in danger of being destroyed. It can
only be aware of some vast upheaval in the
economy of its narcissistic libido. Very large
quantities
of
excitation
crowd
in
upon
it,
giving rise to new
sensations of unpleasure,
and many organs acquire an increased cathexis,
thus foreshadowing the object-cathexis which
will soon set in. What elements in all this can
be considered to be distinctive of a dangersituation?
Unfortunately, far too little is known about
the mental constitution of the new-born child
to make a direct answer possible. I cannot even
vouch for the validity of the description I have
just given. It is easy to say that the baby will
repeat its affect of anxiety in every situation
which recalls the event of birth. The important
thing to know is what it is that recalls that
event and what it is in that event that is
recalled.
All we can do is to examine the occasions on
which infants or rather older children show

[741b]
readiness
to produce
anxiety.
In
his book
on the trauma of birth,1 Rank has made a
determined attempt to establish a relationship
between the earliest phobias of children and
the impressions made on them by the event of
birth. But I do not think he has been successful.
His theory is open to two objections. In the
first
place,
he assumes that the infant has
received certain sensory impressions, in par
ticular of a visual kind, at the time of birth,
the renewal of which can recall to its memory
the trauma of birth and thus evoke a reaction
of anxiety. This assumption is quite unfounded
and extremely improbable. It is not credible
that a child should retain any but tactile and
general sensations relating to the process of
birth. If, later on, children show fear of small
animals that disappear into holes or emerge
from them, this reaction, according to Rank,
is due to their perceiving an analogy. But it is
an analogy of which they cannot be aware. In
the second place, in considering these later
anxiety-situations Rank dwells, according as it
suits him best, now on the child's recollection
of its happy intra-uterine existence, now on its
recollection of the traumatic disturbance which
interrupted that existence; so that he is able to
make almost any interpretation he pleases.
There are, moreover, certain examples of child
hood anxietywhich directlytraversehis theory.
When, for instance, a child is left alone in the
dark, onewould expect it, according to hisview,
to welcome the re-establishment of the intra
uterine situation; yet it is precisely on such
occasions that the child reacts with anxiety.
And if this is explained by sayingthat the child
is being reminded of the interruption which
the event of birth made in its intra-uterine
happiness, then one can no longer shut one's
eyes
to
the
far-fetched
character
of
such
explanations.
I
am
driven to
the
conclusion that the
earliest phobias of infancy cannot be directly
traced back to impressions of birth and that so
far they have not been explained. A certain
preparedness for anxiety is undoubtedly present
in the infant. But thispreparedness for anxiety,
instead of being at its maximum immediately
after birth and then slowly decreasing, does
not emerge till later on, as the mental develop
ment of the infant proceeds. It lasts over a
certainperiodof childhood. If the early phobias
persist beyond that period, one is inclined to
suspect the presence of a neurotic disturbance,
1 Rank, The Trauma of Birth and Us Importance
for Psycho-Analytic Therapy (1924).

[742a]
Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety
739
although here again it is not at all clear what
their relation is
to the undoubted neuroses
that appear later on in childhood.
Only a few of the manifestations of anxiety
in children are comprehensible to us, and we
must confine
our
attention to
them.
They
occur, for instance, when a child is alone or in
the dark, or when it finds itself with an un
known person instead of one to whom it is
used—such as its mother. These three instances
can be reduced to a single condition, namely,
that of missing someone who is loved and
longed-for.
Here is the key, I think, to an understand
ing of anxiety and to a reconciliation of the
contradictions that seem to beset it. The child's
memory picture of the person longed-for is
no doubt intensively cathected, probably in a
hallucinatory way at first. But this has no
effect; and now it seems as though the longing
turns into anxiety. This anxiety has all the
appearance of being an expression of the child's
feeling of not knowingwhat to do, as though in
its still undeveloped state it did not know how
to cope with its cathexis of longing. Here
anxiety seems to be a reaction to the felt loss
of the object; and one is at once reminded
of the fact that castration anxiety, too, is a
fear of being separated from a highly valued
object, and that the earliest anxiety of all—
the primal anxiety of birth—is brought about
on the occasion of a separation
from
the
mother.
But our next reflection takes us a step beyond
this question of loss of object. The reason why
the infant in arms wants to perceive the pres
ence of its mother is only because it already
knows by experience that she gratifies all its
needs without delay. The situation, then, that
it regards as a danger and against which it
wants to be safe-guarded is one of non-gratifica
tion, of a growing tension due to need, against
which it is helpless. I think that if we adopt
this view all the facts fall into place. The situa
tion of non-gratification in which the amounts
of stimulation rise to an unpleasurable height
without the infant being able to master them
by utilizing and discharging them psychologi
cally must be analogous for it to the experience
of being born—must be a repetition of that
situation of danger. What both situations have
in common is an economic disturbance caused
by an accumulation of amounts of stimulation
which require to be disposed of. It is this ele
ment which is the real essence of the danger. In
both cases the same reaction of anxiety sets in.

[742b]
(This anxiety reaction is still an expedient one
in the child at the sucking stage, for, just as it
activated the lungs of the new-born baby to
get rid of the internal stimuli, so now, in being
discharged into
the
respiratory
and
vocal
muscular apparatus, it calls the mother to the
child's side.) It is unnecessary to suppose that
the child carries with it from the time of its
birth anything more than this way of indicating
the presence of danger.
When the child has found out by experience
that an external, perceptible object can put an
end
to
the
dangerous
situation
which
is
reminiscent of birth, the nature of the danger
it fearsis displaced from the economic situation
on to the
condition which determined that
situation, viz., the loss of object. It is the ab
sence of the mother that is now the danger;
and as soon as that danger arises the small
child gives the signal of anxiety, before the
dreaded economic situation has set in. This
change constitutes a first important step for
ward in the provision made by the child for its
self-preservation, and at the same time rep
resents a transition from the automatic and
involuntary new-creation
of anxiety to the
intentional reproduction of anxiety as a signal
of danger.
In these two aspects, as an automatic phe
nomenon and as a rescue-signal,
anxiety is
seen to be a product of the infant's mental
helplessness which is a natural counterpart of
its
biological helplessness. The striking co
incidence by which the anxiety of the new-born
baby and the anxiety of the infant in arms both
depend upon a separation from the mother
does not need to be explained on psychological
lines. It can be accounted for simply enough
from a biological point of view; for, just as
the mother originally satisfied all the needs of
the foetus through her own body, so now, after
its birth, she continues to do so, though partly
through other means. There is much more
continuity between intra-uterine life and earli
est infancy than the impressive caesura of the
act of birth allows us to believe. What happens
is that the child's biological situation as a foetus
is replaced for it by a psychological objectrelation to its mother. But we must not forget
that during its intra-uterine life the mother
was not an object for the foetus, and that at
that time there were no objects at all as far
as it was concerned. It is obvious that in this
scheme of things there is no room for the abreaction of the birth-trauma. We cannot find
that anxiety has any other function except that

[743a]
74o
Sigmund Freud
of being a signal for the avoidance of a dangersituation.
The importance of the loss of object as a
determinant of anxiety extends considerably
further. For the next transformation of anxiety,
viz., the castration anxiety belonging to the
phallic phase, is also a fear of separation and is
thus attached to the same determinant. In this
case the danger is of being separated from one's
genitals. Ferenczi has traced, quite correctly, I
think, a clear line of connection between this
fear and the
fears
contained in the earlier
situations of danger. According to him, the
high degree of narcissistic value which the penis
possesses is due to the fact that this organ is a
guarantee to its owner that he can be once more
united to his mother—i.e., to a substitute for
her—in the act of copulation. Being deprived
of it amounts to a renewed separation from her
and this in its turn means being helplessly
exposed to an unpleasurable tension due to
instinctual need, as was the case in birth. But
this need whose increase, is feared is now a
specific one belonging to the genital libido and
is no longer an indeterminate one, as in the
period of infancy. It may be added that for a
man who is impotent (that is, who is inhibited
by the threat of castration) the substitute for
copulation is a phantasy of returning into his
mother's womb. Following out Ferenczi's line
of thought, one might say that such a man,
while endeavouring to return to his mother's
womb
vicariously—by means of his genital
organ, proceeds to replace that organ regressively by his body as a whole.
The progress which the child makes in its
development—its growing independence,
the
sharper division of its mental apparatus into
several institutions, the advent of new needs—
cannot fail
to
exert an
influence upon the
content
of
the
danger-situation.
We
have
already traced the change of that content from
loss of the mother as an object to castration.
The next change is enforced by the power of
the super-ego. With the depersonalization of
the parental institution from which castration
was feared, the danger becomes less defined.
Castration anxiety develops into moral anxiety
—social anxiety—and it is not so easy now to
, know what the anxiety is about. The formula,
separation and expulsion from the horde, only
applies to that later portion of the super-ego
which has
been formed on the strength of
social prototypes, not to the nucleus of the
super-ego which corresponds to the introjected
parental institution. Putting it more generally,

[743b]
what the ego regards as the danger and responds
to with an anxiety-signal is that the super-ego
should be angry with it or punish it or cease
to love it. The final transformation which the
fear of the super-ego undergoes is, it seems to
me, the fear of death (or fear for life) whichis
a fear of the super-ego projected on to the
powers of destiny.
At one time I attached some importance to
the view that what found discharge in anxiety
was the cathexis which had been withdrawn in
the process of repression. This view seems to
me no longer of any interest. The reason for
this is that whereas I formerly believed that
anxiety invariably arose automatically through
an economic process, my present conception of
anxiety as a signal given by the ego in order to
affect the pleasure-unpleasure institution does
away with the necessity of considering the eco
nomic factor. Of course there is nothing to be
said against the idea that it is precisely the
energy that has been liberated by being with
drawn through repression which is used by the
ego to arouse affect; but it is no longer of any
importance whichportion of the general energy
is employed for this purpose.
This new view of things calls for an examina
tion of another proposition of mine, namely,
that the ego is the actual seat of anxiety. I
think this propositionstill holdsgood. There is,
as far as can be seen, no reason to assign any
manifestation of anxiety to the super-ego;
while the expression anxiety of the id stands in
need of correction, though rather as to its form
than its substance. Anxiety is an affective state
and as such can, of course, only be felt by the
ego. The id cannothaveanxietyas the ego can;
for it is not an organization and cannot make a
judgment about a situation bf danger. On the
other hand it very often happens that processes
take place or begin to take place in the id which
cause the ego to produce anxiety. Indeed, it is
probable that the earliest repressions as well as
most of the later ones are motivated by an egoanxiety of this sort in regard to processes in the
id. Here again one may rightly distinguish
between the case in which something occurs in
the id which activates a danger-situation for the
ego and induces the latter to give the anxiety
signal for inhibition to take place, and the case
in which a situation analogous to the trauma of
birth is established in the id and an automatic
reaction of anxiety ensues. The two cases may
be brought closer together if it is pointed out
that the second case applies to the earliest and
original danger-situation, while the first case

[744a]
Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety
74i
applies to any one of the later determinants of
anxiety that have been derived from it; or,
with regard to psychological disorders, that the
second case is operative in the aetiology of the
actual neuroses, while the first remains typical
for that of the psychoneuroses.
We see, then, that it is not so much a ques
tion of taking back our earlier findings as of
bringing them into line with more recent dis
coveries. It is still an undeniable fact that, in
sexual abstinence, improper interference with
the processes of sexual excitation, or deflection
of the latter from its psychological modifica
tion, anxiety arises directly out of libido; in
other words, that the ego is reduced to a state
of helplessness in the face of an excessive ten
sion due to need, as it was in the situation of
birth, and that anxiety is then produced. Here
once more, though the matter is of little im
portance, it is very possible that what finds
discharge in anxiety is precisely the surplus of
unutilized libido. As we know, a psychoneurosis
is especially liable to develop on the basis of
an actual neurosis. This looks as though the
ego were attempting to save itself from anxi
ety, which it has learned to keep in suspension
for a while, and to bind it by the formation
of symptoms. Analysis of the traumatic warneuroses—a term which, by the way, covers a
great variety of disorders—would probably
have shown that a number of them possess the
characteristics of actual neuroses.
In describing the evolution of the various
danger-situations from their prototype, the act
of birth, I have had no intention of asserting
that every later determinant of anxiety com
pletely invalidates the preceding one. It is true
that as the development of the ego goes on the
earlier danger-situations tend to lose their force
and to be set aside, so that one might say that
each period of the individual's life has its
appropriate determinant of anxiety. Thus the
danger of psychological helplessness is appro
priate to the period of life when his ego is
immature; the dangerof loss of object, to early
childhood when he is still dependent on others;
the danger of castration, to the phallic phase;
and the fear of his super-ego, to the latency
period. Nevertheless, all these danger-situations
and determinants of anxiety can persist side by
side and cause the ego to react to them with
anxiety at a later period than the appropriate
one; or, again, several of them can come into
operation at the same time. It is possible, more
over, that there is a close relationship between
the danger-situation that is operative at a given

[744b]
moment and the form taken by the ensuing
neurosis.1
When, in an earlier part of this discussion,
we found that the danger of castration was of
importance in more than one neurotic affection,
we put ourselves on guard against over-esti
mating that factor, since it could not be a
decisive one for the female sex, and since
women are undoubtedly more subject to neu
roses than men. We now see that there is no
danger of our regarding castration anxiety as
the sole motive force of the defensive processes
which lead to neurosis.
I
have shown else
where how the little girl, in the course of her
development, is led to make a loving objectcathexis through her castration complex. It is
precisely in women that the danger-situation
of loss of object seems to have remained the
most effective. All we need to do is to make
a slight modificationin our description of their
determinant of anxiety, in the sense that it is
no longer a matter of feeling the want of, or
actually losing, the object itself, but of losing
the object's love. Since there is no doubt that
hysteria has a strong affinity with the nature of
women, just as obsessional neurosis has with
that of men, it appears probable that, as a
determinantof anxiety, lossof loveplays much
1Since the differentiation of the ego and the id, our
interest in the problems of repression cannot fail to
have received a fresh impetus. Up till then we had
been content to confine our interest to those aspects
of repression which concerned the ego—the keeping
away from consciousness and from motility, and the
formation of substitutes (symptoms). With regard to
the instinctual impulses themselves, we assumed that
they
remained unaltered in
the
unconscious
for
an
indefinite
length of
time.
But
now
our
interest
is
turned to the vicissitudes of the repressed, and we begin
to suspect that it is not self-evident, perhaps not even
the
usual thing, that those impulses should remain
unaltered and unalterable in this way. There is no
doubt that the original impulses have been inhibited
and deflected from their aim through repression. But
has the unconscious portion of them maintained itself
and been proof against the influences of life that tend
to alter and depreciate them? In other words, are the
old
desires,
about
whose
former
existence
analysis
tells us, still there? The answer seems ready to hand
and certain. It is that the old, repressed desires must
still be present in the unconscious, since we still find
their derivatives,
the symptoms, at
work. But this
answer
is
not
sufficient.
It
does
not enable
us
to
decide between
two possibilities, either that the
old
desire is now operating only through its derivatives,
having transferred the whole of its cathectic energy
to them, or that it is itself still alive too. If its fate
has been to exhaust itself in cathecting its derivatives,
there is yet a third possibility. In the course of the
neurosis it may have become reanimated by regression,
anachronistic though it be. These are no idle specula
tions. There are many things about mental life, both
normal
and
pathological,
which
seem
to
call
for
questions of this kind. In my paper, "The Passing of
the Oedipus-Complex" {Collected Papers, II [1924]), I
had
occasion
to
notice the
difference
between mere
repression and the real
removal of an old conative
impulse.

[745a]
742
Sigmund Freud
the same part in hysteria as the threat of cas
tration does in phobias and fear of the super
ego in obsessional neurosis.
CHAPTER IX
What we have now to do is to consider the
relationship between the formation of symp
toms and the production of anxiety.
There seem to
be two very widely held
opinions on this subject. One is that anxiety is
itself a neurotic symptom. The other is that
there is a much more intimate relation between
the two.
According to the second opinion,
symptoms are only formed in order to avoid
anxiety: they bind the mental energy which
would otherwise be discharged as anxiety. Thus
anxiety would be the fundamental phenomenon
and main problem of neurosis.
That this latter opinion is at least in part
true is shown by some striking examples. If an
agoraphobic patient who has been accompanied
into the street is left alone there, he will have
an anxiety attack. Or if an obsessional neurotic
is prevented from washing his hands after hav
ing touched something, he will become a prey
to almost unbearable anxiety. It is plain, then,
that the purpose and the result of having a
companion in the street or of
washing the
hands were to obviate outbreaks of anxiety of
this kind. In this sense, every inhibition which
the ego imposes upon itself can be called a
symptom.
Since we have traced back the production of
anxiety to a situation of danger we should
prefer to say that symptoms are created in
order to remove the ego from a situation of
danger. If the symptoms are prevented from
being formed, the danger does in fact material
ize; that is, a situation analogous to birth is
established in which the ego is helpless in the
face of a constantly increasing instinctual de
mand-—the earliest and original determinant of
anxiety. Thus in our view the relation between
anxiety and symptom is less close than was
supposed, for we have inserted the factor of
the danger-situation between them. We can
also add that the production of anxiety sets
symptom-formation going and is, indeed,
a
necessary pre-requisite of it. For if the ego did
not arouse the pleasure-unpleasure institution
by developing anxiety, it would not have the
power to arrest the process which is preparing
in the id and which threatens danger. There is
in all this an evident inclination to limit to a
minimum the amount of anxiety developed and
to employ it only as a signal; for to do more

[745b]
would only be to feel in another place the
unpleasure which the instinctual process was
threatening to produce, and that would not be
a good result from the standpoint of the pleas
ure-principle, although it is one that occurs
often enough in the neuroses.
The formation of symptoms, then, does in
effect put an end to the danger-situation. It
has two aspects: one, hidden from view, brings
about those alterations in the id in virtue of
which the ego is removed from danger; the
other presents to the world what the symptomformation has created in place of the instinc
tual process which has been affected—namely,
the substitutive formation.
It would, however, be more correct to ascribe
to the defensive process what we have just said
about symptom-formation and to use the latter
term as synonymous with substitute-formation.
It will then be clear that the defensive process
is analogous to the method adopted by the ego
for removing itself from a danger that threat
ens it from outside, that is, to flight. The de
fensive process is an attempt at flight from an
instinctual danger. An examination of the weak
points in this comparison should prove inform
ative. One thing that can be said against it is
that the loss of an object (or loss of love on
the part of the object) and the
threat of
castration are just as much dangers coming
from without as, say, a ferocious animal would
be; they are not instinctual dangers. Neverthe
less, the two cases are not the same. A wolfwould
probably attack a man irrespective of his be
haviour towards it; but the loved person would
not cease to love him, nor would he be threat
ened with castration if he did not entertain
certain feelings and intentions in his mind.
Thus such instinctual impulses are determinants
of external dangers and so become dangerous
in themselves; and the individual can proceed
against the external dangers by taking meas
ures against the internal ones. In phobias of
animals, the danger seems to be still entirely
felt as an external one, just as it has under
gone an external displacement in the symptoms.
In obsessional neuroses, the danger is much
more internalized. That portion of anxiety in
regard to the super-ego which constitutes social
anxiety represents an internal substitute for an
external danger, while the other portion—moral
anxiety—is already completely endo-psychic.
Another objection is that in taking flight from
an impending external danger all that the subject
does is to increase the distance between him
self and what is threatening him. He does not

[746a]
Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety
743
prepare to defend himself against it or attempt
to alter anything about it, as would be the
case if he attacked the wolf with a stick or
shot at it with a gun. Now the defensive process
seems to do something more than would corre
spond to an attempt at flight. It joins issue
with the threatening instinctual process and
somehow suppresses it or deflects it from its
aims and thus renders it innocuous. This ob
jection seemsunimpeachable and must be given
due weight. I think it is probable that there
are some defensive processes which can truly
be likened to an attempt at flight, while in
others the ego takes a much more active line
of self-protection and initiates vigorous coun
ter-measures. But perhaps the whole analogy
between defence and flight is invalidated by
the fact that both the ego and the instinct in
the id are parts of the same organization, not
separate entities like the wolf and the child, so
that any kind of behaviour on the part of the
ego willresult in an alterationin the instinctual
process as well.
This study of the determinants of anxiety
has, as it were, shown the defensive behaviour
of the ego in a rational light. Each situation of
danger corresponds to a particular period of
life or developmental phase of the mental ap
paratus and appears to be justifiable for it. In
early infancy the individual is really not fitted
to master psychologically the large quantities
of excitation that impinge upon him, whether
from without or from within. Again, at a cer
tain period of life his most important interest
really is that the people he is dependent on
should not withdraw their loving care of him.
Later on in his boyhood, when he feels that
his father is a powerful rival in regard to his
mother and becomes aware of his own aggres
sive inclinations towards him and of his sexual
intentions towards his mother, he really is jus
tified in being afraid of his father; and his fear
of being punished by him can find expression
through phylogenetic reinforcement in the fear
of being castrated. Finally, as he enters into
social relationships, it really is necessary for
him to be afraid of his super-ego, his con
science; for the absence of that factor would
give rise for him to severe conflicts, dangers,
and so on.
But this last point raises a new problem.
Instead of the affect of anxiety, let us take, for
a moment, another affect, say that of pain. It
seems quite normal that at four years of age a
girl should weep painfully if her doll is broken;
or at six, if her schoolmistress reproves her;

[746b]
or at sixteen, if she is slighted by her young
man; or at twenty-five, if a child of her own
dies. Each of these determinants of pain has its
own time and each passes away when that time
is over. Only the final and definitive determi
nants remain throughout life. We should think
it rather unusual if this same girl, after she had
grown to be a wife and mother, were to cry
over some worthless trinket that had been
damaged. Yet that is how the neurotic behaves.
Although all the institutions for mastering
stimuli have long ago been developed within
wide limits in his mental apparatus, and al
though he is sufficiently grown-up to gratify
most of his needs for himself and has long ago
learnt that castration is no longer practised
as a punishment, he nevertheless behaves as
though the old danger-situations still existed,
and retains all the earlier determinants
of
anxiety.
Why this should be so requires a rather long
answer. First of all, let us see what the facts
are. In a great number of cases the old deter
minants of anxiety do really lapse, after having
produced neurotic reactions. The phobias of
infants, which consist in being afraid of being
alone or in
the dark or among strangers—
phobias which can almost be called normal—
usually pass off later on; the child "grows out
of them," as we say about many other dis
turbances of childhood. Animal phobias, which
are of such frequent occurrence, undergo the
same fate, and many conversion-hysterias of
early years find no continuation in later life.
Ceremonial actions appear extremely often in
the latency period but only a very small pro
portion of them develop later into a full obses
sional neurosis. In general, so far as we can tell
from our observations of town children belong
ing to the white races and living according to
fairly high cultural standards, the neuroses of
childhood are in the nature of regular episodes
in a child's development, although too little
attention is still being paid to them. Signs of
childhood neuroses can be detected in all adult
neurotics without exception; but by no means
all children who show those signs become neu
rotic in later life. It must be, therefore, that
certain determinants of anxiety are relinquished
and certain danger-situations lose their signifi
cance as the individual becomes more mature.
Moreover, some of
these
danger-situations
manage to survive into later times by modify
ing their determinants of anxiety so as to bring
them up to date. Thus, for instance, a man
may retain his fear of castration in the guise

[747a]
744
Sigmund Freud
of a syphilidophobia, after he has got to know
that it is no
longer customary to
castrate
people for indulging their sexual lusts, but that,
on the other hand, severe diseases may over
take anyone who thus gives way to his instincts.
Furthermore,
some determinants of anxiety,
such as fear of the super-ego, are destined not
to disappear at all but to accompany the in
dividual throughout his life. In that case the
neurotic will differ from the normal person in
that his reactions to the dangers in question
will be unduly strong. Finally, being grown-up
affords no absolute protection against a return
of
the
original
traumatic
anxiety-situation.
Each individual has in all probability a limit
beyond which his mental apparatus fails in its
function of mastering the quantities of excita
tion which require to be disposed of.
These minor rectifications cannot in any way
alter the main fact that a great many people
remain infantile in their behaviour in regard
to danger and do not overcome age-old deter
minants of anxiety. To deny this would be to
deny the existence of neurosis, for it is pre
cisely such people whom we call neurotics.
But how is this possible? Why are not all
neuroses episodes in the development of the
individual which come to
a
close when the
next phase is reached? Whence comes the ele
ment of persistence in these reactions to dan
ger? Why does the affect of anxiety alone seem
to enjoy the advantage over all other affects
of evoking reactions which are distinguished
from the rest in being abnormal and which,
through their inexpediency, run counter to the
movement of life? In other words, we have
once more unexpectedly come upon the riddle
which has so often confronted us: whence does
neurosis come—what is its ultimate, its own
peculiar meaning? After whole decades of psy
cho-analytic work, we are as much in the dark
about this problem as ever.
CHAPTER X
Anxiety is the reaction to danger. One cannot
help suspecting, however, that the reason why
the affect of anxiety occupies a unique position
in the economy of the mind has something to
do with the essential nature of danger. Yet
danger is a universal human experience; dan
gers are the same for everybody. What we need
and cannot lay our finger on is some factor
which will explain why some people are able
to subject the affect of anxiety, in spite of its
unique quality, to the ordinary workings of the
mind, or why others are doomed to break down

[747b]
over this task. Two attempts to find a factor
of this kind have been made; and it is natural
that such efforts should meet with a sympa
thetic reception, since they set out to fill a
most urgent need. The two attempts in question
are mutually complementary; they approach
the problem at opposite ends. The first was
made by Alfred Adler more than ten years
ago.1 He maintained in essence that it was
those individuals who were too greatly impeded
by some organic inferiority who failed to mas
ter the task set before them by danger. If it
were true that simplex sigillum veri,2 we should
welcome this answer as a perfect solution of
the problem. But on the contrary, our critical
studies of the last ten years have effectively
demonstrated the total inadequacy of such an
explanation—an explanation, moreover, which
sets aside the whole wealth of material that has
been discovered by psycho-analysis.
The second attempt was made by Otto Rank
in 1923 in his book, The Trauma of Birth. It
would be unjust to put his attempt on the same
level as Adler's except in this single point
which concerns us here, for it remains upon
psycho-analytic ground and pursues a psycho
analytic line of thought, so that it may be
accepted as a legitimate endeavour to solve the
problems of analysis. In this matter of the
relation of the individual to danger, Rank
moves away from the question of organic de
fect in the individual and concentrates on the
variable degree of intensity of the danger.
The event of birth is the first situation of
danger and the economic upheaval which it
produces becomes the prototype of reaction to
anxiety. We have already traced the line of
development which connects this first dangersituation and determinant of anxiety with all
the later ones, and we have seen that they all
retain a common quality in so far as they
signify in some way a separation from the
mother—at first only in a biological sense, next
as a direct loss of object and later as a loss of
object indirectly incurred. The discovery of
this extensive concatenation is an undoubted
achievement of Rank's constructive work. Now
the trauma of birth overtakes each individual
with a different degree of intensity, and the
violence of his anxiety-reaction varies with the
strength of the trauma. According to Rank,
whether the individual will ever learn to con
trol his anxiety—whether he will become nor
mal or neurotic—will dependupon the intensity
1 Written in 1926.—Tr.
2 Simplicity is the seal of truth.—-Ed.

[748a]
Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety
74S
of the initial anxiety that is thus produced
in him.
It is not our business to
criticize Rank's
hypothesis in detail here. All we need to do is
to consider whether it helps to solve the par
ticular problem before us. His proposition that
those persons become neurotic in whom the
trauma of birth was so strong that they have
never been able completely to ab-react it is
highly dubious from a theoretical point of view.
We do not rightly know what is meant by
ab-reacting a trauma. Taken literally, it implies
that the more frequently and the more intensely
a neurotic person reproduces affects of anxiety
the more closely will he approach to mental
health. This conclusion is not tenable. It was
because it did not tally with the facts that I
gave up the theory of ab-reaction which had
played such a large part in the cathartic meth
od. To lay so much stress on the variability in
the strength of the birth trauma is to leave no
room for the legitimate claims of hereditary
constitution as an aetiological factor. For this
variability is an organic factor which operates
in an accidental fashion in relation to the con
stitution and is itself dependent on many influ
ences which might be called accidental—as, for
instance, upon timely assistance in child-birth.
Rank's theory completely ignores constitutional
factors as well as phylogenetic ones. If, how
ever, we were to try to find a place for the
constitutional factor by qualifying his state
ment with the proviso, let us say, that what is
really important is the extent to which the
individual reacts to the variable intensity of the
trauma of birth, we should be depriving his
theory of its significance and should be relegat
ing the new factor introduced by him to a
position of minor importance: the factor which
decided whether a neurosis should supervene or
not would lie in a different, and once more in
an unknown, field.
Moreover, the fact that, while man has the
process of birth in common with the other
mammals, he alone is privileged to possess a
special predisposition
to
neurosis
is
hardly
favourable to Rank's theory. But the main
objection to his theory is that it floats in the
air instead of being based upon ascertained
observations. No body of evidence has been
collected to show that difficult and protracted
birth does in fact coincide with the develop
ment of a neurosis, or even that children so
born exhibit early infantile apprehensiveness
more strongly and over a longer period than
other children. It might be rejoined that pre

[748b]
cipitate labour and birth, that are easy for the
mother quite possibly involve a severe trauma
for the child. But we can still point out that
births which lead to asphyxia would be bound
to give clear evidence of the results which are
supposed to follow. It should be one of the
advantages of Rank's aetiological theory that
it postulates a factor whose existence can be
verified by observation. And so long as no such
attempt at verification has been made it is
impossible to assess the value of that theory.
On the other hand, I cannot identify myself
with the view that Rank's theory contradicts
the aetiological importance of the sexual in
stincts as hitherto recognized by psycho-analy
sis. For his theory only has reference to the
position
of the individual in regard
to the
danger-situation, so that it leaves it perfectly
open to us to assume that, if a person has not
been able to master his first dangers, he is
bound to succumb to later situations involv
ing sexual dangers and thus be driven into a
neurosis.
I do not believe, therefore, that Rank's at
tempt has solved the problem of the causation
of neurosis; nor do I believe that we can say
as yet how much it may have contributed to
such a solution. If an investigation into the
effects of difficult birth upon the predisposition
to neurosis should yield negative results, we
shall rate the value of his contribution low.
It is to be feared that our endeavours to find a
single, tangible ultimate cause of neurotic ill
ness will go unrewarded. The ideal solution,
which the medical man no doubt still yearns
for, would be to discover some bacillus which
could be isolated and bred in a pure culture
and which, when injected into a person, would
invariably produce the same illness; or, to put
it somewhat less fantastically, to demonstrate
the existence of certain chemical substances
the administration of which would create or
abolish particular neuroses. But the probability
of a solution of this kind seems slight.
Psycho-analysis leads
to less simple
and
satisfactory conclusions. What I have to say in
this connection is already long since known
and contains nothing new. If the ego succeeds
in protecting itself from a dangerous instinc
tual impulse, through, say, the process of re
pression, it has certainly inhibited and damaged
the particular part of the id concerned; but it
has at the same time given it a bit of inde
pendence and has renounced a bit of its own
sovereignty. This is inevitable from the nature
of repression, which is, fundamentally, an at-

[749a]
746
Sigmund Freud
tempt at flight. The repressed is now, as it
were, outlawed; it is excluded from the great
organization of the ego and is only subject to
the laws which govern the realm of the uncon
scious. If, now, the danger-situation changes so
that the ego has no reason for warding off a
new instinctual impulse which resembles the
repressed one, the consequence of the restriction
of the ego which has taken place will become
manifest. The new impulse will run its course
under an automatic influence—or, as I should
prefer*to say, under the influence of the repeti
tion-compulsion. It will follow the same path
as the earlier, repressed impulse, as though the
danger-situation that had been overcome still
existed. The fixating factor in repression, then,
is the repetition-compulsion of the unconscious
id—a compulsion which in normal circum
stances is only done away with by the mobile
function of the ego. The ego may occasionally
manage to break down the barriers of repres
sion which it has itself put up and to recover
its influence over the instinctual impulse and
direct its course in accordance with the changed
danger-situation. But in point of fact the ego
very seldom succeeds in doing this: it cannot
undo its repressions. It is possible that the way
the struggle will go depends upon quantitative
relations. In many cases one has the impression
that the outcome is an enforced one: the re
gressive attraction exerted by the repressed
impulse and the strength of the repression are
so great that the new impulse has no choice but
to obey the compulsion to repeat. In other
cases the entrance of yet another element into
the play of forces may be perceived: the at
traction exerted by the
repressed instinctual
prototype is reinforced by a repulsion brought
to bear by objective difficulties which are op
posed to the new impulse taking a different
course.
That this is the origin of fixation in repres
sion and of the retention of danger-situations
which are no longer present-day ones is con
firmed by the fact of psycho-analytic therapy
—a fact which is modest enough in itself but
which can hardly be over-rated from a theo
retical point of view. When, in the course of
an analysis, we have given the ego assistance
and have put it in a position to abolish its
repressions, it recovers its power over the re
pressed id and can allow the instinctual im
pulses to run their course as though the old
situations of danger no longer existed. What
we can do in this way is in general accord with
the therapeutic achievements of medicine; for

[749b]
as a rule we must be satisfied with bringing
about more quickly, more certainly and with
less expenditure of energy than would other
wise be the
case
a
desired result which in
favourable circumstances would have occurred
of itself.
We see from what has been said that it is
quantitative relations—relations which are not
directly observable but can only be inferred—
which determine whether or no old situations
of danger shall be preserved, repressions on the
part of the
ego maintained, and
childhood
neuroses find continuance. Among the factors
that play a part in the causation of neuroses
and that have
created the conditions under
which the forces of the mind are pitted against
one another, three emerge into prominence: a
biological, a phylogenetic, and a purely psycho
logical factor.
The biological factor is the-long period of
time during which the young of the human
species is in a condition of helplessness and
dependence. Its intra-uterine existence seems
to be short in comparison with that of most
animals, and it is sent into the world in a less
finished state. As a result the influence of the
objective world upon it is intensified and it
is
obliged to
make an
early differentiation
between the ego and the id. Moreover, the
dangers of the outer world have a greater im
portance for it, so that the value of the object
which can alone protect it against them and
take the place of its former intra-uterine life
is enormously enhanced. This biological factor,
then, establishes the earliest situations of dan
ger and creates the need to be loved which will
accompany the child through the rest of its life.
The existence of the second, phylogenetic,
factor, is based only upon inference. We have
been led to assume its reality by a remarkable
feature in the development of the libido. We
have found that the sexual life of man, unlike
that of most of the animals nearly related to
him, does not make a steady advance from
birth to maturity, but that, after an early ex
pansion up till the fifth year, it undergoes a
very decided interruption; and that it then
starts on its course once more at puberty, be
ginning from the point at which it broke off
in early childhood. This has led us to suppose
that something momentous must have occurred
in the vicissitudes of the human species which
has left behind this interruption in the sex
ual development of the individual as a kind
of historical precipitate. This factor owes its
pathogenic significance to
the fact that the

[750a]
Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety
747
majority of instinctual impulses belonging to
infantile sexuality are treated by the ego as
dangers and warded off as such, so that the
later sexual impulses of puberty, which in the
natural course of things would be ego-syntonic,
run the risk of succumbing to the attraction
of
their infantile
prototypes and
following
them into repression. It is here that we come
upon the most direct aetiology of the neuroses.
It is a curious thing that early contact with
the demands of sexuality should have a similar
effect on the ego as premature contact with
the external world.
The third, psychological, factor resides in a
defect of the mental apparatus which has to do
with its differentiation into id and ego, and
which is therefore ultimately attributable to
the influence of the external world. In view of
the dangers of objective reality the
ego is
obliged to
guard
against certain instinctual
impulses in the id and to treat them as dangers.
But it cannot protect itself from internal in
stinctual dangers as effectively as it can from
some bit of objective reality that is not part of
itself. Intimately bound up with the id as it is,
it can only ward off an instinctual danger by
restricting its own organization and by acqui
escing in the formation of symptoms in ex
change for having impaired the instinct. If the
rejected instinct renews its attack, the ego is
overtaken by all those difficulties which are
known to us as neurotic illness.
Further than this, I believe, our knowledge
of the nature and causes of neurosis has not as
yet been able to go.
CHAPTER XI
Appendices
In the course of this discussion various themes
have had to be put aside before they had been
fully dealt with. They have been brought to
gether in this chapter in order to*receive the
attention they deserve.
A. Modifications of Earlier Views
(a) Resistance and Anti-Cathexis
An important element in the theory of re
pression is the view that repression is not an
event that occurs once but that it requires a
permanent expenditure of energy. If this ex
penditure of energy were to cease, the repressed
impulse, whicli is being fed all the time from
its sources of energy, would seize the next
occasion to flow along the channels from which
it has been forced aside, and the repression

[750b]
would either fail in its purpose or would have
to be repeated an indefinite number of times.
Thus it is because instincts are incessant in
their nature that the ego has to make its
defensive action secure by a permanent ex
penditure of energy. This action undertaken to
protect repression is perceptible as resistance
in analytic treatment. Resistance presupposes
the existence of what I have called an anticathexis. An anti-cathexis of this kind is best
seen in obsessional neurosis. It appears in the
form of an alteration of the ego, as a reactionformation in the ego, and is effected by the
reinforcement
of
the
attitude
which is
the
opposite of the instinctual trend that has to be
repressed, as is seen, for instance, in pity, con
scientiousness, and cleanliness. These reactionformations of obsessional neurosis are essen
tially exaggerations of the normal traits of
character which develop
during
the
latency
period. The presence of an anti-cathexis in
hysteria
is much
more
difficult
to
detect,
though theoretically it is equally indispensable.
In hysteria, too, a certain amount of alteration
of the ego through reaction-formation is un
mistakable and in many circumstances becomes
so marked that it forces itself on our attention
as the principal symptom. The conflict of am
bivalence in hysteria, for instance, is resolved
by this means. The subject's hatred of a person
whom he loves is kept down by an exaggerated
amount of tenderness for him and apprehen
siveness about him. But the difference between
reaction-formations in obsessional neurosis and
in hysteria is that in the latter they do not
have the universality of a character-trait but
are confined to particular relationships. An hys
terical woman, for instance, may be specially
affectionate with her own children whom at
bottom she hates; but she will not be a more
affectionate person than other women or even
very fond of children in general. The reactionformation of hysteria clings tenaciously to a
particular object and never spreads over into a
general disposition of the ego, whereas what is
characteristic of obsessional neurosis is pre
cisely a spreading over of this kind—a loosen
ing of relations to the object and a great facil
ity of displacement in the choice of object.
There is another kind of anti-cathexis, how
ever, which seems more suited to the peculiar
character of hysteria. A repressed instinctual
impulse can be activated
(newly cathected)
from two directions: from within, through re
inforcement from its internal sources of excita
tion, and from without, through the perception

[751a]
748
Sigmund Freud
of an object that it desires. The hysterical anticathexis is mainly directed outwards, against
dangerous perceptions. It takes the form of a
special kind of vigilance which, by means of
restrictions of the ego, causes situations to be
avoided that would entail such perceptions, or
if they do occur, manages to withdraw the
subject's attention from them. Some French
analysts, in particular Laforgue, have recently
given this action of hysteria the special name
of
scotomization.
This
technique
of
anticathexis is still more noticeable in the phobias,
where interest is concentrated on removing the
subject ever further from
the possibility of
making the feared perception. The fact that
anti-cathexis should be orientated in an op
posite direction in hysteria and the phobias from
what it is in obsessional neurosis—though the
difference is not an absolute one—seems to be
significant. It suggests that there is an intimate
connection
between repression
and
external
anti-cathexis on the one hand and between re
gression and internal anti-cathexis (i.e., altera
tions in the ego through reaction-formations)
on the other. The task of defending against a
dangerous perception is, incidentally, common
to all neuroses. Various commands and pro
hibitions in obsessional neurosis have the same
end in view.
As has already been seen, the resistance that
has to be overcome in analysis proceeds from
the ego clinging to its anti-cathexes. It is hard
for the ego to direct its attention to percep
tions and ideas which it has up till now made
a rule of avoiding, or to acknowledge as belong
ing to itself impulses that are the complete
opposite of those which it has made its own.
Our campaign against resistance in analysis is
based upon this view of the facts. If the re
sistance is itself unconscious, as so often hap
pens owing to its connection with the repressed
material, we make that resistance conscious. If
it is conscious, or when it has become con
scious,
we
bring forward
logical arguments
against it; we promise the ego rewards and
advantages if it will give up its resistance.
There can be no doubt or mistake about the
existence of this resistance on the part of the
ego. But we have to ask ourselves whether it
covers the whole state of affairs in analysis. For
we find that, even after the ego has decided
to relinquish its resistances, it still has difficulty
in undoing the repressions; and we have called
the period of strenuous effort which follows
after its praiseworthy decision, the phase of
working through. The dynamic factor which

[751b]
makes a working through of this kind necessary
and comprehensible is not far to seek. It must
be that after the ego-resistance has been re
moved the power of the repetition-compulsion
—the attraction exerted by the unconscious
prototypes upon the repressed instinctual proc
ess—has yet to be overcome. This factor might
well be described as the resistance of the un
conscious. There is no need to be discouraged
by these emendations in our theory. They are
to be welcomed if they do something towards
furthering our knowledge, and they are no dis
grace to us so long as they enrich rather than
invalidate our earlier views—by limiting some
statement, perhaps, that was too general or by
enlarging
some idea that was too narrowly
formulated.
It must not be supposed that these emenda
tions provide us with a complete review of all
the varieties of resistance that are met with in
analysis. Further investigation of the subject
shows that the analyst has to combat no less
than
five varieties of resistance,
emanating
from three quarters—the ego, the id, and the
super-ego. The id and the super-ego supply one
variety apiece, while the ego is the source of
three, each differing in its dynamic nature. The
first of these three ego-resistances is the re
sistance due to repression, which we have al
ready
discussed
and
about
which
there
is
least new to be added. Next there is the trans
ference resistance, which is of the same nature
but has different and much clearer effects in
analysis, since it succeeds in establishing a re
lation to the analytic situation or the analyst
himself
and
thus
re-animating a repression
which should only have been recollected. The
third resistance, though also an ego-resistance,
is of quite a different nature. It proceeds from
the epinosic gain and is based upon an assimila
tion of the symptom by the ego. It represents
an unwillingness to renounce any gratification
or relief that has been obtained. The fourth
variety, belonging to the id, is the resistance
which, as has just been seen, necessitates work
ing through. The fifth, belonging to the super
ego and the last to be discovered, is also the
most
obscure
though not
always
the
least
powerful one. It seems to originate from the
sense of guilt or the need for punishment; and
it opposes every move
towards success, in
cluding, therefore, the patient's own recovery
through analysis.
(b) Anxiety from Transformation of Libido
The view of anxiety which I have put for-

[752a]
Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety
749
ward in these pages differs somewhat from the
one I have hitherto held. Formerly I regarded
anxiety as a general reaction of the ego to
conditions of unpleasure. I always sought to
account for its appearance on economic grounds
and I assumed, on the strength of my investi
gations into the actual neuroses, that libido
(sexual excitement) which was rejected or not
utilized by the ego found direct discharge in
the form of anxiety. It cannot be denied that
these various assertions did not go very well
together, or at any rate did not imply one an
other. Moreover, they gave the impression of
there being a specially intimate connection be
tween anxiety and libido and this did not accord
with the general character of anxiety as a re
action to unpleasure.
The objection to this view arose from our
coming to regard the ego as the sole seat of
anxiety. It was one of the results of the attempt
to subdivide the mental apparatus which I
made in The Ego and the Id. Whereas the old
view made it natural to suppose that anxiety
arose from the libido belonging to the repressed
instinctual impulses, the new one
tended to
make the ego the source of anxiety. Thus it
is a question of id-anxiety (instinctual anxiety)
versus ego-anxiety. Since the energy which the
ego employed is desexualized, the new view
tended to weaken the close connection between
anxiety and libido. I hope I have at least suc
ceeded in making the contradiction plain and
in giving a clear idea of the point in doubt.
Rank's contention—which was originally my
own—that the affect of anxiety is a conse
quence of the event of birth and a repetition
of the situation then experienced, obliged me
to review the problem of anxiety once more.
But I could make no headway with his idea
that birth is a trauma, states of anxiety a re
action of discharge to it, and all subsequent
affects of anxiety an attempt to ab-react it
more and more completely. I was obliged to
go beyond the anxiety reaction to the situation
of danger that lay behind it. The introduction
of this element opened up new aspects of the
question. Birth was seen to be the prototype of
all later situations of danger which overtook
the individual under the new conditions arising
from a changed mode of life and a growing
mental development. The significance of birth
in regard to danger was, however, reduced to
its
occupying this role of
a prototype. The
anxiety felt at birth became the prototype of
an affective state which had to undergo the
same vicissitudes as the
other affects.
Two

[752b]
things might happen to this affect of anxiety: it
might reproduce itself automatically in situa
tions which resembled the
original situation
and thus be an inexpedient form of reaction
instead of an expedient one as it had been in
the first situation; or the ego might acquire
power over it and reproduce it
on its
own
initiative, and employ it as a warning of danger
and as a means of setting the pleasure-unpleas
ure mechanism in motion. We thus gave~the
biological aspect of the affect of anxiety its due
importance by recognizing anxiety as the gen
eral reaction to situations of danger; while
we endorsed the part played by the ego as the
seat of anxiety by allocating to it the function
of producing the affect of anxiety according to
its needs. Thus we attributed two sources of
origin to anxiety in later life. One was involun
tary, automatic, and always due to economic
causes and arose whenever a situation analo
gous to birth had established itself. The other
was produced by the ego as soon as a situation
of this kind merely threatened to occur, in
order that it might be avoided. In the second
case
the ego subjected itself to
anxiety as
though to a sort of inoculation, willing to go
through a slight attack of the illness in order to
escape its full strength. It vividly imagined the
danger-situation, as it were, with the unmistak
able purpose of restricting the actual painful
experience to a mere indication, a signal. We
have already seen in detail how the various
situations of danger arise one after the other,
remaining at the same time connected in their
origin.
We shall perhaps be able to proceed a little
further in our knowledge of anxiety when we
turn to the problem of the relation between
neurotic anxiety and objective anxiety.
Our former hypothesis of a direct trans
formation of libido into anxiety possesses less
interest for us now than it did. But if we do
nevertheless
consider
this
matter
of
trans
formation we shall have to distinguish different
cases. As regards anxiety evoked by the ego as
a signal, it does not come into consideration;
nor does it, therefore, in any of those dangersituations which stimulate the ego to bring on
repression. The libidinal cathexis of the re
pressed instinctual impulse is otherwise em
ployed than in being transformed into anxiety
and discharged as such, as is most clearly seen
in
conversion-hysteria.
On the
other hand,
further enquiry into the question of the dangersituation will bring to our notice an instance
of the production of anxiety which will, I think,

[753a]
750
Sigmund Freud
have to be accounted for in a different way.
(c) Repression and Defence
In the course of discussing the problem of
anxiety I have revived a concept or, to put it
more modestly, a term, of which I made ex
clusive use thirty years ago when I first began
to study the subject but which I later aban
doned. I refer to the term defensive process.1
I afterwards used the word repression, but the
relation between the two remained uncertain.
It will be an undoubted advantage, I think, to
revert to the old term of defence, provided we
employ it explicitly as a general designation for
all the techniques which the ego makes use of
in conflicts which may lead to a neurosis, while
we retain the word repression for that special
method of defence which the line of approach
taken by our investigations made us better
acquainted with in the first instance.
Even a terminological innovation ought to
justify its adoption; it ought to reflect some
new point of view or some extension of knowl
edge. The revival of the idea of defence and
the restriction of that of repression takes into
account a fact which has long since been known
but which has received added importance owing
to some new discoveries. Our first observations
of repression and the formation of symptoms
were made in connection with hysteria. We
found that the perceptual content of excitatory
experiences and the ideational content of path
ogenic
structures of thought were forgotten
and debarred from being reproduced in mem
ory, and we therefore concluded that the keep
ing away from consciousness was a main char
acteristic of hysterical repression. Later on,
when we came to study the obsessional neuro
ses, we saw that in that illness pathogenic
occurrences were not forgotten. They remained
conscious; but they were isolated in some way
that we could not as yet grasp, so that much
the same result was obtained as in hysterical
amnesia. Nevertheless, the difference was great
enough to justify the belief that the process by
which instinctual impulses were set aside in
obsessional neurosis could not be the same as
in hysteria. Further investigations have shown
that in obsessional neurosis a regression of the
instinctual impulses to an earlier libidinal stage
takes place owing to the opposition of the ego,
and that this regression clearly works in the
same sense as repression although it does not
make repression unnecessary. We have seen,
1 Freud,
"The Defence Neuro-Psychoses" (1894),
see page 81 above.

[753b]
too, that in obsessional neurosis anti-cathexis,
which is also presumably present in hysteria,
plays a specially large part in protecting the
ego by effecting a reactive alteration in it. Our
attention has, moreover, been drawn to a proc
ess of isolation (whose technique cannot as yet
be elucidated) which has direct symptomatic
manifestations of its own, and to a procedure,
that may be called magical, of undoing what
has been done—a procedure about whose re
pudiating purpose there can be no doubt, but
which has no longer any resemblance to the
process of repression. These observations pro
vide good enough grounds for re-introducing
the old concept of defence, which can cover all
of these processes with their same purpose—
namely, the protection of the ego against in
stinctual demands—and for subsuming repres
sion under it as a special instance. The impor
tance of this nomenclature is heightened if we
consider the possibility that further investiga
tions may show that there is an intimate con
nection between special forms of defence and
particular illnesses, as, for instance, between
repression and hysteria. In addition we may
look forward to the possible discovery of yet
another important relationship. It may well be
that before its sharp cleavage into an ego and
an id, and before the formation of a super-ego,
the mental apparatus makes use of different
methods of defence from those which it em
ploys after it
has
attained these levels
of
organization.
B. Supplementary Remarks on Anxiety
The affect of anxiety exhibits one or two fea
tures the study of which promises to throw
further light on the subject. Anxiety has an
unmistakable affinity with expectation: it is
anxiety about something. It has a quality of
indefiniteness and lack of object. In precise
speech
we use the
word
fear
rather than
anxiety, if the feeling has found an object.
Moreover, in addition to its relation to dan
ger, anxiety has a relation to neurosis which
we have long been trying to elucidate. The
question arises: why are not all reactions of
anxiety neurotic—why do we-accept so many
of them as normal? And finally the problem
of the difference between objective anxiety
and neurotic anxiety awaits a thorough exam
ination.
To begin with the last problem. The advance
we have made is that we have gone behind
reactions of anxiety to situations of danger. If
we do the same thing with objective anxiety,

[754a]
Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety
75*
we shall have no difficulty in solving the ques
tion. Objective danger is a danger that is known,
and objective anxiety is anxiety about a known
danger of this sort. Neurotic anxiety is anxiety
about an unknown danger Neurotic danger is
thus a danger that has still to be discovered.
Analysis has shown that it is an instinctual
danger. By bringing this danger which is not
known to the ego into consciousness, the ana
lyst makes neurotic anxiety no different from
objective anxiety, so that it can be dealt with
in the same way.
There are two reactions to objective danger.
One, an affective reaction, is an outbreak of
anxiety. The other is a protective action. The
same will presumably be true of instinctual
danger. We know how the two reactions can
co-operate in an expedient way, the one giving
the signal for the other to appear. But they can
also behave in an inexpedient way; paralysis
due to anxiety may set in, and the one reaction
spread at the cost of the other.
In some cases the characteristics of objective
anxiety and neurotic anxiety are mingled. The
danger is known and objective but the anxiety
in regard to it is over-great, greater than seems
proper. It is this surplus of anxiety which be
trays the presence of a neurotic dement. Such
cases, however, contain no new principle; for
analysis shows that to the known objective
danger is attached an unknown instinctual one.
We can find out still more about this if, not
content with tracing anxiety back to danger, we
go on to enquire what the essence and meaning
of a danger-situation is. Clearly, it consists in
the subject's estimation of his own strength
compared to the magnitude of the danger arid
in his admission of helplessness in the face of
it—physical helplessness if the danger is ob
jective and psychological helplessness if it is
instinctual. In doing this he will be guided by
the actual experiences he has had. (Whether he
is wrong in his estimation or not is immaterial
for the outcome.) Let us call a situation of
helplessness of this kind that has been actually
experienced a traumatic situation. We shall
then have good grounds for distinguishing a
traumatic situation from a danger-situation.
The individual will have made an important
advance in his capacity for self-preservation if
he can foresee and expect a traumatic situation
of this kind entailing helplessness instead of
simply waiting for it to happen. Let us call a
situation which contains the determinant for
an expectation of this kind a danger-situation.
It is in this situation that the signal of anxiety

[754b]
is made. The signal announces: "I am expect
ing a situation of helplessness to set in," or:
"The present situation reminds me of one of
the traumatic experiences I have had before.
Therefore I will anticipate the trauma and be
have as though it had already come, while there
is yet time to turn it aside." Anxiety is, there
fore, on the one hand an expectation of a trau
ma, and on the other a repetition of it in a
mitigated form. Thus the two features of anxi
ety which we have noted have a different origin.
Its connection with expectation belongs to the
danger-situation, whereas its indefiniteness and
lack of object belong to the traumatic situation
of helplessness—the situation which is antici
pated in the. danger-situation.
Taking this sequence—anxiety-danger-help
lessness (trauma)—we can now summarize
what has been said. A danger-situation is a
recognized, remembered, and expected situa
tion of helplessness. Anxiety is the original
reaction to helplessness in the trauma and is
reproduced later on in the danger-situation as
a signal for help. The ego, which has undergone
the trauma passively, now repeats it actively in
a weakened version, hoping to have the direc
tion of it in its own hands. It is certain that
children behave in this fashion towards every
painful impression they receive, by reproduc
ing it in their play. In
thus changing from
passivity to activity they attempt to master it
psychologically. If this is what is meant by
ab-reacting a trauma, we can have nothing to
urge against the phrase. But what is of decisive
importance is the first displacement of the
anxiety reaction from its origin in the situation
of helplessness to an expectation of that situa
tion, that is, to the danger-situation. After that
come the later displacements, from the danger
to the determinant of the danger—loss of the
object and the modifications of that loss with
which we are already acquainted.
The undesirable result of spoiling the small
child is to increase the importance of the dan
ger of losing the object (the object being a
protection against every situation of helpless
ness) in comparison with every other danger.
It therefore encourages the individual to re
main in the state of childhood, the period of
life •which is characterized by motor and men
tal helplessness.
So far we have had no occasion to regard
objective anxiety in any different light from
neurotic anxiety. We know what the distinction
is. An objective danger is a danger which
threatens a person from an external object,

[755a]
752
Sigmund Freud
and a neurotic danger is one which threatens
him from an instinctual demand. In so far as
the instinctual demand is something objective,
his neurotic anxiety, too, can be admitted to
have an objective basis. We have seen that the
reason why there seems to be a specially close
connection between anxiety and neurosis is that
the ego defends itself against an instinctual
danger with the help of the anxiety reaction
just as it does against an external objective
danger, but that this line of defensive activity
eventuates in a neurosis, owing to an imperfec
tion of the mental apparatus. We have also
come to the conclusion that an instinctual de
mand often only becomes an (internal) danger
because its gratification would bring on an
external danger, i.e., because the internal dan
ger represents an external one.
On the other hand, the external (objective)
danger must have managed to become internal
ized if it is to be significant for the ego. It
must have been recognized as related to some
situation of helplessness that has been experi
enced.1 Man does not seem to have been en
dowed, or has been endowed, in but small
measure,
with an instinctive recognition
of
the
dangers
that threaten him
from
with
out.
Small
children
are
constantly
doing
things which endanger their lives, and. that
is precisely why they
cannot afford to
be
without a protecting object. With regard to
the traumatic situation, in which the subject is
helpless, external and internal dangers, objec
tive dangers, and instinctualdemands converge.
Whether the ego is suffering from a pain which
will not stop or experiencing an accumulation
of instinctual needs which cannot obtain grati
fication,
the economic situation is the same
and the motor helplessness of the ego finds
expression in psychologicalhelplessness.
In this connection, the puzzling question of
the phobias of early childhood deserves to be
mentioned once again. Some of them, such as
the fear of being alone or in the dark or with
strangers, can be understood as
reactions to
the danger of losingthe object. Others, like the
fear of small animals, thunderstorms, etc.,
#* It may also often happen that, although a dangersituation is correctly estimated in itself, a certain
amount of
instinctual anxiety is joined on to
the
objective anxiety. In that case the instinctual demand
before whose gratification the ego recoils is a maso
chistic one: the instinct of destruction directed against
the subject himself. Perhaps an addition of this kind
explains
cases
in
which
reactions
of
anxiety
are
exaggerated,
ineffectual,
or
paralysing.
Phobias
of
heights
(windows,
towers, precipices, and the like)
may have some such origin. Their hidden
feminine
significance is closely connected with masochism.

[755b]
might perhaps be accounted for as vestigial
traces of the congenital preparedness to meet
objective dangers which is so strongly devel
oped in other animals. In man only that part of
this archaic inheritance is appropriate which
has reference to the loss of object. If his
childhood phobias become fixated and grow
stronger and persist into later years, analysis
shows that their content has become associated
with instinctual demands and has come
to
stand for internal dangers as well.
C. Anxiety, Pain, andMourning
So little is known about the psychology of
processes of feeling that the tentative remarks
I am about to make on the subject may claim
a very lenient judgment. The problem before
us arises out of the conclusion we have reached
that anxiety comes to be a reaction to the dan
ger of losing the object. Now we already know
one reaction to the loss of an object, and that
is mourning. The question therefore is: when
doesloss of object lead to anxietyand when to
mourning? In discussing the subject of mourn
ing on a previous occasion2 I found that there
was one feature about it which remained quite
unexplained. This was its peculiar painfulness.
And yet it somehow seems self-evident that
separation from an object should be painful.
Thus the problem becomes more complicated:
when does separation from an object produce
anxiety, when does it produce mourning, and
when does it produce,it may be, only pain?
Let me say at once that there is no prospect
of answering these questions at present. We
must content ourselves with drawing certain
distinctions and adumbrating certain possi
bilities.
Our starting-point will again be the one situ
ation which we believe we understand—the
situation of the infant when he is presented
with a stranger instead of his mother. He will
exhibit the anxiety which we have attributed to
the danger of loss of object. But his anxiety is
undoubtedly more complicated than this and
merits a more thorough discussion. That he
does have anxiety there can be no doubt; but
the expression of his face and his reaction of
crying, indicate that he is feeling pain as well.
Certain things seem to be confused in him
which will later on be separated out. He cannot
as yet distinguish between temporary absence
and permanent loss. As soon as he misses his
motherhe behaves as if he were nevergoing to
2"Mourning and Melancholia" (1917), Collected
Papers, rv.

[756a]
Inhibitions! Symptoms-, and Anxiety
755
see her again; and repeated consolatory experi
ences to the contrary are necessary before he
learns that her disappearance is usually fol
lowed by her reappearance. His mother encour
ages this piece of knowledge which is so vital
to him by playing the familiar game of hiding
her face from him with her hands and then, to
his joy, uncovering it again. In these circum
stances he can, as it were, feel longing unmixed
with despair.
In consequence of the infant's misunder
standing of the facts, the situation of missing
his mother is not a danger-situation but a trau
matic one. Or, to put it more correctly, it is a
traumatic situation if he happens at the time
to be feeling a need which she is the one to
gratify. It turns into a danger-situation if this
need is not present at the moment. Thus, the
first determinant of anxiety which the ego itself
introduces is loss of perception of the object
(which is equated with loss of the object it
self). There is as yet no question of loss of
love. It is only later on that experience teaches
the child that the object can be present but
angry with him; and then loss of love on the
part of the object becomes a new and much
more enduring danger and determinant of
anxiety.
The traumatic situation of missing the mother
differs in one important respect from the trau
matic situation of birth. At birth no object
existed and so no object could be missed. Anx
iety was the only reaction that occurred. Since
then repeated situations of gratification have
resulted in setting up the mother as an object;
and this object, whenever the infant feels a
need, receives an intense cathexis of longing.
It is to this new aspect of things that the reac
tion of pain is referable. Pain is thus the actual
reaction to loss of object, and anxiety is the
reaction to the danger which that loss entails
and, in its further displacement, a reaction to
the danger of the loss of object itself.
We know very little about pain either. The
only fact we are certain of is that pain occurs
in the first instance and as a regular thing when
ever a stimulus which impinges on the periphery
breaks through the protective barrier against
stimuli and proceeds to act like a continual in
stinctual stimulus, against which muscular ac
tion, which is as
a rule effective because it
withdraws the place that is being stimulated
from the stimulus, is powerless. If the pain does
not proceed from a part of the skin but from
an internal organ the situation is still the same.
All that has happened is that a portion of the

[756b]
inner periphery has taken the place of the
outer periphery. The child obviously has occa
sion to undergo experiences of pain of this
sort, which have no relation to its experiences
of need. This determinant of the development
of pain seems, however, to have very little
similarity with the loss of an object. And be
sides, the element which is essential to pain,
peripheral stimulation, is entirely absent in the
child's situation of longing. Yet it cannot be
for nothing that the common usage of speech
should have
created
the
notion of
internal
mental pain and have treated the feeling of loss
of object as equivalent to physical pain.
When there is physical pain, a high degree
of what may be termed narcissistic cathexis of
the painful place occurs. This cathexis continues
to increase and tends, as it were, to empty the
ego. It is well known that, when internal or
gans are giving pain, spatial and other images
of the affected part of the body arise, though
that part is not represented in conscious idea
tion on other occasions. Again, the remarkable
truth that when the mind is diverted to some
other interest by psychological means even
the most intense physical pains fail to arise
(I must not
say
"remain unconscious" in
this case) can be accounted for by the fact
that there is a concentration of cathexis on the
psychical representative of the part of the body
which is giving pain. I think it is here that we
shall find the point of analogy which has en
abled us to carry sensations of pain over to the
mental sphere. For the
economic conditions
that are produced by the intense cathexis of
longing which is concentrated on the missed or
lost object (a cathexis which steadily mounts
up because it
cannot be appeased)
are
the
same as the economic conditions that are pro
duced by the cathexis of pain which is concen
trated on the injured part of the body. Thus
the element of the peripheral causation of physi
cal pain can be left out of account. The transi
tion from physical pain to mental pain cor
responds to a change from narcissistic cathexis
to object-cathexis. The object whose presenta
tion
is highly cathected by instinctual need
plays the same role as the part of the body
which is cathected by an increase of stimulus.
The continuous nature of the cathectic process
and the impossibility of inhibiting it produce
the same state of mental helplessness. If the
feeling of unpleasure which thus arises has the
specific quality of pain (a quality which cannot
be more exactly described) instead of mani
festing itself in the reactive form of anxiety,

[757a]
754
Sigmund
this may very likely be due to a certain factor
which we have not sufficiently made use of in
our explanatory efforts. I refer to the high level
of cathexis and attachment at which the un
pleasurable processes we have been discussing
take place.
We know of yet another reaction of feeling
to the loss of an object, and that is mourning.
But we have no longer any difficulty in account
ing for it. Mourning occurs under the influ
ence of reality-testing; for the latter function
demands categorically from the bereaved per-

[757b]
Freud
son that he should separate himself from the
object, since it no longer exists. Mourning is
entrusted with the task of carrying out this
retreat from the object in all those situations
in which it was the recipient of a high degree
of cathexis. That this separation should be
painful fits in with what we have just said, in
view of the high degree and insatiable nature
of the cathexis of longing which is concentrated
on the object by the bereaved person during
the reproduction of the situations in which he
must undo the ties that attach him to it.

[758a]
Thoughts for the Times on
War and Death1
I. The Disillusionment of the War
Swept as we are into the vortex of this war
time, our information one-sided, ourselves too
near to focus the mighty transformations which
have already taken place or are beginning to
take place, and without a glimmering of the
inchoate future, we are incapable of apprehend
ing the significance of the thronging impres
sions, and know not what value to attach to
the judgments we form. We are constrained to
believe that never has any event been destruc
tive of so much that is valuable in the common
wealth of humanity, nor so misleading to many
of the clearest intelligences, nor so debasing to
the highest that we know. Science herself has
lost her passionless impartiality; in their deep
embitterment, her servants seek for weapons
from her with which to contribute towards the
defeat of the enemy. The anthropologist is
driven to declare the opponent inferior and de
generate; the psychiatrist to publish his diag
nosis of the enemy's disease of mind or spirit.
But probably our sense of
these immediate
evils is disproportionately strong, and we are
not entitled to compare them with the evils of
other times of which we have not undergone
the experience.
The individual who is not himself a combat
ant—and so a wheel in the gigantic machinery
of war—feels conscious of disorientation, and
of an inhibition in his powers and activities. I
believe that he will welcome any indication,
however slight, which may enable him to find
out what is wrong with himself at least. I pro
pose to distinguish two among the most potent
factors in the mental distress felt by
noncombatants, against ;Which it is such a heavy
task to struggle, and to treat of them here: the
disillusionment which this war has evoked; and
the altered attitude towards death which this
—like every other war—imposes on us.
When I speak of disillusionment, everyone at
once knows what I mean. One need not be a
sentimentalist; one may perceive the biological
and psychological necessity of suffering in the
economics of human Hfe, and yet condemn
1 Collected Papers, IV; first published early in 1915
in Imago, Vol. V; reprinted in Sammlung, 4th Series.
755

[758b]
war both in its means and in its aims, and de
voutly look forward to the cessation of all wars.
True, we have told ourselves that wars can
never cease so long as nations live under such
widely differing conditions, so long as the value
of individual life is in each nation so variously
computed, and so long as the animosities Which
divide them represent such powerful instinctual
forces in the mind. And we were prepared to
find that wars between the primitive and the
civilized peoples, between those races whom a
colour-line divides, nay, wars with and among
the undeveloped nationalities of Europe or
those whose culture has perished—that for a
considerable period such wars would occupy
mankind. But we permitted ourselves to have
other hopes. We had expected the great ruling
powers among the white nations upon whom
the leadership of the human species has fallen,
who were known to have cultivated world-wide
interests, to whose creative powers were due
our
technical
advances in
the direction of
dominating nature, as well as the artistic and
scientific acquisitions of the mind-^peoples such
as these we had expected to succeed in discov
ering another way of settling misunderstand
ings and conflicts of interest. Within each of
these nations there prevailed high standards of
accepted custom for the individual, to which his
manner of life was bound to conform if he de
sired a share in communal privileges. These
ordinances, frequently too stringent, exacted a
great deal from him, much self-restraint, much
renunciation of instinctual gratification. He was
especially forbidden to make use of the im
mense advantages to be gained by the practise
of lying and
deception in competition with
his fellow-men. The civilized state regarded
these accepted standards as the basis of its
existence; stern were its proceedings when an
impious hand was laid upon them; frequent the
pronouncement that to subject them even to
examination by a critical intelligence was en
tirely impracticable. It could be assumed, there
fore, that the state itself would respect them,
nor would contemplate undertaking any in
fringement of what it acknowledged as the basis
of its own existence. To be sure, it was evident

[759a]
756
Sigmund
that within these civilized states were mingled
remnants of certain other races who were uni
versally unpopular and had therefore been only
reluctantly, and even so not to the fullest ex
tent, admitted to participation in the common
task of civilization, for which they had shown
themselves suitable enough. But the great na
tions themselves, it might have been supposed,
had acquired so much comprehension of their
common interests, and enough tolerance for the
differences that existed between them, that for
eigner and enemy could no longer, as still in
antiquity, be regarded as synonymous.
Relying on this union among the civilized
races, countless people have exchanged their
native home for a foreign dwelling-place, and
made their existence dependent on the con
ditions of intercourse between friendly nations.
But he who was not by stress of circumstances
confined to one spot, could also confer upon
•himself, through all the advantages and attrac
tions of these civilized countries, a new, a wider
fatherland, wherein he moved unhindered and
unsuspected. In this way he enjoyed the blue
sea, and the grey; the beauty of the snow-clad
mountains and of the green pasture-lands; the
magic of the northern forests and the splen
dour of the southern vegetation; the emotion
inspired by landscapes that recall great histori
cal events, and the silence of nature in her in
violate places. This new fatherland was for him
a museum also, filled with all the treasures
which the artists among civilized communities
had in the successive centuries created and left
behind. As he wandered from one gallery to
another in this museum, he could appreciate
impartially the varied types of perfection that
miscegenation, the course of historical events,
and the special characteristics of their motherearth had produced among his more remote
compatriots. Here he would find a cool inflex
ible energy developed to the highest point;
there, the gracious art of beautifying existence;
elsewhere, the sense of order and fixed law—in
short, any and all of the qualities which have
made mankind the lords of the earth.
Nor must we forget that each of these citi
zens of culture had created for himself a person
al "Parnassus" and "School of Athens." From
among the great thinkers and artists of all na
tions he had chosen those to whom he conceived
himself most deeply indebted for what he had
achieved in enjoyment and comprehension of
life, and in his veneration had associated them
with the immortals of old as well as with the
more familiar masters of his own tongue. None

[759b]
Freud
of these great figures had seemed to him alien
because he had spoken another language—not
the incomparable investigator of the passions
of mankind, nor the intoxicated worshipper
of beauty, nor the vehement and threatening
prophet, nor the subtle mocking satirist; and
never did he on this account rebuke himself as
a renegade towards his own nation and his be
loved mother-tongue.
The enjoyment of this fellowship in civiliza
tion was from time to time disturbed by warn
ing voices, which declared that as a result of
long-prevailing differences wars were unavoid
able, even among the members of a fellowship
such as this. We refused to believe it; but if
such a war indeed must be, what was our imag
inary picture of it? We saw it as an opportu
nity for demonstrating the progress of mankind
in communal feeling since the era when the
Greek Amphictyones had proclaimed that no
city of the league might be demolished, nor its
olive-groves hewn down, nor its water cut off.
As a chivalrous crusade, which would limit it
self to establishing the superiority of one side
in the contest, with the least possible infliction
of dire sufferings that could contribute nothing
to the decision, and with complete immunity
for the wounded who must of necessity with
draw from the contest, as well as for the physi
cians and nurses who devoted themselves to the
task of healing. And of course with the utmost
precautions for the ncn-combatant classes of
the population—for women who are debarred
from
war-work,
and for the
children
who,
grown older, should be enemies no longer but
friends and co-operators. And again, with pres
ervation of all the international undertakings
and institutions in which the mutual civiliza
tion of peace-time had been embodied.
Even a war like this would have been pro
ductive of horrors and sufferings enough; but
it would not have interrupted the development
of ethical relations between the greater units of
mankind, between the peoples and the states.
Then the war in which we had refused to be
lieve broke out, and brought—disillusionment.
Not only is it more sanguinary and more de
structive than any war of other days, because
of the enormously increased perfection of weap
ons of attack and defence; but it is at least as
cruel, as embittered, as implacable as any that
has preceded it. It sets at naught all those re
strictions known as International Law, which
in peace-time the states had bound themselves
to observe; it ignores the prerogatives of the
wounded and the medical service, the distinc-

[760a]
Thoughts on War and Death
757
tion between civil and military sections of the
population, the claims of private property. It
tramples in blind fury on all that comes in its
way, as though there were to be no future and
no goodwill among men after it has passed. It
rends all bonds of fellowship between the con
tending peoples, and threatens to leave such a
legacy of embitterment as will make any re
newal of such bonds impossible for a long time
to come.
Moreover, it has brought to light the almost
unbelievable phenomenon of a mutual com
prehension between the civilized nations so
slight that the one can turn with hate and loath
ing upon the other. Nay, more—that one of
the great civilized nations is so universally un
popular that the attempt can actually be made
to exclude it from the civilized community as
barbaric, although it long has proved its fitness
by the most magnificent co-operation in the
work of civilization. We live in the hope that
the impartial decision of history will furnish
the proof that precisely this nation, this in whose
tongue we now write, this for whose victory
our dear ones are fighting, was the one which
least transgressed the laws of civilization—but
at such a time who shall dare present himself
as the judge of his own cause?
Nations are in a measure represented by the
states which they have formed; these states,
by the governments which administer them.
The individual in any given nation has in this
war a terrible opportunity to convince himself
of what would occasionally strike him in peace
time—that the state has forbidden to the indi
vidual the practice of wrong-doing, not because
it desired to abolish it, but because it desires to
monopolize it, like salt and tobacco. The war
ring state permits itself every such misdeed,
every such act of violence, as would disgrace
the individual man. It practises riot only the
accepted stratagems, but also deliberate lying
and deception against the enemy; and this, too,
in a measure which appears to surpass the usage
of former wars. The state exacts the utmost de
gree of obedience and sacrifice from its citizens,
but at the same time treats them as children by
maintaining an excess of secrecy, and a censor
ship of news and expressions of opinion that
renders the spirits of those thus intellectually
oppressed defenceless against every unfavour
able turn of events and every sinister rumour.
It absolves itself from the guarantees and con
tracts it had formed with other states, and
makes
unabashed confession of its rapacity
and lust for power, which the private individ-

[760b]
ual is then called upon to sanction in the name
of patriotism.
Nor may it be objected that the state cannot
refrain from wrong-doing, since that would
place it at a disadvantage. It is no less disadvan
tageous, as a general rule, for the individual
man to conform to the customs of morality and
refrain from brutal and arbitrary conduct; and
the state but seldom proves able to indemnify
him for the sacrifices it exacts. It cannot be a
matter for astonishment, therefore, that this
relaxation of all the moral ties between the
greater units of mankind should have had a
seducing influence on the morality of individ
uals; for our conscience is not the inflexible
judge that ethical teachers are wont to declare
it, but in its origin is dread of the community
and nothing else. When the community has no
rebuke to make, there is an end of all suppres
sion of the baser passions, and men perpetrate
deeds of cruelty, fraud, treachery, and barbar
ity so incompatible with their civilization that
one would have held them to be impossible.
Well may that civilized cosmopolitan, there
fore, of whom I spoke, stand helpless in a world
grown strange to him—his all-embracing patri
mony disintegrated, the common estates in it
laid waste, the fellow-citizens embroiled and
debased!
In criticism of his disillusionment, neverthe
less, certain things must be said. Strictly speak
ing, it is not justified, for it consists in the de
struction of—an illusion! We welcome illusions
because they spare us emotional distress, and
enable us instead to indulge in gratification. We
must not then complain if now and again they
come into conflictwith some portion of reality,
and are shattered against it.
Two things in this war have evoked our sense
of disillusionment: the
destitution shown in
moral relations externally by the states which
in their interior relations pose as the guardians
of accepted moral usage, and the brutality in
behaviour shown by individuals, whom, as par
takers in the highest form of human civilization,
one would not have credited with such a thing.
Let us begin with the second point and en
deavour to formulate, as succinctly as may be,
the point of view which it is proposed to criti
cize. How do we imagine the process by which
an individual attains to a higher plane of moral
ity? The first answer is sure to be: He is good
and noble from his very birth, his very earliest
beginnings. We need not consider this any fur
ther. A second answer will suggest that we are
concerned with a developmental process, and

[761a]
758
Sigmund Freud
will probably assume that this development
consists in eradicating from him the evil human
tendencies and, under the influence of educa
tion and a civilized environment, replacing them
by good ones. From that standpoint it is cer
tainly astonishing that evil should show itself
to have suchpowerin thosewhohave beenthus
nurtured.
But this answerimpliesthe thesis from which
we propose to dissent. In reality, there is no
such thing as eradicating evil tendencies. Psy
chological—more strictly
speaking,
psycho
analytic—investigation shows instead that the
inmost essence of human nature consists of ele
mental instincts, which are commonto all men
and aim at the satisfaction of certain primal
needs. These instincts in themselves are neither
good nor evil. We but classify them and their
manifestations in that fashion, according as
they meet the needs and demands of the human
community. It is admitted that all those in
stincts which society condemns as evil—let us
take as representatives the selfishand the cruel
—are of this primitive type.
These primitive instincts undergo a lengthy
processof development before they are allowed
to become active in the adult being. They are
inhibited, directed towards other aims and de
partments, become commingled, alter their ob
jects, and are to some extent turned back upon
their possessor. Reaction-formations
against
certain instincts take the deceptive form of a
changein content, as though egoismhad changed
into altruism, or cruelty into pity. These re
action-formations
are facilitated by the cir
cumstance that many instincts are manifested
almost from the first in pairs of opposites, a
very remarkable phenomenon—and one strange
to the lay public—which is termed the ambiva
lence of feeling. The most easily observable and
comprehensible instance of this is the fact that
intense love and intense hatred are so often to
be found together in the same person. Psycho
analysis adds that the conflicting feelings not
infrequently have the same person for their
object.
It is not until all these vicissitudes to which
instincts are subject have been surmounted that
what we call the character of a human being is
formed, and this, as we know, can only very in
adequately be classified as good or bad. A hu
man being is seldom altogether good or bad;
he is usually good in one relation and bad in
another, or good in certain external circum
stances and
in
others decidedly bad. It is
interesting
to
learn that
the
existence
of

[761b]
strong bad impulses in infancy is often the ac
tual condition for an unmistakable inclination
towards good in the adult person. Those who as
children have been the most pronounced egoists
may well become the most helpful and self-sac
rificing members of the community; most of our
sentimentalists, friends of humanity, champions
of animals, have been evolved from little sadists
and animal-tormentors.
The
transformation
of
bad
instincts
is
brought about by two co-operating factors, an
internal and an external. The internal factor
consists in an influence on the bad—say, the
egoistic—instincts exercised by erotism, that is,
by the human need for love, taken in its widest
sense. By the admixture of erotic components
the egoistic instincts are transmuted into social
ones. We learn to value being loved as an ad
vantage for which we are willing to sacrifice
other advantages. The external factor is the
force
exercised by upbringing, which advo
cates the claims of our cultural environment,
and this is furthered later by the direct pressure
of that civilization by which we are surround
ed.
Civilization is
the fruit of renunciation
of instinctual satisfaction, and from each new
comer in turn it exacts the same renunciation.
Throughout the life of the individual, there
is
a
constant
replacement
of
the
external
compulsion by the internal. The influences of
civilization cause an ever-increasing transmu
tation of egoistic trends into altruistic and so
cial ones, and this by an admixture of erotic
elements. In the last resort it may be said that
every internal compulsion which has been of
service in the development of human beings
was originally, that is, in the evolution of the
human race, nothing but an external one. Those
who are born today bring with them as an in
herited constitution some degree of a tendency
(disposition) towards transmutation of egoistic
into social instincts, and this disposition is easi
ly stimulated to achieve that effect. A further
measure of this transformation must be accom
plished during the life of the individual himself.
And so the human being is subject not only to
the pressure of his immediate environment,
but also to the influence of the cultural devel
opment attained by his forefathers.
If we give the name of cultural adaptability,
to a man's personal capacity for transforma
tion of the egoistic impulses under the influence
of the erotic, we may further affirm that this
adaptability is made up of two parts, one innate
and the other acquired through experience, and
that the relation of the two to each other and

[762a]
Thoughts on War and Death
759
to that portion of the instinctual life which re
mains untransformed is a very variable one.
Generally speaking, we are apt to attach too
much importance to the innate part, and in ad
dition to this we run the risk of overestimating
the general adaptability to civilization in com
parison with those instincts which have re
mained in their primitive state—by which I
mean that in this way we are led to regard hu
man nature as better, than it actually is. For
there is, besides, another factor which obscures
our judgment and falsifies the issue in too fa
vourable a sense.
The impulses of another person are naturally
hidden from our observation. We deduce them
from his actions and behaviour, which we trace
to motives born of his instinctual life. Such a
conclusion is bound to be, in many cases, er
roneous. This or that action which is good from
the civilized point of view may in one instance
be born of a noble motive, in another not so.
Ethical theorists class
as good actions only
those which are the outcome of good impulses;
to the others they refuse their recognition. But
society, which is practical in its aims, is little
troubled on the whole by this distinction; it is
content if a man regulates his behaviour and
actions by the precepts of civilization, and is
little concerned with his motives.
We have seen that the external compulsion
exercised on a human being by his upbringing
and environment produces a further transfor
mation towards good in his instinctual life—a
turning from egotism towards altruism. But
this is not the regular or necessary effect of the
external compulsion. Education and environ
ment offer benefits not only in the way of love,
but also employ another kind of premium sys
tem, namely, reward and punishment. In this
way their effect may turn out to be that he
who is subjected to their influence will choose
to "behave well" in the civilized sense of the
phrase, although no ennoblement of instinct,
no transformation of egoistic into altruistic
inclinations, has taken place within. The result
will, roughly speaking, be the same; only a
particular concatenation of circumstances will
reveal that one man always acts rightly because
his instinctual inclination compels him so to
do, and the other is goodonly in so far and for
so long as such civilized behaviour is advan
tageous for his own egoistic purposes. But su
perficial acquaintance with an individual will
not enable us to distinguish between the two
cases, and we are certainly misled by our op
timism into grossly exaggerating the number

[762b]
of human beings who have been transformed
in a civilized sense.
Civilized society, which exacts good conduct
and does not trouble itself about the impulses
underlying it, has thus won over to obedience
a great many people who are not thereby fol
lowing the dictates of their own natures. En
couraged by this success, society has suffered
itself to be led into straining the moral stand
ard to the highest possible point, and thus it
has forced its members into a yet greater es^
trangement from their instinctual dispositions.
They are consequently subjected to an unceas
ing suppression of instinct, the resulting strain
of which betrays itself in the most remarkable
phenomena of reaction and compensation for
mations. In the domain of sexuality, where such
suppression is most difficult to enforce, the re
sult is seen in the reaction-phenomena of neu
rotic disorders. Elsewhere the pressure of civili
zation brings in its train no pathological re
sults, but is shown in malformations of char
acter, and in the perpetual readiness of the
inhibited instincts to break through to gratifi
cation at any suitable opportunity. Anyone thus
compelled to act continually in the sense of
precepts which are not the expression of in
stinctual inclinations, is living, psychologically
speaking, beyond his means, and might objec
tively be designated a hypocrite, whether this
difference be clearly known to him or not. It is
undeniable that our contemporary civilization
is extraordinarily favourable to the production
of this form of hypocrisy. One might venture
to say that it is based upon such hypocrisy, and.
that it would have to submit to far-reachingmodifications if people were to undertake to
live in accordance with the psychological truth.
Thus there are very many more hypocrites than
truly civilizedpersons—indeed, it is a debata
ble point whether a certain degree of civilized
hypocrisy be not indispensable for the mainte
nance
of
civilization,
because
the
cultural
adaptability so far attained by those living
today would perhaps not prove adequate to the
task. On the other hand, the maintenance of
civilization even on so questionable a basis
offers the prospect of each new generation
achieving a farther-reaching transmutation of
instinct, and becoming the pioneer of a higher
form of, civilization.
From the foregoing observations, we may al
ready derive this consolation—that our mortifi
cation and our grievous disillusionment regard
ing the uncivilized behaviour of our worldcompatriots in this war are shown to be un-

[763a]
760
Sigmund Freud
justified. They were based on an illusion to
which we had abandoned ourselves. In reality
our fellow-citizens have not sunk so low as
we feared, because they had never risen so
high as we believed. That the greater units of
humanity, the peoples and states, have mu
tually abrogated their moral restraints naturally
prompted these individuals to permit them
selves relief for a while from the heavy pres
sure of civilization and to grant a passing sak
isfaction to the instincts it holds in check. This
probably caused no breach in the relative mo
rality within their respective national frontiers.
We may, however, obtain insight deeper than
this into the change brought about by the war
in our former compatriots, and at the same
time receive a warning against doing them an
injustice. For the evolution of the mind shows
a peculiarity which is present in no other proc
ess of development. When a village grows into
a town, a child into a man, the village and,the
child become submerged in the town and the
man. Memory alone can trace the earlier fea
tures in the new image; in reality the old mate^
rials or forms have been superseded and re
placed by new ones. It is otherwise with the de
velopment of the mind. Here one can describe
the state of affairs, which is a quite peculiar
one, only by saying that in this case every ear
lier stage of development persists alongside the
later stage which has developed from it; the suc
cessive stages condition a co-existence, although
it is in reference to the same materials that the
whole series of transformations has been fash
ioned. The earlier mental state may not have
manifested itself for years, but none the less it
is so far present that it may at any time again
become the mode of expression of the forces in
the mind, and that exclusively, as though all
later developments had been annulled, undone.
This extraordinary plasticity of the evolution
that takes place in the mind is not unlimited in
its scope; it might be described as a spe
cial capacity for retroversion—for regression—
since it may well happen that a later and higher
stage of evolution, once abandoned, cannot be
reached again. But the primitive stages can al
ways be re-established; the primitive mind is,
in the fullest meaning of the word, imperishable.
What are called mental diseases inevitably
impress the layman with the idea of destruc
tion of the life of mind and soul. In reality, the
destruction relates only to later accretions and
developments. The essence of mental disease
lies in a return to earlier conditions of affective
life and functioning. An excellent example of

[763b]
the plasticity of mental life is afforded by the
state of sleep, which every night we desire.
Since we have learnt to interpret even absurd
and chaotic dreams, we know that whenever
we sleep we cast off our hard-won morality like
a garment, only to put it on again next morn
ing.This divestiture is naturally unattended by
any danger because we are paralysed, con
demnedto inactivity, by the state of sleep. Only
through a dream can we learn of the regres
sion of our emotional life to one of the earliest
stages of development. For instance, it is note
worthy that all our dreams are governed by
purely egoistic motives. One of my English
friends put forward this proposition at a scien
tific meetingin America,whereupon a lady who
was present remarked that that might be the
case in Austria, but she could maintain for her
self and her friends that they were altruistic
even in their dreams. My friend, although him
self of English race, was obliged to contradict
the lady emphatically on the ground of his
personal experience in dream-analysis,
and
to declare that in their dreams high-minded
American ladies were quite as egoistical as the
Austrians.
Thus the transformations of instinct, on
which our cultural adaptability is based, may
also be permanently or temporarily undone by
the experiences of life. Undoubtedly the in
fluences of war are among the forces that can
bring about such regression; therefore we need
not deny adaptability for culture to all who
are at the present time displaying uncivilized
behaviour, and we may anticipate that the re
finement of their instincts will be restored in
times of peace.
There is, however, another symptom in our
world-compatriots which has perhaps aston
ished and shocked us no less than the descent
from their ethical nobility which has so greatly
distressed us. I mean the narrow-mindedness
shown by the best intellects, their obduracy,
their inaccessibility to the most forcible argu
ments, their uncritical credulity for the most
disputable assertions. This indeed presents a
lamentable picture, and I wish to say emphati
cally that in this T am by no means a bhnd
partisan who finds
all the intellectual short
comings on one side. But this phenomenon is
much easier to account for and much less dis
quieting than that which we have just con
sidered. Students of human nature and phi-,
Iosophers have long taught us that we are mis
taken in regarding our intelligence as an inde
pendent force and in overlooking its depend-.

[764a]
ence upon the emotional life. Our intelligence,
they teach us, can function reliably only when
it is removed from the influences of strong
emotional impulses; otherwise it behaves mere
ly as an instrument of the will and delivers the
inference which the will requires. Thus, in their
view, logical arguments are impotent against
affective interests, and that is why reasons,
which in Falstaff's phrase are "as plenty as
blackberries," produce so few victories in the
conflict with interests. Psycho-analytic expe
rience has, if possible, further confirmed this
statement. It daily shows that the shrewdest
persons will all of a sudden behave like im
beciles as soon as the needful insight is con
fronted by an emotional resistance, but will
completely regain
their. wonted acuity once
that resistance has been overcome. The logical
infatuations into which this war has deluded
our fellow-citizens, many of them the best of
their kind, are therefore a secondary phenom
enon, a consequence of emotional excitement,
and are destined, we may hope, to disappear
with it.
Having in this way come to understand once
more our fellow-citizens who are now so greatly
alienated from us, we shall the more easily en
dure the disillusionment which the nations,
those greater units of the human race, have
caused us, for we shall perceive that the de
mands we make, upon them ought to be far
more modest. Perhaps they are reproducing
the course of individual evolution, and still
today represent very primitive phases in the
organization and formation of higher unities.
It is in agreement with this that the educative
factor of an external compulsion towards mo
rality, which we found to be so effective for
the individual, is barely discernible in them.
True, we had hoped that the extensive com
munity of interests established by commerce
and production would constitute the germ of
such a compulsion, but it would seem that na
tions still obey their immediate passions far
more readily than their interests. Their inter
ests serve them, at most, as rationalizations for
their passions; they parade their interests as
their justification for satisfying their passions.
Actually why the national units should dis
dain, detest, abhor one another, and that even
when they are at peace, is indeed a mystery. I
cannot tell why it is. It is just as though when
it becomes a question of a number of people,
not to say millions, all individual moral ac
quirements were obliterated, and only the most
primitive, the oldest, the crudest mental at-

[764b]
Thoughts on War and Death
761
titudes were left. Possibly only future stages in
development will be able in any way to alter
this regrettable state of affairs. But a little more
truthfulness and upright dealing on all sides,
both in the personal relations of men to one
another and between them and those who gov
ern them, should also do something towards
smoothing the way for this transformation.
II. Our Attitude Towards Death
The second factor to
which I
attribute our
present
sense of
estrangement in this once
lovely and congenial world is the disturbance
that has taken place in our attitude towards
deathman attribute to which hitherto we have
clung so fast.
This attitude was far from straightforward.
We were of course prepared to maintain that
death was the necessary outcome of life, that
everyone owes a debt to Nature and must ex
pect to pay the reckoning—in short, that death
was natural, undeniable, and unavoidable. In
reality, however, we were accustomed to be.,
have as if it were otherwise, We displayed an
unmistakable tendency to "shelve" death, to
eliminate it from life. We tried to hush it up;
indeed we even have the saying, "To think of
something as we think of death."1 That is our
own death, of course. Our own death is indeed
unimaginable, and whenever we make the at
tempt to imagine it we can perceive that we
really survive as spectators. Hence the psycho
analytic school could venture on the assertion
that at bottom no one believes in his own death,
or to put the same thing in another way, in the
unconscious every one of us is convinced of
his own immortality.
As to the death of another, the civilized man
will carefully avoid speaking of such a possi
bility in the hearing of the person concerned.
Children alone disregard this restriction; un
abashed, they threaten one another with the
eventuality of death, and even go so far as to
talk of it before one whom they love, as for
instance: "Dear Mamma, it will be a pity when
you are dead, but then I shall do this or that."
The civilized adult can hardly even entertain
the thought of another's death without seeming
to
himself hard or evil-hearted;
unless, of
course, as a physician, lawyer or something of
the.sort,"he has to deal with death profession
ally. Least of all will he permit himself to think
of the death of another if with that event some
gain to himself in freedom, means, or position
1The German saying is used as an equivalent for
incredible or unlikely.—TR.

[765a]
762
Sigmund
is connected. This sensitiveness of ours is, of
course, impotent to arrest the hand of death;
when it has fallen, we are always deeply af
fected, as if we were prostrated by the over
throw of our expectations. Our habit is to lay
stress on the fortuitous causation of the death
—accident, disease, infection, advanced age; in
this way we betray our endeavour to modify
the significance of death from a necessity to
an accident. A multitude of simultaneous deaths
appears to us exceedingly terrible. Towards the
dead person himself we take up a special atti
tude, something like admiration for one who
has accompHshed a very difficult task. We sus
pend criticism of him, overlook his possible
misdoings, issue the command: De mortuis nil
nisi bene1 and
regard it as justifiable to set
forth in the funeral-oration and upon the tomb
stone only that which is most favourable to his
memory. Consideration for the dead, who no
longer need it, is dearer to us than the truth,
and certainly, for most of us, is dearer also
than consideration for the living.
The culmination of this conventional attitude
towards death among civilized persons is seen
in our complete collapse when death has fallen
on some person whom we love—a parent or a
partner in marriage, a brother or sister, a child,
a dear friend. Our hopes, our pride, our hap
piness, lie in the grave with him, we will not
be consoled, we will not fill the loved one's
place. We behave .then*as if we belonged to the
tribe of the Asia, who must die too when those
die whom they love.
But this attitude of ours towards death has
a powerful effect upon our lives. Life is impov
erished, it loses in interest, When the highest
stake in the game of living, life itself, may not
be risked. It becomes as flat, as superficial, as
one of those American flirtations in which it is
from the first understood that nothing is to
happen, contrasted with a Continental loveaffair in which both partners must constantly
bear in mind the serious consequences. Our ties
of affection, the unbearable intensity of our
grief, make us disinclined to court danger for
ourselves and for those who belong to us. We
dare not contemplate a great many under
takings which are dangerous but quite indis
pensable, such as attempts at mechanical flight,
expeditions to far countries, experiments with
explosive substances. We are paralysed by the
thought of who is to replace the son with his
mother, the husband with his wife, the father
with his children, if there should come dis1 Say nothing but good of the dead.—Ed.

[765b]
Freud
aster.The tendency to exclude death from our
calculations brings in its train a number of other
renunciations and exclusions. And yet the motto
of the Hanseatic League declared: "Navigare
necesse est, vivere non necesse"! (It is neces
sary to sail the seas, it is not necessary to
live.)
It is an inevitable result,of all this that we
should seek in the world of fiction, of general
literature, and of the theatre compensation for
the impoverishment of life. There we still find
people who know how to die, indeed, who are
even capable of killing someone else. There
alone, too, we can enjoy the condition which
makes it possible for us to reconcile ourselves
with death—namely, that behind all the vicis
situdes of life we preserve our existence intact.
For it is indeed too sad that in life it should be
as it is in chess, when one false move may lose
us the game, but with the difference that we
can have no second game, no return-match. In
the realm of fiction we discover that plurality
of lives for which we crave. We die in the per
son of a given hero, yet we survive him, and
are ready to die again with the next hero just
as safely.
It is evident that the war is bound to sweep
away this conventional treatment of
death.
Death will no longer be denied; we are forced
to believe in him. People really are dying, and
now not one by one, but many at a time, often
•ten,"thousand in a single day. Nor is,it any
longer an accident. To be sure, it still seems a
matter of chance whether a particular bullet
hits this man or that; but the survivor may
easily be hit by another bullet; and the ac
cumulation puts an end to the impression
of accident. Life has, in truth, become inter
esting again; it has regained its full signifi
cance.
Here a distinction should be made between
two groups—those who personally risk their
lives in battle, and those who have remained at
home and have only to wait for the loss of their
dear ones by wounds, disease, or infection. It
would indeed be very interesting to study the
changes in the psychology of the combatants,
but I know too little about it. We must stop
short at the second group, to which we our
selves belong. I have said already that in my
opinion the bewilderment and the paralysis of
energies, now so generally felt by us, are essen
tially determined in part by the circumstance
that we cannot maintain our former attitude
towards death, and have not yet discovered a
new one. Perhaps it will assist us to do this if

[766a]
Thoughts on War and Death
763
we direct our psychological inquiry towards
two other relations with death—the one which
we may ascribe to primitive, prehistoric peo
ples, and that other which in every one of us
still exists, but which conceals itself, invisible
to consciousness, in the deepest-lying strata of
our mental life.
The attitude of prehistoric man towards death
is known to us, of course, only by inferences
and reconstruction, but I believe that these
processes havefurnished uswithtolerably trust
worthy information.
Primitive man assumed a very remarkable
attitude towards death. It was far from con
sistent, was indeed extremely contradictory.
On the one hand, he took death seriously, rec
ognized it as the termination of life and used
it to that end; on the other hand, he also de
nied death, reduced it to nothingness. This con
tradiction arose
from the circumstance that
he took up radically differentattitudes towards
the death of another man, of a stranger, of an
enemy, and towards his own. The death of the
other man he had no objection to; it meant the
annihilation of a creature hated, and primitive
man had no scruples against bringing it about.
He was, in truth, a very violent being, more
cruel and more malign than other animals. He
liked to kill, and killed as a matter of course.
That instinct which is said to restrain the other
animals from killing and devouring their own
species we need not attribute to him.
Hence the primitive history of mankind is
filled with murder. Even today, the history of
the world which our children learn in school is
essentially a series of race-murders. The ob
scure sense of guilt which has been common to
man since prehistoric times, and which in many
religions has been condensed into the doctrine
of original sin, is probably the outcome of a
blood-guiltiness incurred by primitive man. In
my book Totem and Taboo (1913) I have, fol
lowing clues given by W. Robertson Smith,
Atkinson, and Charles Darwin, attempted to
surmise the nature of this primal guilt, and I
think that even the contemporary Christian
doctrine enables us to deduce it. If the Son of
God was obliged to sacrifice his life to redeem
mankind from original sin, then by the law of
the talion, the requital of like for like, that sin
must have been a killing, a murder. Nothing
else could call for the sacrifice of a life in ex
piation. And if the original sin was an offence
against God the Father, the primal crime of
mankind must have been a parricide, the killing
of the primal father of the primitive human

[766b]
horde, whose image In memory was later trans
figured into a deity.1
His own death was for primitive man cer
tainly just as unimaginable and unreal as it is
for any one of us today. But there was for him
a case in which the two opposite attitudes to
wards death came into conflict and joined issue;
and this case was momentous and productive
of far-reaching results. It occurred when primi
tive man saw someone who belonged to him die
—his wife, his child,his friend, whom assuredly
he loved as we love ours, for love cannot be
much youngerthan the lust to kill. Then, in his
pain, hehadto learn that onecanindeeddieone
self, an admissionagainst which his wholebeing
revolted; for each of these loved ones was, in
very truth, a part of his own beloved ego. But
even so, on the other hand, such deaths had a
rightfulness for him, since in each of the loved
persons something of thehostilestranger hadre
sided. The law of ambivalence of feeling, which
to this day governs ouremotional relations with
those whom we love most, had assuredly a very
much wider validity in primitive periods.Thus
these beloved dead had also been enemies and
strangers who had aroused in him a measure
of hostile feeling.2
Philosophers have declared that the intellec
tual enigma presented to primitive man by the
picture of deathwaswhat forced him to reflec
tion, andthus that it became the starting-point
of all speculation. I believe that here the phi
losophers think too philosophically, and give too
little consideration to the primarily effective
motives. I would therefore limit and correct
this assertion: By the body of his slain enemy,
primitive man would have triumphed, without
racking his brains aboutthe enigma of life and
death. Not the intellectual enigma, and not every
death, but the conflict of feeling at the death
of loved, yet withal alien and hated persons was
what disengaged the spirit of inquiry in man.
Of this conflict of feeling, psychology was the
direct offspring. Man couldno longerkeep death
at a distance, for he had tasted of it in his grief
for the dead; but still he did not consent entire
ly to acknowledge it, for he could not conceive
of himself as dead. So he devised a compromise;
he conceded the fact of death, even his own
death, but denied it the significance of annihi
lation, which he had had no motive for contest
ing where the death of his enemy had been con
cerned. During his contemplation of his loved
1See
"The
Infantile
Recurrence
of
Totemism,"
Totem
and Taboo.
2 See "Taboo and the
Ambivalence of Emotions."
Totem and Taboo.

[767a]
764
Sigmund Freud
one's corpse he invented ghosts, and it was his
sense of guilt at the satisfaction mingled with
his sorrow that turned these new-born spirits
into evil, dreaded demons. The changes wrought
by death suggested to him the disjunction of
the individuality into a body and a soul—first
of all into several souls; in this way his train of
thought ran parallel with the process of dis
integration which sets in with death. The en
during remembrance of the dead became the
basis for assuming other modes of existence,
gave him the conception of life continued after
apparent death.
These subsequent modes of existence were
at first no more than appendages to that life
which death had brought to a close—shadowy,
empty of content, and until later times but
slightly valued; they showed as yet a pathetic
inadequacy. We may recall the answer made
to Odysseus by the soul of Achilles:
Erst in the life on the earth, no less thana god
we revered thee,
We the Achaeans; and now in the realm of the
dead as a monarch
Here dost thou rule; then why should death
thus grieve thee, Achilles?
Thus did I speak: forthwith then answering
thus he addressed me,
Speak not smoothly of death, I beseech, 0 fa
mous Odysseus,
Better by far to remain on the earth as the
thrall of another;
E9en of a portionless man that hath means
right scanty of living,
Rather than reign sole king in the realm of the
bodiless phantoms.1
Or in the powerful, bitterly burlesque render
ing by Heine, where he makes Achilles say
that the most insignificant little Philistine at
Stuckert-on-the-Neckar, in being alive, is far
happier than he, the son of Peleus, the dead
hero, the prince of shadows in the nether world.
It was not until much later that the different
religions devised the view of this after-life as
the more desirable, the truly valid one, and de
graded the life which is ended by death to a
mere preparation. It was then but consistent to
extend life backward into the past, to conceive
of former existences, transmigrations of the
soul and reincarnation, all with the purpose
of depriving death of its meaning as the termi
nation of life. So early did the denial of death,
which above we designated a convention of
civilization, actually originate.
1Odys**9i XI, 484-491; translated by H. B. Cotterill.

[767b]
Beside the corpse of the beloved were gen
erated not only the idea of the soul, the belief
in immortality, and a great part of man's deeprooted sense of guilt, but also the earliest ink
ling of ethical law. The first and most porten
tous prohibition of the awakening conscience
was: Thou shalt not kill. It was bom of the
reaction against that hate-gratification which
lurked behind the grief for the loved dead, and
was gradually extended to unloved strangers
and finally even to enemies.
This final extension is no longer experienced
by civilized man. When the frenzied conflict of
this war shall have been decided, every one of
the victorious warriors will joyfully return to
his home, his wife and his children, undelayed
and undisturbed by any thought of the enemy
he has slain either at close quarters or by dis
tant weapons of destruction. It is worthy of
note that such primitive races as still inhabit
the earth, who are undoubtedly closer than we
to primitiveman, act differently in this respect,
or did so act until they came under the influ
ence of our civilization. The savage—Austral
ian, Bushman, Tierra del Fuegan—is by no
means a remorseless murderer; when he re
turns victorious from the war-path he may not
set foot in his village nor touch his wife until
he has atoned for the murders committed in
war by penances which are often prolonged and
toilsome. This may be presumed, of course, to
be the outcome of superstition; the savage still
goes in fear of the avenging spirits of the slain.
But the spirits of the fallen enemy are nothing
but the expression of his own conscience, un
easy on account of his blood-guiltiness; be
hind this superstition lurks a vein of ethical
sensitiveness which has been lost by us civi
lized men.2
Pious souls, who cherish the thought of our
remoteness from whatever is evil and base, will
be quick to draw from the early appearance
and the urgency of the prohibition of murder
gratifying conclusions in regard to the force of
these ethical stirrings, which must consequently
have been implanted in us. Unfortunately this
argument proves even more for the opposite
contention. So powerful a prohibition can only
be directed against an equally powerful im
pulse. What no human soul desires there is no
need to prohibit;3 it is automatically excluded.
The very emphasis of the commandment Thou
shalt not kill makes it certain that we spring
from an endless ancestry of murderers, with
2 Cf. Totem and Taboo.
8Cf.
the brilliant argument of Frazer quoted in
Totem and Taboo.

[768a]
offended or injured us. The expression: "Devil
whom the lust for killing was in the blood, as
possibly it is to this day with ourselves. The
ethical strivings of mankind, of which we need
not in the least depreciate the strength and the
significance, are an acquisition accompanying
evolution; they have then become the heredi
tary possession of those human beings alive
today, though unfortunately onlyin a very vari
able measure.
Let us now leave primitive man, and turn to
the unconscious in our own mental life. Here
we depend entirely upon the psycho-analytic
method of investigation, the
only one which
plumbs such depths. We ask what is the atti
tude of our unconscious towards the problem
of death. The answer must be: Almost exactly
the same as primitive man's. In this respect, as
in many others, the man of prehistoric ages
survives unchanged in our unconscious. Thus,
our unconscious does not believe in its own
death; it behaves as if immortal. What we call
our unconscious
(the deepest strata of our
minds, made up of instinctual impulses) knows
nothing whatever of negatives or of denials—
contradictories coincide in it—and so it knows
nothing whatever of our own death, for to that
we can give only a negative purport. It follows
that no instinct we possess is ready for a belief
in death. This is even perhaps the secret of hero
ism. The rational explanation for heroism is
that it consists in the decision that the personal
life cannot be so precious as certain abstract
general ideals. But more frequent, in my view,
is that instinctive and impulsive heroism which
knows no such motivation, and flouts danger in
the spirit of Anzengruber's Hans the RoadMender: "Nothing can happen to we." Or else
that motivation serves but to clear away the
hesitation which might delay an heroic reaction
in accord with the unconscious. The dread of
death, which dominates us oftener than we
know, is on the other hand something second
ary, being usually the outcome of the sense of
guilt.
On the other hand, for strangers and for ene
mies, we do acknowledge death, and consign
them to it quite as readily and unthinkingly
as did primitive man. Here there does, indeed,
appear a distinction which in practise shows
for a decisive one. Our unconscious does not
carry out the killing; it merely thinks it and
wishes it. But it would be wrong entirely to de
preciate this psychical reality as compared with
actual reality. It is significant and pregnant
enough. In our unconscious we daily and hourly
deport all who stand in our way, all who have

[768b]
Thoughts on War and Death
765
take him!" which so frequently comes to our
lips in joking anger, and which really means
"Death take him!" is in our unconscious an
earnest, deliberate death-wish. Indeed, our un
conscious will murder even for trifles; like the
ancient Athenian law of Draco, it knows no
other punishment for crime than death; and
this has a certain consistency, for every injury
to our almighty and autocratic ego is at bottom
a crime of lese-majesti.
•
And so, if we are to be judged by the wishes
in our unconscious, we are, like primitive man,
simply a gang of murderers. It is well that all
these wishes do not possess the potency which
was attributed to them by primitive men;1 in
the cross-fire of mutual maledictions, mankind
would long since have perished, the best and
wisest of men and the loveliest and fairest of
women with the rest.
Psycho-analysis finds little credence among
laymen for assertions such as these. They re
ject them as calumnies which are confuted by
conscious experience, and adroitly overlook the
faint indications through which the unconscious
is apt to betray itself even to consciousness. It
is, therefore, relevant to point out that many
thinkers who could not have, been influenced by
psycho-analysis have quite definitely accused
our unspoken thoughts of a readiness, heedless
of the murder-prohibition, to get rid of anyone
who. stands in our way. From many examples
of this I will choose one very famous one:
In Le Pbre Goriot, Balzac alludes to a pas
sage in the works of J. J. Rousseau where that
author asks the reader what he would do if—
without leaving Paris and of course without
being discovered—he could kill, with great prof
it to himself, an old mandarin in Peking by a
mere act of the will. Rousseau implies that he
would not give much for the life of this digni
tary. "Tuer son mandarin"2 has passed into a
proverb for this secret readiness even on the
part of ourselves today.
There is as well a whole array of cynical
jests and anecdotes which testify in the same
sense, such as, for instance, the remark attrib
uted to a husband: "If one of us dies, I shall go
and live in Paris." Such cynical jokes would
not be possible unless they contained an un
acknowledged verity which could not be coun
tenanced if seriously and baldly expressed. In
joke, as we know, even the truth may be told.
1See "The Omnipotence of Thought,** Totem and
Taboo.
2 To kill his mandarin.—ED.

[769a]
766
Sigmund Freud
As for primitive man, so also for us in our
unconscious, there arises a case in which the
two contrasted attitudes towards death, that
which acknowledges it as the annihilation of
life and the other which denies it as ineffectual
to that end, conflict and join issue—and this
case is the same as in primitive ages—the death,
or the endangered life, of one whom we love, a
parent or partner in marriage, a brother or sis
ter, a child or dear friend. These loved ones are
on the one hand an inner possession, an ingredi
ent of our personal ego, but on the other hand
are partly strangers, even enemies.With the ex
ception of only a very few situations, there ad
heres to the tenderest and closest of our af
fections a vestige of hostility which can excite
an unconscious death-wish. But this conflict of
ambivalence does not now, as it did then, find
issue in theories of the soul and of ethics, but in
neuroses, which afford us deep insight into nor
mal mental life as well. How often have those
physicians who practise psycho-analysis had
to deal with the symptom of an exaggeratedly
tender care for the well-being of relatives, or
with entirely unfounded self-reproaches after
the death of a loved person. The study of these
cases has left them in no doubt about the ex
tent and the significance of unconscious deathwishes.
The layman feels an extraordinary horror at
the possibility of such feelings, and takes this
repulsion as a legitimate ground for disbelief
in the assertions of psycho-analysis. I think,
mistakenly. No depreciation of our love is in
tended, and none is actually contained in it. It
is indeed foreign to our intelligence as also to
our feelings thus to couple love and hate, but
Nature, by making use of these twin opposites,
contrives to keep love ever vigilant and fresh,
so as to guard it against the hate which lurks
behind it. It might be said that we owe the
fairest flowers of our love-life to the reaction
against the hostile impulse which we divine in
our breasts.
To sum up: Our unconscious is just as in

[769b]
accessible to the idea of our own death, as
murderously minded towards the stranger, as
divided or ambivalent towards the loved, as
was man in earliest antiquity. But how far
we have moved from this primitive state in
our conventionally civilized attitude towards
death!
It is easy to see the effect of the impact of
war on this duality. It strips us of the later ac
cretions of civilization, and lays bare the pri
mal man in each of us. It constrains us once
more to be heroes who cannot believe in their
own death; it stamps the alien as the enemy,
whose death is to be brought about or desired;
it counsels us to rise above the death of those
we love. But war is not to be abolished; so long
as the conditions of existence among the na
tions are so varied, and the repulsions between
peoples so intense, there will be, must be, wars.
The question then arises: Is it not we who
must give in, who must adapt ourselves to
them? Is it not for us to confess that in our
civilized attitude towards death we are once
more living psychologically beyond our means,
and must reform and give truth its due? Would
it not be better to give death the place in ac
tuality and in our thoughts which properly be
longs to it, and to yield a little more promi
nence
to that unconscious attitude towards
death which we have hitherto so carefully sup
pressed? This hardly seems indeed a greater
achievement, but rather a backward step in
more than one direction, a regression; but it
has the merit of taking somewhat more into
account the true state of affairs, and of making
life again more endurable for us. To endure
life remains, when all is said, the first duty bf
all living beings. Illusion can have no value if
it makes this more difficult for us.
We remember the old saying: Si vis pacem,
para bellum. If you desire peace, prepare for
war.
It would be timely thus to paraphrase it: Si
vis vitam, para mortem. If you would endure
life, be prepared for death.

[770a]
Civilization and Its Discontents
The impression forces itself upon onethat men
measure by false standards, that everyone seeks
power, success, riches for himself and admires
others who attain them, while undervaluingthe
truly precious things in life. And yet, in mak
ing any general judgment of this kind, one is
in danger of forgetting the manifold variety of
humanity and its mental life.There are certain
men from whom their contemporaries do not
withhold-veneration, although their greatness
rests on attributes and achievements which are
completely foreign to the aims and ideals of the
multitude. One might well be inclined to sup
pose that after all it is only a minority who
appreciate these great men, while the majority
cares nothing for them. But the discrepancy
between men's opinions and their behaviour is
so wide and their desires so many-sided that
things are probably not so simple.
One of these exceptional men calls himself
my friend in his letters to me. I had sent him
my little book which treats of religion as an
illusion and he answered that he agreedentirely
with my views on religion, but that he was
sorry I had not properly appreciated the ulti
mate source of religious sentiments. This con
sists in a peculiar feeling, which never leaves
him personally, which he finds shared by many
others, and which he may suppose millions
more also experience. It is a feeling which he
would like to call a sensation of eternity, a feel
ing as of something limitless, unbounded, some
thing "oceanic." It is,he says, a purely subjec
tive experience, not an article of belief; it im
plies no assurance of personal immortality, but
it is the source of the religious spirit and is
taken hold of by the various Churches and re
ligious systems, directed by them into definite
channels, and also, no doubt, usedup in them.
One may rightly call oneself religious on the
ground of this oceanic feeling alone, even
though one reject all beliefs and all illusions.
These views, expressed by my friend whom I
so greatly honour and who himself once in
poetrydescribed the magic of illusion, put me
in a difficult position. I cannot discover this
"oceanic" feeling in myself. It is not easy to
deal scientifically with feelings. One may at
tempt to describe their physiological signs.

[770b]
Where that is impossible—I am afraid the
oceanic feeling, too, will defy this kind of
classification—nothing remains but to turn to
the ideational content which most readily asso
ciates itself with the feeling. If I have under
stood my friend aright, he meansthe samething
as that consolation offered by an original and
somewhat unconventional writer to his hero,
contemplating suicide: "Out of this world we
cannot fall."1 So it is a feeling of indissoluble
connection,of belonging inseparablyto the ex
ternal world as a whole. To me, personally, I
may remark, this seems something more in the
nature of an intellectual judgment, not, it is
true, without any accompanying feeling-tone,
but with one of a kind which characterizes other
equally far-reaching reflections as well. I could
not in my own person convince myself of the
primary nature of such a feeling. But I cannot
on that account deny that it in fact occurs in
other people. One can only wonder whether it
has been correctlyinterpreted and whetherit is
entitled to be acknowledged asthe fons et origo*
of the whole need for religion.
I have nothing to suggest which could ef
fectively settle the solution of this problem.
The idea that man should receive intimation of
his connection with the surrounding world by
a direct feeling which aims from the outset at
serving this purpose sounds so strange andis so
incongruous with the structure of our psy
chology that one is justified in attempting a
psycho-analytic, that is, genetic explanation of
such a feeling. Whereupon the following lines
of thought present themselves. Normally there
is nothingwe aremorecertain of than the feel
ing of our self, our own ego. It seems to us an
independent unitary thing, sharply outlined
against everything else. That this is a deceptive
appearance, and that on the contrary the ego
extends inwards without any sharp delimitation,
into an unconscious mental entity which we call
the id and to which it forms a facade, was first
discovered by psycho-analytic research, and
the latter still has much to tell us about the
relations of the ego to the id. But towards the
outer world, at any rate, the ego seemsto keep
1 Christian Grabbe, Hannibal: "Ja, aus der Welt
werden wir nicht fallen. Wir sind einmal darin."
2 Source and origin.—Ed.
767

[771a]
768
Sigmund Freud
itself clearly and sharply outlined and delimited.
There is only one state of mind in which it
fails to do this—an unusual state, it is true, but
not one that can be judged as pathological. At
its height, the state of being in love threatens
to obliterate the boundaries between ego and
object. Against all the evidence of his senses,
the man in love declares that he and his be
loved are one, and is prepared to behave as if it
were a fact. A thing that can be temporarily
effaced by a physiological function must also
of course be liable to disturbance by morbid
processes. From pathology we have come to
know a large number of states in which the
boundary line between ego and outer world be
come uncertain, or in which they are actually
incorrectly perceived—cases in which parts of
a man's own body, even component parts of
his own mind, perceptions, thoughts, feelings,
appear to him alien and not belonging to him
self; other cases in which a man ascribes to the
external world things that clearly originate in
himself, and that ought to be acknowledged by
him. So the ego's cognizance of itself is sub
ject to disturbance, and the boundaries between
it and the outer world are not immovable.
Further reflection shows that the adult's sense
of his own ego cannot have been the same from
the beginning. It must have undergone a de
velopment, which naturally cannot be demon
strated, but which admits of reconstruction
with a fair degree of probability.1 When the
infant at the breast receivesstimuli, he cannot
as yet distinguish whether they come from his
ego or from the outer world. He learns it grad
ually as the result of various exigencies. It
must make the strongest impression on him
that many sourcesof excitation,whichlater on
he will recognize as his own bodily organs, can
provide him at any time with sensations,
whereas others become temporarily out of his
reach—amongst these what he wants most of
all, his mother's breast—and reappear only as
a result of his cries for help. Thus an object
first presents itself to the ego as something ex
isting outside, which is onlyinduced to appear
by a particular act. A further stimulus to the
growth and formation of the ego, so that it be
comes something more than a bundle of sensa
tions, i.e., recognizes an outside, the external
world, is afforded by the frequent, unavoidable
and manifold pains and unpleasant sensations
which the pleasure-principle, still in unre1Cf. the considerable volume of work on this topic
dating from that of Ferenczi (Stages in the Develop
ment of the Sense of Reality, 1913) up to Federn's
contributions, 1926, 1927 and later.

[771b]
stricted domination, bids it abolish or avoid.
The tendency arises to dissociate from the ego
everything which can give rise to pain, to cast
it out and create a pure pleasure-ego, in con
trast to a threatening outside, not-self. The
limits of this primitive pleasure-ego cannot
escape readjustment through experience. Much
that the individual wants to retain because it
is pleasure-giving is nevertheless part not of
the ego but of an object; and much that he
wishes to eject because it torments him yet
proves to be inseparable from the ego, arising
from an inner source. He learns a method by
which, through deliberate use of the sensory
organs and suitable muscular movements, he
can distinguish between internal and external
—what is part of the ego and what originates
in the outer world—and thus he makes the first
step towards the introduction of the realityprinciple which is to control his development
further. This capacity for distinguishing which
he learns of course serves a practical purpose,
that of enabling him to defend himself against
painful sensations felt by him or threatening
him. Against certain painful excitations from
within the ego has only the same means of
defence as that employed against pain coming
from without, and this is the starting-point of
important morbid disturbances.
In this way the ego detaches itself from the
external world.
It is more correct to say:
Originally the ego includes everything, later
it
detaches
from
itself the external
world.
The ego-feeling we are aware of now is thus
only a shrunken vestige of a far more exten
sive feeling—a feeling which embraced the
universe and expressed an inseparable con
nection of the ego with the external world.
If we may suppose that this primary egofeeling has been preserved in the minds of
many people—to a greater or lesser extent—
it would co-exist like a sort of counterpart
with the narrower and more sharply outlined
ego-feeling of maturity, and
the
ideational
content belonging to it would be precisely the
notion of limitless extension and oneness with
the universe—the same feeling as that de
scribed by my friend as "oceanic." But have
we any right to assume that the original type
of feeling survives alongside the later one
which has developed from it?
Undoubtedly we have: there is nothing un
usual in such a phenomenon, whether in the
psychological or in other spheres. Where ani
mals are concerned, we hold the view that the
most highly developed have arisen from the

[772a]
Civilization and
lowest. Yet we still find all the simple forms
alive today. The great saurians are extinct and
have made way for the mammals, but a typical
representative of them, the crocodile, is still
living among us. The analogy may be too re
mote, and it is also weakened by the fact that
the surviving lower species are not as a rule
the true ancestors of the present-day more
highly developed types.
The
intermediate
members have mostly died out and are known
to us only through reconstruction.
In
the
realm of mind, on the other hand, the primi
tive type is so commonly preserved alongside
the transformations which have developed out
of it that it is superfluous to give instances in
proof of it. When this happens, it is usually
the result of
a bifurcation in
development.
One quantitative part of an attitude or an
impulse has survived unchanged while another
has undergone further development.
This brings us very close to the more gen
eral problem of conservation in the mind,
which has so far hardly been discussed, but is
so interesting and important that we may take
the opportunity to pay it some attention, even
though its relevance is not immediate. Since
the time when we recognized the error of sup
posing that ordinary forgetting signified de
struction or annihilation of the memory-trace,
we have been inclined to the opposite view
that nothing once formed in the mind could
ever perish, that everything survives in some
way or other, and is capable under certain
conditions of being brought to light again, as,
for instance, when regression extends back far
enough. One might try to picture to oneself
what this assumption signifies by a comparison
taken from another field.
Let us choose the
history of the Eternal City as an example.1
Historians tell us that the oldest Rome of all
was the Roma quadrata, a fenced settlement
on the Palatine. Then followed the phase of
the Septimontium, when the colonies on the
different hills united together; then the town
which was bounded by the Servian wall; and
later still, after all the transformations in the
periods of the republic and the early Caesars,
the city which the Emperor Aurelian enclosed
by his walls. We will not follow the changes
the city went through any further, but will
ask ourselves what traces of these early stages
in its history a visitor to Rome may still find
today, if he goes equipped with the most com
plete historical and topographical knowledge.
1 According to The Cambridge Ancient History, Vol.
vn. (1928) "The Founding of Rome," by Hugh Last.

[772b]
its Discontents
769
Except for a few gaps, he will see the wall of
Aurelian almost unchanged.
He can find sec
tions of the Servian rampart at certain points
where it has been excavated and brought to
light. If he knows enough—more than presentday archaeology—he may perhaps trace out in
the structure of the town the whole course of
this wall and the outline of Roma quadrata.
Of the buildings which once occupied this
ancient ground-plan he will find nothing, or
but meagre fragments, for they exist no longer.
With the best information about Rome of the
republican era, the utmost he could achieve
would
be
to
indicate
the
sites
where
the
temples and public buildings of that period
stood. These places are now occupied by ruins,
but the ruins are not those of the early build
ings themselves but of restorations of them
in later times after fires and demolitions.
It
is hardly necessary to mention that all.these
remains of ancient Rome are found woven
into the fabric of a great metropolis which
has arisen in the last few centuries since the
Renaissance. There is assuredly much that is
ancient still buried in the soil or under the
modern buildings of the town.
This is the
way in which we find antiquities surviving in
historic cities Hke Rome.
Now let us make the fantastic supposition
that Rome were not a human dwelling-place,
but a mental entity with just as long and
varied a past history: that is, in which nothing
once
constructed had
perished, and all the
earlier stages of development had survived
alongside the latest. This would mean that in
Rome the palaces of the Caesars were still
standing on the Palatine and the Septizonium
of Septimius Severus was still towering to its
old height; that the beautiful statues were still
standing in the colonnade of the Castle of St.
Angelo, as they were up to its siege by the
Goths, and so on. But more still: where the
Palazzo Caffarelli stands there would also be,
without this being removed, the Temple of
Jupiter Capitolinus, not merely in its latest
form, moreover, as the Romans of the Caesars
saw it, but also in its earliest shape, when it
still wore an Etruscan design and was adorned
with terra-cotta antifixae. Where the Coliseum
stands now, we could at the same time admire
Nero's Golden House; on the Piazza of the
Pantheon we should find out only the Pan
theon of today as bequeathed to us by Ha
drian, but on the same site also Agrippa's origi
nal edifice; indeed, the same ground would
support the church of Santa Maria sopra Mi-

[773a]
770
Sigmund Freud
nerva and the old temple over which it was
built. And the observer would need merely to
shift the focus of his eyes, perhaps, or change
his position, in order to call up a view of either
the one or the other.
There is clearly no object in spinning this
fantasy further; it leads to the inconceivable,
or even to absurdities. If we try to represent his
torical sequence in spatial terms, it can only be
done by juxtaposition in space; the same space
will not hold two contents. Our attempt seems
like an idle game; it has only one justification;
it shows us how far away from mastering the
idiosyncrasies of mental life we are by treating
them in terms of visual representation.
There is one objection, though, to which we
must pay attention. It questions our choosing
in particular the past history of a city to liken
to the past of the mind. Even for mental life,
our assumption that everything past is pre
served holds good only on condition that the
organ of the mind remains intact and its
structure has not been injured by traumas or
inflammation. Destructive influences compara
ble to these morbid agencies are never lack
ing in the history of any town, even if it has
had a less chequered past than Rome, even if,
like London, it has hardly ever been pillaged
by an enemy. Demolitions and the erection of
new buildings in the place of old occur in cities
which have had the most peaceful existence;
therefore a town is from the outset unsuited
for the comparison I have made of it with
a mental organism.
We admit this objection; we will abandon
our search for a striking effect of contrast and
turn to what is after all a closer object af
comparison, the body of an animal or human
being. But here, too, we find the same thing.
The early stages of development are in no
sense still extant; they have been absorbed
into the later features for which they supplied
the material. The embryo cannot be demon
strated in the adult; the thymus gland of child
hood is replaced after puberty by connective
tissue but no longer exists itself; in the mar
row-bone of a grown man I can, it is true,
trace the outline of the childish bone-structure,
but this latter no longer survives in itself—it
lengthened and thickened until it reached its
final form.
The fact is that a survival of all
the early stages alongside the final form is
only possible in the mind, and that it is im
possible for us to represent a phenomenon of
this kind in visual terms.
Perhaps we are going too far with this con

[773b]
clusion.
Perhaps we ought to be content with
the assertion that what is past in the mind
can survive and need not necessarily perish.
It is always possible that even in the mind
much that is old may be so far obliterated or
absorbed—whether normally or by way of
exception—that it cannot be restored or re
animated by any means, or that survival of
it is always connected with certain favourable
conditions. It is possible, but we know nothing
about it. We can only be sure that it is more
the rule than the exception for the past to
survive in the mind.
Thus we are entirely willing to acknowledge
that
the
"oceanic"
feeling exists
in many
people, and we are disposed to relate it to an
early stage in ego-feeling; the further question
then arises: what claim has this feeling to be
regarded as the source of the need for religion.
To me this claim does not seem very for
cible. Surely a feeling can only be a source of
energy when it is itself the expression of a
strong need.
The derivation of a need for
religion from the child's feeling of helplessness
and the longing it evokes for a father seems
to me incontrovertible, especially since this feel
ing is not simply carried on from childhood
days but is kept alive perpetually by the fear
of what the superior power of fate will bring.
I could not point to any need in childhood so
strong as that for a father's protection. Thus
the part played by the "oceanic" feeling, which
I suppose seeks to reinstate limitless narcis
sism, cannot possibly take the first place. The
derivation of
the
religious attitude can be
followed back in clear outline as
far as the
child's feeling of helplessness. There may be
something else behind this, but for the present
it is wrapped in obscurity.
I can imagine that the "oceanic" feeling
could become connected with religion later on.
That
feeling
of
oneness with
the universe
which is its ideational content sounds very
Hke a first attempt at the consolations of
religion, like another way taken by the ego of
denying the dangers it sees threatening it in
the external world. I must again confess that
I find it very difficult to work with these in
tangible quantities.
Another friend of mine,
whose insatiable scientific curiosity has im
pelled him to the most out-of-the-way re
searches and to the acquisition of encyclo
paedic knowledge, has assured me that the
Yogi by their practices of withdrawal from the
world, concentrating attention on bodily func
tions, peculiar methods of breathing, actually

[774a]
Civilization and its Discontents
771
are able to produce new sensations and diffused
feelings in themselves which he regards as
regressions to primordial, deeply buried men
tal states.
He sees in them a physiological
foundation, so to speak, of much of the wis
dom of mysticism.
There would be connec
tions to
be made here with many obscure
modifications of mental Hfe, such as trance
and ecstasy. But I am moved to exclaim, in
the words of Schiller's diver:
Who
breathes overhead in the
rose-tinted
light may be glad!
II
In my Future of an Illusion1 I was concerned
much less with the deepest sources
of
re
ligious feeling than with what the ordinary
man understands by his
religion, that sys
tem of doctrines and pledges that on the one
hand explains the riddle of this world to him
with an enviable completeness, and on the
other
assures
him
that
a
solicitous
Provi
dence is watching over him and wiU make up
to him in a future existence for any short
comings in this Hfe. The ordinary man can
not imagine this Providence in any other form
but that of a greatly exalted father, for only
such a one could understand the needs of the
sons of men, or be softened by their prayers
and placated by the signs of their remorse.
The whole thing is so patently infantile, so
incongruous with reaHty, that to one whose
attitude to humanity is friendly it is painful
to think that the great majority of mortals will
never be able to rise above this view of life.
It is even more humiliating to discover what
a large number of those alive today, who
must see that this reHgion is not tenable, yet
try to defend it inch by inch, as if with a
series of pitiable rearguard actions. One would
like to count oneself among the believers, so
as to admonish the philosophers who try to
preserve the God of religion by substituting
for him an impersonal, shadowy, abstract prin
ciple, and say, "Thou shalt not take the name
of the Lord thy God in vain!"
Some of the
great men of the past did the same, but that
is no justification for us; we know why they
had to do so.
We will now go back to the ordinary man
and his religion—the only religion that ought
to bear the name.
The well-known words of
one of our great and wise poets come to mind
in which he expresses his view of the relation
of religion to art and science.
They run:
xi927 (London: Hogarth Press, 1928).

[774b]
He who has Science and has Art,
Religion, too, has he;
Who has not Science, has not Art,
Let him religious be!2
On the one hand, these words contrast re
Hgion with the two highest achievements of
man, and on the other, they declare that in
respect of their value in Hfe they can repre
sent or replace each other. If we wish to de
prive even the ordinary man, too, of his re
ligion, we shall clearly not have the authority
of the poet on our side. We wiU seek to get
in touch with the meaning of his utterance by
a special way. Life as we find it is too hard
for us; it entails too much pain, too many
disappointments, impossible tasks.
We
can
not do without palliative remedies. We can
not dispense with auxiHary constructions, as
Theodor
Fontane
said.
There
are perhaps
three of these means: powerful diversions of
interest, which lead us to care little about
our
misery;
substitutive gratification, which
lessen it; and intoxicating substances, which
make us insensitive to it.
Something of this
kind is indispensable.8 Voltaire is aiming at
a diversion of interest when he
brings his
Candide to a close with the advice that peo
ple should cultivate their gardens; scientific
work is another deflection of the same kind.
The substitute gratifications, such as art offers,
are illusions in contrast to reaHty, but none
the less satisfying to the mind on that account,
thanks to the place which phantasy has re
served
for
herself in
mental
Hfe.
The
in
toxicating substances affect our body, alter
its chemical processes.
It is not so simple to
find the place where religion belongs in this
series.
We must look further afield.
The question, "What is the purpose of hu
man life?" has been asked times without num
ber; it has never received a satisfactory an
swer; perhaps it does not admit of such an
answer.
Many a questioner has added that
if it should appear that Hfe has no purpose,
then it would lose all value for him. But these
threats alter nothing.
It looks, on the con
trary, as though one had a right to dismiss
this question, for it seems to presuppose that
beHef in the superiority of the human race
with which we are already so famiHar in its
other expressions.
Nobody asks what is the
3 Goethe, Zahmen Xenien rx (Gedichte aus dem
Nachlass).
8Wilhelm Busch, in Die fromme Helene, says the
same thing on a lower level: "The man who has cares
has brandy too."

[775a]
772
Sigmund Freud
purpose of the Eves of animals, unless peradby our very constitution.
venture they are designed to be of service to
man.
But this, too, will not hold, for with
many animals man can do nothing—except
describe, classify, and study them; and count
less species have declined to be put even to
this use, by living and dying and becoming
extinct before men had set eyes upon them.
So again, only religion is able to answer the
question of the purpose of life. One can hardly
go wrong in
concluding that the idea of a
purpose in Hfe stands and falls with the re
ligious system.
We
will turn, therefore, to
the less am
bitious problem: what the behaviour of men
themselves reveals as the purpose and object
of their lives, what they demand of life and
wish to attain in it.
The answer to this can
hardly be in doubt: they seek happiness, they
want to
become happy and to
remain so.
There are two sides to this striving, a positive
and a negative; it aims on the one hand at
eliminating pain and discomfort, on the other
at the experience of intense pleasures. In its
narrower sense,
the word happiness
relates
only to the last. Thus human activities branch
off in two directions—corresponding to this
double goal—according to which of the two
they aim at realizing, either predominantly or
even exclusively.
As we see, it is simply the pleasure-principle
which draws up the programme of life's pur
pose. This principle dominates the operation
of the mental apparatus from the very begin
ning; there can be no doubt about its effici
ency, and yet its programme is in conflict with
the whole world, with the macrocosm as much
as with the microcosm.
It simply cannot be
put into execution, the whole constitution of
things runs counter to it; one might say the
intention that man should be happy is not
included in the scheme of Creation. What is
called happiness in its narrowest sense comes
from the satisfaction—most often instantane
ous—of pent-up needs which have reached
great intensity, and by its very nature can
only be a transitory experience. When any
condition desired by the pleasure-principle is
protracted, it results in a feeHng only of mild
comfort; we are so constituted that we can
only intensely enjoy contrasts, much less in
tensely states in themselves.1 Our possibilities
of happiness are thus limited from the start
1 Goethe even warns us that "nothing is so hard to
bear as a train of happy days."
This may be an ex
aggeration all the same.

[775b]
It is
much less
difficult to be unhappy. Suffering comes from
three quarters: from our own body, which is
destined to decay and dissolution, and cannot
even dispense with anxiety and pain as dangersignals; from the outer world, which can rage
against us with the most powerful and pitiless
forces of destruction; and finally from our
relations with other men. The unhappiness
whichhas this last originwe find perhaps more
painful than any other; we tend to regard it
more or less as a gratuitous addition, al
though it cannot be any less an inevitable fate
than the suffering that proceeds from other
sources.
It is no wonder if, under the pressure of
these possibilities of suffering, humanity is
wont to reduce its demands for happiness, just
as even the pleasure-principle itself changes
into the more accommodating reality-principle
under the influence of external environment;
if a man thinkshimself happyif he has merely
escaped unhappiness or weathered trouble; if
in general the task of avoiding pain forces
that of obtainingpleasure into the background.
Reflection shows that there are very different
ways of attempting to perform this task; and
all these ways have been recommended by the
various schools of wisdom in the art of life
and put into practice by men.
Unbridled
gratification of all desires forces itself into
the foreground as the most alluring guiding
principle in life, but it entails preferring en
joyment to caution and penalizes itself after
short indulgence. The other methods, in which
avoidance of pain is the main motive, are dif
ferentiated according to the
source of the
suffering against which they are mainly di
rected.
Some of these measures are extreme
and some moderate, some are one-sided ahd
some deal with several aspects of the matter
at once. Voluntary loneliness, isolation from
others, is the readiest safeguard against the
unhappiness that may arise out of human re
lations. We know what this means: the hap
piness found along this path is that of peace.
Against the dreaded outer world one can de
fend oneself only by turning away in some
other direction, if the difficulty is to be solved
single-handed.
There is indeed another and
better way: that of combining with the rest
of the human community and taking up the
attack on nature, thus forcing it to obey hu
man wiU, under the guidance of science. One
is working, then, with all for the good of all.
But the most interesting methods for averting

[776a]
Civilization and
pain are those which aim in influencing the
organism itself. In the last analysis, all pain
is but sensation; it only exists in so far as
we feel it, and we feel it only in consequence
of certain characteristics of our organism.
The crudest of these methods of influencing
the body, but also the most effective, is the
chemical one: that of intoxication.
I do not
think anyone entirely understands their opera
tion, but it is a fact that there are certain
substances foreign to the body which, when
present in the blood or tissues, directly cause
us pleasurable sensations, but also so change
the conditions of our perceptivity that we be
come insensible
of
disagreeable
sensations.
The two effects not only take place simultane
ously, they seem to be closely bound up with
each other.
But there must be substances in
the chemical composition of our bodies which
can do the same, for we know of at least one
morbid state, that of mania, in which a condi
tion similar to this intoxication arises with
out any drug being absorbed. Besides this,
our normal mental life shows variations, ac
cording to which pleasure is experienced with
more or less ease, and along with this goes
a diminished or increased sensitivity to pain.
It is greatly to be regretted that this toxic
aspect of mental processes has so far eluded
scientific research. The services rendered by
intoxicating substances in the struggle for
happiness and in warding off misery rank so
highly as a benefit that both individuals and
races have given them an estabHshed position
within their libido-economy.
It is not merely
the
immediate gain in pleasure which one
owes to them, but also a measure of that
independence of the outer world which is so
sorely craved. Men know that with the help
they can get from "drowning their cares"
they can at any time slip away from the
oppression of reality and find a refuge in a
world of their own where painful feelings do
not enter.
We are aware that it is just this
property which constitutes the danger and
injuriousness of intoxicating substances.
In
certain circumstances they are to blame when
valuable energies which could have been used
to improve the lot of humanity are uselessly
wasted.
The complicated structure of our mental
apparatus admits, however, of a whole series
of other kinds of influence. The gratification
of instincts is happiness, but when the outer
world lets us starve, refuses us satisfaction
of our needs, they become the cause of very

[776b]
its Discontents
773
great suffering. So the hope is born that by
influencing
these impulses one may escape
some measure of suffering. This type of de
fence against pain no longer relates to the
sensory
apparatus; it seeks to
control
the
internal sources of our needs themselves.
An
extreme form of it consists in annihilation of
the instincts, as taught by the wisdom of the
East and practised by the Yogi.
When it
succeeds, it is true, it. involves giving up all
other activities as well (sacrificing the whole
of life), and again, by another path, the only
happiness it brings is that of peace.
The
same way is taken when the aim is less ex
treme and only control of the instincts is
sought. When this is so, the higher mental
systems which recognize the reality-principle
have the upper hand. The aim of gratification
is by no means abandoned in this case; a cer
tain degree of protection against suffering is
secured, in that lack of satisfaction causes
less pain when the instincts are kept in check
than when they are unbridled. On the other
hand, this brings with it an undeniable re
duction in the degree of enjoyment obtainable.
The feeling of happiness produced by indul
gence of a wild, untamed craving is incompa
rably more intense than is the satisfying of
a
curbed desire.
The irresistibility of per
verted impulses, perhaps the charm of for
bidden things generally, may in this way be
explained economically.
Another method of guarding against pain
is by using the libido-displacements that our
mental equipment allows of, by which it gains
so greatly in flexibility. The task is then one
of transferring the instinctual aims into such
directions that they cannot be frustrated by
the outer world. Sublimation of the instincts
lends an aid in this.
Its success is greatest
when a man knows how to heighten sufficiently
his capacity for obtaining pleasure from men
tal and intellectual work. Fate has little power
against him then.
This kind of satisfaction,
such as the artist's joy in creation, in embody
ing his phantasies, or the scientist's in solving
problems or discovering truth, has a special
quality which we shall certainly one day be
able to define metapsychologically. Until then
we can only say metaphorically it seems to us
higher and finer, but, compared with that of
gratifying gross primitive instincts, its inten
sity is tempered and diffused; it does not over
whelm us physically. The weak point of this
method, however, is that it is not generally
applicable; it is only available to the few.

[777a]
774
Sigmund Freud
It presupposes special gifts and dispositions
which are not very commonly found in a suffi
cient degree.
And even to these few it does
not secure complete protection against suffer
ing; it gives no invulnerable armour against
the arrows of fate, and it usually fails when
a man's own body becomes a source of suffer
ing to him.1
This behaviour reveals clearly enough its
aim—that of making oneself independent of
the external world, by looking for happiness
in the inner things of the mind; in the next
method the
same
features
are
even
more
marked. The connection with reality is looser
stiU; satisfaction is obtained through illusions,
which are recognized as such, without the dis
crepancy between
them
and
reaHty being
allowed to interfere with the pleasure they
give. These illusions are derived from the life
of phantasy which, at the time when the sense
of reality developed, was expressly exempted
from the demands of the reality-test and set
apart for the purpose of fulfiUing wishes which
would be very hard to realize. At the head of
these phantasy-pleasures stands the enjoyment
of works of art which through the agency of
the artist is opened to those who cannot them
selves create.2 Those who are sensitive to the
influence of art do not know how to rate it
high enoughas a source of happiness and con
solation in Hfe.
Yet art affects us but as a
mild narcotic and can provide no more than
1When there is no special disposition in a man
imperatively prescribing the direction of his life-inter
est, the ordinary work all can do for a livelihood can
play
the part which Voltaire
wisely
advocated
it
should do in our lives. It is not possible to discuss the
significance of work for the economics of the libido
adequately within the limits of a short survey. Laying
stress upon importance of work has a greater effect
than any other technique of living in the direction of
binding the individual more closely to reality; in his
work he is at least securely attached to a part of
reality, the human community. Work is no less valua
ble
for the opportunity it and
the
human relations
connected with it provide for a very considerable dis
charge of libidinal
component impulses, narcissistic,
aggressive, and even erotic, than because it is indis
pensable for subsistence and
justifies existence in a
society. The daily work of earning a livelihood affords
particular satisfaction when it has been selected by
free choice, i.e., when through sublimation it enables
use to be made of existing inclinations, of instinctual
impulses that have retained their strength or are more
intense than usual for constitutional reasons. And yet
as a path to happiness work is not valued very highly
by men. They do not run after it as they do after other
opportunities for gratification. The great majority work
only when forced by necessity, and this natural human
aversion to work gives rise to the most difficult social
problems.
2 Cf. "Formulations regarding the Two Principles in
Mental
Functioning"
(1911), Collected Papers, TV;
and General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis (191517), Lecture xxm, p. 593 above.

[777b]
a temporary refuge for us from the hardships
of life; its influence is not strong enough to
make us forget real misery.
Another method operatesmore energetically
and thoroughly; it regards reality as the source
of all suffering, as the one and only enemy,
with whom life is intolerable and with whom,
therefore, all relations must be broken off if
one is to be happy in any way at all. The
hermit turns his back on this world; he will
have nothing to do with it.
But one can do
more than that; one can try to re-create it,
try to build up another instead, from which
the most unbearable features are eliminated
and replaced by others corresponding to one's
own wishes.
He who in his despair and de
fiance sets out on this path wiU not as a rule
get very far; reality will be too strong for
him. He becomes a madman and usuaUy finds
no one to help him in carrying through his
delusion. It is said, however, that each one
of us behaves in some respect like the para
noiac, substituting a wish-fulfilment for some
aspect of the world which is unbearable to
him, and carrying this delusion through into
reality. When a large number of people make
this attempt together and try to obtain as
surance of
happiness
and
protection
from
suffering by a delusional
transformation of
reality, it acquires special significance.
The
religions of humanity, too, must be classified
as mass-delusions of this kind.
Needless to
say, no one who shares a delusion recognizes
it as such.
I do not suppose that I have enumerated all
the methods by which men strive to win hap
piness and keep suffering at bay, and I know,
too, that the material might have been ar
ranged differently.
One of these methods I
have not yet mentioned at aU—not because
I had forgotten it, but because it will interest
us in another connection.
How would it be
possible to forget this way of all others of
practising the art of life!
It is conspicuous
for its remarkable capacity to combine charac
teristic features.
Needless to say, it, too,
strives to bring about independence of fate—
as we may best call it—and with this object
it looks for satisfaction within the mind, and
uses the capacity for displacing libido which
we mentioned before, but it does not turn
away from the outer world; on the contrary,
it takes a firm hold of its objects and ob
tains happiness from an emotional relation to
them.
Nor is it content to strive for avoid
ance of pain—that goal of weary resignation;

[778a]
Civilization and
rather it passes that by heedlessly and holds
fast to the deep-rooted, passionate striving for
a positive fulfilment of happiness. Perhaps it
reaUy comes
nearer to
this
goal than any
other method.
I am speaking, of course, of
that way of life which makes love the centre
of all things and anticipates all happiness from
loving and being loved. This attitude is famil
iar enough to all of us; one of the forms in
which love manifests itself, sexual love, gives
us our most intense experience of an over
whelming pleasurable sensation and so fur
nishes a prototype for our strivings after hap
piness.
What is more natural than that we
should persist in seeking happiness along the
path by which we first encountered it?
The
weak side of this way of living is clearly evi
dent ; and were it not for this, no human being
would ever have thought of abandoning this
path to happiness in
favour of any other.
We are never so defenceless against suffering
as when we love, never so forlornly unhappy
as when we have lost our love-object or its
love.
But this does not complete the story of
that way of life which bases happiness on
love; there is much more to be said about it.
We may here go on to consider the inter
esting case in which happiness in life is sought
first and foremost in the enjoyment of beauty,
wherever it is to be found by our senses and
our judgment, the beauty of human forms and
movements, of natural objects, of landscapes,
of artistic and even, scientific creations.
As
a goal in life, this aesthetic attitude offers
little protection against the menace of suffer
ing, but it is able to compensate for a great
deal.
The enjoyment of beauty produces a
particular, mildly intoxicating kind of sensa
tion.
There is no very evident use in beauty;
the necessity of it for cultural purposes is
not apparent, and yet civilization could not do
without it.
The science of aesthetics investi
gates the conditions in which things are re
garded as beautiful; it can give no explana
tion of the nature or origin of beauty; as
usual, its lack of results is concealed under a
flood of resounding and
meaningless words.
Unfortunately, psycho-analysis, too, has less
to say about beauty than about most things.
Its derivation from the realms of sexual sensa
tion is all that seems certain; the love of
beauty is a perfect example of a feeling with
an inhibited aim.
Beauty and attraction are
first of all the attributes of a sexual object.
It is remarkable that the genitals themselves,
the sight
of which is
always exciting, are

[778b]
its Discontents
775
hardly ever regarded as beautiful; the quaHty
of beauty seems, on the other hand, to attach
to
certain secondary sexual characters.
In spite of the incompleteness of these con
siderations, I will venture on a few remarks in
conclusion of this discussion.
The goal to
wards which the pleasure-principle impels us
—of becoming happy—is not attainable; yet
we may not—nay, cannot—give up the effort
to come nearer to realization of it by some
means or other. Very different paths may be
taken towards it: some pursue the positive
aspect of the aim, attainment of pleasure;
others the negative, avoidance of pain.
By
none of these ways can we achieve aU that
we desire.
In that modified sense in which
we have seen it to be attainable, happiness is a
problem of the economics of the Hbido in each
individual. There is no sovereign recipe in this
matter which suits aU; each one must find out
for himself by which particular means he may
achieve felicity. All kinds of different factors
will operate to influence his choice. It depends
on how much real gratification he is likely to
obtain in the external world, and how far he
wiU find it necessary to make himself independ
ent of it; finaUy, too, on the beHef he has in
himself of his power to alter it in accordance
with his wishes. Even at this stage the mental
constitution of the individual will play a deci
sive part, aside from any external considera
tions. The man who is predominantly erotic
wiH choose emotional relationships with others
before all else; the narcissistic type, who is
more self-sufficient, will seek his essential'satis
factions in the inner workings of his own soul;
the man of action will never abandon the ex
ternal world in which he can essay his power.
The interests of narcissistic types will be deter
mined by their particular gifts and the degree
of instinctual subHmation of which they are
capable. When any choice is pursued to an
extreme, it penaHzes itself, in that it exposes
the individual to the dangers accompanying any
one exclusive Hfe-interest which may always
prove inadequate. Just as a cautious business
man avoids investing all his capital in one con
cern, so wisdom would probably admonish Us
also not to anticipate aU our happiness from
one quarter alone. Success is never certain; it
depends on the co-operation of many factors,
perhaps on none more than the capacity of the
mental constitution to
adapt itself
to
the
outer world and then utilize this last for ob
taining pleasure. Any one who is born with a
specially unfavourable instinctual constitution,

[779a]
776
^Sigmund
and whose libido'-components do not go through
the transformation and ^modification necessary
for successful achievement in later life, will
find it hard to obtain happiness from his exter
nal environment, especiaUy if he is faced with
the more difficult tasks. One last possibility of
dealing with life remains to such people and
it-offers them:at least substitute-gratifications;
it takes the: form of the:flight into, neurotic
illness, and they mostly adopt it while they are
still young. Those whose efforts to obtain hap
piness come to nought in later years still find
consolation in the pleasure of chronic intoxica^
tion, or else they embark upon that despairing
attempt at revolt—psychosis.
Religion
circumscribes these
measures
of
choice and adaptation by urging upon everyone
alike its single way of achieving happiness and
guarding against pain. Its method consists in
decrying the value of life and promulgating a
view of the real world that is distorted like a
delusion, and both of these imply a preliminary
intimidating influence upon
intelligence.
At
such a cost—by the forcible imposition of men
tal infantiHsm and inducing a mass-delusion—
reHgion succeeds in saving many people from
individual neuroses. But Httle more. There are,
as .we have said, many paths by which the hap
piness attainable for man can be reached, but
none which is certain to take him to it. Nor can
religion keep her promises either. ^When the
faithful find themselves reduced in the end to
speaking of
God's
inscrutable decree, they
thereby avow that all that is left to them in
their sufferings is unconditional submission as
a last-remaining consolation and source of hap
piness. And if a man is willing to come to this,
he
could probably have arrived there by a
shorter road.
Ill
Our discussion of happiness has so far not
taught us much that is not already common
knowledge. Nor does the prospect of discover
ing anything new seem much greater if we go
on with the problem of why it is so hard for
mankind to be happy. We gave the answer
before, when we cited the three sources of
human sufferings, namely, the superior force of
nature, the disposition to decay of our bodies,
and the inadequacy of our methods of regulating
human relations in the family, the community,
and the state. In regard to the first two, our judg
ment cannot hesitate: it forces us to recognize
these sources of suffering and to submit to the
inevitable: We shall never completely subdue;

[779b]
Freud
nature; our body, too, is an orgamsm, itself a
part of nature, and will always
contain the
seeds of dissolution, with its limited power of
adaptation and achievement. The effect of this
recognition is in no way disheartening; on the
contrary, it points out the direction for our
efforts. If we cannot abolish all suffering, yet
a great deal of it we can, and can mitigate
more; the experience of several thousand years
has convinced us of this. To the third, the
social source of our distresses, we take up a
different attitude. We prefer not to regard it
as one at all; we cannot see why the systems
we have ourselves created should not rather
ensure protection and well-being for us all. To
be sure, when we consider how unsuccessful
our efforts to safeguard against suffering in this
particular have proved, the suspicion dawns
upon us that a bit of unconquerable nature
lurks concealed behind this difficulty as well—:
in the shape of our own mental constitution.
When, we start to consider this possibility,
we come across a point of view which is so
amazing that we will pause over it. According
to it, our so-called civiHzation itself is to blame
for a great part of our misery, and we should
be much happier if we were to give it up and go
back to primitive conditions. I call this amaz
ing because-^however one may define culture
—it is undeniable that every means by which
we try to guard ourselves against menaces from
the several sources of human distress is a part
of this same culture.
How has it come about that so many people
have adopted this strange attitude of hostility
to civiHzation? In my opinion, it arose from a
background of profound long-standing discon
tent with the
existing state of civilization,
which finally crystallized into this judgment as
a result of certain historical happenings. I be
lieve I can identify the last two of these; I
am not learned enough to trace the links in the
chain back into the history of the human spe
cies. At the time when Christianity conquered
the pagan reHgions, some such antagonism to
culture must already have been
actively at
work. It is closely related to the low estimation
put upon earthly life by Christian doctrine.
The earlier of the last two historical develop
ments was when, as a result of voyages of
discovery, men came into contact with primi
tive peoples and races. To the Europeans, who
failed to observe them carefully and misunder-:
stood what they saw, these people seemed to
lead simple, happy lives—wanting for nothing
—such as the traveHers who visited them, with

[780a]
Civilization and
all their
superior
culture,
were unable to
achieve. Later experience has corrected this
opinion on many points; in several instances
the ease of life was due to the bounty of nature
and the possibilities of ready satisfaction for
the great human needs, but it was erroneously
attributed to the absence of the complicated
conditions of civilization. The last of the two
historical events is especially familiar to us; it
was when people began to understand the na
ture of the neuroses which threaten to under
mine the modicum of happiness open to civil
ized man. It was found that men become neu
rotic because they cannot tolerate the degree
of privation that society imposes on them in
virtue of its cultural ideals, and it was supposed
that a return to greater possibilities of happi
ness would ensue if these standards were abol
ished or greatly relaxed.
And there exists an element of disappoint
ment, in addition. In the last generations, man
has made extraordinary strides in knowledge of
the natural sciences and technical application
of them, and has established his dominion over
nature in a way never before imagined. The
details of this forward progress are universally
known: it is unnecessary to enumerate them.
Mankind is proud of its exploitsand has a right
to be. But men are beginning to perceive that
all this newly-won power over space and time;
this conquest of the forces of nature, this ful
filment of age-old longings, has not increased
the amount of pleasure they can obtain in life,
has not made them feel any happier. The valid
conclusion from this is merely that power over
nature is not the only condition of human hap
piness, just as it is not the onlygoal of civiliza
tion's efforts, and there is no ground for infer
ring that its technical progress is worthless
from the standpoint of happiness. It prompts
one to exclaim: Is it not then a positive pleas
ure, an unequivocal gain in happiness, to be
able to hear, whenever I like, the voice of a
child living hundreds of miles away, or to know
directly a friend of mine arrives at his destina
tion that he has come well and safely through
the long and troublesome voyage? And is it
nothing that medical science has succeeded in
enormously reducing the mortality of young
children, the dangers of infection for womenin
childbirth, indeed; in very
considerably pro
longing the average length of human life? And
there is still a long list one could add to these
benefits that we owe to the much-despised era
of,scientific and practical progress—but a crit-.
ical, pessimistic voice makes itself heard, say-

[780b]
its Discontents
777
ing that most of these advantages foUow the
model of those "cheap pleasures" in the anec
dote. One gets this enjoyment by sticking one's
bare leg outside the bedclothes on a cold win
ter's night and then drawing it in again. If
there were no railway to make light of dis
tances, my child would never have left home,
and I should not need the telephone to hear
his voice. If there were no vessels crossing the
ocean, my friend would never have embarked
on his voyage, and I should not need the tele
graph to relieve my anxiety about him. What is
the use of reducing the mortaHty of children,
when it is precisely this reduction which im
poses the greatest moderation gn us in beget
ting them, so that taken all round we do not
rear more children than in the days before the
reign of hygiene, while at the same time we
have created difficult conditions for sexual life
in marriage and
probably counteracted the
beneficial effects of natural selection? And what
do we gain by a long life when it is full of
hardship and starved of joys and so wretched
that wecanonlywelcome death as ourdeliverer?
It seems to be certain that our present-day
civilization does not inspire in us a feeling of
well-being, but it is very difficult to form an
opinion whether in earlier times people felt any
happier and what part their cultural condi
tions played in the question.-We always tend
to regard trouble objectively, i.e.* to place our
selves with our own wants and our own sensibiHties in the same conditions, so as to discover
what opportunities for happiness or unhappi
ness we should find in them. This method of
considering the problem, which appears to be
objective because it ignores the varieties of
subjective sensitivity, is of course the most
subjective possible, for by applying it one sub
stitutes one's own mental attitude for the un
known attitude of other men. Happiness, on
the contrary, is something essentially subjec
tive. However we may shrink in horror at the
thought of certain situations, that of the galleyslaves in antiquity, of the peasants in the
Thirty Years' War, of the victims of the Inqui
sition, of the Jews awaiting a pogrom, it is still
impossible for us to feel ourselves into the
position of these people, to. imagine the differ
ences which would be brought about by con
stitutional obtuseness of feeling, gradual stuper<
faction, the cessation of aU anticipation, and
by all the grosser and more subtle ways in
which insensibility to both pleasurable and
painful sensations can be induced. Moreover,
on occasions when the most extreme forms of

[781a]
778
Sigmund Freud
suffering have to be endured, special mental
protective
devices
come
into
operation. It
seems to me unprofitable to follow
up this
aspect of the problem further.
It is time that we should turn our attention
to the nature of this culture, the value of which
is so much disputed from the point of view of
happiness. Until we have learnt something by
examining it for ourselves, we wiU not look
round for formulas which express its essence
in a few words. We wiU be content to repeat1
that the word culture describes the sum of the
achievements and institutions which differenti
ate our lives from those of our animal forebears
and serve two, purposes, namely, that of pro
tecting humanity against nature and of regu
lating the relations of human beings among
themselves. In order to learn more than this,
we must bring together the individual features
of culture as they are manifested in human
communities. We shall have no hesitation in
aUowingourselves to be guided by the common
usages of language, or, as one might say, the
feeling of language, confident that we shall thus
take into account inner attitudes which still
resist expression in abstract terms.
The beginning is easy. We recognize as be
longing to culture all the activities and posses
sions which men use to make the earth service
able to them, to protect them
against the
tyranny of natural forces, and so on. There is
less doubt about this aspect of civilization than
any other. If we go back far enough, we find
that the first acts of civilization were the use
of tools, the gaining of powerover fire, and the
construction of dwellings. Among these the
acquisition of power over fire stands out as a
quite exceptional achievement, without a pro
totype;3 while the other two opened up paths
1 Cf. The Future of an Illusion.
3Psycho-analytic material, as yet incomplete and
not capable of unequivocal interpretation, nevertheless
admits of a surmise—which sounds fantastic enough—
about the origin of this human feat. It is as if primi
tive man had had the impulse, when he came in con
tact with fire, to gratify an infantile pleasure in re
spect of it and put it out with a stream of urine. The
legends that we possess leave no doubt that flames
shooting upwards like tongues were originally felt to
have a phallic sense. Putting out fire by urinating—
which is also introduced in the later fables of Gulliver
in Lilliput and Rabelais's Gargantua—therefore repre
sented a sexual act with a man, an enjoyment of mas
culine potency in homosexual rivalry. Whoever was
the first to deny himself this pleasure and spare the
fire was able to take it with him and break it in to his
own service. By curbing the
fire of his own sexual
passion, he was able to tame fire as a force of nature.
This great cultural victory was thus a reward for re
fraining from gratification of an instinct. Further, it is
as if man had placed woman by the hearth as the
guardian of the fire he had taken captive, because her
anatomy makes it impossible for her to yield to such

[781b]
which have ever since been pursued by man,
the stimulus towards which is easily imagined.
By means of aU his tools, man makes his own
organs more perfect—both the motor and the
sensory—or else removes the obstacles in the
way of their activity. Machinery places gigan
tic power at his disposal which, like his mus
cles, he can employ in any direction; ships and
aircraft have the effect that neither air nor
water can prevent his traversing them. With
spectacles he corrects the defects of the lens
in his own eyes; with telescopes he looks at far
distances; with the microscope he overcomes
the Hmitations in visibility due to the structure
of his retina. With the photographic camera he
has created an instrument which registers tran
sitory visual impressions, just as the gramo
phone does with equally transient auditory
ones; both are at bottom materializations of
his own power of memory. With the help of
the telephone he can hear at distances which
even fairy-tales would treat as insuperable;
writing to begin with was the voice of the ab
sent; dwellings were a substitute for the moth
er's womb, that first abode, in which he was
safe and felt so content, for which he probably
yearns ever after.
It soundslike a fairy-tale, but not only that;
this story of what man by his science and prac
tical inventions has achieved on this-earth,
where he first appeared as a weakly member
of the animal kingdom, and on which each
individualof his species must ever again appear
as a helpless infant—0 inch of nature!— is a
direct fulfilment of all, or of most, of the dear
est wishes in his fairy-tales. AU these posses
sions he has acquired through culture. Long
ago he formed an ideal conception of omnipo
tence and omniscience which he embodied in
his gods. Whatever seemed unattainable to his
desires—or forbidden
to him—-he attributed
to these gods. One may say, therefore, that
these gods were the ideals of his culture. Now
he has himself approached very near to realiz
ing this ideal, he has nearly become a god him
self. But only, it is true, in the way that ideals
are usually realized in the general experience
of humanity. Not completely; in some respects
not at all, in others only by halves. Man has
become a god by means of artificiallimbs, so to
speak,.quite.magnificent when equipped with
aU his accessory organs; but they do not grow
on him and they stiU give him trouble at times.
a temptation. It is remarkable how regularly analytic
findings
testify to the close connection between the
ideas of ambition, fire, and urethral erotism.

[782a]
Civilization and its Discontents
779
However, he is entitled to console himself with
the thought that this evolution wiU not come
to an end in A.D. 1930. Future ages will pro
duce further great advances in this realm of
culture, probably inconceivable now, and will
increase man's likeness to a god still more. But
with the aim of our study in mind, we will not
forget, all the same, that the human being of
today is not happy with all his likeness to a god.
Thus we recognize that a country has at
tained a high level of civiHzation when we find
that everything in it that can be helpful in
exploiting the earth for man's benefit and in
protecting him against nature—everything, in
short, that is useful to him—is cultivated and
effectively protected. In such a country, the
course of rivers which threaten to
overflow
their banks is regulated, their waters guided
through canals to places where they are needed.
The soil is industriously cultivated and planted
with the vegetation suited to it; the mineral
wealth is brought up assiduously from
the
depths and wrought into the implements and
utensils that are required. The means of com
munications are frequent, rapid, and reliable;
wild and dangerous animals have been exter
minated, the breeding of tamed and domesti
cated ones prospers. But we demand other
things besides these of civilization, and curi
ously enough, we expect to find thenr existing
in the same countries. As if we wished to re
pudiate the first requisition we made, we count
it also as proof of a high level of civilization
when we see that the industry of the inhabit
ants is appHed as well to things which are not
in the least useful and, on the contrary seem
to be useless, e.g., when the parks and gardens
in a town, which are necessary as playgrounds
and air-reservoirs, also bear flowering plants,
or when the windows of dwellings are adorned
with flowers. We soon become aware that the
useless thing which we require of civilization
is beauty; we expect a cultured people to re
vere beauty where it is found in nature and to
create it in their handiwork so far as they
are able. But this is far from exhausting what
we require of civilization. Besides, we expect
to see the signs of cleanliness and order. We
do not think highly of the cultural level of an
English country town in the time of Shakes
peare when we read that there was a tall dungheap in front of his father's house in Stratford;
we are indignant and call it "barbarous," which
is the opposite of civilized, when we find the
paths in the Wiener Wald Httered with paper.
Dirt of any kind seems to us incompatible with

[782b]
civiHzation; we extend our demands for clean
liness to the human body also, and are amazed
to hear what an objectionable odour emanated
from the person of the Roi Soleil; we shake
our heads when we are shown the tiny wash
basin on the Isola Bella which Napoleon used
for his daily ablutions. Indeed, we are not
surprised if anyone employs the use of soap
as a direct measure of civilization. It is the
same with order, which, like cleanliness, relates
entirely to man's handiwork. But whereas we
cannot expect cleanliness in nature, order has,
on the contrary, been imitated from nature;
man's observations of the great astronomical
periodicities not only furnished him with a
model, but formed the ground-plan of his first
attempts to introduce order into his own life.
Order is a kind of repetition-compulsion by
which it is ordained once for all wheii, where
and how a thing shall be done so that oh every
similar occasion doubt and hesitation shall be
avoided. The benefits of order are incontest
able: it enables us to use space and time to
the best advantage, while saving expenditure
of mental energy. One would be justified in
expecting that it would have ingrained itself
from the start and without opposition into all
human activities; and one may well wonder
that this has not happened, and that, on the
contrary, human
beings manifest an
inborn
tendency to negligence, irregularity, and untrustworthiness in their work, and have to be
laboriously trained to imitate the example of
their celestial models.
Beauty, cleanliness, and order clearly occupy
a peculiar position among the requirements of
civiHzation. No one will maintain that they are
as essential to life as the activities aimed at
controlling the forces of nature and as other
factors which we have yet to mention; and yeyt
no one would willingly relegate them to the
background as trivial matters. Beauty is an
instance which plainly shows that culture is
not simply utilitarian in its aims, for the lack
of beauty is a thing we cannot tolerate in civi
lization. The utilitarian advantages of order are
quite apparent; with regard to cleanliness, we
have to remember that it is required of us by
hygiene, and we may surmise that even before
the days of scientific prophylaxis the connec
tion between the two was not altogether un
suspected by mankind. But these aims and
endeavours of culture are not entirely to be
explained on utilitarian lines; there must be
something else at work besides.
According to general opinion, however, there

[783a]
780
Sigmund
is one feature of culture which characterizes it
better than any other, and that is the value it
sets upon the higher mental activities—intel
lectual, scientific, and aesthetic achievement—
the leading part it concedes to ideas in human
life. First and
foremost among these ideas
come the religious systems with their compHcated evolution, on which I have elsewhere en
deavoured to throw a light; next to them come
philosophical speculations; and last, the ideals
man has formed, his conceptions of the per
fection possible in an individual, in a people,
in humanity as a whole, and the demands he
makes on the basis of these conceptions. These
creations of his mind are not independent of
each other; on the contrary, they are closely
interwoven^ and this complicates the attempt
to describe them, as weU as that to trace their
psychological derivation. If we assume as a
general hypothesis that the force behind aU
human activities is a striving towards the two
convergent aims of profit and pleasure, we
must then acknowledge this as valid also for
these other manifestations of culture, although
it can be plainly recognized as true only in
respect of science and art. It cannot be doubted,
however, that the remainder, too, correspond
to some powerful need in human beings—per
haps to one which develops fully only in a
minority of people. Nor may we allow ourselves
to be misled by our own judgments concerning
the value of any of these reHgious or philosoph
ical systems or of these ideals; whether we
look upon them as the highest achievement of
the human mind, or whether we deplore them
as fallacies, one must acknowledge that where
they exist, and especially where they are in the
ascendant, they
testify to a high level of
civilization.
We now have to consider the last, and cer
tainly by no means the least Important, of the
components of culture, namely, the ways in
Which social relations, the relations of one man
to another, are regulated, all that has to do with
him as a neighbour, a source of help, a sexual ob
ject to others, a member of a family or of a state.
It is especially difficult in this matter to remain
unbiased by any ideal standards and to ascer
tain exactly what is specifically cultural here.
Perhaps one might begin with the statement
that the first attempt ever made to regulate
these social relations already contained the es
sential element of civilization. Had no such
attempt been made, these relations would be
subject to the wills of individuals: that is to
say,1 the man who was physicaUy strongest

[783b]
Freud
would decide things in accordance with his own
interests and desires. The situation would re
main the same, even though this strong man
should in his turn meet with another who was
stronger than he. Human Hfe in communities
only becomes possible when a number of men
unite together in strength superior to any single
individual and remain united against all single
individuals. The strength of this united body is
then opposed as right against the strength of
any individual, which is condemned as brute
force.
This substitution of the power of a
united number for the power of a single man is
the decisive step towards civilization. The es
sence of it lies in the circumstance that the
members of the
community have restricted
their possibilities of gratification, whereas the
individual recognized no such restrictions. The
first requisite of culture, therefore, is justice—
that is, the assurance that a law once made will
not be broken in favour of any individual. This
implies nothing about the ethical value of any
such law. The further course of cultural devel
opment seems to tend towards ensuring that
the law shall no longer represent the wiU of any
smaU body—caste, tribe, section of the popula
tion—which may behave Hke a predatory indi
vidual towards other such groups perhaps con
taining larger numbers. The end-result would
be a state of law to which all—that is, all who
are capable of uniting—have contributed by
making some sacrifice of their own desires, and
which leaves none—again with the same excep
tion—at the mercy of brute force.
The liberty of the individual is not a benefit
of culture. It was greatest before any culture,
though indeed it had little value at that time,
because the individual was hardly in a position
to defend it. Liberty has undergone restrictions
through the evolution of civiHzation, and jus
tice demands that these restrictions shall apply
to aU. The desire for freedom that makes itself
felt in a human community may be a revolt
against some existing injustice and so may
prove favourable to a further development of
civilization and remain compatible with it. But
it may also have its origin in the primitive
roots of the personality, still unfettered by
civilizing influences, and so become a source
of antagonism" to culture. Thus the
cry for
freedom is directed either against particular
forms or demands of culture or else against
culture itself. It does not seem as if man could
be brought by any sort of influence to change
his nature into that of the ants; he will always,
one imagines, defend his claim to individual

[784a]
Civilization and
freedom against the will of the multitude. A
great part of the struggles of mankind centres
round the single task of finding some expedient
(i.e., satisfying) solution between these indi
vidual claims and those of the civilized com
munity; it is one of the problems of man's fate
whether this solution can be arrived at in some
particular form of culture or whether the con
flict will prove irreconcilable.
We have obtained a clear impression of the
general picture presented by culture through
adopting the common view as to which aspects
of human life are to be called cultural; but it
is true that so far we have discovered nothing
that is not common knowledge. We have, how
ever,
at
the
same
time
guarded ourselves
against accepting the misconception that civili
zation is synonymous with becoming perfect,
is the path by which man is ordained to reach
perfection. But now a certain point of view
presses for. consideration; it will lead perhaps
in another direction. The evolution of culture
seems to us a peculiar kind of process passing
over humanity, of which several aspects strike
us as familiar. We can describe this process in
terms of the modifications it effects on the
known human instinctual dispositions, which it
is the economic task of our lives to satisfy.
Some of these instincts become absorbed, as
it were, so that something appears in place of
them which in an individual we call a charactertrait. The most remarkable example of this
process is found in respect of the anal erotism
of young human beings. Their primary interest
in the excretory function, its organs and prod
ucts, is changed in the course of their growth
into a group of traits that we know well—
thriftiness, orderliness, and cleanliness—valu
able and welcome qualities in themselves, which,
however, may be intensified till they visibly
dominate the personality and produce what we
call the anal character. How this happens we
do not know; but there is no doubt about the
accuracy of this conclusion.1 Now, we have
seen that order and cleanliness are essentially
cultural demands, although the necessity of
them for survival is not particularly apparent,
any more than their suitability as sources of
pleasure. At this point we must be struck for
the first time with the similarity between the
process of cultural development and that of
the libidinal development
in an
individual.
Other instincts have to be induced to change
1Cf. "Character and Anal Erotism"
(1908), Col
lected Papers, II;
also numerous contributions to the
subject by Ernest Jones and others.

[784b]
its Discontents
y8i
the conditions of their gratification, to find it
along other paths, a process which is usually
identical with what we know so well as sub
limation (of the aim of an instinct), but which
can sometimes be differentiated from this. Sub
Hmation of instinct is an especially conspicuous
feature of cultural evolution; this it is that
makes it possible for the higher mental opera
tions, scientific, artistic, ideological activities,
to play such an important part in civiHzed life.
If one were to yield to a first impression, one
would be tempted to say that subHmation is a
fate which has been forced upon instincts by
culture alone. But it is better to reflect over this
a while longer. Thirdly and lastly, and this
seems most important of all, it is impossible to
ignore the extent to which civilization is built
up On renunciation of instinctual gratifications,
the degree to which the existence of civiliza
tion
presupposes the non-gratification
(sup
pression, repression, or something else?) of
powerful instinctual urgencies. This cultural
privation dominates the whole field of social
relations between human beings; we know al
ready that it is the cause of the antagonism
against which all civilization has to fight. It sets
hard tasks for our scientific work, too; we have
a great deal to explain here. It is not easy, to
understand how it can become possible to with
hold satisfaction from an instinct. Nor is it by
any means without risk to do so; if the depriva
tion is not made good economically, one may
be certain of producing serious disorders.
But now, if we wish to know what use it is
to us to have recognized the evolution of cul
ture as a special process, comparable to the
normal growth of an individual to maturity,
we must clearly attack another problem and put
the question: What are the influences to which
the evolution of culture owes its origin, how
did it arise, and what determined its course?
IV
This task seems too big a one; one may well
confess oneself diffident. Here follows what lit
tle I have been able to elicit about it.
Once primitive man had made the discovery
that it lay in his own hands-^-speaking literally
—to improve his lot on earth by working, it
cannot have been a matter of indifference to
him whether another man worked with him or
against him. The other acquired the value of a
fellow-worker, and it was advantageous to live
with him. Even eariier, in his apelike prehis
tory, man had adopted the habit of forming
famiHes: his first helpers were probably the

[785a]
782
Sigmund Freud
members of his family. One may suppose that
the founding of families was in some way
connected with the period when the need for
genital satisfaction, no longer appearing like
an occasional guest who turns up suddenly and
then vanishes without letting one hear any
thing of him for long intervals, had settled
down with each man like a permanent lodger.
When this happened, the male acquired a mo
tive for keeping the female, or rather, his sex
ual objects, near him; while the female, who
wanted not to be separated from her helpless
young, in their interests, too, had to stay by
the stronger male.1 In this primitive family one
1The organic periodicity of the sexual process has
persisted, it is true, but its effect on mental sexual ex
citation has been almost reversed. This
change is
connected primarily with the diminishing importance
of the olfactory stimuli by means of which the men
strual process produced sexual excitement in the mind
of the male. Their function was taken over by visual
stimuli, which could operate permanently, instead of
intermittently like the olfactory ones. The taboo of
menstruation has its origin in this organic repression,
which acted as a barrier against a phase of develop
ment that had been surpassed; all its other motiva
tions are probably of a secondary nature. (Cf. C. D.
Daly,
"Hindumythologie und
Kastrationskomplex,"
Imago, Vol. .xm, 1927-) This process is repeated on a
different level when the gods of a foregone cultural
epoch are changed into demons in the next. The diminu
tion in importance of olfactory stimuli seems itself,
however, to be a consequence of man's erecting him
self from the earth, of his adoption of an upright gait,
which
made his genitals, that before had been cov
ered, visible and in need of protection and so evoked
feelings of shame. Man's erect posture, therefore, would
represent the beginning of the momentous process of
cultural evolution. The chain of development would
run from this onward, through the diminution in the
importance of olfactory stimuli and the
isolation of
women at their periods, to a time when visual stimuli
became paramount, the genitals became visible, further
till sexual excitation became constant and the
family
was founded, and so to the threshold of human cul
ture. This is only a theoretical speculation, but it is
important enough to be worth checking carefully by
the conditions obtaining among the animals closely
allied to man.
There is an unmistakable social factor at work in
the impulse of civilization towards cleanliness, which
has
been subsequently justified by considerations of
hygiene but had nevertheless found expression before
they were appreciated. The impulse towards cleanliness
originates in the striving to get rid of excretions which
have become unpleasant to the sense-perceptions. We
know that things are different in the nursery. Excreta
arouse no aversion in children; they seem precious to
them, as being parts of their own bodies which have
been detached from them. The training of children is
very energetic in this particular; its object is to expe
dite the development that lies ahead of them, according
to which the excreta are to become worthless, disgust
ing, horrible, and despicable to them. Such a reversal
of values would be almost impossible to bring about,
were it not that these substances expelled from the body
are destined by their strong odours to share the fate
that overtook
the olfactory stimuli after
man had
erected himself from the ground. Anal erotism, there
fore, is from the first subjected to the organic repres
sion which opened up the way to culture. The social
factor, which has been active in the further modifica
tions of anal erotism comes into play with the fact that
in spite of all man's evolutionary progress the smell

[785b]
essential feature of culture is lacking; the wiU
of the father, the head of it, was unfettered. I
have endeavoured in Totem and Taboo to show
how the way led from this family-life to the
succeeding phase of communal existence in the
form of a band of brothers. By overpowering
the father, the sons had discovered that sev
eral men united can be stronger than a single
man. The totemic stage of culture is founded
upon the restrictions that the band were obliged
to impose on one another in order to maintain
the new system. These taboos were the first
right or law. The life of human beings in com
mon therefore had a twofold foundation, i.e.,
the compulsion to work, created by external
necessity, and the power of love, causing the
male to wish to keep his sexual object, the fe
male, near him, and the female to keep near her
that part of herself which has become detached
from her, her child. Eros and Ananke were the
parents of human culture, too. The first result
of culture was that a larger number of human
beings could then live together in common.
And since the two great powers were here co
operating together, one might have expected
that further cultural evolutionwouldhave pro
ceeded smoothly towards even greater mastery
over the external world, as well as towards
greater extension in the numbers of men shar
ing the life in common. Nor is it easy to under
stand how this culture can be felt as anything
but satisfying by those who partake of it.
Before we go on to enquire where the dis
turbances in it arise, we will let ourselves di
gress from the point that love was one of the
founders of culture and so fill a gap left in our
previous discussion. We said that man, having
found by experience that sexual (genital) love
afforded him his greatest gratification, so that
it became in effect a prototype of all happiness
to him, must have been thereby impelled to
seek his happiness further along the path of
sexual relations, to make genital erotism the
central point of his Hfe. We went on to say
that in so doinghe becomes to a very dangerous
degree dependent on a part of the outer world,
of his own excretions is scarcely disagreeable to him
yet, but so far only that of the evacuations of others.
The man who is not clean, i.e., who does not eliminate
his excretions, therefore offends others, shows no con
sideration for them—a fact which is exemplified in the
commonest and most forcible terms of abuse. It would
be incomprehensible, too, that man should use as an
abusive epithet the name of his most faithful
friend
in the animal world, if dogs
did not incur the con
tempt of men through two of their characteristics, i.e.,
that they are creatures of smell and have no horror of
excrement, and, secondly, that they are not ashamed
of their sexual functions.

[786a]
Civilization and
namely, on his chosen love-object, and this ex
poses him to most painful sufferings if he is
rejected by it or loses it through death or
defection. The wise men of all ages have conse
quently warned us emphatically against this
way of life; but in spite of all it retains its
attraction for a great number of people.
A small minority are enabled by their con
stitution, nevertheless, to find happiness along
the path of love; but far-reaching mental trans
formations of the erotic function are necessary
before this is possible. These peoplemake them
selves independent of their object's acquies
cence by transferring the main value from the
fact of being loved to their own act of loving;
they protect themselves against loss of it by
attaching their love not to individual objects
but to all men equally, and they avoid the un
certainties and disappointments of genital love
by turning away from its sexual aimand modi
fying the instinct into an impulse with an
inhibited aim. The state which they induce in
themselves by this process—an unchangeable,
undeviating, tender attitude—has little super
ficial likeness to the stormy vicissitudes of
genital love, from which it is nevertheless de
rived. It seems that Saint Francis of Assisi may
have carried this method of using love to pro
duce an inner feeling of happiness as far as
anyone; what we are thus characterizing as one
of the procedures by whichthe pleasure-princi
ple fulfils itself has in fact been linked up in
many ways with religion; the connection be
tween them may lie in those remote fastnesses
of the mind where the distinctions between the
ego and objects, and between the various ob
jects, become matters of indifference. From
one ethical standpoint, the deeper motivation
of which will later become clear to us, this in
clination towards an all-embracing love of oth
ers and of the world at large is regarded as the
highest state of mind of whichman is capable.
Even at this early stage in the discussion, I
will not withhold the two principal objections
we have to raise against this view. A love that
does not discriminate seems to us to lose some
of its own value, since it does an injustice to its
object. And secondly, not all men are worthy
of love.
The love that instituted the family still re
tains its power; in its original form it does not
stop short of direct sexual satisfaction, and in
its modified form, as aim-inhibited friendli
ness, it influences our civilization. In both these
forms it carries on its task of binding men and
women to one another, and it does this with

[786b]
its Discontents
7^3
greater intensity than can be achieved through
the interest of work in common. The casual and
undifferentiated way in which the word love is
employed by language has its genetic justifica
tion. In general usage, the relation between a
man and a woman whose genital desires have
led them to found a family is called love; but
the positive attitude of feeling between parents
and children, between brothers and sisters in
a family, is also called love, although to us
this relation merits the description of aim-in
hibitedlove or affection. Love with an inhibited
aim was indeed originally full sensual love and
in men's unconscious minds is so still. Both of
them, the sensual and the aim-inhibited forms,
reach out beyond the family and create new
bonds with others who before were strangers.
Genital love leads to the forming of new famiHes; aim-inhibited love to friendships, which
are valuable culturally because they do not en
tail many of the limitations of genital love—
for instance, its exclusiveness. But the inter
relations between love and culture lose their
simplicity as development proceeds. On the one
hand, love opposes the interests of culture; on
the other, culture menaces love with grievous
restrictions.
This rift between them seems inevitable; the
cause of it is not immediately recognizable. It
expresses itself first in a conflict between the
family and the larger community to which the
individual belongs. We have seen already that
one of culture's principal endeavours is to ce
ment men and women together into larger units.
But the family will not give up the individual.
The closer the attachment between the mem
bers of it, the more they often tend to remain
aloof from others, and the harder it is for them
to enter into the wider circle of the world at
large. That form of life in common which is
phylogenetically older, and is in childhood its
only form, resists being displaced by the type
that becomes acquired later with culture. De
tachment from the family has become a task
that awaits every adolescent, and often society
helps him through it with pubertal and initia
tory rites. One gets the impression that these
difficulties form an integral part of every proc
ess of mental evolution—and indeed, at bot
tom, of every organic development, too.
The next discord is caused by women, who
soon become antithetical to cultural trends and
spread around them their conservative influ
ence—the women who at the beginning laid the
foundations of culture by the appeal of their
love. Women represent the interests of the

[787a]
784
Sigmund Freud
family and sexual life; the work of civilization
has become more and more men's business; it
confronts them with ever harder tasks, com
pels them to sublimations of instinct which
women are not easily able to achieve. Since
man has not an unlimited amount of mental
energy at his disposal, he must accomplish his
tasks by distributing his libido to the best ad
vantage. What he employs for cultural pur
poses he withdraws to a great extent
from
women and his sexual life; his constant asso
ciation with men and his dependence on.his
relations with them even estrange him from
his duties as husband and father. Woman finds
herself thus forced into the background by the
claims of culture, and she adopts an inimical
attitude towards it.
The tendency of culture to set restrictions
upon sexual life is no less evident than its other
aim of widening its sphere of operations. Even
the earliest phase of it, the totemic, brought in
its train the prohibition against incestuous ob
ject-choice, perhaps the most maiming wound
ever inflicted throughout the ages on the erotic
life of man. Further limitations are laid on it
by taboos, laws, and customs, which touch men
as well as women. Various types of culture
differ in the lengths to which they carry this;
and the material structure of the social fabric
also affects the measure of sexual freedom that
remains. We have seen that culture obeys the
laws
of psychological economic necessity in
making the restrictions, for it obtains a great
part of the mental energy it needs by subtract
ing it from sexuality. Culture behaves towards
sexuality in this respect Hke a tribe or a sec
tion of the population which has gained the
upper hand and is exploiting the rest to its own
advantage. Fear of a revolt among the op
pressed then becomes a motive for even stricter
regulations. A high-water mark in this type of
development has been reached in our Western
European civilization. Psychologically it is fully
justified in beginningby censuringany manifes
tations of the sexual life of children, for there
would be no prospect of curbing the sexual de
sires of adults if the ground had not been pre
pared for it in childhood. Nevertheless, there
is no sort of justification for the lengths beyond
this to which civilized society goes in actually
denying the existence of these-manifestations,
which are not merely demonstrable but posi
tively glaring. Where sexually mature persons
are- concerned, object-choice is further nar
rowed down to the opposite sex and most of
the; extra-genital forms of satisfaction are in

[787b]
terdicted as perversions. The standard which
declares itself in these prohibitions is that of
a sexual life identical for all; it pays no heed
to the disparities in the inborn and acquired
sexual constitutions of individuals and cuts off
a considerable number of them from sexual en
joyment, thus becoming a cause of grievous
injustice. The effect of these restrictive meas
ures might presumably be that all the sexual
interest of those who are normal and not con
stitutionally handicapped could flow without
further forfeiture into the channel left open to
it. But the onlyoutletnot thus censured, hetero
sexual genitallove,is further circumscribed by
the barriers oflegitimacy and monogamy. Pres
ent-day civilization gives us plainly to under
stand that sexual relations are permitted only
on the basis of a final, indissoluble bond be
tween a man and woman; that sexuality as a
source of enjoyment for its own sake is unac
ceptable to it; and that its intention is to
tolerate it only as the hitherto irreplaceable
means of muliplying the human race.
This, of course, represents an extreme. Ev
eryone knows that it has proved impossible to
put it into execution, even for short periods.
Only the weaklings have submitted to such
comprehensive interference with their sexual
freedom, and stronger natures have done so
only under one compensatory condition, of
which mention may be made later. Civilized
society has seen itself obliged to pass over in
silence many transgressions which by its own
ordinances it ought to have penalized. This does
not justify anyone, however, in leaning towards
the other side and assuming that, because it
does not achieve all it aims at, such an atti
tude on the part of society is altogether harm
less. The sexual life of civiHzed man is seri
ously disabled, whatever wemay say; it some
times makes an impression of being a function
inprocess ofbecoming atrophied, justasorgans
like our teeth and our hair seem to be. One is
probably right in supposing that the impor
tance of sexuality as a source of pleasurable
sensations, i.e., as a means of fulfilling the pur
pose of life, has perceptibly decreased.1 Some
times one imagines one perceives that it is not
only the oppression of culture, but something
in the nature of the function itself that denies
us full satisfaction and urges us in other direc1There is a short story, which I valued long ago, by
a highly sensitive writer, the Englishman, John Gals
worthy, who today enjoys general recognition; it is
called "The Apple Tree." It shows in a very moving
and forcible way how there is no longer any place in
present-day civilized life for a simple natural love be
tween two human beings.

[788a]
Civilization and its Discontents
785
tions. This may be an error; it is hard to
decide.1
^•The
following
considerations would'support the
view expressed above. Man, too, is an animal with an
unmistakably bisexual disposition. The individual repr
resents a fusion of two symmetrical halves, of which,
according to many authorities, one is purely male, the
other female. It is equally possible that each half was
originally
hermaphroditic.
Sex
is
a
biological
fact
which is hard to evaluate psychologically, although it
is of extraordinary importance in mental life. We are
accustomed to say that every human being displays
both male and female instinctual impulses, needs, and
attributes, but the characteristics of what is male and
female can only be demonstrated in anatomy, and not
in psychology. Where the latter is concerned, the an
tithesis of sex fades away into that of activity and
passivity, and we far too readily identify activity with
masculinity and passivity with femininity, a statement
which is by no
means universally confirmed in the
animal world. The theory of bisexuality is still very
obscure, and in psycho-analysis we must be painfully
aware of the disadvantage we are under as long as it
still remains unconnected with the theory of instincts.
However this may be, if we assume it to be a fact that
each
individual
has
both
male
and
female
desires
which need satisfaction in his sexual life, we shall be
prepared for the possibility that these needs will not
both be gratified on the same object, and that they will
interfere with each other, if they cannot be kept apart
so that each impulse flows into a special channel suited
for it. Another difficulty arises from the circumstance
that so often a measure of direct aggressiveness Js
coupled with an erotic relationship, over and above its
inherent sadistic components. The love-object does not
always view these complications with the degree of
understanding and tolerance, manifested by the peasant
woman who complained that her husband did not love
her any more, because he had not beaten her for a
week.
The conjecture which leads furthest, however, is that
—and here we come back to the remarks in the foot
note on p. 782—the whole of sexuality, and not merely
anal erotism, is threatened with falling a victim to the
organic repression consequent upon man's adoption of
the erect posture and
the
lowering in,.value of the
sense of smell; so that since that time the sexual func
tion has been associated with a resistance not suscepti
ble of further explanation, which puts obstacles in the
way of full satisfaction and forces it away from its
sexual aim towards sublimations and displacements of
libido.
I
am
aware that
Bleuler
(in
"Der
Sexualwiderstand," Jahrbuch fur psychoanalytische und psy
chopathologische Forschungen, Vol.
V,
1913)
once
pointed out the existence of a fundamental tendency of
this kind towards rejecting sexual life. All neurotics,
and many others too, take exception to the fact that
inter urinas et faeces nascimur [We are born among
urine and faeces]. The genitals, too, excite the olfac
tory sense strongly in a way that many people cannot
tolerate and which spoils sexual intercourse for them.
Thus we should find, as the deepest root of the sexual
repression that marches with culture, the organic de
fence of the new form of life that began with the erect
posture against the earliest type of animal existence—
a result of scientific researches that coincides in a curi
ous way with often expressed vulgar prejudices. At the
present time, nevertheless, these results are but un
confirmed possibilities, not yet scientifically substan
tiated. Nor should we forget that, in spite of the un
deniable diminution
in
the importance
of
olfactory
stimuli, there exist even
in Europe races who prize
highly as
aphrodisiacs the strong genital odours so
objectionable to us and who will not renounce them.
(Cf. the reports of folkloristic information obtained by
Iwan Bloch's "Questionnaire," appearing under the ti
tle of "Uber den Geruchssinn in der vita sexualis" in
various volumes of Friedrich S. Krauss' Anthropophyteia.)

[788b]
Psycho-analytic work has shown that these
frustrations in respect of sexual life are.espe
cially unendurable to the so-called neurotics
among us. These persons manufacture substi-.
tute-gratifications for themselves in their symp
toms, which, however, are either painful in
themselves or become the cause of suffering
owing to the difficulties they create with the
person's environment and society at large, It
is easy to understand the latter fact, but the
former presents us with a new problem. But
culture demands other sacrifices besides that of
sexual gratifications.
We have regarded the difficulties in the de
velopment of civilization as part of the gen
eral difficulty accompanying all evolution, for
we have traced them to the inertia of libido, its
disinclination to relinquish an old position in-„
favour of a new one. It is much the same thing
if we say that the conflict between civilization
and sexuality is caused by the circumstance
that sexual love is a relationship between two
people, in which a third can only be superflu
ous
or
disturbing,
whereas
civilization
is.
founded on relations between larger groups of
persons. When a love-relationship is at its
height, no room is left for any interest in the
surrounding world; the pair of lovers are suf
ficient unto themselves, do not even need the
child they have in common to make them
happy. In no other case does Eros so plainly
betray the core of his being, his aim of mak-v
ing one out of many; but whenhe has achieved
it intheproverbial way through thelove of two\
human beings, he is not willing to go further.
From all this we might well imagine that a
civilized community could consist of pairs of
individuals such as this, libidinally satisfied in
each other, and linked to all the others by work
and common interests. If this were so, culture
would not need to levy energy from sexuality.
But such a desirable state of things does not
exist and never has existed; in actuality, culr
ture is not content with such limited ties as
these; we see that it endeavours to bind the
members of the community to one another by
libidinal ties as well, that it makes use of every
means and favours every avenue by which
powerful identifications can be created among
them, and that it exacts a heavy toll of aim-,
inhibited libido in order to strengthen com
munities by bonds of friendship between the
members. Restrictions upon sexual life are un
avoidable if this object is to be attained. But
we cannot see the necessity that forces culture

[789a]
786
Sigmund Freud
along this path and gives rise to its antagonism
to sexuality. It must be due to some disturbing
influence not yet detected by us.
We may find the clue in one of the so-called
ideal standards of civilized society. It runs:
"Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself." It
is
world-renowned,
undoubtedly
older
than
Christianity which parades it as its proudest
profession, yet certainly not very old; in his
torical times, men still knew nothing of it. We
will adopt a naive attitude towards it, as if we
were meeting it for the first time. Thereupon,
we find ourselves unable to suppress a feeling
of astonishment, as at something unnatural.
Why should we do this? What good is it to us?
Above all, how can we do such a thing? How
could it
possibly be done? My love seems
to
me
a
valuable
thing
that
I
have
no
right to
throw away without reflection. It
imposes obligations on me which I must be
prepared to make sacrifices to fulfil. If I love
someone, he must be worthy of it in some way
or other. (I am leaving out of account now the
use he may be to me, as well as his possible
significance to me as a sexual object; neither of
these two kinds of relationship between us
come into question where the injunction to
love my neighbour is concerned.) He will be
worthy of it if he is so like me in important
respects that I can love myself in him; worthy
of it if he is so much more perfect than I that
I can love my ideal of myself in him; I must
love him if he is the son of my friend, since
the pain my friend would feel if anything un
toward happened to him would be my pain—I
should have to share it. But if he is a stranger
to me and cannot attract me by any value he
has in himself or any significance he may have
already acquired in my emotional life, it will
be hard for me to love him. I shall even be do
ing wrong if I do, for my love is valued as a
privilege by all those belonging to me; it is an
injustice to them if I put a stranger on a level
with them. But if I am to love him (with that
kind of universal love) simply because he, too,
is a denizen of the earth, like an insect or an
earthworm or a grass-snake, then I fear that
but a small modicum of love will fall to his lot
and it would be impossible for me to give him
as much as by all the laws of reason I am
entitled to retain for myself. What is the point
of an injunction promulgated with such so
lemnity, if reason does not recommend it to us?
When I look more closely, I find still further
difficulties. Not merely is this stranger on the
whole not worthy of love, but, to be honest, I

[789b]
must confess he has more claim to my hos
tility, even to my hatred. He does not seem to
have the least trace of love for me, does not
show me the slightest consideration. If it will
do him any good, he has no hesitation in
injuring me, never even asking himself whether
the amount of advantage he gains by it bears
any proportion to the amount of wrong done
to me. What is more, he does not even need to
get an advantage from it; if he can merely get
a little pleasure out of it, he thinks nothing of
jeering at me, insulting me, slandering me,
showing his power over me; and the more se
cure he feels himself, or the more helpless I
am, with so much more certainty can I expect
this behaviour from him towards me. If he
behaved differently, if he showed me consid
eration and did not molest me, I shouldin any
case, without the aforesaid commandment, be
willing to treat him similarly. If the highsounding ordinance had run: "Love thy neigh
bour as thy neighbourloves thee," I should not
take objection to it. And there is a second
commandment that seems to me even more in
comprehensible, and arouses still stronger op
position in me. It is: "Love thine enemies."
When I think it over, however, I am wrong in
treating it as a greater imposition. It is at bot
tom the same thing.1
I imagine now I hear a voice gravely adjur
ing me: "Just because thy neighbour is not
worthy of thy love, is probably full of enmity
towards thee, thou shouldst love him as thy
self." I then perceive the case to be like that of
Credo, quia absurdum.*
Now it is, of course, very probable that my
neighbour, when he is commanded to love me
as himself, will answer exactly as I have done
and reject me for the same reasons. I hope he
will not have the same objective grounds for
doing so, but hewill hope so as well. Even so,
there are variations in men's behaviour which
ethics, disregarding the fact that they are de
termined, classifies as good andevil. As long as
1A great poet may permit himself, at leastin jest,
to give
utterance
to
psychological truths' that are
heavily censured. Thus
Heine: "Mine is the most
peaceable disposition. My wishes are a humble dwell
ing with a thatched roof, but a good bed, good food,
milk and butter of the freshest, flowers at my win
dows, some fine tall trees before my door; and if the
good God wants to, make me completely happy, he
will grant me the joy of seeing some six or seven of
my enemies hanging from these trees. With my heart
full of deep emotion I shall forgive them before they
die all the wrong they did me in their lifetime—true,
one must forgive one's enemies, but not until they are
brought to execution."—Heine, Gedanken und Einfdlle.
21 believe it, because it is absurd.—Ed.

[790a]
Civilization and
these
undeniable
variations
have
not
been
abolished, conformity to the highest ethical
standards constitutes a betrayal of the inter
ests of culture, for it puts a direct premium on
wickedness. Oneis~irresistibly reminded here of
an incident in the French Chamber when capi
tal punishment was being discussed; the speech
of a member who had passionately supported
its abolition was being applauded with loud
acclamation, when suddenly a voice was heard
calling out from the back of the room, "Que
messieurs les assassins commencent!"1
The bit of truth behind all this—one so
eagerly denied—is that men are not gentle,
friendly creatures wishingfor love, who simply
defend themselves if they are attacked, but
that a powerful measure of desire for aggres
sion has to be reckoned as part of their instinc
tual endowment. The result is that their neigh
bour is to them not only a possible helper or
sexual object, but also a temptation to them
to gratify their aggressiveness on him, to ex
ploit his capacity for work without recompense,
to use him sexually without his consent, to
seize his possessions, to humiliate him, to cause
him pain, to torture and kill him.-Homo homini
lupus;2 whohas the courageto dispute it in the
face of all the evidence in his own hfe and
in history?
This aggressive cruelty usually
lies in wait for
some provocation, or
else
it steps into the service of some other pur
pose, the aim of which might as well have
been achieved by milder measures.
In cir
cumstances that favour it, when those forces
in the mind which ordinarily inhibit it cease
to operate, it also manifests itself sponta
neously and reveals men as savage beasts to
whom the thought of sparing their own kind is
alien. Anyone who calls to mind the atrocities
of the early migrations, of the invasion by the
Huns,
or
by
the
so-called Mongols
under
Jenghiz Khan and Tamurlane, of the sack of
Jerusalem by the pious Crusaders, even in
deed the horrors of the last World War, will
have to bow his head humbly before the truth
of this view of man.
The existence of this tendency to aggression
which, we can detect in ourselves and rightly
presume to be present in others is the factor
that disturbs our relations with our neighbours
and makes it necessary for culture to institute
its high demands. Civilized society is perpetu
ally menaced with disintegration through this
primary hostility of men towards one another.
*Let the murderers begin!—Ed.
2 Man is to man a wolf.—Ed.

[790b]
its Discontents
787
Their interests in their common work would not
hold them together; the passions of instinct
are stronger than reasoned interests. Culture
has to call up every possible reinforcement in
order to erect barriers against the aggressive
instincts of men and hold their manifestations
in check by reaction-formations in men's minds.
Hence its system of methods by which mankind
is to be driven to identifications and
aiminhibited love-relationships; hence the restric
tions on sexual life; and hence, too, its ideal
command to love one's neighbour as oneself,
which is really justified by the fact that nothing
is
so
completely
at
variance with original
human nature as this. With all its striving, this
endeavour of culture's has so far not achieved
very much. Civilization expects to prevent the
worst atrocities of brutal violence by taking
upon itself the right to employ violence against
criminals, but the law is not able to lay hands
on the more discreet and subtle forms in which
human aggressions
are
expressed. The time
comes when every one of us has to abandon the
illusory anticipations with which in our youth
we regarded our fellow-men, and when we real
ize how much hardship and suffering we have
been caused in life through their ill-will. It
would be unfair, however, to reproach culture
with trying to eliminate all disputes and com
petition from human concerns. These things are
undoubtedly indispensable; but opposition is
not necessarily enmity, only it may be misused
to make an opening for it.
The Communists believe they have found a
way of delivering us from this evil. Man is
whole-heartedly good and friendly to his neigh
bour, they say, but the system of
private
property has corrupted his nature. The posses
sion of private property gives power to the
individual and thence the temptation arises to
ill-treat his neighbour; the man who is excluded
from the possession of property is obliged to
rebel in hostility against the oppressor. If pri
vate property were abolished, all valuables held
in common and all allowed to share in the
enjoyment of them, ill-will and enmity would
disappear from among men. Since all needs
would be satisfied, none would have any reason
to regard another as an enemy; all would will
ingly undertake the work which is necessary.
I have no concern with any economic criticisms
of the communistic system; I cannot enquire
into whether the abolition of private property
is advantageous and expedient.8 But I am able
8 Anyone who has been through the misery of pov
erty in his youth, and has endured the indifference and

[791a]
fSS
Sigmund Freud
to recognize that psychologically it is founded
on an untenable illusion. By abolishing private
property one deprives the human love of aggres
sion of one of its instruments, a strong one
undoubtedly, but assuredly not the strongest.
-It in no way alters the individual differences
in power and influence which are turned by
aggressiveness to its own use, nor does it change
the nature of the instinct in any way. This
instinct did not arise as the result of property;
it reigned almost supreme in primitive times
when possessions were still extremely scanty;
it shows
itself already in the nursery when
possessions have hardly grown out of
their
original anal shape; it is at the bottom of all
the
relations
of affection
and love
between
human beings—possibly with the single excep
tion of that of a mother to her male child.
Suppose that personal rights to material goods
are done away with, there still remain prerog
atives in sexual relationships, which must arouse
the strongest rancour and most violent enmity
among
men and women who
are otherwise
equal. Let us suppose this were also to be re
moved by instituting complete liberty in sexual
life, so that the family, the germ-cell of culture,
ceased to exist; one could not, it is true, foresee
the new paths on which cultural development
might then proceed, but one thing one would
be bound to expect and that is that the in
effaceable
feature
of
human
nature
would
follow wherever it led.
Men clearly do not find it easy to do without
satisfaction of this tendency to aggression that
is in them; when deprived of satisfaction of it
they are ill at ease. There is an advantage, not
to be undervalued, in the existence of smaller
communities, through which the aggressive in
stinct can find an outlet in enmity towards
those outside the group. It is always possible
to unite considerable numbers of men in love
towards one another, so long as there are still
some remaining as objects for aggressive mani
festations. I
once interested myself in the
peculiar fact that peoples whose territories are
adjacent, and are otherwise closely related, are
always at feud with and ridiculing each other,
arrogance of those who have possessions, should be
exempt from the suspicion that he has no understand
ing of or goodwill towards the endeavours made to
fight the economic inequality of men and all that it
leads to. To be sure, if an attempt is made to base
this fight upon an abstract demand for equality for all
in the name of justice, there is a very obvious objec
tion to be made, namely, that nature began the injus
tice by the highly unequal way in which she endows
individuals physically and mentally, for which there is
no help.
..
T

[791b]
as, for instance, the Spaniards and the Por
tuguese, the North and South Germans, the
English and the Scotch, and so on. I gave it
the name of narcissism in respect, of minor
differences, which does not do much to explain
it. One can now see that it is a convenient and
relatively harmless form of satisfaction
for
aggressive tendencies, through which cohesion
amongst the members of a group is made
easier.
The Jewish people,
scattered in
all
directions as they are, have in this way rend
ered services which deserve recognition to the
development of culture in the countries where
they settled; but unfortunately not all the
massacres of Jews in the Middle Ages sufficed
to procure peace and security for their Chris
tian contemporaries. Once the apostle Paul had
laid down universal love between all men as
the foundation of his Christian community, the
inevitable consequence in Christianity was the
utmost intolerance towards all who remained
outside of it; the Romans, who had not founded
their state on love, were not given to lack of
religious toleration, although religion was a
concern of the state and the state was per
meated through and through with it. Neither
was it an unaccountable chance that the dream
of a German world-dominion evoked a com
plementary movement towards anti-semitism;
and it is quite intelligible that the attempt to
establish a new communistic type of culture in
Russia should find psychological support in the
persecution of the bourgeois. One only wonders,
with some concern, however, how the Soviets
will manage when they have exterminated their
bourgeois entirely.
If civilization requires such sacrifices, not
only of sexuality but also of the aggressive
tendencies in mankind, we can better under
stand why it should be so hard for men to feel
happy in it. In actual fact, primitive man was
better off in this respect, for he knew nothing
of any restrictions on his instincts. As a set-off
against
this, his prospects of enjoying his
happiness for any length of time were very
slight. Civilized man has exchanged some part
of his chances of happiness for a measure of
security. We will not forget, however, that in
the primal family only the head of it enjoyed
this instinctual freedom;
the other members
lived in slavish thraldom. The antithesis be
tween a minority enjoying cultural advantages
and a majority who are robbed of them was
therefore most extreme in that primeval period
of culture. With regard to the primitive human
types living at the present time, careful in-

[792a]
ClVTLIZATION AND
vestigation has revealed that their instinctual
life is by no means to be envied on account of
its freedom; it is subject to restrictions of a
different kind but perhaps even more rigorous
than is that of modern civilized man.
In rightly finding fault, as we thus do, with
our present state of civiHzation for so in
adequately providing us with,what we require
to make us happy in life, and for the amount
of suffering of a probably avoidable nature it
lays us open to—in doing our utmost to lay
bare the roots of its deficiencies by our un
sparing criticisms, we are undoubtedly exercis
ing our just rights and not showing ourselves
enemies of culture. We may expect that in the
course of time changes will be carried out in
our civilization so that it becomes more satisfy
ing to our needs and no longer open to the
reproaches we have made against it. But per
haps we shall also accustom ourselves to the
idea that there are certain difficulties inherent
in the very nature of culture which will not
yield to any efforts at reform. Over and above
the obligations of putting restrictions upon our
instincts, which we see to be inevitable, we are
imminently threatened with the dangers of a
state one may call la miske psychologique of
groups. This danger is most menacing where
the social forces of cohesion consist predomi
nantly of identifications of the individuals in
the group with one another, whilst leading
personalities fail to acquire the significance
that should fall to them in the process of groupformation.1 The state of civilization in America
at the present day offers a good opportunity
for studying this injurious effect of civilization
which we have reason to dread. But I will resist
the temptation to enter upon a criticism of
Americanculture; I have no desire to give the
impression that I would employ American
methods myself.
VI
Never before in any of my previous writings
have I had the feeling so strongly as I have
now that what I am describing is common
knowledge, that I am requisitioning paper and
ink, and in due course the labour of compositors
and printers, in order to expound things that
in themselves are obvious. For this reason, if
it should appear that the recognitionof a special
independent instinct of aggression would entail
a modification of the psycho-analytical theory
of instincts, I should be glad enough to seize
upon the idea.
1Cf. Group Psychology, etc., p. 664 above.

[792b]
its Discontents
-789
We: shall see: that this is nbt.'so* that it:is
merely a matter of .coming to closer quarters
with a conclusion to- which we long ago com
mitted ourselves and .following it •out to its
logical consequences. '.The whole of analytic
theory has evolved gradually enough, but the
theory of instincts has groped its way forward
under greater difficulties than:any other part
of it. And yet a theory of instincts was so in
dispensable for the;rest that something had to
be adopted in place ofit. In my utter perplexity
at the beginning, I took as my starting-point
the poet-philosopher Schiller's aphorism that
hunger and love make the world go round.
Hunger would serve to represent those instincts
which aim at preservation of the individual;
love seeks for objects: its chief function, which
is favoured in every way by nature, is preserva
tion of the species. Thus first arose the con
trast between ego instincts and object instincts.
For the energy of the latter instincts, and exclu
sively for them, I introduced the term libido;
an antithesis was thus formed between the ego
instincts and the libidinal instincts directed
towards objects, i.e., love in its widest sense.
One of these object instincts, the sadistic,-cer
tainly stood out from the rest in that its aim
was so very unloving; moreover, it clearly allied
itself in many of its aspects with the ego in
stincts, and its close kinship with Jnstincts of
mastery without any libidinal purpose could
not be concealed, but these ambiguities could
be overcome; in spite of them, sadism plainly
belonged to sexual life—the game of cruelty
could take the place of the game of love. Neu
rosis appeared as the outcome of a struggle
between the interests of self-preservation and
the claims of Hbido, a struggle in which the ego
was victorious, but at the price of great suffer
ing and renunciations.
Every analyst will admit that none of this
even now reads like a statement long since
recognized as erroneous. All the same, modifica
tions had to be made as our researches ad
vanced from the repressed to the repressing,
from the object instincts to the ego. A cardinal
point in this advance was the introduction of
the concept of narcissism, i.e., the idea that
libido cathectsthe ego.itself, that its first dwell
ing-place was in the ego, and that the latter
remains to some extent its permanent head
quarters. This narcissistic libido turns:in the
direction of objects, thus becoming objectlibido, and
can transform itself
back
into
narcissistic Hbido. The concept of narcissism
made it possible to consider the traumatic

[793a]
790
Sigmund Freud
neuroses, as well as many diseases bordering on
the psychoses, and also the latter themselves,
from the psycho-analytic angle. It was not
necessary to abandon the view that the trans
ference-neuroses are attempts on the part of
the ego to guard itself against sexuality, but the
concept of the libido was jeopardized. Since
the ego-instincts were found to be Hbidinal as
well, it seemed for a time inevitable that libido
should become synonymous with instinctual
energy in general, as C. G. Jung had previously
advocated. Yet there still remained in me a
kind of conviction, for which as yet there were
no grounds, that the instincts could not all be
of the same nature. I made the next step in
Beyond the PleasurePrinciple (1920), when the
repetition-compulsion
and
the
conservative
character of instinctual life first struck me. On
the basis of speculations concerning the origin
of life and of biological parallels, I drew the
conclusion that, beside the instinct preserving
the organic substance and binding it into ever
larger units,1 there must exist another in antith
esis
to
this, which would seek to
dissolve
these units and reinstate their antecedent in
organic state. That is to say, a death instinct
as well.as Eros; the phenomena of life would
then be explicable from the interplay of the
two and their counteracting effects on each
other. It was not easy, however, to demonstrate
the working of this hypothetical death instinct.
The manifestations of Eros were conspicuous
and audible enough; one might assume that the
death instinct worked silently within the organ
ism towards its disintegration, but that, of
course, was no proof. The idea that part of the
instinct
became
directed
towards the outer
world and then showed itself as an instinct of
aggression and destruction carried us a step
further. The instinct would thus itself have
been pressed into the service of Eros, in that
the organism would be destroying something
animate or inanimate outside itself instead of.
itself. Conversely, any cessation of this flow
outwards must have the effect of intensifying
the self-destruction which in any case would
always be going on within. From this example
one could then surmise that the two kinds of
instincts
seldom—perhaps
never—appear in
isolation, but always mingle with each other in
different, very varying proportions, and
so
make themselves unrecognizable to us. Sadism,
1The contradiction between the tireless tendency of
Eros to spread ever further and the general conserva
tive nature of the instincts here becomes very notice
able; it would serve as the starting-point of enquiries
into further problems.

[793b]
long since known to us as a component-instinct
of sexuality, would represent a particularly
strong admixture of the instinct of destruction
into the love impulse; while its counterpart,
masochism, would be an alliance between sex
uality and the destruction at work within the
self, in consequence of which the otherwise
imperceptible destructive trend became directly
evident and palpable.
The assumption of the existence of a death
instinct or a destruction instinct has roused
opposition even in analytical circles; I know
that there is a great tendency to ascribe all that
is dangerous and hostile in love rather to a
fundamental bipolarity in its own nature. The
conceptions I have summarized here I first put
forward only tentatively, but in the course of
time they have won such a hold over me that I
can no longer think in any other way. To my
mind they are theoretically far more fruitful
than any others it is possible to employ; they
provide us with that simplification, without
either ignoring or doing violence to the facts,
which is what we strive after in scientific work.
I know that we have always had before our
eyes manifestations of the destruction instinct
fused with erotism, directed outwards and in
wards in sadism and masochism; but I can no.
longer understand how we could have over
looked the universality of non-erotic aggression
and destruction, and could have omitted to give
it its due significance in our interpretation of
life. (It is true that the destructive trend that
is directed inwards, when it is not erotically
tinged, usually eludes our perceptions.) I can
remember my own defensive attitude when the
idea of an instinct of destruction first made its
appearance in psycho-analytical literature and
how long it took until I became accessible to it.
That others should have shown the same resist
ance, and still show it, surprises me less. Those
who love fairy-tales do not like it when people
speak of the innate tendencies in mankind to
wards aggression, destruction, and, in addition,
cruelty. For God has made them in his own
image, with his own perfections; no one wants
to be reminded how hard it is to reconcile the
undeniable existence—in spite of all the prot
estations of Christian Science—of evil with
His omnipotence and supreme goodness. The
devil is, in fact, the best way out in acquittal
of God; he can be used to play the same
economic role of outlet as Jews in the world of
Aryan ideals. But even so, one can just as well
hold God responsible for the existence of the
devil as for the evil he personifies. In view of

[794a]
these difficulties, it is expedient for every man
to make humble obeisance on suitable occasions
in honour of the high-minded nature of men;
it will assist him to become universally beloved
and much shaUbe forgiven unto him on account
of it.1
The name libido can again be used to denote
the manifestations of the power of Eros in
contradistinction to the energy of the death
instinct.2 We must confess that it is
more
difficult for us to detect the latter, and to a
great extent we can merely conjectureits exist
ence as a background to Eros, also that it
eludes us wherever it is not betrayed by a
fusion with Eros. In sadism, where it bends
the erotic aim to its own wiU and yet at the
same time gratifies the sexual craving com
pletely, we can obtain the clearest insight into
its nature and its relation to Eros. But even
where it shows itself without any sexual pur
pose, even in the blindest frenzy of destructiveness,
one
cannot
ignore
the
fact
that
satisfaction of it is accompanied by an extraor
dinarily intense narcissistic enjoyment, due to
the fulfilment it brings to the ego of its oldest
omnipotence-wishes. The instinct of destruc
tion, when tempered and harnessed (as it were,
inhibited in its aim)
and
directed towards
objects, is compelled to provide the ego with
satisfaction of its needs and with power over
nature. Since the assumption of its existence
is based essentially on theoretical grounds, it
must be confessed that it is not entirely proof
against theoretical objections. But this is how
things appear to us now in the present state
of our knowledge; future research and reflec
tion will undoubtedly bring further Hght which
will decide the question.
In all that follows, I take up the standpoint
1 In
Goethe's Mephistopheles we
have a quite ex
ceptionally striking identification of the principle of
evil with the instinct of destruction:
All entities that be
Deserve their end—nonentity.
So all that you name sin, destruction—
Wickedness, briefly—proves to be
The native element for me.
As his adversary, the devil himself cites not what is
holy and good, but the power in nature working to
wards the creation and renewal of life—that is, Eros.
From air, from water, germs in thousands,
As from the soil, break forth, break free,
Dry, wet, warm, cold—a pullulationt
Had I not laid on flame a reservation,
Nothing were set apart jor me.
2Our present
point of view can be roughly ex
pressed in the statement that libido participates in
every instinctual manifestation, but that not every
thing in that manifestation is libido.

[794b]
Civilization and its Discontents
791
that the tendency to aggression is an innate,
independent, instinctual disposition in man, and
I come back now to the statement that it con
stitutes the most powerful obstacle to culture.
At one point in the course of this discussion, the
idea took possession of us that culture was a
peculiar process passing over human life and
we are still under the influence of this idea.
We may add to this that the process proves to
be in the service of Eros, which aims at bind
ing together single human individuals, then
families, then tribes, races, nations, into one
great unity, that of humanity. Why this has
to be done we do not know; it is simply the
work of Eros. These masses of men must be
bound to
one
another libidinally;
necessity
alone, the advantages of common work, would
not hold them together. The natural instinct
of aggressiveness in man, the hostility of each
one against all and of aU against each one,
opposes this program of civilization. This in
stinct of aggression is the derivative and main
representative of the death instinct we have
found alongside of Eros, sharing his rule over
the earth. And now, it seems to me, the mean
ing of the evolution of culture is no longer a
riddle to us. It must present to us the struggle
between Eros and death, between the instincts
of life and the instincts of destruction, as it
works itself out in the human species. This
struggle is what all life essentially consists of
and so the evolution of civilization may be
simply described as the struggle of the human
species for existence.3 And it is this battle of
the Titans that our nurses and governesses try
to compose with their lullaby-song of Heaven!
VII
Why do the animals, kin to ourselves, not
manifest any such cultural struggle? Oh, we
don't know. Very probably certain of them,
bees,ants, termites, had to strive for thousands
of centuries before they found the way to those
state institutions, that division of functions,
those restrictions upon individuals, which we
admire them for today. It is characteristic of
our present state that we know by our own
feelings that we should not think ourselves
happy in any of these communities of the
animal world, or in any of the roles they
delegate to individuals. With other animal
species it may be that a temporary deadlock
has been reached between the influences of their
8And we may probably add more precisely that its
form was necessarily determined after some definite
event which still remains to be discovered.

[795a]
792
Sigmund Freud
environment and.the instincts contending with
in them, so that a cessation of development
has taken place. In primitive man, a fresh ac
cess of libido may have kindled a new spurt of
energy on the part of the instinct of destruc
tion. There are a great many questions in all
this to which as yet we have no answer.
Another question concerns us more closely
now. What means does civilization make use
of to hold in check the aggressiveness that
opposes it, to make it harmless, perhaps to get
rid of it? Some of these measures we have
already come to know, though not yet the one
that is apparently the most important. We can
study it in the evolution of the individual.
What happens in him to render his craving for
aggression innocuous? Something very curious,
that we should never have guessed and that yet
seems simple enough. The aggressiveness is
introjected, internalized; in fact, it is sent back
where it came from, i.e., directed against the
ego. It is there taken over by a part of the ego
that distinguishes itself from the rest as a
super-ego, and now, in the form of conscience,
exercises the same propensity to harsh aggres
siveness against the ego that the ego would
have liked to enjoy against others. The tension
between the strict super-ego and the subordi
nate ego we call the sense of guilt; it manifests
itself as the need for punishment. Civilization,
therefore, obtains the mastery over the danger
ous love of aggression in individuals by en
feebling and disarming it and setting up an
institution within their minds to keep watch
over it, like a garrison in a conquered city.
As to the origin of the sense of guilt, analysts
have different views from those of the psychol
ogists; nor is it easy for analysts to explain it
either. First of all, when one asks how a sense
of guilt arises in anyone, one is told something
one cannot dispute: people feel guilty (pious
people call it "sinful") when they have done
something they know to be bad. But then one
sees how little this answer teUs one. Perhaps,
after some hesitation, one wiU add that a per
son who has not actually committed a bad act,
but has merely become aware of the intention
to do so, can also hold himself guilty; and then
one will ask why in this case the intention is
counted as equivalent to the deed. In both
cases,
however,
one
is
presupposing
that
wickedness has already been recognizedas rep
rehensible, as something that ought not to be
put into
execution. How is this
judgment
arrived at? One may reject the suggestion of
an original—as one might say, natural—capac

[795b]
ity for discriminating between good and evil.
Evil is often not at all that which-would injure
or endanger the.ego; on the contrary, it can
also be something that it desires, that would
give it pleasure; An *extraneous influence
is
evidently at work; it is this that decides what
is to be called good and bad. Since their own
feelings wouldnot have led-men alongthe same
path, they musthavehad a motive for obeying
this extraneous influence. It is easy to discover
this motive in man's helplessness and depend
ence upon others-, it can best be designated the
dread of losing love. If he loses the love of
others on whomhe is dependent, he wiU forfeit
also their protection against many dangers,
and above allhe runs the risk that this stronger
person will show his superiority in the form of
punishing him. What is bad is, therefore, to
begin with, whatever causes one to be threat
ened with a loss of.love; because of the dread
of this loss, one must desist from it. That is
why it makes little difference whether one has
already committed the bad deed or only in
tends to do so; in either case the danger begins
only when the authority has found it out, and
the latter would behave in the same way in
both cases.
We call this state of mind a bad conscience
but actually it does not deserve this name, for
at this stage thesense ofguilt isobviously only
the dread of losing love, social anxiety. In a
little child it can never be anything else, but
in many adults too it has only changed in so
far as the larger human community takes the
place of the father or of both parents. Conse
quently, such people habitually permit them
selves to do any bad deed that procures them
something they want, if only they are sure
that no authority will discover it or make them
suffer for it; their anxiety relates only to the
possibility of detection.1 Present-day society
has to take into account the prevalence of this
state of mind.
A great change takes place as soon as the
authority has been internalized bythedevelop
ment of a super-ego. The manifestations of
conscience are thenraised to a newlevel; to be
accurate, one should not call them conscience
and sense of guilt before this.2 At this point
1One is reminded of Rousseau's famous mandarin!
u 2Every reasonable person will understand and take
into account that in this descriptive survey things that
in reality occur by gradual transitions are sharplydif
ferentiated and that the mere existence bf a super-ego
is not the only factor concerned, but also its relative
strength and sphere of influence. All that has been said
above in regard to conscience and guilt, moreover, is
common knowledge and practically undisputed.

[796a]
Civilization and
the dread of discovery ceases to operate and
also once for all any difference between doing
evil and wishing to do it, since nothing is hid
den from the super-ego, not even thoughts. The
real seriousness of the situation has vanished,
it is true: for the new authority, the super-ego,
has no motive, as far as we know, for ill-treat
ingthe ego withwhich it is itself closely bound
up. But the influence of the genetic derivation
of these things, which causes what has been
outlived and surmounted to be re-lived, mani
fests itself so that on the whole things remain
as they were at the beginning. The super-ego
torments the sinful ego with the same feelings
of dread and watches for opportunities whereby
the outer world can be made to punish it.
At this second stage of development, con
science exhibits a peculiarity which was absent
in the first and is not very easy to account for.
That is, the morerighteousa man is, the stricter
and more suspicious will his conscience be,
so that ultimately it is precisely those people
who have carried hoHness farthest
who re
proach themselves with the deepest sinfulness.
This means that virtue forfeits some of her
promised reward; the submissive and abstemi
ous egodoesnot enjoy the trust and confidence
of its mentor, and, as it seems, strives in vain
to earn it. Now, to this some people will be
ready to object that these difficulties are artifi
cialities. A relatively strict and vigilant con
scienceis the very sign of a virtuous man, and
though saints may proclaim themselvessinners,
they are not so wrong, in view of the tempta
tions of instinctual gratifications to which they
are
peculiarly liable—since,
as
we know,
temptations do but increase under constant
privation, whereas they subside, at any rate
temporarily, if they are sometimes gratified.
The field of ethics is rich in problems, and
another of the facts we find here is that mis
fortune, i.e., external deprivation, greatly in
tensifies
the
strength of conscience in the
super-ego. As long as things go wellwith a man,
his conscience is lenient and lets the ego do aU
kinds of things; when some calamity befalls,
he holds an inquisition within, discovers his
sin, heightens the standards of his conscience,
imposes abstinences on himself and punishes
himself with penances.1 Whole peoples have
1 This increased sensitivity of morals in consequence
of ill-luck has been illustrated by Mark Twain in a
delicious little story: The First Melon I ever Stole.
This melon, as it happened, was unripe. I heard Mark
Twain tell
the story himself in one of his lectures.
After he had given out the title, he stopped and asked
himself in a doubtful way: "Was it the first?" This
was the whole story.

[796b]
its Discontents
793
acted in this way and still do so. But this is
easily explained from the original infantile
stage Of conscience which, as we thus see, is
not abandoned after the introjection into the
super-ego, but persists alongside and behind
the latter. Fate is felt to be a substitute for the
agency of the parents: adversity means that
one is no longer loved by this highest power of
all, and, threatened by this loss of love, one
humbles oneself again before the representative
of the parents in the super-ego which in happier
days one had tried to disregard. This becomes
especially clear when destiny is looked upon in
the strictly religious sense as the expression of
God's will and nothing else. The people of
Israel believed themselves to be God's favourite
children, and when the great Father hurled
visitation after visitation upon them, it still
never shook them in this belief or caused them
to doubt His power and His justice; they pro
ceeded instead to bring their prophets into the
world to declare their sinfulness to them and
out of their sense of guilt they constructed the
stringent commandments of their priestly re
ligion. It is curious how differently a savage
behaves! If he has had bad fortune, he does not
throw the blame on himself, but on his fetish,
who has plainly not done his duty by him, and
he belabours it instead of punishing himself.
Hence we know of two sources for feelings of
guilt: that arising from the dread of authority
and the later one from the dread of the super
ego. The first one compels us to renounce in
stinctual gratification; the other presses over
and above this towards punishment, since the
persistence of forbidden wishes cannot be con
cealed from the super-ego. We have also heard
how the severity of the super-ego, the rigour
of conscience, is to be explained. It simply
carries on the severity of external authority
which it has succeeded and to some extent re-^
placed. We see now how renunciation of in
stinctual gratification is related to the sense of
guilt. Originally, it is true, renunciation is the
consequence of a dread of external authority;
one gives up pleasures so as not to lose its love.
Having made this renunciation, one is quits
with authority, so to speak; no feeling of guilt
should remain. But with the dread of the super
egothe caseis different. Renunciation of grati
fication does not suffice here, for
the wish
persistsand is not capable of being hiddenfrom
the super-ego. In spite of the renunciations
made, feelings of guiltwill be experienced and
this is a great disadvantageeconomicaUy of the
erection of the super-ego, or, as one may say,

[797a]
794
Sigmund Freud
of the formation of conscience. Renunciation
no longer has a completely absolving effect;
virtuous restraint is no longer rewarded by the
assurance of love; a threatened external.un
happiness—loss of love and punishment meted
out by external authority—has been exchanged
for a lasting inner unhappiness, the tension of
a sense of guilt.
These inter-relations are so compHcated and
at the same time so important that, in spite of
the dangers of repetition, I will consider them
again from another angle. The chronological
sequence would thus be as follows: first, in
stinct-renunciation due to dread of an aggres
sion by external authority—this is, of course,
tantamount to the dread of loss of love, for
love is a protection against these
punitive
aggressions. Then follows the erection of an
internal authority, and instinctual renunciation
due to dread of it—that is, dread of conscience.
In the second case, there is the equivalence of
wicked acts and wicked intentions; hence comes
the sense of guilt, the need for punishment.
The aggressiveness of conscience carries
on
the aggressiveness of authority. Thus far all
seems to be clear; but how can we find a place
in this scheme for the effect produced by mis
fortune (i.e., renunciations externally imposed),
for the effect it has of increasing the rigour of
conscience? How account for the exceptional
stringency of conscience in the best men, those
least given to rebel against it? We have already
explained both these peculiarities of conscience,
but probably we still have an impression that
these explanations do not go to the root of the
matter, and that they leave something still un
explained. And here at last comes in an idea
which is quite peculiar to psycho-analysis and
alien to ordinary ways of thinking. Its nature
enables us to understand why the whole matter
necessarily seemed so confused and obscure to
us. It tells us this: in the beginning conscience
(more correctly, the anxiety which later be
came conscience) was the cause of instinctual
renunciation, but later this relation is reversed.
Every renunciation then becomes a dynamic
fount of conscience; every fresh abandonment
of gratification increases its severity and intol
erance; and if we could only bring it better
into harmony with what we already know about
the development of conscience, we should be
tempted to make the following paradoxical state
ment: Conscience is the result of instinctual
renunciation, or: Renunciation (externally im
posed) gives rise to conscience, which then de
mands further renunciations.

[797b]
The contradiction between this proposition
and our previous knowledge about the genesis
of conscience is not in actual fact so very
great, and we can see a way in which it may
be still further reduced. In order to state the
problem more easily, let us select the example
of the instinct of aggression, and let us suppose
that the renunciation in question is always a
renunciation of aggression. This is, of course,
merely a provisional assumption. The effect of
instinctual renunciation on conscience then op
erates as follows: every impulse of aggression
which we omit to gratify is taken over by the
super-ego and goes to heighten its aggressive
ness (against the ego). It does not fit in well
with this that the original aggressiveness of
conscience should represent a continuance of
the rigour of external authority, and so have
nothing to do with renunciation. But we can
get rid of this discrepancy if we presume a
different origin for the first quantum of ag
gressiveness with which the super-ego was en
dowed.
When authority prevented the child from en
joying the first but most important gratifica
tions of all, aggressive impulses of considerable
intensity must have been evokedin it, irrespec
tive of the particular nature of the instinctual
deprivations concerned. The child must neces
sarily have had to give up the satisfaction of
these revengeful aggressive wishes. In this sit
uation, in which it is economically so hard
pressed, it has recourse to certain mechanisms
well known to us; by the process of identifica
tion it absorbs into itself the invulnerable au
thority, which then becomes the super-ego and
comes into possession of all the aggressiveness
which the child would gladly have exercised
against it. The child's ego has to content itself
with the unhappy role of the authority—the
father—who has been thus degraded. It is, as
so often, a reversal of the original situation,
"If I were father and you my child, I would
treat you badly." The relation between super
ego and ego is a reproduction, distorted by a
wish, of the real relations between the ego,
before it was subdivided, and an external ob
ject. That is also typical. The essential differ
ence, however, is that the original severity of
the super-ego doesnot—or not so much—repre
sent the severity which has been experienced
or anticipated from the object, but expresses
the child's own aggressiveness towards the lat
ter. If this is correct, one could truly assert
that conscience is formed in the beginning
from the suppression of an aggressive impulse

[798a]
Civilization and its Discontents
795
minished, if one passes from individual to
andstrengthened as time goes onby each fresh
suppression of the kind.
Now, which of these two theoriesis the true
one? The earlier, which seemed genetically so
unassailable, or the new one, which rounds off
our theories in such a welcome manner? Clear
ly, they are both justified, and by the evidence,
too, of direct observation; they do not contra
dict each other, and even coincide at one point,
for the child's revengeful aggressiveness will
be in part provoked by the amount of punish
ing aggression that it anticipates from the
father. Experience has shown, however, that
the severity which a child's super-ego develops
in no way corresponds to the severity of the
treatment it has itself experienced.1 It seems
to be independent of the latter; a child which
has been very leniently treated can acquire a
very strict conscience. But it would also be
wrong to exaggerate this independence; it is
not difficult to assure oneself that strict up
bringing also has a strong influence on the
formation of a child's super-ego. It comes to
this, that the formation of the super-ego and
the development of conscience are determined
in part by innate constitutional factors and in
part by the influence of the actual environ
ment; and that is in no way surprising—on
the contrary, it is the invariable aetiological
condition of all such processes.2
It may also be said that when a child reacts
to the first great instinctual deprivations with
an excessive aggressiveness and a correspond
ing strictness of its super-ego, it is thereby
following a phylogenetic prototype, unheedful
of what reaction would in reality be justified;
for the father of primitive times was certainly
terrifying, and one may safely attribute the
utmost degree of aggressiveness to him. The
differences between the two theories of the
genesis of conscience are thus still further di1 As has rightly been emphasized by Melanie Klein
and other English writers.
2 In
his
Psychoanalyse
der
Gesamtpersonlichkeit,
1927, Franz Alexander has, in connection with Aichhorn's study of dissocial behaviour in children, dis
cussed the two main types of pathogenic methods of
training, that of excessive severity and of spoiling. The
unduly lenient and indulgent father fosters the develop
ment of an over-strict super-ego because, in face of the
love which is showered on it, the child has no other
way of disposing of its aggressiveness than to turn it
inwards. In neglected children who grow up without
any love, the tension between ego and super-ego is
lacking; their aggressions can be directed externally.
Apart from any constitutional factor which may be
present, therefore, one may say that a strict conscience
arises from the co-operation of two factors in the en
vironment: the deprivation of instinctual gratification
which evokes the child's aggressiveness, and the love it
receives
which
turns
this
aggressiveness
inwards,
where it is taken over by the super-ego.

[798b]
phylogenetic development. But then, on the
other hand, we find a new important difference
between the two processes. We cannotdisregard
the conclusion that man's sense of guilt has its
origin in the Oedipus complex and was ac
quiredwhenthe father waskilledby the associ
ation of the brothers. At that time the agres
sion was not suppressed but carried out, and
it is this same act of aggression whose suppres
sion in the child we regard as the source of
feelings of guilt. Now, I should not be sur
prised if a reader were to cry out angrily: "So
it makes no difference whether one does kill
one's father or does not, one gets a feeling of
guilt in either case! Here I should think one
may be allowed some doubts. Either it is not
true that guilt is evoked by suppressed aggres
siveness or else the whole story about the
father-murder is a romance, and primeval man
did not kill his father any more often than
peopledo nowadays. Besides this, if it is not a
romance but a plausible piece of history, it
would only be an instance of what we aU ex
pect to happen, namely, that one feels guilty
because one has really done something which
cannot be justified. And what we are all wait
ing for is for psycho-analysis to give us an
explanation of this reaction, which at any rate
is something that happens every day."
This is true, and we must make good the
omission. There is no great mystery about it
either. When one has feelings of guilt after
one has committed some crime and because of
it, this feeHng should more properly be called
remorse. It relates only to the one act, and
clearly it presupposes that conscience, the-ca
pacity for feelings of guilt, was already in
existence before the deed. Remorse of this kind
can, therefore, never help us to find out the
source of conscience and feelings of guilt in
general. In these everyday instances the course
of events is usually as foUows: an instinctual
needacquires the strength to achieve fulfilment
in spite of conscience, the strength of which
also has its limits, whereupon the inevitable
reduction of the need after satisfaction restores
the earHer balance of forces. Psycho-analysis
is quite justified, therefore, in excluding the
case of a sense of guilt through remorse from
this discussion, however frequently it may oc
cur and however great its importance may be
practically.
But if man's sense of guilt goes back to the
murder of the father, that was undoubtedly an
instance of remorse, and yet are we to suppose

[799a]
796
Sigmund Freud
that there were no conscience and feelings of
guilt before the act on that occasion? If so,
where did the remorse come from then? This
instance must explain to us the riddle of the
sense of guilt and so make an end of our diffi
culties. And it will do so, as I believe. This
remorse was the result of the very earHest
primal ambivalence of feelings towards the
father: the sons hated him, but they loved him
too; after their hate against him had been sat
isfied by their aggressive acts, their love came
to expression in their remorse about the deed,
set up the super-ego by identification with the
father, gave it the.father's power to punish as
he would have done the aggression they had
performed, and created the restrictions which
should prevent a repetition of the deed. And
since impulses to aggressions against the father
were repeated in the next generations, the feel
ings of guilt, too, persisted, and were further
reinforced every time an aggression was sup
pressed anew and made over to the super-ego.
At this point, it seems to me, we- can at last
clearly perceive the part played by love in the
origin of conscience and the fatal inevitableness of the sense of guilt. It is not really a
decisive matter whether one has killed one's
father or abstained from the deed; one must
feel guilty in either case,for guilt is the expres
sion of the conflict of ambivalence, the eternal
struggle between Eros and the destructive or
death instinct. This conflict is engendered as
soon as man is confronted with the task of Hving with his fellows; as long as he knows no
other form of life in common but that of the
family, it must express itself in the Oedipus
complex, cause the development of conscience,
and create the first feelings of guilt. When
mankind tries to institute wider forms of com
munal life, the same conflict continues to arise
—in forms derived from the past—and inten
sified so that a further reinforcement of the
sense bf guilt results. Since culture obeys an
inner erotic impulse which bids it bind man
kind into a closely-knit mass, it can achieve
this aim only by means of its vigilance in
fomenting an ever-increasing sense of guilt.
That,which began in relation to the father ends
in relation to the community. If civilization is
an inevitable course of development from the
group of the family to the group of humanity
as a whole, then an intensification of the sense
of guilt—resulting from the innate conflict, of
ambivalence, from the eternal struggle between
the love and the death trends—wiU be inex
tricably bound up with it, until perhaps the

[799b]
sense of guilt may swell to a magnitude that
individuals can hardly. support. One is re
minded of the telling accusation made by the
great poet against the heavenly forces:
Ye set our feet on thislife's road,
Ye watch our guilty,erring courses,
Then leave us, bowed beneath our load,
For earth its every debt enforces.1
And one may heave a sigh at the thought
that it is vouchsafed to a few, with hardly an
effort, to salve from the whirlpool of their own
emotions the deepest truths, to which we oth
ers have to force our way, ceaselessly groping
amid torturing uncertainties.
VTII
On reaching the end of such a journey as this,
the author must beghis readers to pardon him
for not having been a more skilful guide, not
sparing them bleak stretches of country at
times and laborious detours at others. There is
no doubt that it could have been done better.
I will now try to make some amends.
First of all, I suspect the reader feels that
the discussion about the sense of guilt over
steps its proper boundaries in this essay and
takes up too much space so that the rest of
the subject-matter, which is not always closely
connected with it, gets pushed to one side.
This may have spoilt the composition of the
work; but it faithfully corresponds to my in
tention to represent the sense of guilt as the
most important problem in the evolution of
culture, and to convey that the price of prog
ress in civilization is paid in forfeiting happi
ness through the heightening of the sense of
guilt.2 What sounds puzzling in this statement,
which is the final conclusion of our whole in
vestigation, is probably due to the quite pecul
iar relation—as yet completely unexplained—
1Goethe, Wilhelm
Meister, "The Song
of the
Harper."
2"Thus consciencedoes make cowards of us all
"
That the upbringing of young people at the present
day conceals from them the part sexuality will play in
their lives is not the only reproach we are obliged to
bring against it. It offends too in not preparing them
for the aggressions of which they are destined to be
come the objects. Sending the young out into life with
such a false psychological orientation is as if one were
to equip people going on a Polar expedition with sum
mer clothing and maps of the Italian lakes. One can
clearly see that ethical standardsare being misused in
a way. The strictness of these standards would not do
much harm if education were to say: "This is how
men ought to be in order to be happy and make others
happy,but you have to reckon with theirnot beingso."
Instead of this the young are made, to believe that
everyone else conforms to the standard of ethics, i.e.,
that everyone else is good. And then on this is based
the demand that the young shall be so too.

[800a]
Civilization and
the sense of guilt has to our consciousness. In
the common cases of remorse which we think
normal, it becomes clearly perceptible to con
sciousness; indeed, we often speak of con
sciousness of guilt instead of sense of guilt. In
our study of the neuroses, in which we have
found invaluable clues towards an understand
ing of normal people, we find some very con
tradictory states of affairs in this respect. In
one of these maladies, the obsessional neurosis,
the sense of guilt makes itself loudly heard in
consciousness; it dominates the clinical picture
as well as the patient's life and lets hardly
anything else appear alongside of it. But in
most of the other types and forms of neurosis
it remains completely unconscious, without its
effect being any less great, however. Our pa
tients do not beHeve us when we ascribe an
unconscioussense of guilt to them; in order to
become even moderately intelligible to them,
we have to explain that the sense of guilt ex
presses itself in an unconscious seeking for
punishment. But its connection with the form
of the neurosis is not to be over-estimated;
even in the obsessional neurosis there are peo
ple who are not aware of their sense of guilt
or who perceive it only as a tormenting uneasi
ness or kind of anxiety and then not until they
are prevented from carrying out certain ac
tions. We ought some day to be able at last
to understand these things; as yet we cannot.
Here perhaps is the place to remark that at
bottom the sense of guilt is nothing but a topo
graphical variety of anxiety, and that in its
later phases it coincides completely with the
dread of the super-ego. The relation of anxiety
to consciousness, moreover, is characterized by
the same extraordinary variations. Somewhere
or other there is always anxiety hidden behind
all symptoms; at one moment, however, it
sweeps into consciousness, drowning everything
else with its clamour, and at the next it secretes
itself so completelythat we are forced to speak
of unconscious anxiety—or if we want to have
a cleaner conscience psychologicaUy, since anx
iety is after all only a perception—of possibili
ties of anxiety. Consequently it is very likely
that the sense of guilt produced by culture is
not perceived as such and remains to a great
extent unconscious, or comes to expression as
a sort of uneasiness or discontent for which
other motivations are sought. The different re
ligions, at any rate, have never overlooked the
part played by the sense of guilt in civilization.
What is more, they come forward with a claim,

[800b]
its Discontents
797
which I have not considered elsewhere,1 to
save mankind from this sense of guilt, which
they call sin. We indeed have drawn our con
clusions, from the way in which in Christianity
this salvation is won—the sacrificial death of
one who therewith takes the whole of the com
mon guilt of all upon himself—about the oc
casion on which this primal sense of guilt was
first acquired, that is, the occasion which was
also the inception of culture.3
It will not be very important, but it may
be just as well to go more precisely into the
meaning of certain words like super-ego, con
science, sense of guilt, need for punishment,
remorse, which we have perhaps often used too
loosely and in place of one another. They all
relate to the same situation, but they denote
different aspects of it. The super-ego is an
agency or institution in the mind whose exist
ence we have inferred: Conscience is a func
tion we ascribe, among others, to the super
ego; it consists of watching over and judging
the actions and intentions of the ego, exercis
ing the functions of a censor. The sense of
guilt, the severity of the super-ego, is therefore
the same thing as the rigour of conscience; it
is the perception the ego has that it is watched
in this way, the ego's appreciation of the ten
sion between its strivings and the standards of
the super-ego; and the anxiety that lies behind
all these relations, the dread of that critical
institution, the need for punishment, is an in
stinctual manifestation on the part of the ego,
which has become masochistic under the in
fluence of the sadistic super-ego, i.e., which
has brought a part of the instinct of destruc
tion at work within itself into the service of
an erotic attachment
to
the
super-ego. We
ought not to speak of conscience before a
super-ego is demonstrable; as to consciousness
of guilt, we must admit that it comes into be
ing before the super-ego, therefore before con
science. At that time is is the direct expression
of the dread of external authority, the recog
nition of the tension between the ego and this
latter; it is the direct derivative of the conflict
between the need for parental love and the
urgency towards instinctual gratification, and
it is the thwarting of this urgency that pro
vokes the tendency to aggression. It is because
these two different versions of the sense of
guilt—one arising from dread of the external
and the other from dread of the inner authority
—are superimposed one on the other that our
11 mean in The Future of an Illusion.
2 Totem and Taboo (1912).

[801a]
798
Sigmund Freud
insight into the relations of conscience has been
hampered in so many ways. Remorse is a gen
eral term denoting the ego's reaction under a
special form of the sense of guilt; it includes
the almost unaltered sensory material belong
ing to the anxiety that is at work behind the
sense of guilt; it is itself a punishment and
may include the need for punishment; it too,
therefore, may occur before conscience has
developed.
Further, it will do no harm for us to review
once more the contradictions which have con
fused us at times during our enquiries. The
sense of guilt, we said at one point, was the
consequence of uncommitted aggressions; but
another time and, in particular, in the case of
its historical beginning, the murder of the
father, it was the consequence of an aggression
that was carried out. We also found a way
out of this difficulty. The development of the
inner authority, the super-ego, was precisely
what radically altered the whole situation. Be
fore this, the sense of guilt coincided with
remorse; we observe, in saying this, that the
term remorse is to be reserved for the reaction
after an actual performance of an aggressive
deed. After this, the omniscience of the super
ego robbed the distinction between intended
aggressions and aggressions committed of its
significance; a mere intention to commit an act
of violence could then evoke a sense of guilt—
as psycho-analysis has found—as well as one
which has actually been committed—as all the
world knows. The conflict of ambivalence be
tween the two primal instincts leaves the same
impress on the psychological situation, irre
spective of the change that has taken place
in this. A temptation arises to look here for
an explanation of the mystery of the varying
relation between the sense of guilt and con
sciousness. The sense of guilt which is due to
remorse for an evil deed must always have been
conscious; that due to a perception of an evil
impulse could have remained unconscious. But
it cannot be as simple as that: the obsessional
neurosis contradicts it emphatically. The sec
ond contradiction was that the aggressive en
ergy with which one imagined the super-ego to
be endowed was, according to one view, merely
a continuation of the punitive energy belonging
to
external authority, preserved
within the
mind; whereas according to another view it
consisted, on the contrary, of aggressive energy
originating in the self, levelled against this in
hibiting authority but not allowed to discharge
itself in actions. The
first
view
seemed to

[801b]
accord better with the history of the sense
of guilt, the second with the theory of it. More
searching reflection has resolved this appar
ently irreconcilable contradiction almost too
completely; what remained as essential and
common to both was that in both cases we
were dealing with an aggression that had been
turned inward. Clinical observation, moreover,
really permits us to distinguish two sources for
the aggressiveness we ascribe to the super-ego,
each of which in any given case may be oper
ating predominantly, but which usually are
both at work together.
This, I think, is the place to suggest that a
proposal which I previously put forward as a
provisional
assumption
should be
taken in
earnest. In the latest analytical literature,1 a
predilection has been shown for the view that
any kind of privation, any thwarted instinctual
gratification, results in a heightening of the
sense of guilt, or may do so. I believe one
obtains a great simplification of theory if one
regards this as valid only for the aggressive
instincts, and that little will be found to con
tradict this assumption. How then is it to be
explained dynamically and economicaUy that a
heightening of the sense of guilt should appear
in place of an unfulfilled erotic desire? This can
surely only happen in a roundabout way: the
thwarting of the erotic gratification provokes
an access of aggressiveness against the person
who interfered with the gratification, and then
this tendency to aggression in its turn has itself
to be suppressed. So then it is, after all, only
the aggression which is changed into guilt, by
being suppressed and made over to the super
ego. I am convinced that very many processes
will admit of much simpler and clearer expla
nation if we restrict the findings of psycho
analysis in respect of the origin of the sense
of guilt to the aggressive instincts. Reference
to the clinical material here gives us no un
equivocal answer, because, according to our
own hypothesis, the
two kinds of instincts
hardly ever appear in a pure form, unmixed
with each other; but the investigation of ex
treme cases would probably point in the direc
tion I anticipate. I am tempted to extract our
first advantage from this narrower conception
by applying it to the repression-process. The
symptoms of neurosis, as we have learned, are
essentially substitutive gratifications for unful
filled sexual wishes. In the course of our ana1 In particular, in contributions by Ernest Jones,
Susan Isaacs, Melanie Klein; also, as I understand,
in those of Reik and Alexander.

[802a]
Civilization and
lytic work wehave found to our surprise that
perhapsevery neurosis masksa certain amount
of unconscious sense of guilt, which in its turn
reinforces the symptoms by exploiting them as
punishment. Oneis nowinclined to suggest the
following statement as a possible formulation:
when an instinctual trend undergoes repression,
its
libidinal
elements are
transformed into
symptoms and its aggressive components into
a sense of guilt. Even if this statement is only
accurate as an approximation, it merits our
interest.
Some readers of this essay, too, may be un
der the impression that the formula of the
struggle between Eros and the death instinct
has been reiterated too often. It is supposed to
characterize the cultural process which evolves
in humanity; but it has been related also to
the development of the individual, and, besides
this, is supposed to have revealed the secret of
organic life in general. It becomes necessary
for us to examine the relation of these three
processes to one another. Now, the repetition
of the same formula is vindicated by the con
sideration that the cultural processes, both in
humanity and in the development of an indi
vidual, are Hfe-processes; consequently they
must both partake of the most universal char
acteristic of life. On the other hand, evidence
of the presence of this universal characteristic
does not help us to discriminate, unless it is
further narrowed down by special qualifica
tions. We can therefore set our minds at rest
only if we say that the cultural process is the
particular modification undergone by the lifeprocess under the influence of the task set
before it by Eros and stimulated by Ananke,
external necessity; and this task is that of
uniting single human beings into a larger unity
with
libidinal
attachments
between
them.
When, however, we compare the cultural proc
ess in humanity with the process of develop
ment or upbringing in an individual human
being, we shall conclude without much hesita
tion that the two are very similar in nature,
if not in fact the same process applied to a
different kind of object. The civilizing process
in the human species is naturally more of an
abstraction than the development of an indi
vidual, and therefore harder to apprehend in
concrete terms, nor should the discovery of
analogies be pushed to extremes; but in view
of the similar character of the aims of the two
processes—in one the incorporation of an in
dividual as a member of a group and in the
other the
creation of a single group out of

[802b]
its Discontents
799
many individuals—the similarity of the means
employed and of the results obtained in the
two cases is not surprising. In view of its ex
ceptional importance, we must no longer post
pone mention of one feature differentiating the
two processes. The development of the indi
vidual is ordered according to the program
laid down by the pleasure-principle, namely,
the attainment of happiness, and to this main
objective it holds firmly; the incorporation of
the individual as a member of a community,
or his adaptation to it, seems like an almost
unavoidable condition which has to be filled
before he can attain this objective of happi
ness. If he could achieve it without fulfilling
this condition, it would perhaps be better. To
express it differently, we may say: Individual
development seems to us a product of the in
terplay of two trends, the striving for happi
ness, generally called egoistic, and the impulse
towards merging with others in the commu
nity, which we call altruistic. Neither of these
descriptions goes far beneath the surface. In
individual development, as we have said, the
main accent falls
on the egoistic trend, the
striving for happiness; while the other tend
ency, which may be called the cultural one,
usually contents itself with instituting restric
tions. But things are different in the develop
ment of culture: here far the most important
aim is that of creating a single unity out of
individual men and women, while the objective
of happiness, though still present, is pushed
into the background; it almost
seems as if
humanity could be most successfully united
into one great whole if there were no need to
trouble about the happiness of individuals. The
process of development in individuals must
therefore be admitted to have its special fea
tures which are not repeated in the cultural
evolution of humanity; the two processes on
ly necessarily coincide in so far as the first
also includes the aim of incorporation into the
community.
Just as a planet
circles round its central
body, while at the same time rotating on its
own axis, so the individual man takes his part
in the course of humanity's development as he
goes on his way through life. But to our dull
eyes the play of forces in the heavens seems set
fast in a never-varying scheme, though in or
ganic life we can still see how the forces con
tend with one another and the results of the
conflict change from day to day. So in every
individual the two trends, one towards personal
happiness and the other towards unity with the

[803a]
8oo
Sigmund Freud
rest of humanity, must contend with each oth
er; so must the two processes of individual and
of cultural development oppose each other and
dispute the ground against each other. This strug
gle between individual and society, however, is
not derived from the antagonism of the primal
instincts, Eros and death, which are probably
irreconcilable; it is a dissension in the camp
of the libido itself, comparable to the
con
test
between
the
ego and
its
objects
for
a share of the libido; and it does eventually
admit of a solution in the individual, as we
may hope it will also do in the future of civili
zation—however greatly it may oppress the
lives of individuals at the present time.
The analogy between the process of cultural
evolution and the path of individual develop
ment may be carried further in an important
respect. It can be maintained that the com
munity, too, develops a super-ego, under whose
influence cultural evolution^proceeds. It would
be an enticing task for an authority on human
systems of culture to work out this analogy in
specific cases. I will confine myself to pointing
out certain striking details. The super-ego of
any given epoch of civilization originates in
the same way as that of an individual; it is
based on the impression left behind them by
great leading personalities, men of outstanding
force of mind, or men in whom some one hu
man tendency has developed in unusual strength
and purity, often for that reason very dispro
portionately. In many instances the analogy
goes still further, in that during their lives—•
often enough, even if not always—such persons
are ridiculed by others, ill-used, or even cruelly
done to
death,
just as happened with
the
primal father who also rose again to become a
deity long after his death by violence. The
most striking example of this double fate is
the figure of Jesus Christ, if indeed it does not
itself belong to the realm of mythology which
called it into being out of a dim memory of
that primordial event. Another point of agree
ment is that the cultural super-ego, just like
that of an individual, sets up high ideals and
standards, and that failure to fulfil them is
punished by both with anxiety of conscience.
In this particular, indeed, we come across the
remarkable circumstance that the mental proc
esses concerned here are actually more familiar
to us and more
accessible to
consciousness
when they proceed from the group than they
can be in the individual. In the latter, when
tension arises, the aggressions of the super-ego
voicing its noisy reproaches are all that is per

[803b]
ceived, while its injunctions themselves often
remain unconscious in the background. If we
bring them to the knowledge of consciousness,
we find that they coincide with the demands
of the prevailing cultural super-ego. At this
point the two processes, that of the evolution
of the group and the development of the in
dividual, are always firmly mortised together,
so to speak. Consequently many of the effects
and properties of the super-ego can be more
easily detected through its operations in the
group than in the individual.
The cultural super-ego has elaborated its
ideals and erected its standards. Those of its
demands which deal with the relations of hu
man beings to one another are comprised under
the name of ethics. The greatest value has at
all times been set upon systems of ethics, as
if men had expected them in particular to
achieve something especially important. And
ethics does in fact deal predominantly with the
point which is easily seen to be the sorest of
all in any scheme of civilization. Ethics must
be regarded, therefore, as a therapeutic effort:
as an endeavour to achieve something through
the standards imposed by the super-ego which
had not been attained by the work of civiliza
tion in other ways. We already know—it is
what we have been discussing—that the ques
tion is how to dislodge the greatest obstacle to
civilization, the constitutional tendency in men
,to aggressions against one another; and for that
very reason the commandment to love one's
neighbour as oneself—probably the most re
cent of the cultural super-ego's demands—is
especially interesting to us. In our investiga
tions and our therapy of the neuroses we can
not avoid finding fault with the super-ego of
the individual on two counts: in commanding
and prohibiting with such severity it troubles
too little about the happiness of the ego, and it
fails to take into account sufficiently the diffi
culties in the way of obeying it—the strength
of instinctual cravings in the id and the hard
shipsof external environment. Consequently, in
our therapy we often find ourselves obliged to
do battle with the super-ego and work to mod
erate its demands. Exactly the same objections
can be made against the ethical standards of
the cultural super-ego. It, too, does not trou
ble enough about the mental constitution of
human beings; it enjoins a command and never
asks whether or not it is possible for them to
obey it. It presumes, on the contrary, that a
man's ego is psychologically capable of any
thing that is required of it—that his ego has

[804a]
unlimited power over his id. This is an error;
even in so-called normal people the power of
controlling the id cannot be increased beyond
certain limits. If one asks more of them, one
produces revolt or neurosis in individuals or
makes them unhappy. The command to love
our neighbours as ourselves is the strongest
defence there is against human aggressiveness
and it is a superlativeexample of the unpsycho
logical attitude of the cultural super-ego. The
command is impossible to fulfil; such an enor
mous inflation of love can only lower its value
and not remedy the evil. CiviHzation pays no
heed to all this; it merely pratesthat the harder
it is to obey the more laudable the obedience.
The fact remains that anyone who follows such
preaching in the present state of civilization
only puts himself at a disadvantage beside all
those who set it at naught. What an overwhelm
ing obstacle to civilization aggression must be
if the defence against it can cause as much
misery as aggression itself! Natural ethics, as
it is called, has nothing to offer here beyond
the narcissistic satisfaction of thinking oneself
better than others. The variety of ethics that
links itself with religion brings in at this point
its promises of a better future Hfe. I should
imagine that as long as virtue is not rewarded
in this life ethics will preach in vain. I too
think it unquestionable that an actual change
in men's attitude to property would be of more
help in this direction than any ethical com
mands; but among the Socialists this proposal
is obscured by new idealistic expectations dis
regarding human nature, which detract from its
value in actual practice.
It seems to me that the point of view which
seeks to
follow the phenomena of cultural
evolution
as
manifestations of a
super-ego
promises to yield stiU further discoveries. I am
coming quickly to an end. There is one ques
tion, however, which I can hardly ignore. If the
evolution of civilization has such a far-reach
ing similarity with the development of an
individual, and if the same methods are em
ployed in both, would not the diagnosis be jus
tified that many systems of civilization—or
epochs of it—possibly even the whole of hu
manity—have become neurotic under the pres
sure of
the
civilizing
trends?
To
analytic
dissection of these neuroses, therapeutic rec
ommendations
might
follow
which
could
claim a great practical interest. I would not
say that such an attempt to apply psycho
analysis to civilized society would be fanciful
or doomed to fruitlessness. But it behooves us

[804b]
Civilization and its Discontents
801
to be very careful, not to forget that after all
we are dealing only with analogies, and that it
is dangerous, not only with men but also with
concepts, to drag them but of the region where
they originated and have matured. The diagno
sis of collective neuroses, moreover, wiU be
confronted by a special difficulty. In the neu
rosis of an individual we can use as a startingpoint the contrast presented to us between the
patient and his environment which we assume
to be normal.
No
such background as this
would be available for' any society similarly
affected; it would have to be supplied in some
other way. And with regard to any therapeutic
application of our knowledge, what would be
the use of the most acute analysis of social
neuroses, since no one possesses power to com
pel the community to adopt the therapy? In
spite of all these difficulties, we may expect that
one day someone will venture upon this re
search into the pathology of civilized communi
ties.
For various reasons, it is very far from my
intention to express any opinion concerning
the value of human civilization.
I have en
deavoured to guard myself against the enthusi
astic partiality which believes our civilization
to be the most precious thing that we possess
or could acquire, and thinks it must inevitably
lead us to undreamed-of heights of perfection.
I can at any rate listen without taking um
brage to those critics who aver that when one
surveys the aims of civilization and the means
it employs, one is bound to conclude that the
whole thing is not worth the effort and that in the
end it can only produce a state of things which
no individual will be able to bear. My impar
tiality is all the easier to me since I know very
little about these things and am sure only of
one thing, that the judgments of value made
by mankind are immediately determined by
their desires for happiness: in other words, that
those judgments are attempts to prop up their
illusions with arguments. I could understand
it very well if anyone were to point to the in
evitable nature of the process of cultural de
velopment and
say,
for instance,
that the
tendency to institute restrictions upon sexual
life, or to carry humanitarian ideals into ef
fect at the cost of natural selection, are de
velopmental trends which it is impossible to
avert or divert, and to which it is best for us
to submit as though they were natural necessi
ties. I know, too, the objection that can be
raised against this:
that tendencies such as
these, which are believed to have insuperable

[805a]
802
Sigmund Freud
power behind them, have often in the history
of man been thrown aside and replaced by oth
ers. My courage fails me, therefore, at the
thought of rising up as a prophet before my
feUow-men, and I bow to their reproach that
I have no consolation to offer them; for at
bottom this is what they all demand—the fren
zied revolutionary as passionately as the most
pious believer.
The fateful question of the human species
seems to me to be whether and to what extent
the cultural process developed in it will suc
ceed in mastering the derangements of com
munal Hfe caused by the human instinct of

[805b]
aggression and self-destruction. In this connec
tion, perhaps the phase through which we are
at this moment passing deserves special Inter
est. Men have brought their powers of subdu
ing the forces of nature to such a pitch that by
using them they could now very easily extermi
nate one another to the last man. They know
this—hence arises a great part of their cur
rent unrest, their dejection, their mood of
apprehension. And now it may be expected that
the other of the two heavenly forces, eternal
Eros, will put forth his strength so as to main
tain himself alongside of his equally immortal
adversary.

[806a]
[página ilustrada]

[806b]
[página ilustrada]

[807a]
Contents:
New Introductory Lectures on
Psycho-Analysis
Preface
807
lecture
«
29. Revision of the Theory of Dreams
807
30. Dreams and the Occult
818
31. The Anatomy of the Mental Personality
830
32. Anxiety and Instinctual Life
840
33. The Psychology of Women
853
34. Explanations, Applications and Orientations
864
35. A Philosophy of Life
873

[807b]


[808a]
New Introductory Lectures
on Psycho-Analysis
Preface
My Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis1
were delivered in the two winter terms of 191516 and 1916-17, in one of the lecture-rooms of
the Vienna Psychiatrical Clinic, before an audi
ence composed of members and students of
every Faculty. The first half of the lectures
were improvised, and written down immediately
afterwards; the second half were composed dur
ing an intervening summer vacation in Salz
burg, and were deHvered word for word in the
following winter. In those days I stiU possessed
the gift of a phonographic memory.
In contradistinction to them, these new lec
tures have never been delivered. My age has in
the meantime reHeved me of the duty of mark
ing my membership of the University—even
though the relation is only a peripheral one—
by giving lectures; and a surgical operation has
rendered me incapable of addressing an audi
ence. It is therefore only in imagination that I
picture myself once more in the lecture-room
as I write out what follows; it may help me not
to forget my duty to the reader as I delve
deeper into my subject.
Tfye new lectures arein no way intended to
take the place of the earHer ones. They do not
compose an independent whole which could
hope to find a circle of readers of its own; but
they are continuations and supplements which
fall into three groups in their relation to the
earlier lectures. To the first group belong the
new manipulations of themes which have al
ready been dealt with fifteen years ago, but
which demand further treatment on account of
the deepening^ of our knowledge and the altera
tion of our views; this group consists, that is to
say, of critical revisions. The two other groups
contain actual enlargements of our field, in that
they deal with matters which either did not
LECTURE 29
Revision of the Theory of Dreams
Ladies and Gentlemen: After a silence of
more than fifteen years, I have brought you
1A General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis, p. 449
above.

[808b]
exist in psycho-analysis at the time of the first
lectures, or about which too little was known at
that time to justify a special chapter-heading.
It cannot be avoided, but it is also not to be
deplored, that some of the new lectures unite
the characteristics of these groups.
I have, moreover, emphasized the depend
ence of these new lectures on the Introductory
Lectures by numbering them in continuation of
the old ones. Thus the first lecture in this book
is called the Twenty-ninth. Once more, they
offer to the analytic specialist little that is new,
and they are addressed to that large group of
educated persons to whom, let us hope, one can
ascribe a benevolent, if cautious, interest in the
special nature and discoveries of this young
science. And this time again it has been my
guiding purpose to make no sacrifice in favour
of apparent simplicity, completeness and finali
ty; not to hide any problems and not to deny
the existence of gaps and uncertainties. In no
other field of scientific work would it be neces
sary to insist upon the modesty of one's claims.
In every other subject this is taken for granted;
the public expect nothing else. No reader of a
work on astronomy would feel disappointed
and contemptuous of that science, if he were
shown the point at which our knowledge of the
universe melts into obscurity. Only in psy
chology is it otherwise; here the constitutional
incapacity of men for scientific research comes
into full view. It looks as though people did
not expect from psychology progress in knowl
edge, but some other kind of satisfaction; every
unsolved problem, every acknowledged uncer
tainty is turned into a ground of complaint
against it.
Anyone who loves the science of the mind
must accept these hardships as well.
Freud
Vienna Summer 1932
together again in order to discuss with you the
new developments, or it may be improvements,
which have taken place in psycho-analytic the
ory during the interval. From more than one
point of view it is right and proper that we
807

[809a]
8o8
Sigmund Freud
should turn our attention, in the first place, to
the theory of dreams. This theory occupies a
peculiar position
in the history of psycho
analysis; it marks a turning-point. With the
theory of dreams, analysis passed from being a
psycho-therapeutic method to being a psychol
ogy of the depths of human nature. Ever since
then the theory of dreams has remained the
most characteristic and the most peculiar fea
ture of the young science, something which has
no parallel in the rest of scientific knowledge, a
new found land which has been reclaimed from
the regions of Folklore and Mysticism. The
strangeness of the ideas which are necessarily
involved in it has made it into a shibboleth, the
use of which distinguishes those who might
become believers in psycho-analysis from those
who are incapable of comprehending it. Speak
ing for myself, I always found it a thing I could
hold on to during those difficult times when the
unsolved problems of the neuroses used
to
confuse my inexperienced judgment. When
ever I began to have doubts about the correct
ness of my tentative conclusions, the moment
I managed to translate a senseless and compli
cated dream into a clear and intelligible mental
process in the dreamer, I felt, with renewed
confidence, that I was on the right track.
It is therefore of especial interest for us to
follow, in regard to this particular matter of
the theory of dreams, what changes psycho
analysis has undergone during the interval I
have mentioned, and what progress it has made
in gaining appreciation and understanding from
contemporary thought. I may as well teU you
straight away that you will be disappointed in
both directions.
Let us look through the volumes of the Inter
nationale Zeitschrift fur (arztliche) Psycho
analyse, in which the most important work on
our subject has appeared since 1913. In the
earlier volumes you will find one recurring
heading, "On the Interpretation of Dreams,"
under which will be a quantity of contributions
on various points of dream-theory. But the
further you go, the rarer such contributions
become; this standing heading eventually dis
appears entirely. The analysts behave as though
they had nothing more to say about the dream,
as though the whole subject of dream-theory
were finished and done with. If, on the other
hand, you ask how much of the theory of dreams
is accepted by outsiders, the numerous psychia
trists and psycho-therapeutists who warm their
pot of soup at our fire—without indeed being
very grateful for our hospitality—the so-called

[809b]
educated people who are in the habit of appro
priating the more startling of the conclusions of
science, the Hterati and the general public, then
the answer is not very satisfactory. A few
formulae are generally known,
and,
among
them, several which we have never put for
ward, such as the statement that all dreams are
of a sexual nature; but even such important
things as the fundamental distinction between
the
manifest dream-content
and
the
latent
dream-thoughts, the view that anxiety dreams
do not contradict the wish-fulfilling function of
the dream, the impossibility of interpreting a
dream unless one knows the relevant associa
tions of the dreamer, and, above all, the rec
ognition of the fact that the most important
part of the dream is the dream-work, seem,
every one of them, to be as far removed from
the consciousness of the generality of mankind
as they were thirty years ago. I myself have
every reason to say this, because during that
period I have received an enormous number of
letters, in. which
the
writers inscribe their
dreams for interpretation, or ask for informa*
tion about the nature of dreams. They declare
that they
have
read
the
Interpretation of
Dreams, and yet in every sentence they betray
their lack of understanding of our dream-the
ory. That will not prevent our once more giving
an account of what we know about dreams.
You will remember that last time we devoted a
whole group of lectures to showing how we
have come to understand this hitherto unex
plained psychic phenomenon.
Supposing some one, say a patient under
analysis, tells us one of his dreams; then we
assume that he has made one of those com
munications to us to which he committed him
self when he entered on his analytical treat
ment. It is, of course, a communication which
is
insufficiently
communicative,
because
a
dream is, in itself, not a social utterance; it is
not a means for making oneself understood.
We have not, indeed, the least idea what the
dreamer wishes to say, and he himself knows
no better than ourselves. At the outset, we have
to make a quick decision. On the one hand, the
dream may be, as the non-analytical physicians
assure us, an indication that the dreamer has
slept badly, that not all the parts of his brain
achieved a uniform state of rest, that certain
regions of it endeavoured to go on working
under the influence of unknown stimuH and
could only do so in a very incomplete way. If
that is the case, then we are quite right not to
bother ourselves any longer over this psycho-

[810a]
New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis
809
logically worthless product of nocturnal dis
turbance. For how could we expect from the
investigation of such things to arrive at any
thing useful for our purposes? On the other
hand, however—-but it is clear that from the
outset we have decided otherwise. We haveperhaps quite arbitrarily—made the assump
tion, put forward the postulate, that even this
unintelligible dream must be a perfectly vaHd,
sensible, and valuable psychic act, of which
we can make use in the analysis, just like any
other communication. Only the result of our
attempt can show us whether we are right. If
we are able to turn the dream into a valuable
utterance of this kind, then we obviously have
a chance of learning something new, and of ob
taining information of such a sort as otherwise
would remain inaccessible to us.
Now, however, the difficulties of our task,
and the puzzling nature of our theme become
apparent. How are we going to set about turn
ing a dream into a normal communication, and
how are we going to explain that a part of the
utterance of our patient has taken on a form
which is as unintelligible for him as for us?
You will observe, ladies and gentlemen, that
this time I am not expounding the subject on
genetic lines, but I am speaking dogmatically.
The first thing we have to do is to lay the
foundations of our new attitude towards the
problem of the dream by introducing two new
concepts and two new names. We call what one
usually refers to as the dream, the dream-text
or the manifest dream, and what we are look
ing for, what we, as it were, suspect to lie be
hind the dream, the
latent dream-thoughts.
Now we can express our two problems in the
following way: we have got to turn the mani
fest dream into the latent dream, and we have
to show how the latter became the former in
the mental life of the dreamer. The first bit
is a practical problem, it comes under the head
ing of dream-interpretation, and requires a tech
nique; the second is a theoretical problem, its
solution should be the explanation of the hypo
thetical dream-work, and can only be a theory.
Both the technique of dream-interpretation and
the theory of the dream-work have to be built
up from the beginning.
Which bit shall we begin with? I think we
should start with the technique of dream-in
terpretation. It has a clearer outline and will
make a more vivid impression on you.
The patient, then,
has described a dream
which we have to interpret. We have listened
quietly without making use of our powers of

[810b]
reflection. What do we do next? We determine
to bother our heads as little as possible over
what wehave heard—over the manifest dream,
that is to say. Naturally this manifest dream
displays all sorts of characteristics to which we
are not completely indifferent. It may be co
herent, smoothly composed, like a literary
work, or unintelHgibly confused, almost like a
delirium; it may have absurd elements, or
jokes and apparently brilliant inferences; it
may seemclearand welldefinedto the dreamer,
or it may be dim and indefinite; the pictures
in it may have the full sensuous force of a per
ception, or they may be as shadowy and vague
as a mist. The greatest variety of character
istics can be found distributed in the various
parts of the samedream.Finally, the dream may
be attended by an indifferent feeling tone, or
by a very strong pleasurable or painful affect.
You must not think that we regard this end
less variety as a matter of no importance; we
shall come back to it later, and shall find in it
much that is useful for our interpretation; but
for the present we must put it aside, and travel
along the main road which leads to the inter
pretation of the dream. This means that we ask
the dreamer as well to free himself from the
impression of the manifest dream, to switch
his attention from the dream as a whole to
individual parts of its content, and to tell us
one after another the things that occur to him
in connection with these parts, what associa
tions come into his mind when he turns his
mental eye on to each of them separately.
That is a curious technique, is it not? It is not
the usual way to treat a communication or an
utterance. You guess, of course, that behind
this procedure there lie concealed assumptions
which have not yet been mentioned. But let us
proceed. In what order shall we get the patient
to take the parts of his dream? Here we have
a variety of courses open to us. We can simply
follow the chronological order in which the
dream has been presented to us in description.
That is what one might call the strictest, the
classical method. Or we can ask the dreamer to
look for the residue of the previous day in his
dream, because experience has taught us that
in almost every dream is incorporated a mem
ory trace of, or an allusion to, an event (or it
may be several events) of the previous day;
and if we follow up these links we often dis
cover all of a sudden the bridge from the ap
parently remote dream-world to the real Hfe of
the patient. Or else we tell him to begin with
those elements in the dream-content which have

[811a]
8io
Sigmund Freud
struck him on account of their clarity and
sensuous force. We happen to know that-it is
particularly easy for him to obtain associations
to such elements. It makes no difference by
which of these ways we choose to reach the
associations we are looking for.
And now let us consider these associations.
They consist of the most varied material, mem
ories of the day before, the "dream .day,."-and
memories of times long since passed, delibera
tions, arguments for and against, admissions
and questionings. A great many of them are
poured out by the patient with ease, while he
hesitates when he reaches others. Most of them
show a clear connection with one of the ele
ments of the dream, and no wonder, because
they have actuaUy sprung from these elements;
but it may also happen that the patient intro
duces them with the words: "That doesn't seem
to have anything to do with the dream at all;
I say it because it comes into my head."
When one Hstens to this flood of ideas, one
soon notices that they have more in common
with the content of the dream than the mere
fact that it provided them with their origin.
They throw an astonishingly clear fight on aU
the parts of the dream, they fill in the gaps
between them, and they make their odd juxta
position intelHgible. Finally, we must get clear
the relation between them and the content of
the dream. The dream seems to be an abridged
extract from the associations, which has been
put together in accordance with rules which
we have not yet considered; its elements are
like the representatives of a multitude which
have been chosen by vote. There is no doubt
that our technique has enabled us to discover
what the dream has replaced, and wherein lies
its psychological value; and what we have dis
covered displays no longer the bewildering pe
culiarities of the dream, its strangeness and its
confused nature.
But let us have no misunderstanding. The
associations to the dream are not the latent
dream-thoughts. These are contained, but not
completely contained, in the associations. On
the one hand, the associations produce a great
deal more than we require for the formulation
of the latent dream-thoughts, namely, all the
elaborations, the transitions, and the connect
ing links, which the intellect of the patient
must produce on the road which leads to the
dream-thoughts. On the other hand, the associa
tion has often stopped short immediately be
fore it has reached the dream-thoughts them
selves; it has only touched them allusively. We

[811b]
now play a part ourselves: we follow up the
indications, we draw inevitable conclusions and
bring out into the open what the patient in his
associations has only touched upon. That sounds
as if we allow our cleverness and our arbitrary
imagination to play with the material which the
dreamer has placed at our disposal, and misuse
it to the extent of reading into his utterances
what we have no business to find there; and
indeed it is no easy matter to show the pro
priety of our behaviour in an abstract exposi
tion. But if you try a dream-analysis your
selves, or make yourselves famiHar with a welldescribed example from our literature, you will
be convinced of the compelling manner in which
such a process of interpretation unfolds itself.
Although in dream-interpretation we are in
general and predominantly dependent on the
associations of the dreamer, nevertheless we
treat certain elements of the content quite in
dependently—mainly because we have to, be
cause, as a rule, associations refuse to come.
We noticed at an early stage that this happens
always in connection with the same material;
these
elements are not very numerous, and
long experience has taught us that they are to
be taken as symbols for something else, and to
be interpreted as such. In comparison with the
other elements of the dream, one can give them
a permanent meaning, which need not, however,
be ambiguous, and the limits of which are de
termined by special laws, which are of an un
usual kind. Since we understand how to trans
late these symbols, while the dreamer does not,
although he himself has made use of them, it
may very weU be that the sense of the dream
is immediately clear to us, even before we have
begun the work of dream-interpretation, as
soon as we have heard the text of the dream,
while the dreamer himself is still puzzled by it.
But in the earlier lectures I have already said
so much about symbolism, about our knowledge
of it, and about the special problems to which
it gives rise, that I need not go over the same
ground again today.
That, then, is our method of dream-interpre
tation. The next.and very proper question is:
Can we by these means interpret every dream?
And the answer is: No, not every one; but so
many that we can afford to be absolutely cer
tain about the utility and correctness of our
procedure. But why not all? The recent answer
to this question will teach us something im
portant, which has a bearing on the psychologi
cal conditions of dream
formation. It is be
cause the work of interpretation is carried on

[812a]
in the face of resistance, which may vary from
an imperceptible amount to an amount so great
that we cannot overcome it—at any rate with
the means which are at present at our disposal.
One cannot help observing the manifestation
of this resistance during the interpretation. In
many places the associations are given without
hesitation, and the
first or second of them
already provides us with the explanation. In
other places the patient pauses and hesitates
before he utters an association, and then one
often has to listen to a long chain of ideas
before one gets anything which is of any use
for the understanding of the dream. We are
right in supposing that the longer and the more
circuitous the*chain of associations^ the stronger
is the resistance.
And in the
forgetting of
dreams, too, we sense the same influence. Often
enough it happens that, however much he may
try, the patient cannot remember one of his
dreams. But when, by a piece of analytical
work, we have removed a difficulty which has
been disturbing the patient in his relation to
the analysis, the forgotten dream will come into
his mind quite suddenly. Two more observa
tions may be mentioned here. It very often
happens that a piece of the dream is missing,
which is eventually added as an afterthought.
This is to be regarded as an attempt to forget
that particular piece. Experience shows that it
is this very piece of the dream which is the
most valuable; we suppose that a stronger re
sistance stood in the way of its communica
tion than was the case with the other parts.
And, furthermore, we often find that a patient
may try to combat the forgetting of his dreams
by writing them down immediately after, he
wakes up. We may as well tell him that it is
useless to do so, because the resistance from
which he may have preserved the text of the
dream wiU then transfer itself to the associa
tions and render the manifest dream inaccessible
for interpretation.
This
being the case, we
need not be surprised if a further increase of
the resistance suppresses the associations alto
gether, and thus frustrates the interpretation
of the dream entirely.
From aU this we draw the conclusion that the
resistance which we come across during the
process of
dream-interpretation
must
play
some part in the formation of the dream as
well.
One
can
actually
distinguish
between
dreams which have been
formed under low
pressure of resistance and those in which the
resistance has been high. But this pressure also
changes within the same dream from one place

[812b]
New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis
8ii
to another; it is responsible for the gaps, the
obscurities and the confusion which may upset
the coherence of the most beautiful dreams
But what is the resistance doing here, and
what is it resisting? Now for us a resistance is
the sure sign of a conflict. There must be a
force present which is trying to express some
thing, and another which is striving to prevent
its expression. What comes into being as the
manifest dream may, therefore, be regarded as
comprising all the solutions to which the battle
between these two opposing forces can be re
duced. At one point one of the forces may have
been able to get through what it wanted to say,
at another the counteracting force may have
succeeded ..in, abolishing- the -intended
com
munication entirely, or may have substituted
for it something which betrays no sign of it.
The most usual cases, and those which are the
most characteristic of the process of dreamformation, are those in which the conflict re
sults in a compromise, so that the communicat
ing force can indeed say what it wants to say,
but not in the way it wants to say it; it is toned
down, distorted, and made unrecognizable. If,
therefore, the dream does not faithfully rep
resent the dream-thoughts, if a process of inter
pretation
is
necessary
to
bridge
the
gulf
between the two, this is the result of the coun
teracting,
inhibiting,
and
restraining
force
whose existence we have inferred from perceiv
ing the resistance in dream-interpretation. So
long as we regarded the dream as an isolated
phenomenon, independent of other psychologi
cal formations which are allied to it, we called
this force the dream-censor.
You have long been familiar with the fact
that this censorship is not a mechanism which is
peculiar to
dreams. You remember that the
conflict of two psychic factors, which we—
roughly—call the
repressed unconscious and
the conscious, dominates our lives, and that the
resistance against the interpretation of dreams,
the hall-mark of the dream-censorship, is none
other
than
the
repression-resistance
which
keeps these two factors apart. You also know
that, under certain conditions, other psychologi
cal formations emerge from the conflict between
these same factors, formations which are the
result of compromises just as dreams are; and
you will not require me to repeat all that is
involved in my introduction to the theory of
the neuroses in order to put before you what
we know about the conditions under which such
compromise formations come about. You will
have reaHzed that the dream is a pathological

[813a]
812
Sigmund Freud
product, the first member of the series which
includes the hysterical symptom, the obsession,
and the delusion among
its members; it is
differentiated from the others by its transitoriness and by the fact that it occurs under con
ditions which are part of normal Hfe. For we
must never forget that the dream-Hfe is, as
Aristotle has already told us, the way our mind
works during sleep. The state of sleep repre
sents a turning away from the real external
world, and thus provides a necessary condition
for the development of a psychosis. The most
penetrating study of serious cases of psychosis
will reveal no characteristic which is more typi
cal of these pathological conditions. In psy
choses, however, the turning away from reality
is brought about in two ways; either because
the repressed unconscious is too strong, so that
it overwhelms the conscious, which tries to
cling on to reality, or because reaHty has be
come so unbearably painful that the threatened
ego, in a despairing gesture
of opposition,
throws itself into the arms of the unconscious
impulses. The harmless, dream-psychosis is the
result of a consciously willed, and only tempos
rary, withdrawal from the external world; it
ceases to operate when relations with the ex
ternal world are resumed.. While the sleeper is
isolated, there is an alteration in the distribu
tion of his psychic energy; part of the repres
sive expenditure, which is otherwise used to
keep down the unconscious, can be saved, for
if the unconscious makes use of its relative
freedom and enters on some activity, it finds
the avenue to motor expression stopped up, and
only the innocent outlet of haUucinatory satis
faction open to it. It can now, therefore, form
a dream,; but the, fact of dream-censorship
shows that enough
repressive resistance re
mains operative even during sleep.
Here we have an opportunity of answering
the question whether the dream has also
a
function to perform, whether any useful task is
entrusted to it. The condition of repose with
out stimuli, which the state of sleep attempts
to bring about, is threatened from three sides:
in a chance fashion by external stimuli during
sleep, by interests of the day-before which
have not yet abated, and, in an unavoidable
manner, by the unsatisfied repressed impulses,
which are ready to seize on any opportunity
for expression. On account of the nightly re
duction of the repressive forces, the risk is run
that the repose of sleep will be broken every
time the outer and inner disturbances manage
to link up with one of the unconscious sources

[813b]
of energy. The dream-process allows the result
of
such a combination to
discharge itself
through the channel of a harmless hallucina
tory experience,and thus insures the continuity
of sleep. There is no contradiction of this func
tion in the fact that the dream sometimes wakes
the sleeper in a state of anxiety; it is rather a
sign that the watcher regards the situation as
being too dangerous, and no longer thinks he
can cope with it. Quite often, indeed, while we
are still asleep, we are aware of the comforting
thought, which is there to prevent our waking
up: "After all, it is only a dream."
That is all, ladies and gentlemen, that I
wanted to say about dream-interpretation, the
business of which is
to trace
the manifest
dream back to the latent dream-thoughts. When
this has been done, the interest in the dream
from the point of view of practical analysis
fades. The analyst links up the communication
which he has received in the form of a dream
with the patient's other communications and
proceeds with the analysis. We, however, wish
to linger a little longer over the dream; we are
tempted to study the process
by means of
which
the latent dream-thoughts are
trans
formed into the manifest dream. We call this
the dream-work. You will remember that in the
previous lectures I described it in such detail
that, for today's review of the subject, I can
confine myself to the briefest summary.
The process of dream-work is something
quite new and strange, the like of which has
never before been known. It has given us our
first glimpse into those processes which go on
in our unconscious mental system, and shows
us that they are quite different from what we
know about our conscious thought, and that to
this latter they must necessarily appear faulty
and preposterous. The importance of this dis
covery is increased when we realize that the
same mechanisms—we hardly dare call them
"thought processes"—are at work in the forma
tion of neurotic symptoms as have turned the
latent dream-thoughts into the manifest dream.
In what foUows, I cannot avoid making my
exposition a schematic one. Supposing we have
before us in a given instance aU the latent
thoughts, more or less affectively toned, which
have taken the place of the manifest dream
after a complete interpretation. We shall then
notice a distinction among them, and this dis
tinction will take us a long wTay. Almost all
these dream-thoughts wiU be recognized or ac
knowledged by the dreamer; he will admit that
he thought thus at. one time or another, or that

[814a]
New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Anaiysis
813
he might very well have done so. But he may
resist the acceptation of one single thought, it
is foreign to him, perhaps even repellent; it
may be that he will passionately repudiate it.
Now it becomes clear to
us that the other
thoughts are bits of his conscious, or, more cor
rectly, of his pre-conscious thought; they might
very well have been thought during waking
life, and have probably formed themselves dur
ing the day. This one rejected thought, or, bet
ter, this one impulse, is a child of the night;
it belongs to the unconscious of the dreamer,
and is therefore disowned and repudiated by
him. It had to await the nightly relaxation of re
pression in order to achieve any sort of ex
pression. In any case, the expression that it
obtains is enfeebled, distorted, and disguised;
without the work of interpretation we should
never have discovered it. It is thanks to its con
nection with the other unobjectionable dreamthoughts that this unconscious impulse has had
the opportunity of slipping past the barrier of
the censorship in an unostentatious disguise;
on the other hand, the pre-conscious dreamthoughts
owe to the same connection their
power of occupying the mental life, even dur
ing sleep. We can, indeed, have no doubt about
this: the unconscious impulse is the real cre
ator of
the dream, it provides the psychic
energy required for its formation. Just like any
other instinctual impulse it can do no other
than seek its own satisfaction, and our experi
ence in dream-interpretation shows us, more
over, that this is the meaning of all dreaming.
In every dream an instinctual wish is displayed
as fulfilled. The nightly cutting-off of mental
life from reality, and the regression to primitive
mechanisms which it makes possible, enable
this desired instinctual satisfaction to be ex
perienced in a hallucinatory fashion as actually
happening. On account of the same process of
regression, ideas are turned into visual pictures
in the dream; the latent dream-thoughts are,
that is to say, dramatized and iUustrated.
From this piece of dream-work we obtain
information about some of the most striking
and peculiar characteristics of the dream. Let
me repeat the stages of dream-formation. The
introduction: the wish to sleep, the voluntary
withdrawal from the outside world. Two things
follow from this: firstly, the possibility for
older and more primitive modes of activity to
manifest themselves, i.e., regression; and, sec
ondly, the decrease of the repression-resistance
which weighs on the unconscious. As a result of
this latter feature, an opportunity for dream-

[814b]
formation presents itself, which is seized upon
by the factors which are the occasion of the
dream; that is to say, the internal and external
stimuli which are in activity. The dream which
thus eventuates is already a compromise-for
mation; it has a double function: it is on the
one hand in conformity with the ego (egosyntonic), since it subserves the wish to sleep
by draining off the stimuli which would other
wise disturb it, while on the other hand it
allows to a repressed impulse the satisfaction
which is possible in these circumstances in the
form of an hallucinatory wish-fulfilment. The
whole process of dream-formation, which is
permitted by
the sleeping ego, is, however,
under the control of the censorship, a control
which is exercised by what is left of the forces
of repression. I cannot explain the process more
simply; it is not in itself simpler than that.
But now I can proceed with the description of
the dream-work.
Let us go back once more to the latent
dream-thoughts. Their dominating element is
the repressed impulse, which has obtained some
kind of expression, toned down and disguised
though it may be, by associating itself with
stimuH which happen to be there and by tack
ing itself on the residue of the day before. Just
like any other impulse this one presses forward
toward satisfaction in action, but the path to
motor discharge is closed to it on account of
the physiological characteristics of the state of -
sleep, and so it is forced to travel in the retro
grade direction to perception, and content itself
with an hallucinatory satisfaction. The latent
dream-thoughts are therefore turned into a
collection of sensory images and visual scenes.
As they are travelling in this direction some
thing happens to them which seems to us new
and bewildering. All the verbal apparatus by
means of which the more subtle thought-re
lations are
expressed,
the conjunctions and
prepositions, the variations of declension and
conjugation, are lacking, because the means of
portraying them are absent: just as in primi
tive, grammarless speech, only the raw material
of thought can be expressed, and the abstract
is merged again in the concrete from which it
sprang. What is left over may very well seem
to lack coherence. It is as much the result of
the archaic regression in the.mental apparatus
as of the demands of: the. censorship that so
much use is made of the representation of
certain objects and processes by means of sym
bols which have become strange to conscious
thought. But of more far-reaching import are

[815a]
814
Sigmund
the other alterations to which the elements
comprising the dream-thoughts are subjected.
Such of them as have any point of contact are
condensed into new unities. When the thoughts
are translated into pictures, those forms are
indubitably preferred which allow of this kind
of telescoping, or condensation; it is as though
a force were at work which subjected the mate
rial to a process of pressure or squeezing to
gether. As a result of condensation, one element
in a manifest dream may correspond to a num
ber of elements of the dream-thoughts; but,
conversely, one of the elements from among
the dream-thoughts may be represented by a
number of pictures in the dream.
Even more remarkable is the other process
of displacement or transference
of accent,
which in conscious thinking figures only as an
error in thought or as a method employed in
jokes. For the individualideas which make up
the dream-thoughts are not all of equal value;
they have various degrees of affective-tone at
tached to them, and corresponding to these,
they are judged as more or less important, and
more or lessworthy of attention. In the dreamwork these ideas are separated from their
affects; the affects are treated separately. They
may be transferred to somethingelse, they may
remain where they were, they may undergo
transformation, or they may disappear from
the dream entirely. The importance of the ideas
which have been shorn of their affect reappears
in the dream in the form of the sensuous vivid
ness of the dream-pictures; but we notice that
this
accent, which should lie on important
elements, has been transferred to unimportant
ones, so that what seems to be pushed to the
forefront in the dream, as the most important
element in it, only plays a subsidiary role in the
dream-thoughts, and, conversely, what is im
portant among the dream-thoughts obtainsonly
incidental and rather indistinct representation
in the dream. No other factor in the dreamwork plays such an important part in rendering
the dream strange and unintelligible to the
dreamer. Displacement is the chief method
employed in the process of dream-distortion,
which the dream-thoughts have
to undergo
under the influence of the censorship.
After these operations on the dream-thoughts,
the dream is almost ready. There is still, how
ever, a more or less non-constant factor, the
so-called secondary elaboration, that makes its
appearance after the dream has come into con
sciousness as an object of perception. When
the dream has come into consciousness, we

[815b]
Freud
treat it in exactly the same way that we treat
any content of perception; we try to fill in the
gaps, we add connecting links, and often enough
we let ourselves in for serious misunderstand
ings. But this, as it were, rationalizing activity,
which at its best provides the dream with a
smooth fagade, such as cannot correspond to its
real content, may be altogether absent in some
cases, or only operate in a very feeble way, in
which case the dream displays to view all its
gaps and inconsistencies. On the other hand,
one must not forget that the dream-work, too,
does not always
function with equal force;
quite often it limits its activity to certain parts
of the dream-thoughts, while others are allowed
to come into the dream unaltered. In this event,
one has the impression that one has carried out
the most complicated and subtle intellectual
operations during the dream, that one has made
brilliant speculations or jokes, or that one has
come to decisions or solved problems; really,
however, all this is the result of our normal
mental activity, and may just as well have
happened during the day before the dream as
during the night. It has nothing to do with the
dream-work, nor does it display any feature
which is characteristic of dreams. It is perhaps
not superfluous once more to emphasise the
distinction which subsists among the dreamthoughts themselves, between the unconscious
impulse and the residues of the preceding day.
While the latter exhibit the whole variety of our
mental activity, the former, which is the real
motive force of the dream, always finds its
outlet in a wish-fulfilment.
I could have told you all that fifteen years
ago; in fact I actually did teU it you at the
time. Now let us bring together such modifica
tions and new discoveries as have been made
during the interval.
I have already told you that I am afraid you
will find that there is very little to say; so you
will not understand why I have obHged you to
listen to the same thing twice over, and have
obHged myself to say it. But fifteen years have
passed, and I hoped that in this way I might
most easily re-establish contact with you. And
indeed these elementary matters are of such
decisive importance for the understanding of
psycho-analysis that it is a good thing to hear
them for a second time, and the very fact that
they have remained the same after fifteen years
is in itself something worth knowing.
You will naturally find in the Hterature of
these years a great deal of confirmatory mate
rial and exposition of details, of which I only

[816a]
New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis
815
intend to give you examples. I can also add to
this a certain amount that was already known
before. Most of it has to do with symbolism
and the other methods of representation in
dreams. Only quite recently the physicians at
an American university refused to allow that
psycho-analysis was a science, on the ground
that it admits of no experimental proof. They
might have raised the same objection against
astronomy; experimentation with the heavenly
bodies is, after all, exceedingly difficult. There
one has to rely on observation. Nevertheless,
certain Viennese
investigators have made a
start on the experimental confirmation of our
theory
of
dream-symbolism.
Dr.
Schrotter
discovered as long ago as 1912 that when one
orders a deeply hypnotized person to dream of
sexual activities, the sexual material in
the
dream that is thus provoked is represented by
the symbols which are familiar to us. For ex
ample, a woman is told to dream of sexual
intercourse with a lady friend of hers. In her
dream the friend appears with a travelling-bag,
which has a label pasted on it: "Ladies only."
Even more impressive are the experiments of
Betlheim and Hartmann (1924), who worked
with
patients
suffering
from
the
so-called
Korsakow's syndrome. They told the patient
stories with a crude sexual content, and then
noted the distortions which appeared when he
was asked to
reproduce what he had heard.
Here again the symbols with which we are
familiar as standing for the sexual organs and
sexual intercourse cropped up, and among them
the symbol of a staircase, with regard to which
the authors very properly observe that it would
be inaccessible to
a
conscious intention
to
distort.
Silberer performed a very interesting series
of experiments in which he showed that one
can surprise the dream-work, as it were, in
flagrante delicto, and see how it translates the
abstract thoughts into visual pictures. When
he tried to force himself, in a very tired and
sleepy condition, to perform an
intellectual
task, the thought itself would escape him, and
in its place would come a visual image, which
was often a substitute for it.
Here is a simple example. The thought which
Silberer set before himself was that he must
smooth out an uneven passage in an article.
His visual image was that he saw himself plan
ing a piece of wood. It often happened in these
experiments that it was not the idea which was
awaiting elaboration that formed the content
of the visual image, but his own state of mind

[816b]
while he was trying to make the effort—the
subjective condition rather than the objective
content. This Silberer calls a functional phe
nomenon. An example will easily show you what
is meant. The author is trying to make a com
parison between the views of two philosophers
about some problem, but in his drowsiness one
of these views is always escaping him, and
finally he has a vision of himself asking infor
mation of a cross-grained secretary, who is
leaning over his desk and disregards him at
first and then looks at him with a disagreeable
expression, as if he would like to send him
about his business. It is probably due to the
conditions of the experiment itself that the
visual images which are aroused in this way so
often represent introspective material.
Let us consider symbols a little longer. There
were some which we thought we had grasped,
but about which we were nevertheless troubled
because we could give no account of how that
particular symbol got its particular meaning.
In such cases any confirmation we could get
from other sources, from philology, folklore,
mythology or ritual, was particularly welcome.
An example of this kind was the symbol of a
cloak. We held that in a woman's dream a
cloak stood for a man. I hope now you will be
impressed when you hear that Reik (1920) tells
us: "In the ancient marriage ceremony of the
Bedouins, the bridegroom covers the bride with
a special cloak which is called an 'aba,' and at
the same time utters the ritual words: 'Let no
man in the future cover thee but me'" (from
Robert Eisler, Weltenmantel und Himmelszelt).
We have also discovered a great many new
symbols, of which I wiUgive you two examples.
According to Abraham (1922), a spider in a
dream is a symbol of the mother; but it means
the phallic mother, whom one fears, so that
the fear of the spider expresses the horror of
incest with the mother and the abhorrence felt
towards the female genitals. You know, perhaps,
that the mythological figure of the Medusa's
head is to be traced back to the same motif of
castration-fear. The other symbol of which I
should like to
speak is
the symbol of
the
bridge. Ferenczi has explained it (1921-1922).
It stands originally for the male genital organ,
which connects the parents with each other
during sexual intercourse; but it.develops into
a wider set of meanings, which spring out of
the first. Since the male genital organ is respon
sible for the fact that one can emerge from the
waters of birth into the world, the bridge de
picts the passage from Yonder (not-yet-born-

[817a]
8i6
Sigmund Freud
ness, the womb) to Here (life), and since
mankind also represents death as the return
into the mother's womb (into the water), the
symbol of the bridge gets the meaning of some
thing that brings
about death;
and finally,
further removed from its original meaning, it
indicates transition, or any change of condition
whatever. That is why a woman who has not
yet overcome her desire to be a man so fre
quently dreams of bridges which are too short
to reach the other side.
Very often pictures and situations appear in
the manifest content of the dream which re
mind one of well-known themes from
fairy
stories, legends and myths. The interpretation
of such dreams throws light on the original
motives which created these themes, though
naturally we must not forget the change of
meaning which this material has undergone
during the passage of time. Our work of inter
pretation uncovers what one might call the raw
material, which often enough may be regarded
as sexual in the broadest sense of the word, but
which has found the most varied application in
later elaborations. When we trace things back
like this, we very often arouse the rage of all
investigators who do not share the analytical
point of view, as though we were seeking to
deny or underestimate all the later develop
ments which the raw material has undergone.
None the less, such ways of looking at things
are instructive and interesting. The same is
true of the tracing back of various motifs of
plastic art—as, for example, when J. Eisler
(1919), guided by the dreams of his patients,
interprets analyticaUy the young man playing
with a little boy, portrayed in the Hermes of
Praxiteles. Finally, I cannot help mentioning
how often mythological themes find their ex
planation
through dream-interpretation. The
story of the Labyrinth, for example, is found
to be a representation of anal birth; the tor
tuous paths are the bowels, and the thread of
Ariadne is the umbiHcal cord.
The method of representation which
the
dream-work adopts, a fascinating and almost
inexhaustible subject, is constantly becoming
better known to us as we study it more closely.
I will give you a few proofs of this. The notion
of frequency,
for instance,
is expressed in
dreams
by means
of the
multiplication
of
similars. Listen to this remarkable dream of a
young girl. She goes into a hall and finds there
a person sitting on a chair; this figure is re
peated six times, eight times, and even more,
but every time the person is her father. This

[817b]
can easily be understood when one learns from
the additional features which emerged in in
terpretation that the room represents the womb.
The dream then becomes equivalent to
the
familiar fantasy of the young girl who believes
that she met her father during her intra-uterine
life, when he visited the womb
during her
mother's pregnancy. The fact that an element
in the dream is turned the wrong way round,
that the act of entry is transferred from the
father to the dreamer herself, should not lead
you astray; it has indeed a special meaning of
its own. The multiplication of the father image
can only mean that the procedure in question
was frequently repeated. But then the dream
always turns temporal relations into spatial
ones whenever it has to deal with them. Thus,
one may see in a dream a scene between people
who look very small and far away, as if one
were looking at them through the wrong end
of a pair of opera glasses. The smallness and
the spatial remoteness here mean the same; it
is remoteness in time that is meant, the inter
pretation being that it is a scene from the far
distant past. Besides this, you may remember
that in my previous lectures I showed you,
with the help of examples, that we had learnt
to make use even of the purely formal charac
teristics of the manifest dream for purposes of
interpretation; that is to say, to turn them into
the content of the latent dream-thoughts. Now
you know, of course, that all the dreams of one
night belong to the same context; but it is by
no means
immaterial whether these dreams
appear to
the dreamer as a continuum, or
whether they are organized in several pieces,
and if so in how many. The number of pieces
often corresponds to the same number of dis
tinct nodal points in the chain of thoughts,
which make up the latent dream-thoughts; or
it may correspond to forces in the mental life
of the dreamer which are struggling with one
another, and
each of which
finds
its main
(though not its exclusive) expression in one
particular part of the dream. A short introduc
tory dream and a long main dream often stand
to each other in the relation of condition and
consequence; of this you will find a very clear
example in the old lectures. A dream which the
dreamer describes as "somehow interpolated"
really corresponds to a dependent clause in the
dream-thoughts. Franz Alexander in his essay
on
pairs of
dreams
that not
infrequently
two dreams which occur on the same night
play separate parts in the fulfilment of the
dream-function, so that taken together they

[818a]
New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis
817
provide a wish-fulfilment in two steps, a thing
which each alone does not do. If a dream-wish
has as its content some piece of forbidden be
haviour towards a certain individual, then that
person may appear in the first dream undis
guised
while the
behaviour is
only
faintly
indicated. In the second dream it will be the
other way round. The behaviour will be openly
shown, but the person will be made unrecog
nizable, or else some indifferent person will be
substituted for him. It must be admitted that
this gives one an impression of deliberate art
fulness. A second and similar relation between
two members of a pair of dreams is that in
which the one represents the punishment and
the other the sinful wish-fulfilment. It is just as
if one said: "If I take the punishment on my
self, then I can do the forbidden thing."
I must not detain you longer with such
discoveries of matters of detail, nor with dis
cussions of the uses of dream-interpretation in
analytic work. I am sure you are impatient to
hear what alterations have been made in our
basic attitude towards the nature and-meaning
of dreams. You will be prepared to hear that
there is little to tell. The most hotly disputed
point of the^whole theory was undoubtedly the
assertion that all dreams are wish-fulfilments.
The inevitable and
ever-recurrent
objection
from the laity that there are so many anxietydreams has already been completely answered,
I think, in my earlier lectures. We have kept
our theory intact by dividing
dreams into
wish-dreams, anxiety-dreams, and punishmentdreams.
Even punishment-dreams arewish-fulfilments,
but they do not fulfil the wishes of the instinc
tual impulses, but those of the critical, censur
ing, and punishing function of the mind. If we
are faced with a pure punishment-dream, a
simple mental operation will enable us to re
instate the wish-dream to which the punish
ment-dream
was
the
proper
rejoinder;
on
account of this repudiation, the punishmentdream has appeared in place of the wish-dream
as the manifest one. You know, ladies and
gentlemen, that the study of dreams was the
first thing that helped us to understand the
neuroses. And you wiU not be surprised to hear
that our subsequent knowledge of the neuroses
has influenced our conception of the dream. As
you will learn presently, we have been forced
to assume the existence in the mind of a special
criticizing and forbidding function which we
call the super-ego. Since we have now recognized
the dream-censorship as an activity of this

[818b]
function, we have been led to consider the part
which the super-ego plays in dream-formation
in greater detail.
Only two serious difficulties face the wishfulfilment theory of dreams, the examination
of which leads us far afield and for which we
have found no completely satisfactory solution.
The first difficulty is presented by the fact
that people who have had severe shocks or who
have gone through serious psychic traumas
(such as were frequent during the war, and
are also found to lie at the back of traumatic
hysteria) are continually being put back into
the traumatic situation in dreams. According
to our acceptation of the function of dreams,
this ought not to be the case. What conative
impulse could possibly be satisfied by this re
instatement of a most painful traumatic ex
perience? It is indeed hard to guess. We meet
with
the second
fact almost
daily
in our
analytical work; it does not involve such a
serious objection as the other. You know that
it is one of the tasks of psycho-analysis to lift
the veil' of amnesia which shrouds the earliest
years of childhood and to bring the expressions
Of infantile sexual life which are hidden behind
it into conscious memory. Now these first sex
ual experiences of the child are bound up with
painful impressions of anxiety,
prohibition,
disappointment,
and
punishment
One
can
understand why they have been repressed; but,
if so, it is difficult to see why they should have
such easy access to dream-life, why they should
provide the pattern for so many dream-phan
tasies, and why dreams are full of reproductions
of these infantile scenes and allusions to them.
The pain that attaches to them and the wishfulfilling tendency of the dream-work would
seem to be incompatible. But perhaps in this
case we exaggerate the difficulty. All the im
perishable and unrealizable desires which proVide the energy for the formation of dreams
throughout one's whole life are bound up with
these same childish experiences, and one can
well trust to their abiHty with their powerful
upward thrust to force even material of a pain
ful nature to the surface. And, on the other
hand, in the manner in which this material is
reproduced the efforts of the dream-work are
unmistakable;
it disowns pain by means of
distortion and turns disappointment into ful
filment. In the case of the traumatic neuroses
it is quite different; here the dream habitually
ends in anxiety. In my opinion we ought not to
shirk the admission that in
such
cases
the
function of the dream
fails. I will not have

[819a]
8i8
Sigmund Freud
recourse to the saying that the exception proves
the rule; the validity of this phrase seems to
me very dubious. But at any rate the exception
does not do away with the rule. If for the pur
poses of investigation one isolates from every
other mental process a single psychic activity
like the dream, one is enabled to discover the
laws which govern it; if one then puts it back
into its place, one must be prepared to find
that one's discoveries are obscured and inter
fered with when they come into contact with
other forces. We assert that the dream is a
wish-fulfilment; in order to take these last
objections into account, you may say that the
dream is an attempted wish-fulfilment. But for
those who
have
an understanding
for the
dynamics of the mind you will not be saying
anything different. Under certain conditions
the dream can only achieve its end in a very
incomplete way, or has to abandon it entirely;
an unconscious fixation to the trauma seems
to head the list of these obstacles to the dreamfunction. The sleeper has to dream, because
the nightly relaxation of repression allows the
upward thrust of the traumatic fixation to be
come active; but sometimes his dream-work,
which endeavours to change the memory traces
of the traumatic event into a wish-fulfilment,
fails to operate. In these circumstances, the
result is that one becomes sleepless; one gives
up all idea of sleep becauseof one's fear of the
failure of the dream-function. The traumatic
neurosis is an extreme case, but one must also
attribute a traumatic character to infantile ex
periences as well; so one need not be surprised
if lesser disturbances of the function of the
dream occur in other circumstances.
LECTURE 30
Dreams and the Occult
Ladies and Gentlemen: Today we are to
travel along a narrow path, but it may lead us
to a wide prospect.
When you hear that I am going to talk about
the connection between dreams and the occult,
you need hardly feel surprised. Dreams are in
deed often regarded as the portal to the world
of mysticism, and even today seem to many to
be in themselves an occult phenomenon. Even
we, who have made them an object of scientific
study, cannot deny that several strands link
them up with those obscure regions. Mysticism
—occultism—what is meant by these terms?
Do not imagine that I shall attempt to provide
you with a clear definition of such hazy con

[819b]
cepts. In a general and vague way we all know
what we mean by the terms. They refer to a
kind of "other world" which lies beyond the
clear world, with its inexorable laws, which
science has built up for us.
Occultism assumes that
there are in fact
more things in heaven and
earth than are
dreamt of in our philosophy. Well, we need not
be tied down by the narrow-mindedness of the
Schools; we are ready to beHeve whatever is
made plausible to us.
We intend to treat these things in just the
same way as we treat any other material for
scientific investigation. First, we have to estab
lish whether these processes really occur, and
then, but only then, when there is no doubt as
to their actuality, we can set about their ex
planation. But we cannot hide from ourselves
the fact that even the first step will be made
difficult for us by intellectual, psychological,
and historical factors. It is by no means the
same as when we start on any other investi
gation.
Let us consider the intellectual difficulties
first. Allow me to give you a crude, obvious
explanation of what I mean. Supposing we are
dealing with the constitution of the interior of
the earth. Admittedly we know nothing certain
about it. We suppose that it consists of heavy
metals in a molten condition. Now let us imag
ine that some one asserts that the interior of
the earth is made of water impregnated with
carbonic acid; that is to say, a kind of sodawater. We shall certainly say that it is very
improbable, that it runs counter to all our ex
pectations, and that it does not take into con
sideration the scientific data which have led
us to put forward the mental hypothesis. But
for all that it is not unthinkable. If any one
shows us the way to prove the soda-water
hypothesis, we shall follow it without any resistence. But now another person comes along
who seriously asserts that the centre of the
earth is made of jam. We shall behave quite
differently towards his theory. We shall say to
ourselves that jam is not a product of Nature
but of human cookery; moreover, the existence
of that material presupposes the presence of
fruit-trees and their fruit, and we cannot see
our way to placing vegetation and human cook
ery in the centre of the earth. The result of
this intellectual objection will be a diversion
of our interests; instead of their being directed
on to the investigation itself, as to whether the
interior of the earth is really made of jam or
not, we shall wonder what kind of man it must

[820a]
New Introductory.Lectures onJPsycho-Analysis
819
be who can get such an idea into his heap!, or
at the most we shaU ask him where he got the
idea from.
The unfortunate inventor of the
jam hypothesis wiUbe very much offended, and
will complain that we are refusing to consider
an objective evaluation of this theory out of
what he calls scientific prejudice. But his com
plaints will be in vain. Prejudices, we feel, are
pot always to be deplored, but are sometimes
justified; and they are useful in saving us
unnecessary trouble. They are, indeed, nothing
more than conclusions drawn by analogy from
other weH-founded judgments.
A whole number of occult theories make the
same impression on us as the jam theory, so
that we feel justified in putting them aside at
the outset without testing them. But it is not
quite such a simple matter. An analogy such as
I have suggested—like all analogies—proves
nothing. In any case it is doubtful whether it
is a fair analogy, and it is obvious that it was
our attitude of scornful rejection which in the
first
instance
determined
our
choice
of it.
Prejudices are very often useful and justified,
but sometimes they are erroneous and harmful,
and one never knows when they will be the one
or the other. The history of science is full of
examples which should warn us against too
hasty a condemnation. For a long time it was
thought to be an absurd thesis that the stones
which we now
caH
meteorites
should have
reached the
earth from outer space, or that
mountains, the rocks bf which contain remains
of shells, should once have formed the bed of
the sea. And, after aU, not so very different a
fate befeU our psycho-analysis itself, when it
brought forward the discovery of the uncon
scious. We analysts, therefore, have special
reason to be cautious in making use of intellec
tual arguments in the rejection of new theories,
and we must recognize that such arguments
will not put us beyond the reach of feelings of
aversion, doubt, and uncertainty.
I caUed the second factor psychological. By
that I meant the general human inclination to
wards creduHty and belief in the marvellous.
From the very beginning, when Hfe imposes its
stern discipline upon us, there grows up in us
a resistance against the restlessness and mo
notony of the laws of thought, and against the
need for putting things to the test of reaHty.
Reason becomes an enemy that keeps us from
so many possibilities of pleasure. One discovers
what a joy it is to escape from it at least for a
moment, and give oneself up to the fascination
of irrationaHty. The schoolboy amuses himself

[820b]
by making up ridiculous plays on words, the
specialist makes fun of his own work after a
scientific congress, and even the serious-minded
man enjoys an occasional joke. More serious
antagonism
against "Wisdom
and
Science,
man's most prized powers," awaits its oppor
tunity; it is eager to prefer the miracle-man
or the natural healer to the trained.doctor, it
makes us warm towards the theories of the
occult, so long as its reputed facts can be taken
as breaches of law and rule. It puts our critical
faculty to sleep, falsifies our perception, and
forces us to confirm and agree without real
justification. Any one who takes these human
weaknesses into consideration has every reason
to discount the value of much of. the infor
mation contained in occult literature.
In
referring to
the third obstacle as the
historical one I had in mind the
fact that
nothing new is to be found in the world of the
occult. On the contrary, we meet igain in it
with all the signs, wonders, prophecies, and
apparitions which have been handed down to
us from remote ages and in old books, and
which we long ago thought we had done with
as being the offspring of unbridled imagination
or tendentious fraud, the product of a time
when the ignorance of mankind was at its height
and when the scientific spirit was still in its
infancy. If we accept as true what we are told
by the occultists of our own day, then we must
be prepared to befieve the accounts which have
come down to us from the past. And then we
remember that the traditions and sacred books
of aU races are packed with such marvels, and
that reHgions base their claim to credibility
precisely on such extraordinary and wondrous
happenings, and find in them the proof of the
operation of superhuman forces. At this point
it is hard for us to avoid the suspicion that
occult interests are really religious ones, and
that it is one of the secret motives of the occult
ist movements to come to the aid of refigious
belief, threatened as it is by the progress of
scientific thought. The discovery of a motive
of this kind cannot fail to increase our mistrust
and our disincHnation to embark upon an in
vestigation of these so-called occult phenomena.
But this disinclination must be overcome.
The whole thing is really a question of fact: is
what the occultists tell us true or not? It must
be possible to decide this by observation. Au
fond, we ought to be grateful to the occultists.
The tales of wonderful happenings which have
come down to us from ancient days are beyond
our powers of testing. If we say that they can-

[821a]
820
Sigmund Freud
not be proved, we must at least admit that,
strictly speaking,, they cannot
be disproved.
But about what happens in the present, about
things which we can actually witness, we ought
to be able to reach a definite conclusion. If we
are convinced that such wonders do not occur
nowadays, we need not fear the objection that
they might have occurred in days gone by.
Other explanations wiUthen be far more plaus
ible. We have, then, put aside our scruples and
are ready to take part in the observation of
occult phenomena.
Unfortunately, we come up against consider
ations which are highly unfavourable to our
laudable intentions. The observations on which
our judgments must depend have to be made
under conditions which render,our powers of
perception insecure, and which blunt our fac
ulty of attention; the phenomena take place in
the dark or in the faint glimmer of a red light
after long periods of fruitless waiting. We are
told that even our sceptical—that is to say,
our critical—attitude may very weU prevent
the hoped for phenomena from manifesting
themselves. The situation which thus arises is
simply a caricature of the conditions under
which.we are used to carrying out scientific h>
vestigations. The observations are made on
so-caUed mediums, persons to whom are as
cribed special "sensitive" gifts, who, however,
do not display outstanding quaHties of inteUigence or character, and who are not moved, as
the old wonder-workers were, by some great
idea or by some serious purpose. On the con
trary, they are
regarded as particularly un
trustworthy even by the people who believe in
their mysterious powers; most of them have
already been unmasked as frauds, and we are
tempted to expect that the: same will happen
with the rest as well. Their performances re
mind us of the mischievous pranks of a child
or of a conjuror's tricks. Nothing of any value
has so far ever come out of these siances with
mediums; no new source of energy has become
accessible to us. And, to be sure, one does not
expect
any
advances in
our knowledge
of
pigeon-breeding from the tricks of a conjuror
who produces pigeons out of an empty top-hat.
I can easily put myself into the position of a
nian who wishes to fulfil the demands: of objec
tivity and therefore takes part in these occult
sSances, but tires of them after a while, and,
put off by what is required of him, gives up the
whole business and returns to his prejudices
no wiser than before. To such a man one might
object that his behaviour is not right, and that

[821b]
if one is going to investigate phenomena one
cannot decide beforehand of what nature they
shall be and under what conditions they shall
manifest themselves. It is, on the contrary, his
business to persevere and form some estimate
of the precautionary measures of control which
are used nowadays as a protection against the
untrustworthiness of mediums. Unfortunately*
the modern control technique puts an end to
the easy accessibility of occult observations.
The study of the occult has become.a special
ized and difficult pursuit, a form of activity
which one cannot carry on side by side with
one's other interests. And until the investiga
tors who have given their minds to it have
come to some conclusion, one is. necessarily
given
over
to
doubts
and
to
one's
own
conjectures.
Among these conjectures the most probable
is, I think, that in occultism there is a core of
facts which have hitherto not been recognized,
and round which fraud and phantasy have wo
ven a veil which it is hard to penetrate. But
how can we even approach this core? at what
point can we grasp the problem? It is here, it
seems to me, that the dream comes to our aid
by suggesting to us that we should pick out the
theme of telepathy from all the confused ma
terial that surrounds it.
You know that by telepathy we mean the
alleged fact that an event which occurs at a
specific time comes more or less simultaneously
into the consciousness of a person who is spa
tially distant, without any of the known meth
ods, of communication coming into play. The
tacit assumption is that this event occurs to a
person, in whom the receiver of the message has
some strong emotional interest. Thus, for exam
ple, a person A has an accident, or dies, and a
person B, some one closely connected with A, his
mother or daughter or loved one, learns of it
at about the time of its occurrence through a
visual or auditory perception; in the latter case
it is as though they were in telephonic com
munication, which, however, they are not; in
fact, it is a kind of psychic parallel to wireless
telegraphy. I need not emphasize to you the
improbability of such processes, and anyway
there are good grounds for rejecting the majors
ity of such reports. Some of them are left over
which cannot be rejected so easily. I must now
ask you to allow me to leave out the precau
tionary word:alleged for the purposes of what I
have to tell you, and to let .me continue, as
though I believed in the objective; reaHty of
telepathic, phenomena. But you must remember

[822a]
New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis
821
aU the time that this is not the case, that I have
not committed myself to any conclusion on
the subject.
As a matter of fact I have but little to tell
you—only one modest fact. And I will further
diminish your expectations by informing you
that fundamentally the dream has but little to
do with telepathy. Telepathy throws no new
light on the nature of the dream, nor does the
dream bear witness for the reality of telepathy.
Telepathic phenomena are also by no manner
of means confined to dreams; they can also
manifest themselves during waking life. The
only ground for mentioning the connection be
tween dreams and telepathy is that the condi
tion of sleep seems to be especially suitable for
the reception of telepathic communications. If,
then, one comes across a so-called telepathic
dream, one can convince oneself by its analysis
that the telepathic message has
played
the
same role as any other residue of waking life,
and as such has been altered by the dream-work
and made to serve its purpose.
Now in the course of the analysis of a tele
pathic dream of this kind something occurred
which seems to me of sufficient importance, in
spite of its slightness, to serve as the startingpoint for this lecture. When in the year 1922
I brought up this subject for the first time, I
had only one observation at my disposal. Since
then I have made several other observations;
but I shall keep to the first example, because it
is the easiest one to describe, and I shaU pro
ceed at once to the heart of the matter.
An obviously inteUigent man, and one who
according to his own estimation, was in no
way "tainted with occultism" wrote to me
about a
dream which seemed to him to be
remarkable. He prefaced his story with the
information that his married daughter, who
lived some distance from him, was expecting
her first confinement in the middle of Decem
ber. He was very much devoted to this daugh
ter, and he knew that she was very much at
tached to him. Now he dreamed in the night
between the 16th and 17th of November that
his wife had had twins. There followed sev
eral details which I can pass over here, not all
of which have found a satisfactory explanation.
The woman who, in the dream, had become
the mother of the twins, was his second wife,
the daughter's step-mother. He did not wish
to have children by this woman, whom he did
not consider fitted for bringing up children in
an understanding way, and at the time of the
dream he had for a long time given up sexual

[822b]
intercourse with her. What induced him
to
write to me was not a doubt about the vafidity
of the theory of dreams, though the manifest
dream would have justified him if that had
been the case; for why does the dream, in flat
contradiction to his wishes, depict this woman
as bearing children? And according to his story
he had no grounds for fearing that this unwished-for occurrence might take place. What
determined him to tell me about his dream was
the fact that early in the morning of November
18th he received a telegram to say that his
daughter had given birth to twins. The telegram
had been handed in the day before, and the
birth had taken place during the night between
the 16th and 17th, at about the same time that
he had dreamt that his wife had had twins. The
dreamer asked me whether I thought that the
simultaneity of the dream and the event was a
mere coincidence. He did not go so far as to call
the dream a telepathic one, because the differ
ence between the content of the dream and the
event itself concerned precisely what he con
sidered to be the most important point, the
person who had the children. But from one of
his remarks it looked as though he would not
have been surprised if he had had a real tele
pathic dream. His daughter, he felt certain, had
"thought especially about him" during labour.
Ladies and Gentlemen, I am sure that you
can already explain the dream, and that you
understand why I have told it to you. Here is
a man, dissatisfied with his second wife, who
would prefer to have a wife like his daughter
by his first marriage. In the unconscious this
like is naturally omitted. Now during the night
he receives the telepathic communication that
his daughter has had twins. The dream-work
seizes on this information, allows his uncon
scious wish that his daughter should replace
his second wife to act upon it, and thus emerges
the singular manifest dream in which the wish
itself is veiled and the message distorted. We
must admit that only dream-interpretation has
shown us that this is a telepathic dream; psy
cho-analysis has discovered a telepathic event
which we should not otherwise have recognized
as such.
But do not let yourselves be led astray. In
spite of all this, dream-interpretation has said
nothing about the objective truth of telepathic
phenomena. It may
be
only an appearance
which can be explained in some other way. It
is possible that the man's latent dream-thoughts
ran like this: "Today is the day on which the
confinement must take place, if my daughter,

[823a]
822
Sigmund Freud
as I incidentally beHeve is the case, has been
a month out in her calculations. And her ap
pearance when I saw her last time was such
that it looked as though she was going to have
twins. And my dead wife was so fond of chil
dren: how delighted she would have been by
twins!" (The last point is derived from associ
ations of the dreamer which I have not yet
mentioned.) In that case the stimulus for the
dream would have been well-founded suspi
cions on the part of the dreamer and not a
telepathic message; the result would have been
the same in both cases. You notice that even
this interpretation has told us nothing about
the question of whether one should assign ob
jective reality to telepathy. One could only
come to a conclusion about that after making
detailed enquiries into all the circumstances of
the case, which unfortunately was impossible
with this example, as it was with aU the others
in my experience. We may grant that the as
sumption of telepathy gives us by far the
simplest explanation; but that does not carry
us very far. The simplest explanation is not
always the right one, truth is very often not
simple, and one must act with the greatest cau
tion before committing oneself to such a farreaching assumption.
We can now leave the subject of dreams and
telepathy; I have nothing more to say about
it. But I want you to notice that it was not
dreams that seemed to teach us something
about telepathy, but the interpretation of the
dreams, the psycho-analytic treatment of them.
We can therefore leave dreams on one side in
what follows, and we will examine further our
suspicion that the application of psycho-analy
sis may throw a fight on other so-called occult
facts. There is, for example, the phenomenon
of thought-transference, which is closely allied
to telepathy and, indeed, can be identified with
it without much difficulty. It is held that psy
chological processes, ideas, states of excitement,
volitions, which occur in the mind of
one
person, can be transferred through space to
another, without the usual means of commu
nication (words or signs) being employed. Inci
dentally, it is remarkable that it is actuaUy these
phenomenawhich find the least mention in the
old accounts of.the miraculous.
During the psycho-analytic treatment of pa
tients, I have had the impression that the ac
tivities of professional fortune-tellers provide
an admirable opportunity for making really
satisfactory observations of thought-transfer
ence. It is usually mediocre and even inferior

[823b]
people who carry on practices of this sort, deal
out cards, study writing and the lines upon
the hand, or make astrological reckonings, and
foretell the future of their visitors, after hav
ing shown some knowledge of their past or
present history. Their clients usually express
themselves as satisfied by their performances,
and bear them no ill-will if their prophecies do
not come true in the end.
I have come across
a great many such cases and have been able to
study them analytically. I will tell you the most
remarkable instances of the kind. Unfortu
nately the evidential value of this information
is reduced on account of the numerous omis
sions which are necessitated by the rules of
professional secrecy. I have, however, carefully
avoided any distortions. This is the story of
one of my female patients, who had an experi
ence of the kind we are discussing with a
fortune-teUer.
She was the eldest of a family of brothers
and sisters, grew up with an extraordinarily
strong attachment to her father, had married
young, and had found entire satisfaction in her
married life. There was only one thing wanting
to make her happiness complete; she was child
less, and thus the husband whom she loved
could not wholly fill the place of her father.
When after many years she decided to have a
gynaecologicaloperation, her husband disclosed
to her the fact that the fault lay in him, that
through an illness which had occurred before
marriage he had been rendered incapable of
procreating children. She took this disappoint
ment very badly, became neurotic, and suffered
unmistakably from dread of the husband's at
tempts. In order to cheer her up, her husband
took her with him on a business visit to Paris.
While they were there, they were sitting one
day in the hall of the hotel when she noticed a
stir among the hotel servants. She asked what
was happening, and learnt that Monsieur le
Professeur had arrived and was giving consul
tations in a certain room. She expressed her
wish to see what the thing was Hke herself. Her
husband tried to dissuade her, but when he was
not looking she slipped into the room where the
fortune-teller was giving his consultations. She
was twenty-seven years old, but looked much
younger, ^andwshe,had .taken off .her,weddingring. Monsieur le Professeur told her to rest
her hand on a bowl filled with ashes, carefully
studied the imprint, and, after telling her all
sorts of things about severe troubles which lay
before her, concluded with the comforting assur
ance that she would get married all the same

[824a]
and have two children by the time she was
thirty-two years of age. When she toldme this
story she was forty-three, veryill, and withno
expectation of ever having a child at aU. The
prophecy therefore had not come true, and yet
she spoke of it withnobitterness whatever, but
with an unmistakable expression of satisfac
tion, as though she were looking back with
pleasure upon a happy experience. It was easy
to assure oneself that she had not the slightest
idea what the two numbers in the prophecy
might mean, or whether they meant anything
at all.
You will saythat this is a stupidandincom
prehensible story, and ask why I have related
it to you. Now I should feel exactly as you do,
but for the fact—and this is the important
p0mt—that the analysis enabled us to obtain
an interpretation of the prophecy, which was
actually most significant when it came to the
details. For the two numbers have a place in
the life of the mother of my patient. She had
married late, when she was more than thirty,
and her family had often remarked how suc
cessful she had been in making up for lost time.
Her two first children—and our patient was
the elder of these—had been born within a sin
gle calendar year with the smallest possible
interval between them; and it was reaUy true
of her that by the time shewas thirty-twoshe
had two children.What Monsieur le Professeur
toldmy patient meant this: "Cheer up, for you
are still young! You will have the same experi
ence as your mother, who also had to wait a
long time for children, and you will have two
children by the time you are thirty-two."
But
to have
the
same experience as her
mother, to be in her position, to take her
place with her father, was the strongest wish
of her childhood, the wish whose non-fulfil
ment was beginning to make her ill. The
prophecy promised her that it would be ful
filled, how could she feel otherwise than friend
ly towards the prophet? But do youthink that
Monsieur le Professeur could really have been
familiar with the dates of the intimate family
history of a chance client? It is impossible;
whence, then, came theknowledge that enabled
him to express in his prophecy the strongest
and most secret wish of my patient by bringing
in these two numbers? I can see only two pos
sibilities. Either the story, as she told it to me,
was not true and the events were different, or
we must accept thought-transference as a real
phenomenon. It could, nodoubt, beargued that
my patient, after the lapse of sixteen years, had

[824b]
823
New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis
carried over the two numbers we are discussing
from her unconscious into her recollection. I
have no evidence for this suggestion, but I
cannot rule it out, and I imagine that you
would prefer to believe in such an explanation
rather than in the reality of thought-transfer
ence. If, however, you should accept the latter
view, do not forget that it was only analysis
that brought to Hght the occult element, which
had been distorted out of all recognition.
If we had to deal with only one case like that
of my patient, we should turn away from it
with a shrug of the shoulders. It would not
occur to any one to base a befief which has
such far-reaching implications on an isolated
observation. But I can assure you that this is
not the only case in my experience. I have col
lected a whole set of such prophecies, and I
have the impression that in every instance the
fortune-teUer has only given expression to the
thoughts, and particularly to the secret wishes,
of his clients; so that we are justified in ana
lysing such prophecies as if they were the sub
jective productions, phantasies, or dreams of
the people concerned. Naturally not all cases
have equal evidential value, nor in aU cases is
it equally possible to rule out more rational
explanations; but taking all the evidence to
gether there remains a heavy weight of probabifity in favour of the reafity...of-thought?
transference. The importance of the matter
would justify my putting all my cases before
you; but I cannot do that because the mate
rial would be of inordinate length and would
inevitably involve a breach of professional
secrecy. I wiU try to salve my conscience as
far as possible by giving you one or two more
examples.
One day a very intelligent young man came
to see me. He was a student, preparing for his
final medical examination; but he was not in a
condition to take it, because,as he complained,
he had lost all his interests, aU power of con
centration, and even the faculty of a wellordered memory.The history of this paralysing
condition was soon unravelled: he had fallen
iU after carrying through a line of conduct
which had necessitated great self-discipHne. He
had a sister towards whom he felt, just as she
did towards him, an intense but always-re
strained affection. They had often enough said
to each other: "What a shame it is that we
cannot marry!" An unobjectionable"man''had
faUen in love with the sister, and sne had re
turned his feeling, but her parents would not
give their consent tothe union. The couple had

[825a]
8*4
Sigmund Freud
turned to my patient for help, and he had not
refused it. He had enabled them to correspond
with each other, and it had been due to his
influence that the parents had eventually been
persuaded to give their consent. While they
were engaged, a chance occurrence had taken
place, whose significance it is easy to guess. He
and his future brother-in-law undertook a diffi
cult climb without a guide; they lost their way
and were in danger of never returning alive.
Shortly after the marriage of his sister he
had
fallen into his present state of mental
exhaustion.
When he had become able to work as
a
result of psycho-analysis, he left me to take
his examination; but after he had got through
it he came back to me in the autumn of the
same year for a short period. He then told me
of a remarkable experience which he had had
before the summer.
In his university town
there lived a fortune-teller, who carried on a
very successful practice there. Even the princes
of the reigning house used to consult her regu
larly before undertaking any important step.
The way in which she worked was very simple.
She asked for the facts concerning the birth of
the person involved, but wanted to know noth
ing else about him, not even his name. She
then consulted her astrological books, made
long calculations and in the end made a proph
ecy about him. My patient decided to make use
of her secret arts in connection with his broth
er-in-law. He visited her and gave her the req
uisite data about him. After she had made her
calculations
she
pronounced
the
following
prophecy: "This person will die in July or
August of this year of poison from eating crabs
or oysters." My patient finished his story by
explaining: "And that really was marvellous!"
From the very beginning, I had listened to
his story without enthusiasm; and after this
exclamation I permitted myself to ask: "What
is it that makes you find this prophecy so
marveUous? We have already reached the late
autumn, and your brother-in-law is not dead
yet, or you would have told me long ago: The
prophecy therefore has not come true." "The
prophecy—no," he said, "but the remarkable
thing is this. My brother-in-law is passionately
fond of crabs and oysters, and last summer,
that is to say before my visit to the fortune
teller, he was poisoned by eating oysters, and
nearly died of it." What could I say about it?
I could only feel distressed that such an intel
Hgent man,;and, moreover, one who had a sat
isfactory .analysis behind him, should not have

[825b]
seen through the whole thing more clearly. For
my part, before I believe that one can calculate
the onset of shellfish-poisoning by consulting
astrological tables, I would rather suppose that
my patient had not yet overcome his hatred
towards his rival, the repression of which had
caused his own illness, and that the lady astrol
oger simply gave voice to his own hope: "Peo
ple never give up such tastes, and one day they
will really be the end of him." I admit that I
can find no other explanation for this case,
except perhaps that my patient was making a
joke at my expense. But neither then nor later
didhe givemeany grounds for sucha suspicion,
and he seemed to mean quite seriously what
he said.
Here is another case. A young man of good
position had a mistress, and showed a remark
able obsession in his relations with her. From
time to time he was impelled to wound her feel
ings with insulting remarks till she was reduced
to despair. When he had got her into this con
dition he felt relieved, madeit up with her, and
gave her presents. But now he wanted to free
himself from her, for the obsession was becom
ing a worry to him: he noticed that his profes
sional life was suffering from the relationship,
and wanted to have a wife and family of his
own. Since, however, he could not get away
from his mistress by his ownefforts, he came to
analysis for help. After one of these scenes,
which occurred during the analysis, he got her
to write him a few words on a piece of paper
and showed it to a graphologist. The informa
tion he received from him was to the effect
that this was the handwriting,of a person in
the depths of despair, who would certainly
commit suicide in the course of the next few
days. That event did not indeed come about,
for the lady remained alive, but the analytical
treatment enabled him to free himself from his
fetters; he left the lady and turned his atten
tions to a young girl who he thought would
make him a good wife. Soon afterwards he had
a dream which could only be explained as due
to an incipient doubt about the young girl's
worth. He obtained a specimen of her hand
writing as well, which he placed before the
same authority, and received a judgment on it
which confirmed his anxieties. He therefore
gave up his intention of making her his wife.
To estimate the reports of the handwriting
expert, and particularly the first one, at their
proper value, one must know something of the
private history of our subject. In his earlyad
olescent years he was madly in love with a

[826a]
young woman, some years older than himself,
in the passionate way that was characteristic
of him. She rejected him, and he thereupon
attempted suicide; nor can we doubt the seri
ousness
of his intention. It was only by a
miracle that he escaped death, and it was only
after careful nursing that he recovered. But
this reckless act made a deep impression upon
the woman he was in love with; she responded
to his
attentions, and became his mistress.
From that time onwards he had a deep attach
ment to her, and served her in a truly devoted
manner. After more than two decades, when
they had both lost something of their youth,
the woman naturally more than he, he felt the
need of detaching himself from her; he wanted
to be free, to lead his own life, and to have a
house and family of his own. And at the same
time that he
felt this dissatisfaction, there
sprang up in him the long-suppressed need for
revenge upon her. Just as at first he had tried
to commit suicide himself, because she rejected
him, so now he wanted to have the satisfaction
of seeing her seek destruction because he was
leaving her. But his love was still too strong for
this wish to become conscious; nor was he able
to behave badly enough to her to drive her to
commit suicide. In this frame of mind, he took
on the mistress whom I first mentioned as a
kind of whipping-boy, in order to satisfy his
thirst for revenge in corpore vili, and inflicted
on her all the injuries calculated to produce in
her the effect he desired to produce in the
woman he loved. The fact that the revenge was
actually directed towards the latter was only
betrayed by the circumstances that he made
her a confederate and advisor in his love-affair,
instead of hiding his lapse from her. The un
fortunate woman, who had sunk from the posi
tion of giving favours
to that of receiving
them, probably suffered from his confidences
more than the new mistress did from his bru
tality/ The obsession of which he complained
in reference to the latter, and which brought
him under analytic treatment, had naturally
been -transferred from his first mistress to her;
it was from his first mistress that he wanted to
free himself and could not. I am no handwrit
ing expert, and I do not think much of the art
of guessing character from handwriting; still
less do I believe in the possibility of foretelling
the future of the writer in that way. You see,
however, that, whatever one may think of the
value of graphology, it is undeniable that the
expert, when he promised that the writer of the
specimen which had been brought to him would

[826b]
New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis
825
commit suicide during the next few days, had
once more only brought to light a very strong
secret wish on the part of the person who was
asking his opinion. Something similar happened
in the case of the second report, only that here
we are not
concerned
with an unconscious
wish; here it was the incipient doubts and
anxieties of the inquirer that found overt ex
pression through the mouth of the handwriting
specialist. I may add that my patient was able,
with the help of analysis, to make a love-choice
outside the magic circle within which he had
been speU-bound.
Ladies and Gentlemen—You have now heard
what dream-interpretation and psycho-analysis
in general can do for occultism. You have seen
by means of examples that, through the applica
tion of psycho-analytic theory, occult phenom
ena have been revealed which would otherwise
have
remained
unrecognized.
The
question
which doubtless interests you most, whether
we ought to believe in the objective reality of
the phenomena, is one which psycho-analysis
cannot answer directly; but at least the ma
terial which it has helped to bring to light is
favourable to an affirmative reply. But your
interest will not stop there. You will want to
know to what conclusion that far richer vein
of material, with
which psycho-analysis has
nothing whatever to do, leads us. There, how
ever, I cannot follow you; it is no longer my
province. The only thing I can do is to tell you
of some observations, which at any rate have
something to do with psycho-analysis in the
sense that they were made during analytical
treatment, and were perhaps rendered possible
by means of it. I willgive you one example,
the one which left the strongest impression with
me; it will be long-winded, and you will have
to keep a number of details in your minds, and
even so a great deal will have to be omitted
which increased the evidential value of the
observation. It is an instance in which the phe
nomena in which we are interested came to
light quite obviously and did not have to be
brought out by analysis. In discussing it, how
ever, we shall not be able to do without analy
sis. But I Ought to warn you beforehand that
even this example of apparent thought-trans
ference in the analytic situation is not proof
against all objections, and does not warrant
unconditional acceptance of the reaHty of oc
cult phenomena.
The story is this. One autumn,day in the
year 1919, at about 16.45 a.m., Dr. David
Forsyth, who had just arrived frorii Lqiddon,

[827a]
826
Sigmund Freud
sent in his card while I was working with a
patient. (My respected colleague from the Uni
versity of London will, I feel sure, not think I
am being indiscreet if I teU you that he came
to me for some months to be initiated into the
mysteries of psycho-analytical technique.)
I
had only time to say "How do you do?" and
arrange an appointment foT later on. Dr. For
syth had a special claim upon my interest; for
he was the first foreigner who came to me after
the isolation of the war years, and seemed to
be a harbinger of better times. Soon after this,
at eleven o'clock, my next patient arrived, a
Mr. P, an inteUigent and charming man of be
tween forty and fifty, who had come to me
because he experienced difficulties in sexual
intercourse with women. In his case there was
no prospect of bringing about a cure, and I had
long ago suggested that he should break off
the treatment; but he had preferred to con
tinue it, obviously because he felt comfortable
in a weU-tempered father-transference upon
myself. Money played no part at this time,
because there was too little of it about. The
hours I spent with him were stimulating for
me as weU, and a relaxation, and so, setting
aside the strict rules of medical etiquette, we
were going on with the analytic treatment for
a specified length of time.
On this particular day, P reverted to his at
tempts at sexual intercourse with women, and
mentioned oncemore the pretty, piquante girl,
in poor circumstances, with, whom he might
have been successful if only the fact of her
virginity had not frightened him off from tak
ing any serious steps. He had often spoken of
her, but that day he told me for the first time
that she, though naturally she had not the
slightest idea of the real grounds of his diffi
culty, used to call him Mr. Foresight (Vorsicht).
I was much struck by this piece of informa
tion; Dr. Forsyth's card was beside me, and
I showed it to him.
These are the facts. I dare say they will
seem to you to be rather thin; but if you will
have patience you will find that there is more
to come.
P had spent some years of his youth in Eng
land, and had retained a lasting interest in
English literature. He possessed a well-stocked
library of EngHsh books*.which he used to lend
me, and it is to him that I owe my acquaint
ance with authors such as Arnold Bennett and
Galsworthy, of whose works I had so far read
but little. One day he lent me a novel by Gals
worthy called The Man of Property, the sub

[827b]
ject of which is an imaginary family named
Forsyte. Galsworthy's imagination was obvi
ously captured by this creation of his, because
in the later stories he repeatedly went back to
members of this family, and eventuaUy col
lected all the stories which had to do with them
under the heading of The Forsyte Saga.Only a
few days-before the event I am telHng you
about, P had brought me a new volume out of
this series. The name Forsyte, and aU that it
typified for the author, had played a part in
my conversations with P; it had become a part
of the private language which so easily grows
up between two people who see each other
regularly. Now the name Forsyte out of the
novels is not very different from that of my
visitor Forsyth (as pronounced by a German,
indeed, they are hardly distinguishable), and
the expressive English word foresight, which
means Voraussicht or Vorsicht, would be pro
nounced in the same way. P had, therefore,
produced from his own personal experiences a
name that was in my mind at the same time
on account of a circumstance quite unknown
to him.
As you see, we are making some progress.
But I think we shall be even more strongly
impressed by this remarkable occurrence and
get some sort of insight into the condition of
its origin, if we turn the light of analysis on to
two other associations which P brought up
during the same hour.
First :.One.day in the,preceding week I was
expecting Mr. P at n
o'clock, but he had not
appeared, and I went out to pay a call on Dr.
Anton von Freund at his pension. I was sur
prised to find that Mr. P lived on another floor
of the same house in which the pension was.
Referring to this later, I told P that I had in a
sense paid him a visit at his house; but I am
absolutely certain that I did not mention the
name of the person whom I had visited in the
pension, and now, soon after the mention of
Mr. Foresight, he asked me the foUowing ques
tion: "Is the lady called Freud-Ottorego who
gives
the
English
course at the Volks-universtat your daughter by any chance?" And
for the first time in our long acquaintance he
let sHp the distorted form of my name, to
which officials, clerks, and printers have ac
customed me; instead of Freud, he said Freund.
Secondly: At the end of the hour he told
me a dream out of which he had awakened with
a feeling of anxiety, a regular Alptraum (night
mare) he called it. He
added that he had
recently forgotten the EngHsh word for it, and

[828a]
had told<some~one who had asked him, that the
English forAlptraum was"a mare'snest." That
is of course, absurd, because "a mare's nest"
means nothing of the sort, and the correct
translation of Alptraum is "nightmare." This
association seemed to have nothing more in
common with the others than the element of
English; but he reminded me of a trivial oc
currence which had happened about a month
before. P was sitting in my room with me,
when there appeared quite unexpectedly an
other welcome guest from London, Dr. Ernest
Jones, whom I had not seen for a long time.
I noddedto him to gointo my other room until
I had finished with P. The latter recognized
him at once, however, from a photograph of
him which hung in the waiting-room, and even
asked to be introduced to him. Now Jones is
the author of a monograph on the nightmare.
I did not know whether P was acquainted with
the book; he avoided
reading
analytical
Hterature.
At this point I should like to consider what
analytical understanding we can obtain of P's
associations and their motivations. P had the
same attitude towards the name Forsyte as I
had; it meant the same to him as it did to me,
and in fact it was to him that I owed my
knowledge of the name. The remarkable thing
was that he brought this name into the analysis
immediately after it
had acquired another
meaning for me through a recent experience,
namely the arrivalof the physician from Lon
don. But perhapsnot less interesting is the way
in which the name came up in his analytical
hour. He did not say: "Now the name Forsyte,
out of the novels you have read, comes intomy
mind," but, without any conscious referenceto
this source, he managed to weave it into his
own personal experiences and brought it to the
surface in that way—a thing which might have
happened long before, but which had not as
a matter of fact occurred until now. At this
juncture, however, he said: "I am a Forsyte,
too, for that is what the girl called me." One
cannot mistake the mixture of exacting jealousy
and plaintive self-depreciation which finds ex
pression in this utterance. We shall not go far
wrong if we complete it thus: "I am hurt that
your thoughts should be so much wrapped up
in this newcomer. Come back to me; after all,
I am a Forsyth too—or rather only a Mr. Fore
sight, as the girl called me." And now, starting
from the idea of English, his train of thought
worked back to two earHer situations, which
mightvery wellhave aroused the same jealousy

[828b]
New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis
827
in him. "A few days ago you paid a visit at my
house, but, alas, it was not to me, it was to a
Herr von Freund." This idea made him distort
the name Freud into Freund. The name FreudOttorego from the lecture list came in, because
as the name of a teacher of English it paved the
way for the manifest association. And now the
memory of another visitor of a few weeksback
presented itself, a visitortowards whomhe cer
tainly felt just as jealous, this visitor (Dr.
Jones) wasat the same time in a superior posi
tion to him, because he could write a book
about nightmares, while the best he could do
wasto have nightmareshimself. The allusion to
his mistake about the meaning of a "mare's
nest" belongedto the same connection; it must
mean: "I am not a properEngfishman after aU,
any more than I am a proper Forsyth."
Now it could not be said that his jealous
feelings were either inappropriate or incompre
hensible. He had already been made aware that
his analysis, and with it our relations, would
come to an end as soon as foreign pupils and
patients began to return to Vienna; and this is
actuaUy what happened shortly afterwards. But
what we have just been doing has been a piece
of analytical work: the explanation of three
ideas which were brought up in the same hour
and were determined by the same motivation.
This has not much to do with the question
whether these ideas could have been produced
without thought-transference or not. The latter
question applies to each of the threeideas, and
can thus be divided into three separate ques
tions. Could P have known that Dr. Forsyth
had just paid his first visit to me? Could he
have known the name of the person whom I
visited in his house? Did he know that Dr.
Jones had written a book about nightmares?
Or was it only my knowledge of these things
which was displayed in the ideas that came
into his head? Whether this observation of
mine leads to a conclusion in favour of thoughttransference depends on the answer which is
given to these separate questions. Let us leave
the first question aside for the moment, as the
two others are easier to deal with. The case of
the visit to the pension strikes one at first sight
as being very convincing. I am quite sure that
in my short humorous mention of my visit to
his house I did not mention any name; I think
it is most improbable that P made inquiries in
the pension to discover the name of the person
I had caUed on; in fact, I believe that he never
knew of his existence. But the evidential value
of this case is undermined by a chance factor.

[829a]
828
Sigmund Freud
The manwhom I had been to see in the pension
was not only called Freund, but was indeed a
true friend to us all. It was he whose generosity
had made possiblethe founding of our publish
ing-house. His early death, and that of Karl
Abraham a few years later, were the most seri
ous misfortunes which have befallen the de
velopment of psycho-analysis. It is possible,
therefore, that I said to Mr. P: "I have been
visiting a friend at your house," and with this
possibiHty the occult interest of the second as
sociation evaporates.
The impression made by the third associa
tion, too, soon fades. Could P have known that
Jones had published a monograph on the night
mare, seeing that he never read analytical lit
erature?. Yes, he could. He possessed books
issued by our pubHshing-house, and he might
certainly have seen the titles of new publica
tions printed on the covers. It cannot be proved,
but it cannot he disproved. Along this road,
then, we can come to no decision. This example
of mine, I regret to say, is open to the same
objections as so many others. It was written
down too late, and came up for discussion at
a time when I was not seeing Mr. P any more,
and could not ask him any further questions.
Let us return to the first association, which
even by itself would support the aUeged occur
rence of thought-transference. Could P have
known that Dr. Forsyth had been with me a
quarter of an hour before him? Could he even
have knownof his existence or of his presence
in Vienna? We must not give way to the temp
tation to answer both questions straight off in
the negative. I might very well have told. Mr.
PI was expectinga physician from England for
training in analysis, the first dove after the
deluge. This might have happened in the sum
mer of 1919; Dr. Forsyth had made arrange
ments with me by letter, months before his
arrival, I may even have mentioned his name,
though that is most improbable. In view of the
other association which the name had for us
both, the mention of it would inevitably have
led to a conversation of which some trace at
least would have been preserved in my mem
ory. Neverthelesssuch a conversationmay have
taken placeand I may have totally forgottenit,
so that it became possible for the mention of
Mr. Foresight in the analytical hour to strike
me as miraculous. If one regards oneself as a
sceptic, it is weU from time to time to
be
sceptical about one's scepticism. Perhaps I too
have that secret leaning towards the miraculous

[829b]
which meets the production of occult phe*
nomena half-way.
Even if one part of this miraculous occur
rence is thus explained away, we still have an
other part on our hands, and that the most dif
ficult part of all. Granted that Mr. P knew
that there was such a person as Dr. Forsyth
and that he was expected in Vienna in the au
tumn, how was it that my patient became sen
sitive to him on the very day of his arrival and
immediately after his first visit?.We might
say that it was chance, that is, we might leave
it unexplained; but I have mentioned the two
other ideas which occurred to Mr. P precisely
in order to exclude chance, in order to show
you that he really was occupied with jealous
thoughts directed against people who visited
me, and whom I visited. Or, if we are anxious
not to overlook anything even remotely pos
sible, we might suppose that P noticed that I
was in a state of unusual excitement, a state of
which I was certainly not aware, and that he
drew his inferenee-from that. Or that Mr. P,
who after all had arrived only a quarter of an
hour after the Engfishman, had met him in the
immediate neighbourhood of my house, that
he had recognized him from his typically Eng
Hsh appearance, and with his jealous feelings
on the alert, had immediately thought: '.'Ah,
there is Dr. Forsyth, whose arrival means the
end of my analysis; and probably he has just
left the Professor." I cannot go any further
into these rationalistic hypotheses. We are left
once more with a non liquet, but I must con
fess that here too I feel that the balance is in
favour of thought-transference. For the matter
of that, I am certainly not the only person who
has met with occult phenomena in the analytic
situation. Helene Deutsch in 1926 reported
someobservationsof the same kind, and studied
the wayin which they were conditioned by the
relation of transference between the patient
and the analyst.
I am sure that you will not be satisfied with
my position with regard to this problem—not
completely convincedand yet ready to be con
vinced. Perhaps you will say to yourselves:
"Here is another example of a person who has
all his life been a steady-going man of science,
and is now in his old agebecoming weak-mind
ed, religious, and credulous." I know that some
great names belong in that category, but you
must not reckon mine among them. At least I
have not grown religious, and I hope I have
not become credulous. If one has humbled one-

[830a]
self aU one's life long in order to avoid painful
conflict with facts, one tends to keep one's
back bowed in one's old age before any new
facts which may appear. No doubt you would
far prefer that I should hold fast to a moderate
theism, and turn relentlessly against anything
occult. But I am not concerned to seek any
one's favour, and I must suggest to you that
you should think more kindly of the objective
possibility of thought-transference and there
fore also of telepathy.
You must not forget that I have only dealt
with the problem here in so far as one can ap
proach it from the direction of psycho-analysis.
When I turned my thoughts towards it more
than ten years ago, I too felt afraid lest our
scientific outlook might be endangered and have
to giveway to spiritualism or mysticism if oc
cult phenomena wereproved to be true. I think
otherwise now; it seems to me that one is disr
playing no great trust in science if one cannot
rely on it to accept and deal* with any oxcult
hypothesis that mayturn out to be correct. And
as regards thought-transference in particular, it
would seem actually to favour the extension of
the scientific (or, as opponents would say,
mechanistic) way of thinking on to the elusive
world of the mind. For the telepathic process
is supposed to consist in a mental act of one
person giving rise to the same mental act in
another. What lies between the two mental acts
mayverywell be a physical process, intowhich
the mentalprocess transforms itself at one end
and which is transformed back into the same
mental process at the other. The analogy with
other transformations, such as speaking and
hearingacross the telephone, is an obvious one.
And think what it would mean if one could get
hold of this physical equivalent of the mental
act! I should like to point out that by insert
ing the unconscious between the physical and
what has hitherto been regarded as the mental,
psycho-analysis has prepared the way for the
acceptance of such processes as telepathy. If
one gets used to the idea of telepathy, one can
account for a great deal by means of it, so far,
of course, only in imagination. It is a familiar
fact that we have no notion of how the com
munal will of the great insect states comes
about. Possibly it works by means of mental
transference of this direct kind. One is led to
conjecture that this may be the original archaic
method by which individuals understood one
another, and which has been pushed into the
background in the course of phylogenetic de

[830b]
New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis
829
velopment by the better method of communi
cation by means of signs apprehended by the
sense organs.But such older methods may have
persistedin the background, and maystiU mani
fest themselves under certain conditions: for
example, in crowds roused to a state of pas
sionate excitement. AU of this is highly specu
lative and full of unsolved problems, but there
is no need to be alarmed by it.
If telepathy is a real process, one may, in
spite of the difficulty of proof,suppose that it is
quite a common phenomenon. It would fit in
with our expectations if we could show that it
occurs particularly in the mental Hfe of chil
dren. One is reminded of the frequent fear felt
by children that their parents know all their
thoughts without having been told them—a fear
which is a complete parallel to, and perhaps
the origin of, the belief of adults in the om
niscience of God. A short time ago a trust
worthy observer, Dorothy Burlingham, pub
lished some findings in a paper called "Child
Analysis and the Mother," which, if they are
confirmed, must put an end to any remaining
doubts of the reality of thought transference.
She took as her starting-point a number of those
cases (now no longer rare) in which a mother
and child are being analysed at the same time,
and reported such remarkable phenomena as
the following. One day in her analytic hour the
mother was talking about a gold coin which
had figured in one of her childhoodexperiences.
Immediatelyafterwards,whenshe had returned
home, her little ten-year-old boy cameinto her
room and brought her a gold coin to keep for
him. She was astonished and asked him where
he had got it from. He had been given it on his
birthday, but that was several months ago, and
there was no reason why the child should have
remembered the gold coin just then. The mother
told the analyst about the coincidence, and
asked her to try to find out from the child why
he had behaved in this way. But the analysis of
the child elicited nothing; the action had made
its way into the child's life that day like a
foreign body. A few weekslater the mother was
sitting at her writing table, in order to make a
note of the occurrence, as she had been asked
to do. At that moment the boy came in and
asked for the gold coin back, saying that he
wanted to take it to show his analyst. Once
more the child's analysis disclosed nothing that
led up to the wish.
And with that we return to our startingpoint—the study of psycho-analysis.

[831a]
830
Sigmund Freud
LECTURE 31
The Anatomy of the Mental Personality
Ladies and Gentlemen: I am sure you aU
recognize in your dealings, whether with per
sons or things, the importanceof your startingpoint. It was the same with psycho-analysis:
the course of development through which it
has passed, and the reception which it has met
with have not been unaffected by the fact that
what it began working uponwasthe symptom,
a thing which is more foreign to the ego than
anything else in the mind. The symptom has
its origin in the repressed; it is, as it were, the
representative of the repressed in relation to
the ego; the repressed is a foreign territory to
the ego, an internal foreign territory, just as
reality is—you must excusethe unusualexpres
sion—an external foreign territory. From the
symptom the path of psycho-analysis led to the
unconscious, to the life of the instincts, to
sexuality, and it was then that psycho-analysis
was met by iHuminating criticisms to the effect
that man is not merely a sexual being but has
nobler and higher feelings. It might have been
added that, supported by the consciousness of
those higher feelings, he often allowed himself
the right to think nonsense and to overlook
facts.
You know better than that. From the very
beginning our view was that men fall ill owing
to the conflict between the demands of their
instincts and the internal resistance which is
set up against them; not for a moment did we
forget this resisting, rejecting and repressing
factor, which we befieved to be furnished with
its own special forces, the ego-instincts, and
which corresponds to the ego of popular psy
chology. The difficulty was that, since the
progress of all scientific work is necessarilyla
borious, psycho-analysis could not study every
part of the field at once or make a pronounce
ment on every problem in one breath. At last
we had got so far that we could turn our atten
tion fromthe repressed to the repressing forces,
and we came face to face with the ego, which
seemed to need so little explanation, with the
certain expectation that there, too, we should
find things for which we could not have been
prepared; but it was not easy to find a first
method of approach. That is what I am going
to talk to you about today.
Before I start, I may tell you that I have a
suspicion that my account of the psychology
of the ego will affect you differently than the
introduction into the psychological underworld

[831b]
that preceded it. Why that should be the case,
I cannot say for certain. My original explana
tion was that you would feel that, whereas
hitherto I have been telling you in the main
about facts, however strange and odd they
might appear, this timeyouwould be Hstening
chiefly to theories, that is to say, speculations.
But that is not quitetrue; when I weighed the
matter more carefully I was obliged to con
clude that the part played by intellectual
manipulation of the facts is not much greater
in our ego-psychology than it was in the psy
chology of the neuroses. Other explanations
turned out to be equallyuntenable, and I now
think that the character of the material itself
is responsible, and the fact that we are not
accustomed to dealing with it. Anyhow I shaU
not be surprised if you are more hesitant and
careful in your judgment than you have been
hitherto.
The situation in which we find ourselves at
the beginning of our investigation will itself
suggest the path we have to foUow. We wish
to make the ego the object of our study, our
own ego. But how can we do that? The ego is
the subject par excellence, how can it become
the object? There is no doubt, however, that
it can. The ego can takeitself as object, it can
treatitself like any otherobject, observe itself,
criticize itself, and do Heaven knows what
besides with itself. In such a case one part of
the ego stands overagainst the other. The ego
can, then, be split; it splits when it performs
many of its functions, at least for the time be
ing. The parts can afterwards join up again.
After all that is saying nothing new; perhaps
it is only underlining more than usual some
thing that every one knows already. But on
the other hand we are familiar with the view
that pathology, with its magnification and ex
aggeration, can make us aware-of normalphenomena which we should otherwise have missed.
Where pathology displays a breach or a cleft,
under normal conditions there may well be a
link. If we throw a crystal to the ground, it
breaks, but it does not break haphazard; in ac
cordance with the lines of cleavage it falls into
fragments, whose limits were already deter
mined by the structure of the crystal, although
they were invisible. Psychotics are fissured and
splintered structures such as these. We cannot
deny them a measure of that awe with which
madmen were regarded by the peoples of an
cient times. They have turned away from ex
ternal reality, but for that very reason they
know more of internal psychic reality and can

[832a]
tell us much that would otherwise be inacces
sible to us. One group of them suffer what we
call delusions of observation. They complain
to us that they suffer continually, and in their
most intimate actions, from the observation of
unknown powers or persons, andthey havehal
lucinations in which they hear these persons
announcing the results of their observations:
"Now he is going to say this; now he is dress
inghimselfto goout," andsoon. Suchobserva
tion is not the same thing as persecution, but
it is not far removed from it. It implies that
these persons distrust the patient, and expect
to catchhim doing something that is forbidden
and for which he will be punished. How would
it be if these mad people were right, if we all
of us had an observing function in our egos
threatening us with punishment, which, in their
case, hadmerely become sharply separated from
the ego and hadbeen mistakenly projected into
external reality?
I do not know whether it will appeal to you
in the same-way asit appeals to me. Under the
strong impression of this clinical picture, I
formed the idea that the separating off of an
observing function from the rest of the ego
mightbe anormalfeature of the ego's structure;
this idea has never left me, and I was driven to
investigate the further characteristics and re
lations of the function which had been separated
off in this way. The next step is soon taken.
The actual content of the delusion of observa
tion makes it,probable that the observation is
onlya first steptowards conviction and punish
ment, so that we may guess that another ac
tivity of this function must be what we call
conscience. There.is .hardly anything that we
separate off from our ego so regularly as our
conscience and so easily set over against it. I
feel a temptationto do something whichprom
ises to bring me pleasure, but I refrain from
doing it on the ground that my conscience will
not allowit. Or I allow myself to be persuaded
by the greatness of the expectation of pleasure
into doing something against which thevoiceof
my conscience has protested, and after I have
done it my conscience punishes mewithpainful
reproaches, andmakes jne feel remorse for it. I
might simply saythat the function which I am
beginning to distinguish within the ego is the
conscience; but it is moreprudent to keep that
function as a separate entity and assume that
conscience is one of its activities, and that the
self-observation which is necessary as a pre
liminary to the judicial aspect of conscience is
another. And since the process of recognizing

[832b]
New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis
831
a thing as a separate entity involves giving it
a name of its own, I will henceforward callthis
function in the ego the super-ego.
At this point I am quite prepared for you to
ask scornfully whether our ego-psychology
amounts to no more than taking everyday ab
stractions literally, magnifying them, and turn
ing them from concepts into things—which
would not be of much assistance. My answer
to that is that in ego-psychology it wiUbe dif
ficult to avoid what is already famifiar, and
that it is more a question of arriving at new
ways of looking at things and new groupings
of the facts than of making new discoveries. I
will not ask you, therefore, to abandon your
critical attitude but merely to await further
developments. The facts of pathology give our
efforts a background for which you will look in
vain in popular psychology. I will proceed. No
sooner have we got used to the idea of this
super-ego, as something whichenjoys a certain
independence, pursues its own ends, and is
independent of the ego as regards the energy
at its disposal, than we are faced with a clini
cal picture which throws into strong refief the
severity, andevencruelty, of this function, and
the vicissitudes through which its relationswith
the ego may pass. I refer to the condition of
melancholia, or more accurately the melan
cholic attack, of which you must have heard
often enough, even if you arenot psychiatrists.
In this disease, about whose causesand mecha
nism we know far too Httle, the most remark
able characteristic is the way in which the
super-ego—you may call it, but in a whisper,
the conscience—treats the ego. The melancho
liac during periods of health can, Hkeany..one
else, be more or less severe towards himself;
but when he has a melancholic attack, his
super-ego becomes over-severe, abuses, humili
ates, and iU-treats his unfortunate ego, threat
ens it with the severest punishments, reproaches
it for long forgotten actions which were at the
time regarded quite lightly, and behaves as
though it had spent the whole interval in
amassing complaints and was only waiting for
its present increase in strength to bring them
forward, and to condemn the ego on their ac
count. The super-ego nas the ego at its mercy
and appfies the most severe moral standards to
it; indeed it represents the whole demands of
morality, and we seeall at once that ourmoral
sense of guilt is the expression of the tension
between the ego and the super-ego. It is a very
remarkable experience to observe morality,
which was ostensibly conferred on us by God

[833a]
S$2
Sigmund Freud
and planted deep in our hearts, functioning as
a periodical phenomenon. For after a certain
number of months the whole moral fuss is at
an end, the critical voice of the super-ego is
silent, the ego is reinstated, and enjoys once
more aU the rights of man until the next attack.
Indeed in many forms of the malady something
exactly the reverse takes place during the in
tervals; the ego finds itself in an ecstatic state
of exaltation, it triumphs, as though the super
egohad lost aUits power or had become merged
with the ego, and this Hberated, maniac ego
gives itself up in a really uninhibited fashion,
to the satisfaction of all its desires.Happenings
rich in unsolved riddles!
You will expect me to do more than give a
mere example in support of my statement that
we have learnt a great deal about the forma
tion of the super-ego, that is, of the origin of
conscience. The philosopher Kant once de
clared that nothing proved to him the greatness
of God more convincingly than the starry heav
ens and the moral conscience within us. The
stars are unquestionably superb, but where con
science is concerned God has been guilty of
an uneven and careless piece of work, for a
great many men have only a limited share of
it or scarcely enough to be worth mentioning.
This doesnot mean, however, that we are over
looking the fragment of psychological truth
which is contained in the assertion that con
science is of divine origin! but the assertion
needs interpretation. Conscience is no doubt
something within us, but it has not been there
from
the beginning. In this sense it is the
opposite of sexuality, which is certainly present
from the very beginning of life, and is not a
thing that only comes in later. But small chil
dren are notoriously a-moral. They have no
internal inhibitions against their pleasure-seek
ing impulses. The role, which the super-ego
undertakes later in life, is at first played by an
external power, by parental authority. The in
fluence of the parents dominates the child by
granting proofs of affection and by threats of
punishment, which, to the child, mean loss of
love, and which must also be feared on their
own account. This objective anxiety is the fore
runner of the later moral anxiety; so long as
the former is dominant one need not speak of
super-ego or of conscience. It is only later that
the secondary situation arises, which we are
far too ready to regard as the normal state of
affairs; the external restrictions are introjected,
so that the super-ego takes the place of the
parental function, and thenceforward observes,

[833b]
guides, and threatens the ego in just the same
way as the parents acted to the child before.
The super-ego, which in this way has taken
over the power, the aims and even the methods
of the parental function, is, however, not
merely the legatee of parental authority, it is
actually the heir of its body. It proceeds di
rectly from it, and we shall soon leam in what
way this comes about. First, however, we must
pause to consider a point in which they differ.
The
super-ego seems to have made a one
sided selection, and to have chosen only the
harshness and severity of the parents, their
preventive and punitive functions, while their
loving careis not taken up and continued by it.
If the parents have really ruled with a rod of
iron, we can easily understand the child de
veloping a severe super-ego, but, contrary to
our
expectations, experience shows that the
super-ego may reflect the same relentless harsh
ness even when the up-bringing has been gentle
and kind, and avoided threats and punishment
as far as possible. We shall return to this con
tradiction later, when we are dealing with the
transmutation of instincts in the formation of
the super-ego.
I cannot tell you as much as I could wish
about the change from the parental function to
the super-ego, partly because that process is so
complicated that a description of it does not
fit into the framework of a set of introductory
lectures such as these, and partly because we
ourselves do not feel that we have fully un
derstoodit. Youwillhave to be satisfied, there
fore, with the following indications. The basis
of the process is what we callan identification,
that is to say, that one ego becomes like an
other, one which results in the first ego behav
ing itself in certain respects in the same way
as the second; it imitates it, and as it were
takes it into itself. This identification has been
not inappropriately compared with the oral
cannibalistic incorporation of another person.
Identification is a very important kind of re
lationship with another person, probably the
most primitive, and is not to be confused with
object-choice. One can express the difference
betweenthem in this way: whena boy identifies
himself with his father, he wants to be like his
father; when he makes him the object of his
choice, he wants to have him, to possess him;
in the first case his ego is altered on the model
of his father, in the second case that is not
necessary. Identification and object-choice are
broadly speaking independent of each other;
but one can identify oneself with a person, and

[834a]
New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis
833
alter one's ego accordingly, and take the same
person as one's sexual object. It is said that
this influencingof the ego by the sexual object
takes place very often with women, and is
characteristic of femininity. With regard to
what is by far the most instructive relation
between identification and object-choice, I must
have given you some information in my previ
ous lectures. It can be as easily observed in
children as in adults, in normal as in sick per
sons; If one has lost a love-object or has had
to give it up, one often compensates oneself
by identifying oneself with it; one sets it up
again inside one's ego, so that in this case
object-choice regresses, as it were, to identifi
cation.
I am myself not at all satisfied with this
account of identification, but it will suffice if
you will grant that the establishment of the
super-ego can be described as a successful in
stance of identification with the parental func
tion. The fact which is decisively in favour of
this point of view is that this new creation of
a superior function within the ego is extremely
closely bound up with the fate of the Oedipus
complex, so that the super-ego appears as the
heir of that emotional tie, which is of such
importance for childhood. When the Oedipus
complex passes away, the child must give up
the intense object-cathexeswhich it has formed
towards its parents, and to compensate for this
loss of object, its identifications with its par
ents, which have probably long been present,
become greatly intensified. Identifications of
this kind, which may be looked on as precipi
tates of abandoned object-cathexes, will recur
often enough in the later life of the child; but
it is in keeping with the emotional importance
of this first instance of such a transformation
that its product shouldoccupya specialposition
in the ego.Further investigation also reveals that
the super-ego does not attain to full strength
and developmentif the overcoming of the Oedi
pus complex has not beencompletely successful.
During the course of its growth, the super-ego
also takes over the influence of those persons
who have taken the place of the parents, that is
to say of persons who have been concerned in
the child'supbringing,and whomit has regarded
as ideal models. Normally the super-ego is con
stantly becoming more and more remote from
the original parents, becoming, as it were, more
impersonal. Another thing that we must not
forget is that the child values its parents dif
ferently at different periods of its life. At the
time at which the Oedipus complex makes way

[834b]
for the super-ego, they seem to be splendid
figures, but later on they lose a good deal of
their prestige. Identifications take place with
these later editions of the parents as weU, and
regularly provide important contributions to
the formation of character; but these only af
fect the ego, they have no influence on the
super-ego, which has been determined by the
earliest parental imagos.
I hopeyou wiU by now feel that in postulating
the existence of a super-ego I have been de
scribing a genuine structural entity, and have
not been merely personifying an abstraction,
such as conscience. We have now to mention
another important activity which is to be as
cribed to the super-ego. It is also the vehicle of
the ego-ideal, by which the ego measures itself,
towards which it strives, and whose demands
for ever-increasing perfection it is always striv
ing to fulfil. No doubt this ego-ideal is a pre
cipitation of the old idea of the parents, an
expression of the admiration which the child
felt for the perfection which it at that time
ascribed to them. I know you have heard a
great deal about the sense of inferiority which
is said to distinguish the neurotic subject. It
crops up especially in the pages of works that
have literary pretensions. A writer who brings
in the expression inferiority-complex thinks he
has satisfied all the demands of psycho-analysis
and raised his work on to a higher psychologi
cal plane. As a matter of fact the phrase in
feriority-complex is hardly ever used in psycho
analysis. It does not refer to anything which
we regard as simple, let alone elementary. To
trace it back to the perception in oneself of
some organic disability or other, as the school
of so-called Individual Psychologists Hke to do,
seems to us a short-sighted error. The sense of
inferiority has a strong erotic basis. The child
feels itself inferior when it peceives that it is not
loved, and so does the adult as well. The only
organ that is really regarded as inferior is the
stunted penis—the girl's clitoris. But the major
part of the sense of inferiority springs from
the relationship of the ego to its super-ego,
and, like the sense of guilt, it is an expression
of the tension between them. The sense of in
feriority and the sense of guilt are exceedingly
difficultto distinguish.Perhaps we should do bet
ter if we regarded the former as the erotic com
plement to the sense of moral inferiority. We
have paid but little attention to such questions
of conceptual differentiation in psycho-analysis.
Seeing that the inferiority-complex has be
come so popular, I shall venture to treat you to

[835a]
834
Sigmund Freud
a short digression. A historical personage of
our own time, who is still living but who for
the present has retired into the background,
suffers from the mal-development of a limb
caused by an injury at birth. A very wellknown contemporary writer who has a predilec
tion for writing the biographies of famous per
sons, has dealt with the life of the man to
whom I am referring. Now if one is writing a
biography, it is naturaUy very difficult to sup
press the urge for psychological understanding.
The author has therefore made an attempt to
build up the whole development of his hero's
character on the basis of a sense of inferiority,
which was caused by his physical defect. While
doing this he has overlooked a small but not
unimportant fact. It is usual for mothers to
whom fate has given a sickly or otherwise de
fective child to try to compensate for this un
fair handicap with an extra amount of love. In
the case we are speaking of, the proud mother
behaved quite differently; she withdrew her
love from the child on account of his disability.
When the child grew up into a man of great
power, he proved beyond all doubt by his be
haviour that he had never forgiven his mother.
If you wiU bear in mind the importance of
mother-love for the mental life of the child,
you will be able to make the necessary correc
tions in the inferiority-theory of the biographer.
But let us get back to the super-ego. We have
allocated to it the activities of self-observation,
conscience, and the holding up of ideals. It fol
lows from our account of its origin that it is
based upon an overwhelmingly important bio
logical
fact no less than upon a momentous
psychological fact, namely the lengthy-depend
ence of the human child on its parents and the
Oedipus complex; these two facts, moreover,
are closely bound up with each other. For us
the super-ego is the representative of all moral
restrictions, the advocate of the impulse to
wards perfection, in short it is as much as we
have been able to apprehend psychologically of
what people call the "higher" things in human
life. Since it itself can be traced back to the
influence of parents, teachers, and so on, we
shall learn more of its significance if we turn
our attention to these sources. In general, par
ents and similar authorities foUow the dictates
of their own super-egos in the upbringing of
children. Whatever terms their ego may be on
with their super-ego, in the education of the
child they are severe and exacting. They have
forgotten the difficulties of their own childhood,
and are glad to be able to identify themselves

[835b]
fully at last with their own parents, who in
their day subjected them to such severe re
straints. The result is that the super-ego of the
child is not really built up on the model of the
parents, but on that of the parents' super-ego;
it takes over the same content, it becomes the
vehicle of tradition and of all the age-long
values which have been handed down in this
way from generation to generation. You may
easily guess what great help is afforded by the
recognition of the super-ego in understanding
the social behaviour of man, in grasping the
problem of delinquency, for example, and per
haps, too, in providing us with some practical
hints upon education. It is probable that the
so-called materialistic conceptions of history
err in that they underestimate this factor. They
brush it aside with the remark that the ideolo
gies of mankind are nothing more than result
ants of their economic situation at any given
moment or superstructures built upon it. That
is the truth, but very probably it is not the
whole truth. Mankind never lives completely
in the present; the ideologies of the super-ego
perpetuate the past, the traditions of the race
and the people, which yield but slowly to the
influence of the present and to new develop
ments, and, so long as they work through the
super-ego, play an important part in man's life,
quite independently of economic conditions.
In 1921, I tried to apply the distinction be
tween the ego and the super-ego to the study
of group psychology. I reached a formula, which
ran like this: A psychological group is a collec
tion of individuals who have introduced the
same person into their super-ego, and on the
basis of this common factor have identified
themselves with one another in their ego. This,
naturally, only holds for groups who have a
leader. If we could find more applications of
this kind, the hypothesis of the super-ego would
lose all its strangeness for us, and we should
be entirely relieved of the embarrassment which
we cannot help feeling when, used as we are to
the atmosphere of the underworld, we make
excursions into the more superficialand higher
planes of the mental apparatus. Of course we
do not for a moment think that the last word
on ego-psychology has been spoken with the
demarcation of the super-ego. It is rather the
beginning of the subject, but in this case it is
not only the first step that is difficult.
But now another task awaits us, as it were
at the opposite end of the ego. This question is
raised by an observation which is made during
analytic work, an observation which is, indeed,

[836a]
New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis
835
an old one. As so often happens, it has taken
a long time for its.true value to be appreciated.
As you are aware, the whole of psycho-analytic
theory is in fact built up on the perception of
the resistance exerted by the patient when we
try to make him conscious of his unconscious.
The objective indication of resistance is that
his associations stop short or wander far away
from the theme that is being discussed. He may
also become subjectively aware of the resist
ance by experiencing painful feelings when he
approaches the theme. But this last indication
may be absent. In such a case, we say to the
patient that we conclude from his behaviour
that he is in a state of resistance, and he replies
that he knows nothing about it and is only
aware of a difficulty in associating. Experience
shows that we were right, but, if so, his re
sistance too must have been unconscious, just
as unconscious as the repressed material which
we were trying to bring to the surface. Long
ago we should have asked from which part of
the mind such an unconscious resistance could
operate. The beginner in psycho-analysis will
be ready at once with the answer that it must
be the resistance of the unconscious. An am
biguous and useless answer! If it means that
the resistance operates from the repressed, then
we must say:
"Certainly not!" To the re
pressedwemust rather ascribea strongupwarddriving force, an impulsion to get through to
consciousness. The resistance can only be a
manifestation of the ego, which carried through
the repression at one time or other and is now
endeavouring to keep it up. And that, too, was
our earlier view. Now that we have posited a
special function within the egoto represent the
demand for restriction and rejection, i.e., the
super-ego, we can say that repression is the
work of the super-ego—either that it does its
work on its own account or else that the ego
does it in obedience to its orders. If now we are
faced with the case where the patient under
analysis is not conscious of his resistance, then
it must be either that the super-ego and the ego
can operate unconsciously in quite important
situations, or, which would be far more signifi
cant, that parts of both ego and super-ego
themselves are unconscious. In both cases we
should have to take account of the disturbing
view that the ego (including the super-ego)
does not by any means completely coincide
with the conscious, nor the repressed with the
unconscious.
Ladies and Gentlemen—I feel I must have a
Httle breathing space, which I expect you will

[836b]
welcome with refief, and before I go on I must
make an apology* Here am I giving you a sup
plement to the introduction to psycho-analysis
which I started fifteen years ago, and I am
behaving as though you yourselves had been
doing nothing but psycho-analysis all that time.
I know it is a monstrous supposition, but I am
helpless, I have no alternative. The reason is
that it is exceedingly difficult tongive~aninsight
into psycho-analysis to any one who is not him
self a psycho-analyst. I assure you that we do
not like to give the effect of being members of
a secret society carrying on a secret science.
And yet we have been obliged to recognize and
state as our considered opinion that no one has
a right to a say in psycho-analysis unless he
has been through certain experiences which he
can only have by being analysed himself. When
I delivered my lectures to you fifteen years
ago, I tried to let you off certain speculative
parts of our theory, but it is with those very
parts that are connected the new discoveries
which I am going to speak of to-day.
Now let me return to my theme. With re
gard to the two alternatives—that the ego and
the super-ego may themselves be unconscious,
or that they may merely give rise to uncon
scious effects—we have for good reasons de
cided in favour of the former. Certainly, large
portions of the ego and super-ego can remain
unconscious, are, in fact, normally unconscious.
That means to say that the individual knows
nothing of their contents and that it requires
an expenditure of effort to make him conscious
of them. It is true, then, that ego and conscious,
repressed and' unconscious do not coincide. We
are forced fundamentaUy to revise our atti
tude towards the problem of conscious and un
conscious. At first
we might be inclined to
think very much less of the importance of con
sciousness as a criterion, since it has proved
so untrustworthy. But if we did so, we should
be wrong. It is the same with life: it is not
worth much, but it is all that we have. Without
the light shed by the quality of consciousness,
we should be lost in the darkness of depth-psy
chology. Nevertheless we must try to orientate
ourselves anew.
What is meant by conscious, we need not
discuss; it is beyond all doubt. The oldest and
best meaning of the word unconscious is the
descriptive one; we call unconscious any mental
process the existence of which we are obliged
to assume—because, for instance, we infer it in
some way from its effects—but of which we
are not directly aware. We have the same re-

[837a]
836
Sigmund
lation to that mental process as we have to a
mental process in another person, except that
it belongs to ourselves. If we want to be more
accurate, we should modify the statement by
saying that we call a process unconscious when
we have to assume that it was active at a cer
tain time, although at that time we knew noth
ing about it. This restriction reminds us that
most conscious processes are conscious only for
a short period; quite soon they become latent,
though they can easily become conscious again.
We could also say that they had become un
conscious, if we were certain that they were
still something mental when they were in the
latent condition. So far we should have learnt
nothing, and not even have earned the right to
introduce the notion of the unconscious into
psychology. But now we come across a new
fact which we can already observe in the case
of errors. We find that, in order to explain a
sHp of the tongue, for instance, we are obliged
to assume that an intention to say some par
ticular thing had formed itself in the mind of
the person who made the slip. We can infer it
with
certainty from
the
occurrence
of the
speech-disturbance, but it was not able to obtain
expression; it was, that is to say, unconscious.
If we subsequently bring the intention to the
speaker's notice,, he may recognize it
as a
familiar one, in which case it was only tem
porarily unconscious, or he may repudiate it as
foreign to him, in which case it was perma
nently unconscious. Such an observation as
this justifies us in also regarding what we have
called latent as something unconscious. The
consideration of these dynamic relations puts
us in a position to distinguish two kinds of un
conscious: one which is transformed into con
scious material easily and under conditions
which frequently arise, and another in the case
of which such a transformation is difficult, can
only come about with a considerable expendi
ture of energy, or may never occur at all. In
order to avoid any ambiguity as to whether we
are referring to the one or the other uncon
scious, whether we are using the word in the
descriptive or dynamic sense, we make use of
a legitimate and simple expedient. We call the
unconscious which is only latent, and so can
easily become conscious, the preconscious, and
keep the name unconscious for the other. We
have now three terms, conscious, preconscious,
and unconscious, to serve our purposes in de
scribing mental phenomena. Once again, from
a purely descriptive point of view, the precon
scious is also unconscious, but we do not give

[837b]
Freud
it that name, except when we are speaking
loosely, or when we have to defend in general
the existence of unconscious processes in men
tal life.
You will, I hope, grant that so far things are
not so bad and that the scheme is a convenient
one. That is all very well; unfortunately our
psycho-analytic work has compeUed us to use
the word unconscious in yet another, third,
sense; and this may very well have given rise
to
confusion. Psycho-analysis has impressed
us very strongly with the new idea that large
and important regions of the mind are normaUy
removed from the knowledge of the ego, so
that the processes which occur in them must
be recognized as unconscious in the true dy
namic sense of the term. We have consequently
also attributed to the word unconscious a topo
graphical
or systematic meaning;
we have
talked of systems of the preconscious and of
the unconscious, and of a conflict between the
ego and the Ucs system; so that the word un
conscious has more and more been made to
mean a mental province rather than a quality
which mental things have. At this point, the
discovery, inconvenient at first sight, that parts
of the ego and super-ego, too, are unconscious
in the dynamic sense, has a facilitating effect
and enables us to remove a complication. We
evidently have no right to call that region of
the mind which is neither ego or super-ego the
Ucs system, since the character of unconscious
ness is not exclusive to it. Very well; we will
no longer use the word unconscious in the sense
of a system, and to what we have hitherto
called by that name we will give a better one,
which will not give rise to misunderstandings.
Borrowing, at G. Groddeck's suggestion, a term
used by Nietzsche, we wiU call it henceforward
the id. This impersonal pronoun seems partic
ularly suited to express the essential character
of this province of the mind—the character of
being foreign to the ego. Super-ego, ego and id,
then, are the three realms, regions or provinces
into which we divide the mental apparatus of
the individual; and it is their mutual relations
with which we shall be
concerned in what
follows.
But before we go on I must make a short
digression. I have no doubt that you are dis
satisfied with the fact that the three qualities
of the mind in respect to consciousness and the
three regions of the mental apparatus do not
fall together into three harmonious pairs, and
that you feel that the clarity of our conclusions
is consequently impaired. My own view is that

[838a]
New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis
837
we ought not to deplore this fact but that we
should say to ourselves that we had no right
to expect any such neat arrangement. Let me
give you an analogy; analogies prove nothing,
that is quite true, but they can make one feel
more at home. Let us picture a country with a
great variety of geographical configurations,
hills, plains and chains of lakes, and with mixed
nationalities Hving in it,
Germans, Magyars
and Slovaks, who, moreover, are engaged upon
a number of different occupations. Now the
distribution might be such that the Germans
lived in the hills and kept cattle, the Magyars
on the plains and grew corn and vines, while
the Slovaks lived by the lakes and caught fish
and plaited reeds. If this distribution were neat
and exact it would no doubt give great satis
faction to a President Wilson; it would also be
convenient for giving a geography lesson. It is
probable, however, that you would find a less
orderly state of affairs if you visited the region.
Germans, Magyars and Slovaks would be living
everywhere mixed up together, and there would
be cornfields, too, in the hills, and cattle would
be kept on the plains as well. One or two things
would be as you expected, for one cannot catch
fish on the mountains, and wine does not grow
in water. The picture of the region which you
had brought with you might on the whole fit
the facts, but in details you would have to put
up with departures from it.
You must not expect me to teU you much
that is new about the id, except its name. It
is the obscure inaccessible part of our person
ality; the little we know about it we have
learnt from the study of dream-work and the
formation of neurotic symptoms, and most of
that is of a negative character, and can only be
described as being all that the ego is not. We
can come nearer to the id with images, and call
it a chaos, a cauldron of seething excitement.
We suppose that it is somewhere in direct con
tact with somatic processes, and takes over
from them instinctual needs and gives them
mental expression, but we cannot say in what
substratum this contact is made. These instincts
fill it with energy, but it has no organization
and no unified will, only an impulsion to obtain
satisfaction for the instinctual needs, in accord
ance with the pleasure-principle. The laws of
logic—above all, the law of contradiction—do
not hold for processes in the id. Contradictory
impulses exist side by side without neutralizing
each other or drawing apart; at most they
combine in compromise formations under the
overpowering economic pressure towards dis

[838b]
charging their energy. There is nothing in the
id which can be compared to negation, and we
are astonished to find in it an exception to the
philosophers' assertion that space and time
are necessary forms of our mental acts. In the
id there is nothing corresponding to the idea
of time, no recognition of the passage of time,
and
(a thing which is very remarkable and
awaits
adequate
attention
in
philosophic
thought) no alteration of mental processes by
the passage of time. Conative impulses which
have never got beyond the id, and even im
pressions which have been pushed down into
the id by repression, are virtually immortal and
are preserved for whole decades as though they
had only recently occurred. They can only be
recognized as belonging to the past, deprived
of their significance, and robbed of their charge
of energy,
after they have been made con
scious by the work of analysis, and no small
part of the therapeutic effect of analytic treat
ment rests upon this fact.
It is constantly being borne in upon me that
we have made far too little use of our theory of
the indubitable fact that the repressed remains
unaltered by the passage of time. This seems
to offer us the possibifity of an approach to
some really profound truths. But I myself have
made no further progress here.
NaturaUy, the id knows no values, no good
and evil, no morality. The economic, or, if you
prefer, the quantitative factor, which is so
closely bound up with the pleasure-principle,
dominates all its processes. Instinctual cathexes
seeking discharge—that, in our view, is all that
the id contains. It seems, indeed, as if the
energy of these instinctual impulses is in a
different condition
from that in which it is
found in the other regions of the mind. It must
be far more fluid and more capable of being
discharged, for otherwise we should not have
those displacements and condensations, which
are so characteristic of the id and which are so
completely independent of the quafities of what
is cathected. (In the ego we should call it an
idea.) What would one not give to understand
these things better? You observe, in any case,
that we can attribute to the id other character
istics than that of being unconscious, and you
are aware of the possibility that parts of the
ego and super-ego are
unconscious without
possessing the same primitive and irrational
quality. As regards a characterization of the
ego, in so far as it is to be distinguished from
the id and the super-ego, we shaU get.on better
if we turn our attention to the relation between

[839a]
838
Sigmund Freud
it and the most superficial portion of the men
tal
apparatus;
which
we
caU the
Pcpt-Cs
(perceptual-conscious) system. This system is
directed on to the external world, it mediates
perceptions of it, and in it is generated, while
it is functioning, the phenomenon of conscious
ness. It is the sense-organ of the whole appara
tus, receptive, moreover, not only of excitations
from without but also of such as proceed from
the interior of the mind. One can hardly go
wrong in regarding the ego as that part of the
id which has been modified by its proximity
to the external world and the influence that
the latter has had on it, and which serves the
purpose of receiving stimuli and protecting the
organism
from
them, like the cortical layer
with which a particle of living substance sur
rounds itself. This relation to the external world
is decisive for the ego. The ego has taken over
the task of representing the external world for
the id, and so of saving it; for the id, blindly
striving to gratify its instincts in complete dis
regard of the superior strength of outside forces,
could not otherwise escape annihilation. In the
fulfilment of this function, the ego has to ob
serve the external world and preserve a true
picture of it in the memory traces left by its
perceptions, and, by means of the reafity-test,
it has to eliminate any element In this picture
of the external world which is a contribution
from internal sources of excitation. On behalf
of the id, the ego controls the path of access to
motility, but it interpolates between desire and
action the procrastinating factor of thought,
during which it makes use of the residues of
experience stored up in memory. In this way
it dethrones the pleasure-principle, which exerts
undisputed sway over the processes in the id,
and
substitutes
for
it
the
reality-principle,
which promises greater security and greater
success.
The relation to time, too, which is so hard
to describe, is communicated to the-ego by the
perceptual system; indeed it can hardly be
doubted that the mode in which this system
works is the source of the idea of time. What,
however, especially marks the ego out in contra-distinction to
the id,
is
a tendency to
synthesize its contents, to bring together and
unify its mental processes which is entirely
absent from the id. *When we come to deal
presently with the instincts in mental life, I
hope we shall succeed in tracing this funda
mental characteristic of the ego to its source.
It is this alone that produces that high degree
of organization which the ego needs for its

[839b]
highest achievements. The ego advances from
the function of perceiving instincts to that of
controlling them, but the latter is only achieved
through the mental representative of the in
stinct becoming subordinated to a largerorgan
ization, and finding its place in a coherent
unity. In popular language, we may say that
the ego stands for reason and circumspection,
while the id stands for the untamed passions.
So far we have allowed ourselves to dweU on
the enumeration of the merits and capabilities
of the ego; it is time now to look at the other
side of the picture. The ego is after aU only
a part of the id, a part purposively modified
by its proximity to the dangers of reality. From
a dynamic point of view, it is weak; it borrows
its energy from the id, and we are not entirely
ignorant of the methods—one might almost
caU them "tricks"—by means of which it draws
further amounts of energy from the id. Such a
method, for example, is the process of identi
fication, whether the object is retained or given
up. The object-cathexes proceed from the in
stinctual demands of the id. The first business
of the ego is to take note of them. But by
identifying itself with the object, it recom
mends itself to the id in the place of the object
and seeks to attract the libido of the id on to
itself. We have already seen that, in the course
of a person's Hfe, the ego takes into itself a
large number of such precipitates of former
object-cathexes. On the whole, the ego has to
carry out the intentions of the id; it fulfils its
duty if it succeeds in creating the conditions
under which these intentions can best be ful
filled. One might compare the relation of the
ego to the id with that between a rider and his
horse.
The
horse
provides
the
locomotive
energy, and the rider has the prerogative of
determining the goal and of guiding the move
ments of his powerful mount towards it. But
all too often in the relations between the ego
and the id we find a picture of the less ideal
situation in which the rider is obliged to guide
his horse in the direction in which it itself wants
to go.
The ego has separated itself off from one
part of the id by means of repression-resist
ances. But the barrier of repression does not
extend into the id; so that the repressed mate
rial merges into the rest of the id.
The proverb tells us that one cannot serve
two masters at once. The poor ego has a still
harder time of it; it has to serve three harsh
masters, and has to do its best to reconcile the
claims and demands of all three. These de-

[840a]
New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis
839
mands are always divergent and often seem
quite incompatible; no wonder that the ego so
frequently gives way under its task. The three
tyrants are the external world, the super-ego,
and the id. When one watches the efforts of
the ego to satisfy them aU, or rather, to obey
them
all
simultaneously,
one
cannot
regret
having personified the ego, and established it
as a separate being. It feels itself hemmed in
on three sides and threatened by three kinds
of danger, towards which it reacts by develop
ing anxiety when it is too hard pressed. Having
originated in the experiences of the perceptual
system, it is designed to represent the demands
of the external world, but it also wishes to be
a loyal servant of the id, to remain upon good
terms with the id, to recommend itself to the
id as an object, and to draw the id's libido on
to itself. In its attempt to mediate between the
id and reality, it is often forced to clothe the
Ucs commands of the id with its own Pes ration
alizations, to gloss over the conflicts between
the id and reality, and with diplomatic dis
honesty to
display
a pretended regard for
reality, even when the id persists in being stub
born and uncompromising. On the other hand,
its every movement is watched by the severe
super-ego, which holds up certain norms of be
haviour, without
regard to
any
difficulties
coming from the id and the external world; and
if these norms are not acted up to, it punishes
the ego with the
feelings of tension which
manifest themselves as a sense of inferiority
and guilt. In this way, goaded on by the id,
hemmed in by the super-ego, and rebuffed by
reality, the ego struggles to cope with its
economic task of reducing the forces and in
fluences which work in it and upon it to some
kind of harmony; and we may weU understand
how it is that we so often cannot repress the
cry: "Life is not easy." When the ego is forced
to acknowledge its weakness, it breaks out into
anxiety: reality anxiety in face of the external
world, normal anxiety in face of the super-ego,
and neurotic anxiety in face of the strength of
the passions in the id.
I have represented the structural relations
within the mental personality, as I have ex
plained them to you, in a simple diagram, which
I here reproduce.
You will observe how the super-ego goes
down into the id; as the heir to the Oedipus
complex it has, after all, intimate connections
with the id. It lies further from the perceptual
system than the ego. The id only deals with the
external world through the medium of the ego,

[840b]
at least in this diagram. It is certainly still too
early to say how far the drawing is correct; in
one respect I know it is not. The space taken
up by the unconscious id ought to be incom
parably greater than that given to the ego or to
the preconscious. You must, if you please, cor
rect that in your imagination.
And now, in concluding this certainly rather
exhausting and perhaps not very illuminating
account, I must add a warning. When you think
of this dividing up of the personaHty into ego,
super-ego, and id, you must not imagine sharp
dividing lines such as are artificiaUy drawn in
the field of political geography. We cannot do
justice to the characteristics of the mind by
means of linear contours, such as occur in a
drawing or in a primitive painting, but we need
rather the areas of colour shading off into one
another that are to be found in modern pic
tures. After we have made our separations, we
must allow what we have separated to merge
again. Do not judge too harshly of a first at
tempt at picturing a thing so elusive as the
human mind. It is very probable that the extent
of these differentiations varies very greatly
from person to person; it is possible that their
function itself may vary, and that they may at
times undergo a process of involution. This
seems to be particularly true of the most in
secure and, from the phylogenetic point of view,
the most recent of them, the differentiation
between the ego and the super-ego. It is also
Pcpt-Cs
incontestable that the same thing can come
about as a result of mental disease. It can easily
be imagined, too, that
certain practices of
mystics may succeed in upsetting the normal
relations between the different regions of the
mind, so that, for example, the perceptual sys
tem becomes able to grasp relations in the
deeper layers of the ego and in the id which
would otherwise be inaccessible to it. Whether

[841a]
846
Sigmund Freud
such a procedure can put one in possession of
ultimate truths, from which all good will flow,
may be safely doubted. All the same, we must
admit that the therapeutic efforts of psycho
analysis have chosen much the same method
of approach. For their object is to strengthen
the ego, to make it more independent of the
super-ego, to widen its field of vision, and so to
extend its organization that it can take over
new portions of the id. Where id was, there
shall ego be.
It is reclamation work, like the draining of
the Zuyder Zee.
LECTURE 32
Anxiety and Instinctual Life
Ladies and Gentlemen : You will not be sur
prised to hear that I have a great deal of new
information to give you about our hypotheses
on the subject of anxiety and the fundamental
instincts of the mind, and also that none of
this information claims to provide a final solu
tion of these doubtful problems. I speak pur
posely of hypotheses. This is the most difficult
task that has been set us, but the difficulty does
not lie in the incompleteness of our obser
vations, for it is actually the commonest and
most familiar phenomena that present us with
such riddles; nor does it lie in the remoteness
of the speculations to which these phenomena
give rise, for speculation hardly comes into the
picture in this connection. No, it is genuinely a
question of hypotheses; that is to say, of the
introduction of the right abstract ideas, and of
their application to the raw material of ob
servation so as to bring order and lucidity into
it.
I devoted one lecture in my former series—
the twenty-fifth—to the study of anxiety. I
must recapitulate its contents in brief. We said
then that anxiety is an affective condition—
that is to say, a combination of certain feelings
of the pleasure-pain series with their corre
sponding efferent innervations, and a perception
of them—but we asserted that anxiety is prob
ably also the trace of a certain important event,
taken over by inheritance, and therefore com
parable to the ontogenetically acquired hyster
ical attack. We suggested that the event which
left this affective trace behind it was the process
of birth, in which the modifications of the
heart's action and
of respiration, which are
characteristic of anxiety, served a useful pur
pose. The first anxiety of aU would thus have
been a toxic one. We then started from the

[841b]
distinction between objective anxiety and neu
rotic anxiety, the former being what seems to
us an intelligible reaction to danger—that is,
to anticipated injury from without—and the
latter altogether puzzling and, as it were, pur
poseless. In our analysis of objective anxiety
we explained it as a condition of increased
sensory attention and motor tension, which we
called anxiety-preparedness. Out of this the
anxiety-reaction arises.
The anxiety-reaction
may run one of two courses. Either the anxietydevelopment, the repetition of the old traumatic
experience, is restricted to a signal, in which
case the rest of the reaction can adapt itself
to the new situation of danger, whether by
flight or defence; or the old experience gets
the upper hand, and the whole reaction ex
hausts itself in anxiety-development, in which
case the affective state is paralyzing and unadapted to the present situation.
We then
turned our attention to neurotic
anxiety, and pointed out that it could be ob
served in three forms. Firstly, we have freefloating,
general apprehensiveness, ready to
attach itself for
the time being to any new
possibility that may arise in the form of what
we call expectant dread, as happens, for in
stance, in the typical anxiety-neurosis. Second
ly, we find it firmly attached to certain ideas,
in what are known as phobias, in which we can
still recognize a connection with external dan
ger, but cannot help regarding the anxiety felt
towards it as enormously exaggerated. Thirdly
and finally, we have anxiety as it occurs in
hysteria and
in other severe neuroses; this
anxiety either accompanies symptoms or mani
fests itself independently, whether as an attack
or as a condition which persists for some time,
but always without having any visible justifi
cation in an external danger. We then asked
ourselves two
questions:
"What are people
afraid of when they have neurotic anxiety?"
and: "How can one bring this kind of anxiety
into line with objective anxiety felt towards
an external danger?"
Our investigations were by no means unsuc
cessful, and we succeeded in reaching a few
important conclusions. With regard to anxious
expectation, clinical experience has taught us
that there is a regular relationship between it
and the disposition of the libido in the sexual
life. The most frequent cause of anxiety-neu
rosis
is undischarged excitation. A libidinal
excitation is aroused, but is: not satisfied or
used; in the place»of this libido which has been
diverted from its use, anxiety makes its appear-

[842a]
ance. I even thought it was justifiable to say
that this unsatisfied libido is directly trans
formed into anxiety. This view found some
support in certain almost universal phobias of
small children. Many of these phobias are alto
gether enigmatic, but others, such as the fear
of being left alone and the fear of unfamiliar
people, can be definitely explained. Being left
alone or seeing strange faces stirs up the child's
longing for the familiar presence of its mother;
it cannot control this libidinal excitation; it
cannot keep it in a state of suspension, but
turns it into anxiety. This anxiety in children,
therefore, is not objective anxiety, but must
be classed among the neurotic anxieties. Chil
dren's phobias, and the anxious expectation in
anxiety-neurosis, serve as two examples of one
way in which neurotic anxiety comes about;
i.e., through direct transformation of libido.
In a moment we shall learn of a second method,
and we shall see that it is not so very different
from the first.
For it is to the process of repression that we
attribute the appearance of anxiety in hysteria
and other neuroses^ We now believe that it is
possible
to give a fuller
description Of this
process than before, if we separate the history
of the idea that has to be repressed from that
of the Hbido which is attached to it. It is the
idea that undergoes repression and may be
distorted so as to become unrecognizable; its
associated affect is always turned into anxiety,
regardless of its nature^ whether, that is to say,
it is aggression or love. Now it makes no essen
tial difference on what grounds a given quan
tity of Hbido has become unusable, whether on
account of the infantile weakness of the ego,
as in the case of children's phobias, or on
account of somatic processes in sexual life, as
in the case of anxiety neuroses, or on account
of repression, as in the case of hysteria. The
two mechanisms which give rise to neurotic
anxiety are therefore essentiaUy the same.
While we were engaged in these investiga
tions, we noticed a very important connection
between anxiety-development and symptomformation. It was that the two are interchange
able. The agoraphbbiac, for example,
begins
his illness with an attack of anxiety in the
street. This is repeated every time he walks
along the street again. He now develops a
symptom—a street phobia—which can also be
described as an inhibition of a functional re
striction of the ego, and thus he preserves
himself from anxiety attacks. One can observe
the reverse process if one interferes with the

[842b]
New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis
841
formation of symptoms, as is possible, for in
stance, in the case of obsessive acts. If one
prevents a patient from carrying out his wash
ing ceremonial, he is thrown into an intolerable
state of anxiety, against which his symptom
has obviously protected him. And, indeed, it
seems as though anxiety-development is the
earlier and symptom-formation the later of the
two, as though the symptom were created in
order to prevent the outbreak of a state of
anxiety. Aiid it is in keeping with this that the
first neuroses of childhood are phobias—con
ditions, that is to say, in which one sees quite
clearly how what began as anxiety-development
is later replaced by symptom-formation: one
gets
an
impression
that
this
circumstance
affords the best starting-point from which to
approach an understanding of neurotic anxiety.
At the same time, we succeeded in discovering
the answer to the question of what it is that
one fears in neurotic anxiety, and thus restoring
the connection between neurotic anxiety and
objective anxiety. What one fears is obviously
one's own libido. The difference between this
and objective anxiety lies in two points—that
the danger is an internal instead of an external
one, and that it is not Consciously recognized.
In the case of phobias one can see clearly
how this internal danger is transformed into
an external one; how, that is to say, neurotic
anxiety turns into apparent objective anxiety.
Let us simplify a state of affairs which is often
very complicated, and suppose that the agoraphobiac is always afraid of his impulses in con
nection with teniptations aroused in him by
meeting people in the street. In his phobia he
makes a displacement and is now afraid of an
external situation. What he gains thereby is
obvious; it is that he feels he can protect him
self better in that way. One can rescue oneself
from an external danger by flight, whereas to
attempt to fly from an internal danger is a
difficult undertaking.
At the end of my original lecture on anxiety
I
expressed the
opinion that, though these
various results of our investigations did not
actually
contradict one
another, they were
nevertheless not entirely
consistent.
As
an
affective condition, anxiety is the reproduction
of an
old danger-threatening event; anxiety
serves the purposes of self-preservation as being
a signal of the presence bf a new danger; it
arises from libido that has become unusable
for some reason or other, including the process
of
repression;
it
is replaced by
symptomformation, and is thus, as it were, psychically

[843a]
842
Sigmund
bound; in aHof this one feels that something is
missing which would combine these fragments
into a unity.
Ladies and Gentlemen—The division of the
mental personality into a super-ego, ego, and
id, which I spoke about in the last lecture, has
forced us to take up a new position with regard
to the problem of anxiety. In assuming that the
ego is the only seat of anxiety, and that only
the ego can produce and feel anxiety, we have
taken up a new and secure position, from which
many facts take on a new aspect. And when
you come to think of it, it is difficult to see
what sense there could be in speaking of an
anxiety of the id, or how we could ascribe a
capacity for feeling anxiety to the super-ego.
On the contrary, we have found a satisfactory
confirmation of our theory in the fact that the
three
main
varieties
of
anxiety—objective
anxiety, neurotic anxiety, and moral anxiety—
can so easily be related to the three directions
in which the ego is dependent, on the external
world, on the id, and on the super-ego. Our
new position, too, has brought to the fore the
function of anxiety as a signal indicating the
presence of a danger-situation, a function with
which we were already not unfamifiar. The
question of the stuff out of which anxiety is
made loses interest for us, and the relations
between objective anxiety and neurotic anxiety
are clarified and simplified in a surprising way.
And,, besides this, it is to be noticed that we
now understand the
apparently complicated
cases of anxiety-formation better than we do
those which seem to be simple.
We have recently investigated the manner in
which anxiety comes about in certain phobias,
which we class with anxiety-hysteria, and we
have chosen for investigation cases in which we
have to deal with the typical repression of
desires proceeding from the Oedipus complex.
We should have expected to find that it is the
libidinal cathexis of the mother as object which,
as a result of repression, is transformed into
anxiety, and now manifests itself in the form
of a symptom as attached to the father-sub
stitute. I cannot tell you all the individual steps
of an investigation of this kind; let it suffice
to say that, to our astonishment, the result was
the reverse of what we had expected. It is not
the repression that creates the anxiety, but the
anxiety is there first and creates the repression!
But what sort of anxiety can it be? It can only
be fear of a threatening external danger, that
is to say, objective anxiety. It is true that the
boy is afraid of the demands of his Hbido, in

[843b]
Freud
this case of his love for his mother; so that
this is really an instance of neurotic anxiety.
But this being in love seems to him to be an
internal danger, which he must avoid by re
nouncing his object, only because it involves
an external danger-situation. And in every case
we have investigated we
have obtained the
same result. It must, however, be confessed
that we were not prepared to find that the in
stinctual danger was only a half-way house to
an external and real danger-situation.
We have, however, not yet said what the
real danger is that the child fears as a result
of his being in love with his mother. It is the
punishment of castration, the loss of his penis.
Naturally, you will object that after aU that is
not a real danger. Our boys are not castrated
because they are in love with their mothers
during the phase of the Oedipus-complex. But
the question cannot be so easily dismissed. It
is not primarily a matter of whether castration
is really performed; what is important is that
the danger is one that threatens from without,
and that the boy believes in it. He has some
grounds for doing so, for, not infrequently,
threats of his penis being cut off are made
during his phallic phase, at the time of his
early masturbation; and no doubt aUusions to
such a punishment will always find a phylogen
etic reinforcement on his side. We have con
jectured that, in the early days of the human
family, castration reaUy was performed on the
growing boy by the jealous and cruel father,
and that circumcision, which is so frequently
an element in puberty rites, is an easily recog
nizable trace of it. We are aware of how far
removed we are from the common point of
view in saying this, but we must maintain our
position that fear of castration is one of the
most frequent and one of the strongest motive
forces of repression, and therefore of the for
mation of neuroses. The analysis of cases in
which, it is true, not castration itself, but cir
cumcision, has been performed on boys as a
cure or as a punishment for masturbation (a
thing which was by no means of rare occurrence
in English and American society) has provided
us with conclusive proof that we are right. It
is a great temptation at this juncture to go
further into the
castration-complex, but we
will keep to our subject. Fear of castration is
naturaUy not the only motive for repression;
to start with, it has no place in the psychology
of women; they have, of course, a castrationcomplex, but they cannot have any fear of
castration. In its place, for the other sex, is

[844a]
New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis
843
found fear of the loss of love, obviously a
continuation of the fear of the infant at the
breast when it misses its mother. You will
understand what objective danger-situation is
indicated by this kind of anxiety. If the mother
is absent or has withdrawn her love from the
child, it can no longer be certain that its needs
will be satisfied, and may be exposed to the
most painful feelings of tension. There is no
need to reject the idea that these conditions
for anxiety fundamentaHy repeat the situation
of the original birtfi-anxiety, which, to be sure,
also implied separation from the mother. In
deed, if you follow a line of thought suggested
by Ferenczi, you may add fear of castration,
too, to this series, for the loss of the male
genital organ-results-In--the impossibility of a
reunion with the mother, or with a substitute
for her, in the sexual act. I might mention,
incidentally, that the common phantasy of re
turning into the womb is a substitute for this
desire for coitus. There are still a great number
of interesting and surprising
facts which I
might tell you about in this connection; but I
must not step beyond the bounds of an intro
duction to psycho-analysis. I will, therefore,
merely draw your attention to the way in
which, at this point, the findings of psychology
take us to the frontiers of biological fact.
Otto Rank, to whom psycho-analysis owes
many valuable contributions,has also the merit
of having strongly emphasized the importance
of the act of birth and of separation from the
mother. It is true that the rest of us found it
impossible to accept the extreme deductions
that he drew from this factor with regard to
the theory of the neuroses and even to analyti
cal therapy. But before this he had already
discovered the central feature of his doctrine,
namely, that the anxiety-experience of birth is
the prototype of all later danger-situations. If
we pause for a moment at this point we can
say that, as a matter of fact, every stage of
development has its own particular conditions
for anxiety; that is to say, a danger-situation
appropriate to it. The danger of mental help
lessness corresponds to the stage of early im
maturity of the ego; the danger of loss of
object or of love correspondsto the dependence
of the early years of childhood; the danger of
castration to the phallic phase; and finally, the
fear of the super-ego, which occupies a special
position, to the period of latency. As develop
ment proceeds, the old conditions for anxiety
should
vanish,
since
the
danger-situations,
which, correspond to them, have lost their force

[844b]
owing to the strengthening of the ego. But this
only happens to a very incomplete degree. A
great many people cannot overcome the fear
of loss of love; they never become independent
enough of the love of other people, and con
tinue their infantile behaviour in this respect.
The fear of the
super-ego should normally
never cease, since it is indispensable in social
relations in the form of moral anxiety, and it is
only in the rarest instances that an individual
succeeds in becoming independent of the com
munity. A few of the old danger-situations also
manage to preserve their force in later Hfe by
giving their conditions for anxiety an up-todate form. Thus, for instance, the danger of
castration is preserved under the disguise of
syphilidophobia.
Grown-up
people
are well
aware that castration is no longer practised as
a punishment for indulging sexual desires, but,
on the other hand, they have learned from ex
perience that instinctual freedom in this direc
tion involves the risk of severe illnesses. There
is ho doubt that persons whom we caU neurotic
remain infantile in their attitude towards dan
ger and have not grown out
of antiquated
conditions for anxiety. Let us accept this as a
factual contribution to our characterization of
neurotics; why it should be so is not so easy
to say.
I hope you have not lost the thread of our
discourse, and that you remember that we are
discussing the relations between anxiety and
repression. We have discovered two new facts
in doing so: first, that anxiety causes repression,
and not the other way round as we used to
think, and secondly, that frightening instinctual
situations can in the last resort be traced back
to
external situations of danger.
Our next
question will be: How can we picture the proc
ess of repression carried out under the influence
of anxiety? I think this is what happens: the
ego becomes aware that the satisfaction of
some nascent instinctual demand would evoke
one among the weU-remembered danger-situa
tions. This instinctual cathexis must, therefore,
somehow
or other be suppressed, removed,
made powerless.We know that the ego succeeds
in this task if it is strong, and if it has assim
ilated the impulse in question into its organi
zation. In the case of repression, however, the
impulse is still a part of the id, and the ego
feels weak. In such a contingency, the ego caUs
to its aid a technique, which is, at bottom,
identical with that of normal thinking. Thinking
is an experimental dealingwith smaU quantities
of energy, just as a general moves miniature

[845a]
844
Sigmund Freud
figures about over a map before setting his
troops in motion. In this way, the ego antici
pates the satisfaction of the questionable im
pulse, and enables it to reproduce the painful
feefings which are attached to the beginning
of the dreaded danger-situation. Thereupon the
automatic
mechanism
of
the
pleasure-pain
principle
is brought into
play
and
carries
through the repression of the dangerous impulse.
"Stop!" you wiU exclaim, "we cannot go so
far as that with you." You are right; I shall
have to add something to what I have said, to
make it seem acceptable to you. First of all, I
must admit that I have tried to translate into
the language of our normal thought a process
which is in fact certainly neither conscious nor
preconscious, and which takes place between
charges of energy at some deep level of the
mind that it is hard to picture. But that is not
a very serious objection; it could not be done
in any other way. It is more important that we
should clearly distinguish between what goes
on in the ego and what goes on in the id during
the process of repression. We have just ex
plained what the ego does. It makes use' of an
experimental cathexis, and by means of a dan
ger-signal sets in motion the automatic pleasurepain mechanism. Several reactions then become
possible, or a combination of them, in various
proportions. Either the anxiety attack develops
completely and the ego withdraws entirely from
the objectionable excitation; or, in place of the
experimental cathexis, the ego meets.the ex
citation with an anti-cathexis (counter-charge)
which then combines with the energy of the
repressed impulse to form a symptom, or is
taken up into the ego as a reaction-formation,
as an intensification of certain dispositions, as
a permanent alteration of the ego. The more
the development of anxiety can be restricted to
a mere signal, the more the ego can make use
of defensive acts, which amount to a mental
binding of the repressed, and the more the
process approximates to the standard of a nor
mal modification of the impulse, without of
course ever reaching it. Here I shall digress for
a moment or so. You will, no doubt, yourselves
have assumed that the thing which is so hard to
define but which we call character must be
thought of as belonging entirely to the province
of the ego. We have already learned something
of what it is that creates this thing called char
acter. The incorporation of the early parental
function in the shape of the super-ego is no
doubt the most important and decisive ele
ment; next come identifications with the par

[845b]
ents of a later date and with other persons in
authority, and the same identifications as pre
cipitates of abandoned object-relations. We can
now add to this list, as contributions to char
acter-formation which are never absent, the
reaction-formations which the ego acquires,
first in making its repressions, and later in a
more normal way, in repudiating undesirable
impulses.
Now let us go back to a consideration of the
id. It is not so easy to discover what it is that
happens during the process of repression to the
impulses that are being opposed. The main
question to which we want to know the answer
is: What happens to the energy, to the libidinal
charge of the impulse, and how is it used? You
will remember that my earlier hypothesis was
that it was precisely this energy that was turned
into anxiety. We can, however, no longer ven
ture to say that; we must content ourselves
with a more modest answer. Its fate is prob
ably not always the same. Probably there is a
close correspondence between what happens in
the ego and what happens in the id with respect
to the repressed impulse, and it should be pos
sible to learn something of its nature. For, since
we have adopted the view that the pleasurepain principle is brought into action in re
sponse to the danger-signal, and plays a part
in repression, we are obliged to modify our
anticipations. This principle has unrestricted
sway over the processes in the id. We can credit
it, too, with the power of bringing about very
profound changes in the impulse in question.
We are, therefore, prepared to befieve that the
effects of repression wiU be very varied, and
sometimes more and sometimes less extensive.
In many cases the repressed impulse may re
tain its libidinal cathexis, and continue to exist
unaltered in the id, although under the per
petual pressure of the ego. In other instances
it seems to undergo complete destruction, in
which case its libido is finally diverted into
other channels. I have suggested that this is
what happens where the Oedipus complex is
dealt with normaUy. In this desirable state of
affairs, the Oedipus complex would thus not
merely be repressed, but would be actually
destroyed in the id. Clinical experience has
further taught us that in a great many cases,
instead of the usual result of repression, a deg
radation of the libido take place, a regression
of the Hbidinal organization to an earlier stage
of development. That can naturaUy only happen
in the id, and when it does happen, it must be
under the influence of the same conflict that

[846a]
was introduced by the danger-signal. The most
remarkable example of this is to be found in
the obsessional neurosis, where regression of
libido and repression go hand in hand.
Ladies and Gentlemen—I am afraid that this
account will seem to you very difficult to fol
low, and you will guess that it is by no means a
complete one. I am sorry to have caused you
annoyance. My only aim, however, must be to
give you some impression of the^nature of our
findings, and of the difficulties we have: to face
in dealing with them. The deeper we probe in
our study of mental processes, the more we
become aware of the richness and complexity
of their content. Many simple formulas which
seemed to us at first to meet the case, turned
out later to be inadequate. We are incessantly
altering and improving them. In my lecture on
the theory of dreams, I led you into a field of
knowledge in which hardly a single new dis
covery has been made in the last fifteen years;
here, where we are dealing with anxiety, every
thing is in a state of flux and change. These
new findings have not yet been thoroughly
worked over, and perhaps for that very reason
their exposition is difficult. However, you must
have patience;-we shaU soon be able to leave
the problem of anxiety, though that does not
mean that it will have been solved to our satis
faction. I hope, however, that we have ad
vanced a step further. And incidentally we
have acquired much fresh knowledge. Thus we
are now able, through the study of anxiety, to
add a fresh trait to our characterization of the
ego. We have said that the ego is weak in rela
tion to the id, that it is its faithful servant,
and that it tries to carry out its orders and ful
fil its requirements. We have no intention of
withdrawing this assertion. But on the other
hand the ego is the better organized part of
the id, orientated as it is towards reality. We
must not exaggerate too much the separation
between the two, and we must not be surprised
if the ego, too, on its side exerts an influence
on the processes in the id. I think the ego
exerts an influence of this kind when it sets
the all-powerful pleasure-pain principle in mo
tion by means of the danger-signal. It is true
that immediately afterwards it displays its
weakness again, for by the act of repression it
renounces a portion of its organization, and is
obliged to allow the repressed impulse to re
main permanently withdrawn from its influence.
And now just one more point in regard to
the problem of anxiety. Neurotic anxiety has,
under our hands, turned into objective anxiety,

[846b]
New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis
845
into anxiety felt towards certain external dan
ger-situations. But we cannot leave it at that;
we must take a step further, though in a sense
it will be a step backwards. What is it that is
actually dangerous and actually feared in such
a danger-situation? It is clearly not the objec
tive injury, which need
have absolutely no
importance psychologically, but it is something
which is set up in the mind by it. Birth, for
example, our prototype for the.state of anxiety,
can hardly in itself be regarded as an injury,
although it may involve a risk of injury. The
fundamental thing about birth, as about every
danger-situation, is that it evokes in mental ex
perience a condition of tense excitation, which
is felt as pain, and which cannot be mastered
by discharge. Let us call such a situation, in
which the efforts of the pleasure-principle come
to nothing, a traumatic factor; in that way, by
following the series—neurotic anxiety-objective
anxiety-danger-situation—we can arrive at a
simple formula: what is feared, the object of
the anxiety, is always the emergence of a trau
matic factor, which cannot be dealt with in
accordance with the norms of the pleasureprinciple. We can immediately see that the
operation of the pleasure-principle does not
guarantee us against objective injury, but only
against a particular injury to our mental econ
omy. From the pleasure-principle to the in
stinct of self-preservation is a long way; and
the two
tendencies are far from coinciding
from the first. We can observe something else,
however, and perhaps this is the solution for
which we were looking. I have in mind the fact
that all along we are dealing with questions of
relative quantities. It is only the magnitude of
the excitation which turns an impression into
a traumatic factor, which paralyzes the opera
tion of the pleasure-principle and gives signifi
cance to the danger-situation. And if this is
really the case, if these problems admit of such
a simple solution, why should it not be possible
that traumatic
factors
of
this kind
should
occur in the mental life without relation to the
supposeddanger-situations,traumatic factors in
regard to which anxiety is not aroused as a
signal, but manifests itself afresh and for new
reasons? Clinical experience definitely tells us
that this actually occurs. Only the later repres
sions display the mechanism which we have
described, in which anxiety is called forth.as a
signal of an earlier danger-situation; the earn
est
and
most fundamental repressions arise
directly from traumatic factors, where the ego
comes into contact with an excessive libidinal

[847a]
846
Sigmund Freud
demand; these traumatic factors create their
own anxiety anew, though in accordance with
the pattern of the birth-situation. The same
may be true of the development of anxiety
in anxiety-neuroses, caused by somatic injury
of the sexual
function. We shall no longer
maintain that it is the Hbido itself that is turned
into anxiety in such cases. But I can see no ob
jection to postulating twofold origin of anxiety,
first as the direct effect of a traumatic factor,
and secondly, as a signal that a traumatic fac
tor of this kind threatens to recur.
Ladies and Gentlemen—-I am sure you are
delighted with the prospect of hearing no more
about anxiety. But your defight will be short
lived, for what is to follow is no better. I pro
pose to take you straight on to the subject of
the theory of the Hbido or of the instincts, for
there, too, many new developments have oc
curred. I cannot say that we have made any
very great progress or that any trouble you
may take in learning about it will be amply
rewarded. No; it is a field in which we are
struggling hard to get some sort of orienta
tion and understanding; you will only be wit
nesses of the efforts we are making. Here, too,
I shall have to repeat much that I put before
you in my earHer lectures.
The theory of the instincts is, as it were,
our mythology. The instincts are mythical be
ings, superb in their indefiniteness. In our work
we cannot for a moment overlook them, and
yet we are never certain that we are seeing
them clearly. You know how popular thought
deals with the instincts. It postulates as many
different instincts as may be needed, an in
stinct of assertiveness, instincts of imitation
and play, a social instinct and a great many
more besides. It takes them up, as it were, lets
each do its particular work, and then drops
them again. We have always suspected that
behind this multitude of small occasional in
stincts there Hes something much more serious
and powerful, which must be approached with
circumspection. Our first
step was
tentative
enough. We felt we should probably not go far
wrong if we started by distinguishing two main
instincts, or species or groups of instincts, cor
responding to our two great needs—hunger and
love. However jealously we may in other con
nections have defended the independence of
psychology from aU other sciences, neverthe
less we are here overshadowed by the immu
table biological fact that the living individual
serves two purposes, self-preservation and the
preservation of the species, which seem to be

[847b]
independent of each other, which we have not
been able to trace back to a common source,
and whose interests often conflict in animal
Hfe. Here we are really discussing biological
psychology, we are studying the psychological
concomitants of biological processes. In accord
ance with this view, we introduced the egoinstincts and the sexual instincts into psycho
analysis. Under the former heading we placed
everything that had to do with the preservation,
maintenance and advancement of the individr
ual. To the latter we ascribed the rich content
implied in infantile and perverse sexual Hfe.
Our investigation of the neuroses led us to re
gard the ego as the restricting and repressing
force and the sexual impulses as the restricted
and repressed ones, with the result that we
thought we had firmly grasped not only the
difference between the two groups of instincts,
but the conflictbetween them. At first, the ob
jects of our studies consisted only of the sexual
impulses, whose energy we called the libido.
From the study of them we tried to make out
what an instinct was and what attributes it
possessed. At this point we reach the theory of
the libido.
An instinct differs from a stimulus in that it
arises from sources of stimulation within the
body, operates as a constant force, and is such
that the subject cannot escape from it by flight
as he can from an external stimulus. An instinct
may be described as having a source, an ob
ject, and an aim. The source is a state of ex
citation within the body, and its aim is to
remove that excitation; in the course of its
path from its source to the attainment of its
aim the instinct becomes operative mentally.
We picture it as a certain sum of energy forc
ing its way in a certain direction. We speak of
active
and passive instincts, but we ought
rather to speak of active and passive instinctual
aims; for an expenditure of activity is required
even in order to attain a passive aim. The aim
can be attained in the subject's own body, but
as a rule an external object is introduced, in
which the instinct attains its external aim; its
internal aim is always a somatic modification
which is experienced as satisfaction. Whether
the relation to a somatic source gives the in
stinct any specific characters, and if so which,
is not at all clear. The evidence of analytic
experience proves conclusively that instinctual
impulses from one source can join on to in
stinctual impulses from another and share their
further vicissitudes, and that in general the
satisfaction of one instinct can be substituted

[848a]
for
the satisfaction of another. It must be
freely admitted, however, that we are not very
clear about the explanation of this. The rela
tions of an instinct to its aim and to its object
are also susceptible to alterations; both can be
exchanged for others, but the relation to the
object is the more easily loosened of the two.
There is a particular kind of modification of
aim and changeof object, with regardto which
our social values come into the picture; to this
we give the name of sublimation. We have also
grounds for the differentiation of what we call
aim-inhibited instincts; these proceed from fa
miliar sources and have unambiguous aims, but
come to a stop on their way to satisfaction,
with the result that a permanent object-ca
thexis and an enduring driving force come into
being. Of such a kind, for instance, is the feel
ing of affection, whose source undoubtedly lies
in sexual needs but invariably renounces their
gratification. We are, as you see, still in ig
norance about many of the characteristics of
the instincts and their history. We ought here
to mention another distinction between the
sexual instincts and the instincts of self-preser
vation which would be of the utmost theoret
ical importance, if it applied to the whole
group. The sexual instincts are remarkable for
their plasticity, for the faciHty with which they
can change their aims, for their interchangeability—for the ease with which they can sub
stitute one form of gratification for another,
and for the way in which they can be held in
suspense, as has been so well illustrated by the
aim-inhibited instincts. It would be convenient
if we could assert that these characteristics do
not apply to the instincts of self-preservation,
and that the latter are inflexible, do not allow
of delay, are far more imperative and respond
quite differently to repression and anxiety. On
reflection, however, we see that this peculiarity
does not apply to all the ego-instincts but only
to those of hunger and thirst, and is clearly due
to
the
special nature
of
their instinctual
sources. A great deal of our perplexity also
arises from the fact that we have not devoted
any attention to the alterations which the in
stinctual impulses originally belonging to the
id undergo under the influence of the organ
ized ego.
We find ourselves on firmer ground when we
turn to the question of how the instinctual life
serves the sexual function. Here we have ob
tained decisive information; but you are al
ready familiar with it. We do not, that is to
say, believe that there is a single sexual in

[848b]
New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis
847
stinct, which is from the first the vehicle of
the impulse towards the aim of the sexual func
tion, that is, the union of the two sex ceUs..
On the contrary, we see a large number of com
ponent instincts, arising from various regions
of the body, which strive for satisfaction more
or less independently of one another, and find
this satisfaction in
something that may be
called organ-pleasure. The genitals are the lat
est of these erotogenic zones; and their organpleasure must certainly be called sexual. Not
all of these pleasure-seeking impulses are in
corporated in the final organization of the sex
ual function. Many of them are put aside as
useless, by means of repression or in some
other way; some of them are deflected from
their aims in the remarkable manner which we
have already mentioned and used for the
strengthening of other impulses; while others
persist, but play minor parts, and serve the
purpose of bringing about preliminary actions
and of arousing fore-pleasure. You have heard
that in this long-drawn-out course of develop
ment several phases of provisional organization
are to be recognized, and that aberrations and
maldevelopments of the sexual function are to
be explained by reference to its history. The
first of these pregenital phasesis calledthe oral
phase, because, in accordance with the fact
that the infant is nourished through the mouth,
the
erotogenic zone of
the mouth domi
nates what we may call the sexual activity of
this period of life. At a second stage the sadistic
and anal impulses come to the fore, obviously
in connection with the cutting of the teeth, the
strengthening of the musculature, and the con
trol of the sphincters. We have learnt a great
many interesting details about this remarkable,
stageof development in particular. Third comes
the phallic phase, in which for both sexes the
penis (and what corresponds to it in the girl)
achieves an importance which can no longer be
overlooked. We have reserved the name of
genital phase for the final sexual organization,
established after puberty, in which the female
genitals receive for the first time the recogni
tion which the male genitals have long since
obtained.
So far all this has been mere recapitulation.
And you must not suppose that the things
which I have omitted to mention this time no
longer hold true. This recapitulation was neces
sary so that we could have a starting-point for
our account of the
further
advance in our
knowledge. We can flatter ourselves that we
have obtained a great deal of new information

[849a]
848
Sigmund Freud
precisely about this matter of the early organi
zations of the libido and that we have a better
understanding of what we already knew—in
proof of which I will give you a few instances.
In 1924, Abraham showed that we can differ
entiate two stages in the sadistic-anal phase.
In the former of these the destructive tend
encies to annihilate and to get rid of things
have the upper hand, while in the latter those
tendencies predominate which are friendly to
the object, and seek to possess things and hold
them fast In the middle of this phase, then,
there appears for the first time a consideration
for the object which is a forerunner of a later
relation of love towards the object. We are
equaUy justified in assuming a similar subdi
vision in the first or oral phase. In the earHer
stage of it, we only have oral incorporation,
and there is no ambivalence in the relation to
the object, i.e., the mother's breast. The second
stage, which is distinguished by the onset of
biting activities, may be called the oral-sadistic
stage. It is here that we get the first manifesta
tions of ambivalence, which become so much
more obvious in the next, or
sadistic-anal
phase. The value of these new differentiations
becomes especially clear when we want to
discover
the
predispositional points of the
libidinal development in the case of certain
neuroses—such as obsessional neurosis and mel
ancholia. I need only recall to you here what
we have learnt on the subject of fixation of
libido, predisposition, and regression.
Our attitude to the phases of libidinal or
ganization has in general altered somewhat. We
used formerly to emphasize the way in which
one phase gives place tb the next; nowadays,
we direct our attention more to the facts which
indicate how much of each earlier phase per
sists side by side with, and behind, later organ
izations, and obtains permanent representation
in the economy of the libido and in the charac
ter of the individual. Even more important are
those investigations which have shown us how
frequently under pathological conditions re
gression to earHer phases takes place, and that
certain regressions are characteristic of certain
forms of illness. I cannot, however, go into
that questionhere; it is.a matter for a special
ized treatise on the psychologyof the neuroses.
We have been able to study the transforma
tion of instincts and similar processes, espe
cially with reference to anal-erotism, in which
the impulses have theirsource intheerotogenic
anal zone, and we are surprised to find the
multipHcity of the channels along which these

[849b]
instinctual impulses can be directed. It is,
perhaps, not easy to free oneself from the con
temptuous attitude which we have come to
adopt towards this particular zone during the
course of our development. It is as well, there
fore, to bear in mind Abraham's reminder that
embryologically the anus corresponds to the
primitive mouth, which has moved down to the
end of the bowel. It appears, then, that when,in
the
course of
development,
the
individual
comes to feel disfavour for his own faeces or
excrement, his instinctual interest arising from
anal sources passes over to objects which can
be given away as gifts. And rightly so, for
faeces were the first gift that the infant could
make, and he parted with them out of love for
the person wholooked after him. Subsequently,
the old interest in faeces turns into an appre
ciation of gold and money, and also makes a
contribution to the affective cathexis attaching
to the ideas of child and penis. It is the view
of aU children, who, as we know, cling to the
cloaca-theory for a long time, that babies are
born out of the bowel, like a piece of faeces;
defecation is the prototype of the act of birth.
But the penis, too, has its forerunner in the
column of feaces, which fills the mucous mem
brane tube of the bowel and stimulates it. When
the child has unwiUingly imbibed the knowl
edge that there are human beings who do not
possess a penis, that organ seems to him some
thing which can be detached from the body,
and an unmistakable analogy is drawn between
it and the excrement which was the first piece
of bodily substance that had to be given up.
A large quantity of anal-erotism is thus trans
ferred to the cathexis of the penis. But the
interest in that part of the body has, besides
an anal-erotic basis, a perhaps even more pow
erful root in oral erotism; for in accordance
with the situation of sucking, the penis derives
a great deal from the nipple of the mother's
breast.
It is impossible to have any understanding
of people's phantasies, or of associations which
occur under the influence of the unconscious,
or of the language of symptoms, if one does
not know about these deep-lying connections.
On this level, faeces-money-gift-child-penis are
taken as havingthe same meaning, and can be
represented by the same symbols. You must
not forget that I can only give you very in
complete information on the subject. I will,
however, add in passing that thelate awakening
interest in the vagina is mainly of anal-erotic
derivation. Thisis not to be wondered at, since

[850a]
New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis
849
the vagina is, in the admirable phrase of Lou
Andreas-Salome, "hired out" from the rectum;
and in the lives of homosexuals, who have not
got beyond a certainstagein their sexual devel
opment, the vagina is once more represented
by the anus. In dreams we often meet with a
place which was formerly a single room, but
is now divided into two by a partition wall, or
vice versa. This always refers to the relation
of the vagina to the rectum. We can alsofollow
very clearly the way in which in a girl, the
entirely unfeminine desire for the possession
of a penis normally turns into the desire for a
child, and then for a man as the bearer of the
penis and the giver of the child, so that in this
case, too, we can see how an element of what
was originaUy an anal-erotic interest is taken
up into the later genital organization.
In the course of these studies of the pregeni
tal phases of the Hbido, we have gleaned some
newpieces of information about the formation
of character. We have been made aware of a
triad of characteristics which are almost always
to be found together: orderliness, parsimoniousness, and obstinacy, and wehave concluded
from the analysis of persons possessing them
that these characteristics proceed from the dis
sipation of their anal-erotism and its employ
ment in other ways. Where this remarkable
combination is to be found, therefore, we speak
of an anal character, and in a sense contrast it
with unmodified anal-erotism. A similar arid
perhaps even firmer connection is to be found
between ambition and urethral erotism. We
have found a remarkable reference to this cor
relation in the legend that Alexander the Great
was born on the same night that a certain
Herostratus, from a craving for notoriety, set
fire to the famous temple of Artemis at Ephesus. It seems that the ancients were well aware
of the connection involved. You already know
how close a connection there is between uri
nation and fire and the putting out of fire.
Naturally, we expect to find that other traits
of character will also turn out to be derived
from pregenital Hbidinal formations, either as
precipitates or as reaction-formations; but we
cannot as yet demonstrate this.
It is now time for me to turn back to an
earlier stage of our problem, and again take up
the question of instinctual life in its most gen
eral aspect. The contrast between ego-instincts
and sexual instincts lay, to begin with, at the
bottom of our theory of the libido. When, later
on, we began to study the egoin greater detail,
and came to understand the idea of narcissism,
this distinction itself lost its validity. In certain
rare cases one observes that the ego takes itself
as object, and behaves as if it were in love with
itself. For this reason we have borrowed the
name of narcissism from the Greek legend.
But that is only an extreme exaggeration of the
normal course of events. We must understand
that the ego is always the main reservoir of
Hbido, from which libidinal cathexes of objects
proceed, and into which they return again,
while the greater part of this libido remains
perpetually in the ego. There is therefore a
constant transformation of ego-libido into ob
ject-libido,and of object-libidointo ego-fibido.
But if this is so, the two cannot differ from
each other in their nature, and there is no
point in distinguishing the energy of the one
from that of the other; one can either drop
the term libido altogether, or use it as meaning
the same as psychic energy in general.
We did not keep to this point of view for
long. The idea of contrasting forces within the
instinctual life was soon given another and
more precise meaning. I shall not go through
the processes by which I arrived at this new
point of view; it, too, rests essentially on bio
logical considerations; I will put it before you
as a finished article. We suppose that there are
two fundamentally different kinds of instincts,
the sexual instincts in the widest sense of the
word {Eros, if you prefer that name) and the
aggressive instincts, whose aim is destruction.
WTieri it is put like that, you will hardly think
of it as anything new; it looks as though it
were a theoretical glorification of the com
monplace opposition between love and hate,
which may perhaps coincide with the polarity
bf attraction and repulsion which physics postu
lates for the inorganic world. But it is remark
able that this hypothesis was nevertheless felt
by many to be an innovation, and indeed a
most undesirable one which ought to be got
rid of as soon as possible. I think a strong
emotional factor was responsible for this rejec
tion. Why have we ourselves taken so long to
bring ourselves to recognize the existence of
an aggressive instinct? Why was there so much
hesitation in using for our theory facts which
lay ready to hand and were familiar to every
one? One would probably meet with but Httle
opposition if one were to ascribeto animals an
instinct with such an aim as this. But to intro
duce it into the human constitution seems im
pious; it contradicts too many religious preju
dices and social conventions. No, man must be
by nature good, or at least good-natured. If he

[851a]
850
Sigmund Freud
occasionally shows himself to be brutal, vio
lent, and cruel, these are only passing disturb
ances of his emotional life, mostly provoked,
and perhaps only the consequence of the illadapted social system which he has so far made
for himself.
Unfortunately the testimony of history and
our own experience do not bear this out, but
rather confirm the judgment that the belief in
the goodness of man's nature is one of those
unfortunate iUusions from which mankind ex
pects some kind of beautifying or amelioration
of their lot, but which in reality bring only
disaster. We need not proceed with this po
lemic; for it is not on account of the teaching
of history and of our own experience of life
that we maintain the hypothesis of a special
instinct of aggression and destructiveness in
man, but on account of general considerations,
to which we were led in trying to estimate the
importance of the phenomena of sadism and
masochism. You know that we use the word
sadism when sexual satisfaction depends upon
the sexual object suffering pain, ill-treatment,
and humifiation, and the
word
masochism,
when the subject himself has to
suffer such
treatment. You know, too,
that there is a
certain admixture of these two tendencies in
normal sexual relations, and that we call them
perversions when they thrust the other sexual
aims into the background and substitute their
own aims for them. It can hardly have escaped
you that sadism has a close connection with
masculinity, and masochism with femininity,
as if there were some secret relationship be
tween them. I must tell you at once that we
have made no further progress along this path.
Both of them, sadism and masochism, are very
hard to account for by the theory of the libido,
and especially masochism; and it is only right
and proper that the stone which was an obsta
cle to the one theory should become the corner
stone of the other.
For we believe that in sadism and masochism
we have two admirable examples of the fusion
of the two kinds of instincts, Eros and aggres
siveness, and we now put forward the hypothe
sis that this relationship is typical and that all
the instinctual impulses that we can study are
made up of such fusions or aUoys of the two
kinds of instincts. Naturally, they are to be
found mixed in the greatest variety of propor
tions. To this mixture the erotic instincts will
contribute the whole multiplicity of their sex
ual aims, while the others will admit only of
mitigation and graduation
of their uniform

[851b]
tendency. This hypothesis opens up a Kne of
investigation which may some day be of great
importance for the understanding of patholog
ical processes. For fusions may be undone, and
such defusions of instincts may be expected to
bring about the most serious consequences to
adequate functioning. But this point of view is
still too new; no one has so far attempted to
make practical use of it.
Let us return to the specificproblem which is
presented by masochism. If we put its erotic
components on one side for a moment, it
proves the existence of a tendency which has
self-destruction as its aim. We have already
stated that the ego (or rather, as we should
here say, the id, the whole personality) originaUy includes all the instinctual impulses; if
this applies equally to the destructive instinct)
it will
follow that masochism is older than
sadism; and that sadism is the destructive in
stinct directed outwards, thereby acquiring the
character of aggressiveness. Varying quantities
of the original destructive instinct may stiU
remain insidethe organism; it seemsas though
we could only perceive it undertwo conditions,
either when it is bound up with the erotic in
stincts so as to form masochism, or when it is
turned on to the external world (with a greater
or lesser erotic addition) in the shape of ag
gressiveness. We are now led to consider the
important possibility of the aggression being
unableto find satisfaction in the externalworld,
because it comes up against objective hin
drances. It may then perhaps turn back and
increase the amount of self-destructiveness
within. We shall see that this actually occurs,
and that it is an event of great importance. It
wouldseem that aggression when it is impeded
entails serious injury, and that we have to
destroy other things and other people, in order
not to destroy ourselves, in order to protect
ourselves from the tendency to self-destruction.
A sad disclosure, it will be agreed, for the
moralist.
But the moralist will, for a long time to
come, console himself with the improbability
of our speculations. It is indeed a strange in
stinct that is occupied with the destruction of
its own organic home! It is true that the poets
speak of things of this sort; but poets are
irresponsible beings, they enjoy the privilege of
poetic licence. But, after all, such ideas are not
foreign to physiology, where we find, for in
stance, the mucous membrane of the stomach
digesting itself. But it must be admitted that our
instinct of self-destruction requires more con-

[852a]
New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis
851
formation. One cannot put forward a hypothesis
that is so far-reaching, simply on the ground
that a few poor fools have attached a curious
condition to their sexual satisfaction. I think
that a deeper study of the instincts will give
us what we want. The instincts do not only
dominate mental Hfe, but vegetative Hfe as
well, and these organic instincts display a char
acteristic which merits our most serious atten
tion. Whether it is a general characteristic of
all instincts we shall only be able to decide
later. They turn out to be directed towards the
reinstatement of an earlier state of things. We
may assume that, as soon as a given state of
things is upset, there arises an instinct to re
create it, and phenomena appear whichwe may
call repetition-compulsion. Embryology, for in
stance, is nothing but a repetition-compulsion;
stretching far backin the animal series wefind
a capacity to form afresh organs which have
been lost, and the instinct of recovery, to
which, alongside of our therapeutic activities,
we owe our power to get well, may be the re
mains of this capacity which is so wonderfully
developed in the lower animals. The spawning
migrations of fish and perhaps the migrations
of birds, possibly all that we describe as a
manifestation of instinct in animals, takes place
under the domination of repetition-compulsion,
which expresses the conservative nature of in
stincts. And in the realm of the mind, too, we
shall not have far to seek for evidence of the
presence of that compulsion. It has always
surprised us that the forgotten and repressed
experiences of early childhood should repro
duce
themselves
in
dreams
and
reactions
during analytic treatment, especially in the
reactions involved in the transference, although
their reawakening runs counter to the interests
ofthepleasure-principle; andwehave explained
this by saying that in such cases repetitioncompulsion has overcome even the pleasureprinciple. Outside analysis, too, onecanobserve
the same thing. There are peoplewho, all their
fives, repeat, to their own detriment, the same
reactions, without any correction, or who seem
to be dogged by a relentless ill-fortune, though
a closer investigation shows that they
are
unwittingly bringingthis ill-fortune upon them
selves. Thus we explain what is called a demonic
character as being due to the repetition-com
pulsion.
But how can this conservative quality of in
stincts help us to understand the self-destruc
tive tendency? What is the earHer state of
things that such an instinct is trying to rein

[852b]
state? Now the answer to this question lies
near at hand, and opens up a wide vista of
possibilities. If it is true that once in an incon
ceivably remote past, and in an unimaginable
way, Hfe arose out of inanimate matter, then,
in accordance with our hypothesis, an instinct
must at that time have come into being, whose
aim it was to abofish life once more and to reestabfish the inorganic state of things. If in
this instinct we recognize the impulse to selfdestruction of our hypothesis, then we can
regard that impulse as the manifestation of a
death instinct, which can never be absent in
any vital process. And now the instincts in
which we believe separate themselves into two
groups; the erotic instincts, which are always
trying to collect living substance together into
ever larger unities, and the death instincts
which act against that tendency, and try to
bring Hving matter back into an inorganic con
dition. The co-operation and opposition of
these two forces produce the phenomena of life
to which death puts an end.
You will perhaps shrug your shoulders and
say: That is not natural science, that is the
philosophy of Schopenhauer. But, Ladies and
Gentlemen, why shouldnot a bold thinker have
divined something that a sober and painstak
ing investigation of details subsequently con
firms? And after all, everything has been said
already, and many people said the same thing
before Schopenhauer. And besides, what we
have said is not even true Schopenhauer. We
do not assert that death is the only aim of life;
we do not overlook the presence of life by the
side of death. We recognize two fundamental
instincts, and ascribe to each of them its own
aim. How the two mingle in the vital process,
how the death instinct is pressed into
the
service of Eros, especially when it is turned
outwards in the form of aggressiveness—these
areproblems which remain for futureinvestiga
tion. We can go no further than the point at
which this prospect opens up before us. The
question whether aU instincts without exception
donot possess a conservative character, whether
the erotic instincts also do not seek the rein
statement of an earlier state of things, when
they strive towards the synthesis of living sub
stance into larger wholes—this question, too,
must be left unanswered.
We have wandered somewhat far from our
thesis, but I will tell you the starting-point of
these reflections uponthe theory of the instincts.
It was the same thing that led us to a revision
of the relation between the ego and the uncon-

[853a]
852
Sigmund Freud
scious: the impression we received from our
analytical work that the patient who puts up a
resistance very often knows nothing about it.
But he is unconscious not only of the fact of
his resistance but of the motives for it. It was
necessary for us to look for these motives or
this motive, and we foundit, to our surprise, in
a strong need for punishment, which we could
not help associating with masochistic wishes.
The practical value of this discovery is no less
than its theorotical importance, for this need
for punishment is the worst enemy of our
therapeutic efforts.It is satisfiedby the suffering
which is bound up with the neurosis, and there
fore holds fast to the state of illness. It seems
as though this factor, the unconscious need for
punishment, plays a part in every neurotic dis
ease. The truth of this view is brought home to
one in the most convincing way by cases in
which we see neurotic suffering vanish at the
appearance of suffering of another kind. I will
give you an instance of this. I once succeeded
in freeing a middle-aged spinster from a symp
tom-complex that had condemned her to a mis
erable existence for about fifteen years, and had
quite prevented her from taking any part in
life. She felt that she was now restored to
health, and plunged into a whirl of activity in
order to develop her talents, which were by no
means small, and derive a little appreciation,
enjoyment, and success from Hfe before it was
too late. But all her attempts ended in its being
made clear to her, or in her seeing for herself,
that she was too old to effect anything in that
direction. Every time this happened, the next
step for her would have been a relapse into her
illness, but that she could no longer bring
about; instead of it an accident would always
befall her, which incapacitated her for some
time: and caused her suffering. She would fall
down and sprain her foot, or injure her knee,
or else hurt her hand while she was doing some
thing or other. As soon as she saw how great a
part she herself played in these apparently
chance accidents, she altered her technique, as
one might say. Instead of accidents she con
tracted on the same occasions slight illnesses,
such as catarrhs, sore throats, influenzal con
ditions, or rheumatic swellings, until at last
when she made up her mind to resign herself to
inactivity, the whole business came to an end.
As to the origin of this unconscious need for
punishment, there can be, I think, no doubt.
It behaves like a part of the conscience, like
the prolongation of conscience into the uncon
scious; and it must have the same origin as

[853b]
conscience, that is to say, it wiH correspond to
a piece of aggressiveness which has been in
ternalized and taken over by the super-ego. If
only thewords were less incongruous, weshould
be justified, for allpractical purposes, in calling
it an unconscious sense of guilt. Theoreti
cally, as a matter of fact, we are in doubt,
whether we ought to. suppose that all ag
gressiveness that has turned back from the
external world is bound by the super-ego,
and so used against the ego, or whether a part
of it carries on its silent sinister activity as a
free destructive instinct in the ego and the id.
Probably there is a division of this kind, but
we know nothing further about it. When first
the super-ego is set up, there is no doubt that
that function is endowed with that part of the
child's aggressiveness against its parents for
whichit can find no discharge outwards on ac
count of its love-fixation and external difficul
ties; and, for this reason, the severity of the
super-ego need not correspond to the severity
of its upbringing. It is quite likely that when
on subsequent occasions aggressiveness is sup
pressed,the instinct follows the path whichwas
opened to it at that decisiveperiod.
People in whom this unconscious sense of
guilt is dominant, distinguish themselves under
analytic treatment by exhibiting what is so
unwelcome from the point of viewof prognosis
—a negative therapeutic reaction. In the nor
mal course of events, if one gives a patient
the solution of a symptom, at least the tempo
rary disappearance of that symptom should re
sult; with these patients, on the contrary, the
effect is a momentary intensification of the
symptom and the sufferingthat accompaniesit.
It often needs only a word of praise of their
behaviour during the cure, the utterance of a
few words of hope as to the progress of the
analysis, to bring about an unmistakable ag
gravation of their condition. A non-analyst
would say that they were lacking in the "willto
recovery"; from the analytical point of view,
their behaviour will appear as an expression of
an unconscious sense of guilt, which favours
illness with its attendant sufferings and handi
caps. The problems raised by the unconscious
sense of guilt, its relation to morality, educa
tion, criminality and delinquency, is at the
present moment the favourite field of investi
gation for psycho-analysts. Here wehave quite
unexpectedly emerged into the open from the
mental underworld. I cannot take you any
further, but I wiU detain you for a few mo
ments before I stop with one further considera-

[854a]
New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis
853
tion. We have got into the habit of saying that
our civilization is built up at the cost of our
sexualimpulses, whichare inhibited by society,
being partly repressed, but partly, on the other
hand, made use of for new aims. However
proud we may be of our cultural achievements,
we have admitted that it is by no means easy
to satisfy the requirements of this civiHzation
and to feel comfortable in its midst, because the
restriction of the instincts which it involves
lay a heavypsychological burden on our shoul
ders. Now what we have recognized as true of
the sexual instincts holds to the same extent,
and perhaps to an even greater extent, for the
other instincts, for those of aggression. It is
they above all that make communal existence
difficult, and threaten its permanence. The lim
itation of aggression is the first and perhaps
the hardest sacrifice which society demands
from each individual. We have learnt in what
an ingenious waythis unruly element is tamed.
The setting up of the super-ego, which makes
the dangerous aggressive impulses its own, is
like introducing a garrison into a province that
is on the brink of rebellion. But, on the other
hand, looking at it from a purely psychological
point of view, one has to admit that the ego
does not feel at all comfortable when it finds
itself sacrificed in this way to the needs of
society, whenit has to submit itself to the de
structive impulses of aggression, whichit would
have dearly liked itself to set in motion against
others. It is like a carrying-over into the region
of the mind of the dilemma—eat or be eaten—
which dominates the organic world. Fortunately,
the instincts of aggression are never alone, they
are always alloyed with the erotic ones. In the
cultural conditions which man has created for
himself, the erotic instincts have much to miti
gate and much to avert.
LECTURE 33
The Psychology of Women
Ladies and Gentlemen : The whole time that
I have been preparing the lectures I am giving
you, I have been struggling with an internal
difficulty. I feel, as one might say, uncertain
of the terms bf my licence.It is quite true that
in the course of fifteen years' work, psycho
analysis has altered and grown; but in spite of
that, an introduction to psycho-analysis might
be left unchanged and unexpanded. It is always
at the back of my mind that there is no raison
d'etre for these lectures. For analysts I say too
little and nothing at aU that is new, while to

[854b]
you I say too much and relate thingswhichyou
are not in a position to understand and which
are not for your ears. I have looked about for
excuses, and have tried to justify each of my
lectures on different grounds.
The first, the
one about the theory of dreams, was intended
to put you back at once into the atmosphere
of analysis, and to show you how durable our
hypotheses have proved themselves to be. I
was tempted to give the second, which traced
the connection between dreams and the socalled occult, by the opportunity it afforded of
saying something about a field of research in
which at the present time prejudiced expecta
tion is struggfing against passionate opposition;
and I aUowed myself to hope that you would
not refuse me your company on this expedition,
but would follow me with a judgment educated
to tolerance by example of psycho-analysis.
The third lecture, which dealt with the anatomy
of the personality, certainly made the severest
demands upon you, so strange was its subjectmatter; but it was quite impossible for me to
withhold from you this first contribution to
ego-psychology, and, if we had been in posses
sion of the material fifteen years ago, I should
have had to mention it then. Finally, the last
lecture, which you have probably followed only
with
the greatest difficulty, contained some
necessary emendations and new attempts at
the solution of the most important problems;
and my introduction would have been positively
misleading if I had kept silent about them. You
see how it is that when one tries to excuse
oneself, it comes out in the end that everything
was
inevitable, that everything was
pre-or
dained. I submit to fate; and I beg that you will
do the same.
Nor should today's lecture find a place in an
introduction; but it may serve to give you an
example of the detailed work of analysis, and
there are two things I can add in its favour. It
contains
nothing
but
observed
facts,
with
hardly any speculative additions, and it is con
cerned with a theme which claims your atten
tion almost more than any other. Throughout
the ages, the problem of woman has puzzled
people of every kind—
Heads in hieroglyphic caps,
Heads in turbans, and black bonnets,
Heads bewigged and thousand other
Poor and sweating heads of humans. . . .
Heine, Nordsee.
; You too will have pondered over this question
in so far as you are men; from the women

[855a]
854
Sigmund Freud
among you that is not to be expected, for you
are the riddle yourselves. Male or female is the
first differentiation that you make when you
meet another human being, and you are used
to making that distinction with absolute cer
tainty. Anatomical science shares your certainty
in one point, but not much more. Male is the
male sexual secretion, the spermatozoon, and
its carrier; female is the egg, and the organism
that contains it. In each sex, organs have been
formed which exclusively subserve the sexual
functions; they have probably been developed
from the same basis into two different for
mations. In both sexes, moreover, the other
organs, the shape of the body and the tissues
are influenced by sex (the so-called secondary
sexual characters), but this influence is irregular
and varying in degree. And then science tells
you something that runs counter to your ex
pectations, arid is probably calculated to con
fuse your feelings. It points out to you that
parts of the male sexual apparatus are also to
be found in the body of the female, although
in a rudimentary condition, and vice versa.
Science sees in this phenomenon an indication
of bisexuality, as though the individual were
neither man nor woman, but both at the same
time, only rather more the one than the other.
It then expects you to make yourselves familiar
with the idea that the proportions in which the
masculine and the feminine mingle in an in
dividual are subject to quite extraordinary
variations. And even though, apart from very
rare cases, only one kind of sexual product—
ova or seminal cells—is present in any one
individual, you will go wrong if you take this
factor as being of decisive importance, and you
must conclude that what constitutes masculin
ity or femininity is an unknown element which
it is beyond the power of anatomy to grasp.
Can psychology do any better? We are used
to consider masculine and feminine as mental
qualities as well, and have also carried the
notion of bisexuality over into mental life. We
speak of a human being, whether male or fe
male, behaving in a masculine or a feminine
way. But you will at once observe that that is
simply foUowing the lead of anatomy and con
vention. You can give the concepts of masculine
and feminine nb new content. The difference
is not a psychological one; when you say
"masculine," you mean as a rule active, and
when you say "feminine" you mean passive.
Now it is quite true that there is such a cor
relation. The male sexual cell is
active and
mobile; it seeks out the female one, while the

[855b]
latter, the ovum, is stationary and waits pas
sively. This
behaviour of
the
elementary
organisms of sex is more or less a model of the
behaviour of the individuals of each sex in
sexual intercourse. The male pursues the female
for the purpose of sexualunion, seizes her, and
pushes his way into her. But with that you
have, so far as psychology goes, reduced the
quality of masculinity to the factor of aggres
siveness. You will begin to doubt whether you
havehit uponanything fundamental here,when
you consider that in many classes of animals
the female is the strongerand more aggressive
party, and the male is only active in the single
act of sexual intercourse. That is the case, for
instance, with spiders. The functions of caring
for the young, too, and of rearing them, which
seems to us so essentially feminine, are not,
among
animals,
always
associated with the
female sex. In some species of animals, quite
high in the scale, one finds that the sexes share
in the duties of lookingafter the young, or even
that the male devotes himself to it alone. Even
in the sphere of human sexual Hfe, one soon
notices how unsatisfactory it is to identify
masculine behaviour with activity and feminine
with passivity. The mother is in every sense of
the wordactive in her relations with her child;
it is just as true to say that she gives suck to
the child, as that she lets it suck her breasts.
The further you go from the sexual field in the
narrower sense of the word the more apparent
it becomes that the two ideas do not coincide.
Women can display great activity in a variety
of directions, while men cannot live together
with their kind unless they develop a high de
gree of passive pliability. If you thereupon say
that these facts precisely prove that men and
women
are psychologically bisexual, I
shall
infer that you have decided to identify activity
with masculinity and passivity wth femininity.
But I advise you not to do that. It seems to me
to serve no good purpose and to give us no
new information.
One might make an attempt to characterize
femininity psychologically by saying that it
involves a preference for passive aims. That is
naturally not the same as passivity; it may
require a good deal of activity to achieve a
passive end. It may be that the part played
by women in the sexual function leads them to
incline towards passive behaviour and passive
aims, and that this inclination extends into their
ordinary life to a greater or less degree, accord
ing to whether the influence of her sexual Hfe
as a model is Hmited or far-reaching. But we

[856a]
New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis
855
must take care not to underestimate the influ
ence of social conventions, which also force
women into passive situations. The whole thing
is stiU very obscure. We must not overlook one
particularly constant relation between feminin
ity and instinctual Hfe. The repression of their
aggressiveness, which is imposed upon women
by their constitutions and by society, favours
the development of strong masochistic impulses,
which have the effect of binding erotically the
destructive tendencies which have been turned
inwards. Masochism is, then, as they say, truly
feminine. But when, as so often happens, you
meet with masochism in men, what else can you
do but say that these men display obvious
feminine traits of character?
You are now prepared for the conclusion that
psychology cannot solve the riddle of feminin
ity. The solution must, I think, come from
somewhere else, and it cannot come until we
have learned in general how the differentiation
of living creatures into two sexes came about.
We know nothing whatever about the matter,
and yet sex-differentiation is a most remarkable
characteristic in organic life, and one by which
it is sharply cut off from inanimate nature.
Meanwhile, we shaU find plenty to occupy our
selves with in the study of those human in
dividuals who are characterized as manifestly
or preponderantly female by the possession of
female genitals. It is in harmony with the
nature of psycho-analysis that it does not try
to describe what women are—that would be a
task which it could hardly perform—but it
investigates the way in which women develop
out of children with their bisexual disposition.
We have learnt a certain amount about this
recently, thanks to the fact that several excel
lent women analysts have begun to work on
the problem. A special piquancy has been lent
to the discussion of this subject by the question
of the difference between the sexes; for, when
ever a comparison was made which seemed to
be unfavourable to their sex, the ladies were
able to express a suspicion, that we, the men
analysts, had never overcome certain deeprooted prejudices against the feminine, and that
consequently our investigations suffered from
bias. On the other hand, on the basis of bisex
uality, we found it easy to avoid any impolite
ness. We had only to say: "This does not apply
to you. You are an exception, in this respect
you are more masculine than feminine."
In approaching the study of the sexual de
velopment of women we start with two precon
ceptions: firstly, that, as in the case of men,

[856b]
the
constitution will not adapt itself to its
function without a struggle; and secondly, that
the
decisive changes wiU have been set in
motion or completed before puberty. Both of
these preconceptions turn out to be justified.
Further, a comparison with what happens in
the case of the boy shows us that the develop
ment of the little girl into a normal woman is
more difficult and more complicated; for she
has two additional tasks to perform, to which
there is nothing corresponding in the develop
ment of the man. Let us follow the parallel
from the very beginning. Certainly the original
material is different in the boy and the girl; it
does not require psycho-analysis to find that
out. The difference in the formation of their
genital organs is accompanied by other bodily
differences, which are too familiar for me to
need to mention them. In their instinctual dis
position, as well, there are differences which
foreshadow the later nature of the woman. The
little girl is as a rule less aggressive, less defiant,
and less self-sufficient; she seems to have a
greater need for affection to be shown her, and
therefore to be more dependent and docile. The
fact that she is more easily and more quickly
taught to control her excretions is very prob
ably only the result of this docility; urine and
stool are, as we know, the first gifts that the
child can offer to those who look after it, and
control over them is the first concession which
can be wrung from the instinctual life of the
child. One gets the impression, too, that the
little girl is more intelligent and more lively
than the boy of the same age; she is more in
clined to meet the external world half way,
and, at the same time, she makes stronger
object-cathexes. I do not know whether the
view that she gets a start in development has
been confirmed by more exact observations,
but in any case it is quite clear that the little
girl cannot be called intellectually backward.
But these sexual differences are of no great
importance; they can be out-balanced by in
dividual variations. For the purposes which we
have immediately in view they may be left on
one side.
Both sexes seem to pass through the early
phases of libidinal development in the same
way. One might have expected that already in
the sadistic-anal phase we should find that the
girl showed less aggressiveness; but this is not
the case. Women analysts have found from the
analysis of children's play that the aggressive
impulses of little girls leave nothing to be
desired as regards copiousness and violence.

[857a]
856
Sigmund Freud
With the onset of the phalHc phase the differ
ence between the
sexes becomes much less
important than their similarities. We are now
obliged to recognize that the little girl is a Httle
man. As we know, in the boy this phase is
characterized by the fact that he has discovered
how to obtain pleasurable sensations from his
little penis, and associates its state of excita
tion with his ideas about sexual intercourse.
The little girl does the
same with her even
smaller cfitoris. It seems as though, with her,
aU her masturbatory actions center round this
penis-equivalent, and that the actual female
vagina is stttl undiscovered by both sexes. It
is true that, here and there, reports have been
made that tell us of early vaginal sensations
as well; but it cannot be easy to discriminate
between
these and anal
sensations or
from
sensations of the vaginal vestibule; in any case
they cannot play a very important role. We
may assume that, in the phallic phase of the
girl, the cfitoris is the dominant erotogenic
zone. But it is not destined to remain so; with
the change to femininity, the clitoris must give
up to the vagina its sensitivity, and, with it, its
importance, either wholly or in part. This is
one of the two tasks which have to be per
formed in the course of the woman's develop
ment; the more fortunate man has only to
continue at the time of his sexual maturity
what he has already practised during the period
of early sexual expansion.
We shall return to the part played by the
cfitoris, but shall now pass on to the second
task with which the girl's
development is
burdened. The first love-object of the boy is
his mother, and she remains as such in the
formation of his Oedipus-complex, and, ulti
mately, throughout his whole life. For the little
girl, too, her mother must be her first object
(together with figures of nurses and other at
tendants that merge into hers); the first objectcathexes,
indeed,
follow
the
lines
of
the
satisfaction of the great and simple needs of
Hfe, and the circumstances in which the child
is nursed are the same for both sexes. In the
Oedipus situation,
however, the
father has
become the Httle girl's love-object, and it is
from him that, in the normal course of develop
ment, she should find her way to her ultimate
object-choice. The girl has, then, in the course
of time to change both her erotogenic zone and
her object, while the boy keeps both of them
unchanged. The question then arises of how
this corn.es about. In particular, how does the
Httle girl pass
from
an attachment to
her

[857b]
mother to an attachment to her father? or, in
other words, how does she pass from her mascu
line phase into the feminine phase which has
been biologically marked out for her?
Now it would provide us with an ideaHy
simple solution of the problem if we could
assume that, from a certain age onwards, the
elementary influence of heterosexual attraction
makes itself felt, and draws the little girl to
wards men, while the same principle allows the
boy to keep to his mother. One could even
assume, further, that, in doing this, children
are following a hint given them by the sexual
preferences of their parents. But things are not
so convenient as this. We hardly know whether
we can seriously believe in the mysterious and
unanalysable force, of which the poets sing so
enthusiastically. Painstaking investigations have
resulted in findings of quite a different kind,
the material for which,at all events, was easily
obtainable. You must know that the number of
women who until late in life remain tenderly
attached to father-objects, or indeed to their
real fathers, is very large. We have made the
most surprising discoveries about these women
who display intense and prolonged father-fix
ations. We knew, of course, that there had been
an earlier stage in which they were attached to
their mother; but we did not know that it was
so rich in content, that it persisted so long,and
that it could leave behind it so many occasions
for fixations and predispositions. During this
time, their father is no more than an irksome
rival. In many cases the attachment to the
mother lasts beyond the fourth year; almost
everything that we find later in the fatherrelation wasalready present in that attachment,
and has been subsequently transferred on to
the father. In short, we gain the conviction
that one cannot understand women, unless one
estimates this pre-oedipal attachment to the
mother at its proper value.
Now we should very much like to know what
the libidinal relations of the Httle girl to her
mother are. The answer is that they are mani
fold. Since they pass through aU the three
phases of infantile sexuality, they take on the
characteristics of each separate phase and ex
press themselves by means of oral, sadistic-anal,
and phallic wishes. These wishes represent ac
tive as weU as passive impulses; if one relates
them to the differentiation of the sexes which
comes about later (which one should avoid do
ing as far as possible), one can speak of them as
masculine and feminine. They are, in addition,
completely ambivalent—both of a tender and

[858a]
New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis
857
of a hostile-aggressive nature. It often happens
that the hostile wishes only become apparent
after they have been turned into anxiety-ideas.
It is not always easy to point out the way in
which these early sexualwishes are formulated.
What is most clearly expressed is the desire to
get the mother with child as wellas the corres
ponding one, to have a child by the mother;
both belong to the phallic phase, and seem
sufficiently strange, though their existence is
established beyond all doubt by analytic ob
servation. The attraction of these investigations
Hesin the extraordinary facts which they bring
to light. Thus, for instance, one discovers the
fear of being murdered or poisoned, which may
later on form the nucleus of a paranoic dis
order, already present in this pre-oedipal stage
and directed against the mother. Or, to take
another case. You will remember that interest
ing episode in the history of analytical research
which caused me so many painful hours? At
the time when my main interest was directed
on to the discovery of infantile sexual traumas,
almost aU my female patients told me that they
had been seduced by their fathers. Eventually,
I was forced to the conclusion that these stories
werefalse, and thus I came to understandthat
hysterical symptoms spring from phantasies
and not from real events. Only later was I able
to recognize in this phantasy of seduction by
the father the expression of the typical Oedipuscomplex in woman. And now we find, in the
early pre-oedipal history of girls, the seductionphantasy again; but the seducer is invariably
the mother. Here, however, the phantasy has a
footing in reality; for it must in fact have been
the mother who aroused (perhaps for the first
time) pleasurable sensations in the child's
genitals in the ordinary course of attending to
its bodily needs.
I dare say that you are prepared to suspect
that
this
description of the richness and
strengthof the sexual relations of the little girl
to her mother is very much exaggerated. One
has, after aU, plenty of opportunity of watch
ing little girls, and one notices nothing of the
sort. But the objection cannot be sustained.
One can see enough of such things in children,
if one understands how to observe them, and,
besides this, you must consider how little the
child is able to give preconscious expression to
its sexual wishes, and how little it can com
municate
them.
We
are,
therefore,
acting
entirely within our rights in studying the
subsequent traces and consequences of this
emotional field in persons in whom these de

[858b]
velopmental
processes show a
particularly
clear, or even exaggerated, growth. Pathology,
as you know, has always assisted us, by iso
lation and exaggeration, in making recognizable
things which would normally remain hidden.
And since our researches have been carried
out on people who are by no means grossly
abnormal, we may, I think, consider the results
of them worthy of belief.
We will now turn our attention to the ques
tion of why this strong attachment of the girl
to her mother comes to grief. We are aware
that that is what usually happens to it; it is
fated to give way to an attachment to her
father. And here we stumble on a fact which
points in the right direction. This step in de
velopment is not merely a question of a change
of object. The turning away from the mother
occurs in an atmosphere of antagonism; the
attachment to the mother ends in hate. Such
a hatred may be very marked and may persist
throughout an entire lifetime; it may later on
be carefully overcompensated; as a rule, one
part of it is overcome, while another part per
sists. The outcome is naturally very strongly
influenced by the actual events of later years.
We
will
confine ourselves to
studying this
hatred at the actual time at which the turn
towards the father takes place, and to inquir
ing into its motives. We are then met by a
long list of complaints and grievances, leveUed
at the mother, which are intended to justify
the antagonistic feelings of the child; they
vary much in value, and we shall examine them
further. Many are obviousrationalizations,and
we haye yet to find the true source of the
antagonism. I hope you will bear with me, if
on this occasion I conduct you through aU the
details of a psycho-analytical investigation.
The complaint against the mother that harks
back furthest is that she has given the child
too little milk, which is taken as indicating a
lack of love. Now this complaint has a certain
justificationin the civilized human family. The
mothers often have not enough nourishment
for their children, and content themselves with
nursing them for nine months or six or even
less. Among primitive peoples, children remain
at the breast for as long as two or three years.
The figure of the wet-nurse is as a rule merged
in that of the mother; where this does not take
place, the complaint against the mother takes
another form, namely, that she sent the nurse,
who was so ready to feed the child, away too
soon. But whatever may have been the true
state of affairs, it is impossible that the child's

[859a]
858
Sigmund Freud
complaint can be as often justified as it is met
with. It looks far more as if the desire of the
child for its first form of nourishment is alto
gether insatiable, and as if it never .got over
the pain of losing the mother's breast. I should
not be at all surprised if an analysis of a mem
ber of a primitive race, who must have sucked
the mother's breast when he could already run
and talk, brought the same complaint to light.
It is probable, too, that the fear of poisoning is
connected with weaning. Poison is the nourish
ment that makes one ill. Perhaps, moreover, the
child traces his early illnesses back to this
frustration. It requires a good deal of intellec
tual training before we can believe in chance;
primitive and uneducated people, and certainly
children, can give a reason for everything that
happens. Perhaps this reason was originally a
motive (in the animistic sense). In many social
strata, even to this day, no one can die, without
having been done to death by some one else,
preferably by the doctor. And the regular re
action of a neurotic to the death of some one
intimately connected with him is to accuse
himself of being the cause of the death.
The next accusation against the mother flares
up when the next child makes its appearance in
the nursery. If possible, this complaint retains
the
connection
with
oral
frustration:
the
mother could not or would not give the child
any more milk, because she needed the nourish
ment for the new arrival. In cases where the
two children were born so close together that
lactation was interfered with by the second
pregnancy, this complaint has a real foundation.
It is
a
remarkable fact that even when the
difference between the children's ages is only
eleven months, the older one "is nevertheless
able to take in the state of affairs. But it is not
only the milk that the child grudges the unde
sired interloper and rival, but all the other
evidences of motherly care. It feels that it has
been dethroned, robbed, and had its rights in
vaded, and so it directs a feeling of jealous
hatred against its little brother or sister, and
develops
resentment
against
its
faithless
mother, which often finds expression in a change
for the worse in its behaviour. It begins to be
naughty,
irritable, intractable,
and
unlearns
the control which it has acquired over its ex
cretions. All this has been known for a long
time, and is accepted as self-evident, but we
seldom form a right idea of the strength of
these jealous impulses, of the tenacious hold
they have on the child, and the amount of
influence they exert on its later development.

[859b]
These jealous feefings are particularly impor
tant because they are always being fed anew
during the later years of childhood, and the
whole shattering experience is repeated with
the arrival of every new brother or sister. Even
if the child remains its mother's favourite,
things are not very different; its demands for
affection are boundless; it requires exclusive
attention and will allow no sharing whatever.
A potent source of the child's antagonism
against its mother is found in its many sexual
wishes, which change with its libidinal phases.
These cannot, for the most part, be satisfied.
The strongest of these frustrations occurs in
the
phallic stage,
when the
mother forbids
pleasurable activities centring round the genital
organs—often with an accompaniment of harsh
threats and every indication of disapproval—
activities to which, after all, she herself stimu
lated the child. It might be thought that we
had here motives enough for the Httle girl's
alienation from her mother. In that case it
might be our view that estrangement follows
inevitably from the nature ofinfantile sexuality,
from the child's unlimited demands for love
and the unfulfillable nature of its sexual wishes.
One might even believe that this first love re
lation of the child is doomed to extinction for
the very reason that it is the first, for these
early object-cathexes are always ambivalent to
a very high degree; alongside the child's intense
love there is always a strong aggressive tend
ency present, and the more passionately the
child loves an object, the more sensitive it will
be to disappointments and frustrations coming
from it. In the end, the love is bound to capitu
late to the accumulated hostility. Or, on the
other hand, one might reject the idea of a
fundamental ambivalence of this kind in the
libidinal cathexes, and point to the fact that
it is the peculiar nature of the mother-child
relationship which leads, equally inevitably, to
the disturbance of the child's love, since even
the mildest form of education cannot avoid
using compulsion and introducing restrictions,
and every such encroachment on its freedom
must call forth, as a reaction in the child, a
tendency to rebellion and aggressiveness. A
discussion of these possibilities might, I think,
be very interesting, but at this point an objec
tion suddenly arises, which forces our attention
in
another direction. All of these factors—
slights, disappointments in love, jealousy, and
seduction followed by prohibition—operate as
well in the relationship between the boy and
his mother, and yet are not sufficient to afien-

[860a]
New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis
859
ate him from the mother-object. If we do not
find something which is specific for the girl,
and which is not present at all, or not present
in the same way, in the case of the boy, we
shall not have explained the ending of the
girl's attachment to her mother.
I think that we have discovered this specific
factor, in a place where we might indeed have
expected it, but in a surprising form. In a
placewhere we might have expected it, I say,
for it lies in the castration complex. The ana
tomical distinction between the sexes must,
after all, leave its mark in mental life. It was
a surprise, however, to discover from analyses
that the girl holds her mother responsible for
her lack of a penis, and never forgives her for
that deficiency.
You will note that we ascribe a castrationcomplex to the female sexaswell asto the male.
We have good grounds for doing so, but that
complex has not the same content in girls as
in boys. In the boy, the castration-complex is
formed after he has learnt from the sight of
the female genitals that the sexualorgan which
he prizes so highly is not a necessary part of
every human body. He remembers then the
threats which he has brought on himself by his
playing with his penis, he begins to believe in
them, and thence forward he comes under the
influence of castration-anxiety, which supplies
the strongest motive force for his further de
velopment. The castration-complex in the girl,
as weU, is started by the sight of the genital
organs of the other sex. Sheimmediately notices
the difference, and—it must be admitted—its
significance. She feels herself at a great dis
advantage, and often declares that she would
"like to have something like that too," and falls
a victim to penis-envy, which leaves ineradi
cable traces on her development and characterformation, and, even in the most favourable
instances, is not overcome
without a great
expenditure of mental energy. That the girl
recognizes the fact that she lacks a penis, does
not mean that she accepts its absence Hghtly.
On the contrary, she clings for a long time to
the desire to get something like it, and believes
in that possibility for an extraordinary number
of years; and even at a time when her knowl
edgeof reality has long since led her to abandon
the fulfilment of this desire as being quite un
attainable, analysis proves that it still persists
in the unconscious and retains a considerable
charge of energy. The desire after all to obtain
the penis for which she so much longs may
even contribute to the motives that impel a

[860b]
grown-up woman to come to analysis; andwhat
she quite reasonablyexpectsto get from analy
sis, such as the capacity to pursue an intellec
tual
career, can often be recognized as a
sublimated modification of this repressed wish.
One cannot very weU doubt the importance
of penis-envy. Perhaps you wiU regard the
hypothesisthat envy and jealousyplay a greater
part in the mentallife of women thanthey do
in that of men as an example of male unfair
ness. Not that I think that these characteristics
are absent in men, or that they have no other
origin in women except envy of the penis, but
I am inclined to ascribe the greater amount
of them to be found in women to this latter
influence. Many analysts, however, tend to
minimize the importance of this first wave of
penis-envy in thephallic phase. They think that
the signs one comes across of this attitude in
women are in the main a secondary formation
which has come about through regression to the
early infantile impulse in question on the
occasion of some subsequent conflict. Now this
is one of the general problems of depth psy
chology. In the case of many pathological—or
merely unusual—instinctual attitudes, for ex
ample with aU sexual perversions, the question
arises how much of their force is to be attrib
uted to early infantile fixations and how much
to the influence of later experiences and de
velopments. It is almost always a question of
complemental series, suchaswehavepostulated
when dealing with the aetiology of the neuroses.
Both sets of factors share in the causation in a
varying proportion; a less in the one set wiU
be balanced by a more in the other. The infan
tile factor in every case paves the way; it is
not always the decisive force, though it often
is. But with regard to the particular case of
penis-envy, I should like to come down de
cidedly in favour of the preponderance of the
infantile factor.
The discovery of her castration is a turningpoint in the Hfe of the girl. Three lines of de
velopment diverge from it; oneleads to sexual
inhibition or to neurosis, the
second to a
modification of character in the sense of mascu
linity complex, and the third to normal femi
ninity. We have learnt a good deal, though not
everything, about all three. The fundamental
content of the first is that the little girl, who has
hitherto lived a masculine life, and has been able
to obtain pleasure through the excitationof her
clitoris, and has connected this behaviour with
the sexualwishes (often of an active character)
which she has directed towards her mother,

[861a]
86o
oigmund Freud
finds her enjoyment of phalfic sexuality spoilt
by the influence of penis-envy. Sheis wounded
in her self-love by the unfavourable comparison
with the boy who is so much better equipped,
and therefore gives up the masturbatory satis
faction which she obtained from her clitoris,
repudiates her love towards her mother, and at
the same time often represses a gooddeal of her
sexual impulses in general. No doubt this turn
ing away from her mother does not come to
pass at one blow, for at first the girl looks on
her castration as a personal misfortune, and
only gradually extends it to other females, and
eventually to her mother. Her love had as its
object the phaUic mother; with the discovery
that the mother is castrated it becomes possible
to drop her as a love-object, so that the incen
tives to hostility which have been so long
accumulating, get the upper hand. This means,
therefore, that, as a result of the discovery of
the absence of a penis, women are as much
depreciated in the eyes of the girl as in the
eyes of the boy, and later, perhaps, of the man.
You all know what an overwhelming aetio
logical importance is attributed by neurotics
to their masturbatory practices. They make
them responsible for all their troubles, and we
have the greatest difficulty in getting them to
believe that they are wrong. But, as a matter
of fact, we ought to admit that they are in the
right, for masturbation is the executive agent
of infantile sexuality, from the faulty develop
ment of which they are suffering. The difference
is that what the neurotics are blaming is the
masturbation of the pubertal stage; the infan
tile masturbation, which is the one that really
matters, has for the most part been forgotten
by them.I wishI could find an opportunityfor
giving you a circumstantial account of how
important all the factual details of early mas
turbation are in determining the subsequent
neurosis or
character of the individual con
cerned—such details as
whether it was dis
covered or not, how the parents combated it
or whether they permitted it, and whether the
subject succeeded in suppressing it himself. All
these details will have left indelible traces upon
his development. But, in fact, I am relieved
that it is not necessary for me to do this; it
would be a difficult and weary task, and at the
end you wouldembarrass me because you would
quite certainly ask for Some practical-advice
as to how one should behave towards the mas
turbation of small children as a parent or
educator. The history of the development of
girls, which is the subject I am telling you

[861b]
about, offers an instance of the child itself
striving to free itself from masturbation. But
it does not always succeed. Where penis-envy
has aroused a strong impulse against cfitoritic
masturbation, but wherethe latter wiU not give
way, there follows a fierce battle for freedom,
in which the girl herself takes over,as it were,
the role of the motherwhom she has set aside,
and expresses her whole dissatisfaction with
the inferior clitoris, by striving against the
gratification derived from it. Manyyears later,
when her masturbatory activity has long ago
been suppressed, we may find an interest per
sisting which we must interpret as a defence
against the temptation, which she still fears. It
finds expression in feelings of sympathy for
persons to
whom she ascribes similar diffi
culties; it may enter into her motives for
marriage, and may indeed determine her choice
of a husband or lover. Thesettling of the prob
lem of infantile masturbation is truly no easy
or unimportant task.
When the Httlegirl givesup clitoritic mastur
bation, she surrenders a certain amount of
activity. Her passive side has now the upper
hand, and in turning to her father she is assisted
in the main by passive instinctual impulses.
You will see that a step in development, such
as this one, which gets rid of phallic activity,
must smooth the path for femininity. If in the
process not too much is lost through repression,
this femininity may prove normal. The wish
with which the girl turns to her father, is, no
doubt, ultimately the wish for the penis, which
her mother has refused her and which she now
expects from her father. The feminine situation
is, however, only established when the wish for
the penis is replaced by the wish for a child—
the child taking the place of the penis, in ac
cordance with the old symbolic equation. It
does not escape us that at an earlier stage the
girl has already desired a child, before the
phallic phase was interfered with; that was the
meaning of her playing withdolls. But thisplay
was not really an expression of her femininity,
it served, in identifying Her with her mother,
the purpose of substituting activity for pas
sivity. She was the mother, and the doU was
herself; now she could do everything to the
doll that her mother used to do with her. Only
with the onset of the desire for a penis does
the doll-child become a child by the father,,
and, thence-forward, the strongest feminine
wish. Her happiness is great indeed when this
desire fora child one dayfinds a real fulfilment;
but especially is this so if the child is a little

[862a]
New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis
861
boy, who brings the longed-for penis with him.
In the idea of having a child by the father, the
accent is often enough placed on the child, and
not on the father. Thus the old masculine wish
for the possession of a penis still shows under
the completely developed femininity. But per
haps we should rather think of this desire for a
penis as something essentially feminine in itself.
With the transference of the child-penis wish
on to her father, the girl enters into the situa
tion of the
Oedipus-complex.
The hostifity
against her mother, which did not require to be
newly created, now receives a great reinforce
ment, for her mother becomes a rival, who gets
everything from her father that she herself
wants. The girl's Oedipus-complex has
long
concealed from us the pre-oedipal attachment
to her mother which is so important and which
leaves behind it such lasting fixations. For the
girl, the Oedipus situation is the conclusion of
a long and difficult period of development; it
is a kind of temporary solution of her problem,
a state of equilibrium which is not lightly to
be given up, especially as the onset of the
latency period is not far off. And here we
notice a difference between the two sexes in
the relation between the Oedipus-complex and
the castration-complex, a difference which is
probably a momentous one. The boy's Oedipuscomplex, in which he desires his mother and
wants to get rid of his father as a rival, devel
ops naturally out of the phase of phallic sexu
ality. The threat of castration, however, forces
him to give up this attitude. Under the influ
ence of the danger of losing his penis, he
abandons his Oedipus-complex; it is repressed
and
in
most
normal
cases
entirely
de
stroyed, while.a severe super-ego is set up as
its heir. What happens in the case of the girl
is almost the opposite. The castration-complex
prepares the way for the Oedipus-complex in
stead of destroying it; under the influence of
her penis-envy, the girl is driven from her at
tachment to her mother and enters the Oedipus
situation, as though it were a haven of refuge.
When the fear of castration disappears, the
primary motive is removed, which has forced
the boy to overcome his Oedipus-complex. The
girl remains in the Oedipus situation for an
indefinite period; she only abandons'1it'late in
life, and then incompletely. The formation of
the
super-ego must suffer in these circum
stances; it cannot attain the strength and in
dependence which give it its cultural impor
tance, and feminists are not pleased if one
points to the way in which this factor affects

[862b]
the
development
of
the
average
feminine
character.
Let us now go back a little. We have men
tioned, as the second possible reaction after
the discovery of female castration, the devel
opment of a strong masculinity complex. What
is meant by this is that the girl refuses, as it
were, to accept the unpalatable fact, and, in an
outburst of defiance, exaggerates still further
the masculinity which she has displayed hith
erto. She clings to her cHtoritic activities, and
takes refuge in an identification either with the
phallic mother, or with the father. What is the
determinant which leads to this state of affairs?
We can picture it as nothing other than a
constitutional factor: the possession of a greater
degree of activity, such as is usually character
istic of the male. The essential thing about the
process is, after all, that at this point of devel
opment the onset of passivity, which makes
possible
the
change
over to
femininity,
is
avoided. The most extreme achievement of this
masculinity complex seems to occur when it
influences the girl's object-choice in the direc
tion of manifest homosexuality. Analytic ex
perience teaches us, it is true, that female
homosexuality is seldom or never a direct con
tinuation of infantile masculinity. It seems to
be characteristic of female homosexuals that
they too take the father as love-object for a
while, and thus become implicated in the Oedi
pus situation. Then, however, they are driven
by the inevitable disappointments which they
experience from the father into a regression to
their early masculinity complex. One must not
overestimate the importance of these disap
pointments; girls who eventually achieve femi
ninity also experience them without the same
results. The preponderance of the
constitu
tional factor seems undeniable, but the two
phases in the development of female homosex
uality are admirably reflected in the behaviour
of homosexuals, who just as often and just as
obviously play the parts of mother and child
towards each other as those of man and wife.
What I have been telling you is what one
might call the pre-history of women. It is an
achievement of the last few years, and you
may have been interested in it as an example
of detailed work in analysis. Since women are
our theme, I am going to permit myself to
mention by name a few women to whom this
investigation owes important contributions. Dr.
Ruth Mack Brunswick was the first to describe
a case of neurosis which went back to a fixation
in the pre-oedipal state, and in which the Oedi-

[863a]
862
Sigmund Freud
pus situation was not reached at all. It took
the form of paranoia with delusions of jeal
ousy, and proved accessible to treatment. Dr.
Jeanne Lamplde Groot has, from her own un
equivocal observations, estabfished the fact of
the girl's phallic activities towards her mother
which seem
so hard to believe. Dr. Helene
Deutsch has shown that the erotic behaviour
of homosexual woman reproduces the motherchild relationship.
It is not my intention to trace the further
course of femininity through puberty up to
the time of maturity. Our views on the subject
are indeed not complete enough for me to do
so. In what follows, I will merely mention a few
separate points. Bearing in mind the
early
history of femininity, I will emphasize the fact
that its development remains open to disturb
ance from the traces left behind by the previ
ous masculine period. Regressions to fixations
at these pre-oedipal phases occur very often;
in many women we actually find a repeated
alternation of periods in which either mascu
linity or femininity has obtained the
upper
hand. What we men caU "the enigma of wom
an" is probably based in part upon these signs
of bisexuality in female life. But another ques
tion seems to have become ripe for discussion
in the course of these investigations. We have
called the motor force of sexual life libido. This
sexual life is dominated by the polarity, mascu
line-feminine ; one is therefore tempted to con
sider the relation of the Hbido to this polarity.
It would not be surprising if it turned out that
each form of sexuality had its own special form
of Hbido, so that one kind of Hbido pursued the
aims of the masculine sexual life, and the other
those of the feminine. Nothing of the sort,
however, is the case. There is only one libido
which is as much in the service of the male as
of the female sexual function. To it itself we
can assign no sex; if, in accordance with the
conventional analogy
between
activity
and
masculinity, we choose to caU it masculine, we
must not forget that it also includes impulses
with passive aims.
Nevertheless the
phrase
feminine libido cannot possibly be justified. It
is our impression that more violence is done to
the Hbido when it is forced into the service of
the female function; and that—to speak teleologically—Nature has paid less careful atten
tion to the demands of the female function
than
to
those
of
masculinity.
And—again
speaking teleologicaUy—this may be based on
the fact that the achievement of the biological
aim is entrusted to the aggressiveness of the

[863b]
male, and is to some extent independent of the
co-operation of the female.
The sexual frigidity of women, the frequency
of which seems to confirm this last point, is
stiU a phenomenon which is insufficiently un
derstood. Sometimes it is psychogenic, and, if
so, it is accessible to influence; but in other
cases one is led to assume that it is constitu
tionally conditioned or even partly caused by
an anatomical factor.
I have promised to put before you a few
more of the mental characteristics of mature
femininity, as we find them in our analytical
observation. We do not claim for these asser
tions more than that they are true on the
whole; and it is not always easy to distinguish
between what is due to the influence of the
sexual function and what to social training. We
attribute to women a greater amount of narcis
sism (and this influences their object-choice)
so that for them to be loved is a stronger need
than to love. Their vanity is partly a further
effect of penis-envy, for they are driven to rate
their physical charms more highly as a belated
compensation for their original sexual inferior
ity. Modesty, which is regarded as a feminine
characteristic parexcellence, but is far more a
matter of convention than one would think,
was, in our opinion, originally designed to hide
the deficiencyin her genitals. We do not forget
that, later on, it takes over other functions.
People say that women contributed but little
to the discoveries and inventions of civiHza
tion, but perhaps after aU they did discover
one technical process, that of plaiting and
weaving. If this is so, one is tempted to guess
at the unconscious motive at the back of this
achievement. Nature herself might be regarded
as having provided a model for imitation, by
causing pubic hair to grow at the period of
sexual maturity so as to veil the genitals. The
step that remained to be taken was to attach
the hairs permanently together, whereas in the
body they are fixed in the skin and only tan
gled with one another. If you repudiate this
idea as beingfantastic, and accuseme of having
an idie fixe on the subject of the influence
exercised by the lack of a penis upon the devel
opment of femininity, I cannot of course de
fend myself.
The conditions of object-choice in women
are often enoughmade unrecognizable by social
considerations. Where that choice is aUowed to
manifest itself freely, it often occurs according
to the narcissistic ideal of the man whom the
girl would have fiked to be. If the girl has

[864a]
New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis
863
remained attached to her father, if, that is to
say, she has remained in the Oedipus-complex,
then she chooses according to a father-type.
Since, when she turned from her mother to her
father, the antagonistic part of her ambivalent
feelings remained directed on to her mother,
such a choice should ensure a happy marriage.
But very often a factor emerges which in gen
eral imperils such solutions of the ambivalenceconflict. The antagonism which has been left
behind may follow in the wake of the positive
attachment, and extend to the new object. The
husband, who had in the first instance inherited
his position
from the
father, comes in the
course of time to inherit the position of the
mother as well. In this way it may easily occur
that the second part of a woman's life is taken
up with a struggle against her husband, just as
the shorter earlier part was occupied with re
bellion against her mother. After this reaction
has been lived out, a second marriage may
easily turn out far more satisfactorily. Another
change in a woman's nature, for which neither
husband nor wife are prepared, may come
about after the first child has been born. Under
the influence of her own motherhood, her iden
tification with her mother may be revived (an
identification against which she has struggled
up to the time of her marriage) and may at
tract to itself aU the libido that she has at her
disposal, so that the repetition-compulsion may
reproduce an unhappy marriage of the parents.
That the old factor of lack of penis has not
even yet forfeited its power is seen in the
different reactions of the mother according to
whether the child born is a son or a daughter.
The only thing that brings a mother undiluted
satisfaction is her relation to a son; it is quite
the most complete relationship between human
beings, and the one that is the most free from
ambivalence. The mother can transfer to her
son aU the ambition which she has had to sup
press in herself, and she can hope to get from
him the satisfaction of all that has remained
to her of her masculinity complex. Even a
marriage is not firmly assured until the woman
has succeeded in making her husband into her
child and in acting the part of a mother towards
him.
The mother-identification of the woman can
be seen to have two -levels, the pre-oedipal,
which is based on the tender attachment to the
mother and which takes her as a model, and the
later one, derived from the Oedipus-complex,
which tries to get rid of the mother and replace
her in her relationship with the father. Much of

[864b]
both remains over for the future. One is really
justified in saying that neither is overcome to
any adequate extent during the process of de
velopment. But the phase of tender pre-oedipal
attachment is the decisive one; it paves the
way for her acquisition of those characteristics
which will later enable her to play her part in
the sexual function adequately, and carry out
her inestimable social activities. In this identi
fication, too, she acquires that attractiveness
for the man which kindles his oedipal attach
ment to his mother into love. Only what hap^-
pens so often is that it is not he himself who
gets what he wanted, but his son. One forms
the impression that the love of man and the
love of woman are separated by a psycholog
ical phase-difference.
It must be admitted that women have but
little sense of justice, and this is no doubt con
nected with the preponderance of envy in their
mental life; for the demands of justice are a
modification of envy; they lay down the condi
tions under which one is willing to part with it.
We say also of women that their social interests
are weaker than those of men, and that their
capacity for the sublimation of their instincts
is less. The former is no doubt derived from
the unsocial character which undoubtedly at
taches tb aU sexual relationships. Lovers find
complete satisfaction in each other, and even
the family resists absorption into wider organi
zations. The capacity for sublimation is subject
to the greatest individual variations. In spite
of this I cannot refrain from mentioning an
impression which one receives over and over
again in analytic work. A man of about thirty
seems a youthful, and, in a sense, an incom
pletely developed individual, of whom we ex
pect that he will be able to make good use of
the possibilities of development, which analysis
lays open to him. But a woman of about the
same age frequently staggers us by her psy
chological rigidity and unchangeability. Her
libido has taken up its final positions and seems
powerless to leave them for others. There are
no paths open to her for further development;
it is as though the whole process had been
gone through and remained inaccessible to in
fluence for the future; as though, in fact, the
difficult development which leads to femininity
had exhausted all the possibilities of the indi
vidual. As therapeutists, we deplore this state
of affairs, even when we are successful in re
moving her sufferings by solving her neurotic
conflict.
That is all I had to say to you about the

[865a]
864
Sigmund Freud
psychology of women. It is admittedly incom
plete and fragmentary, and sometimes it does
not sound altogether flattering. You must not
forget, however, that we have only described
women in so far as their natures are determined
by their sexual function. The influence of this
factor is, of course, very far-reaching, but we
must remember that an individual woman may
be a human being apart from this. If you want
to know more about femininity, you must in
terrogate your own experience or turn to the
poets, or else wait until science can give you
more profound and more coherent information.
LECTURE 34
Explanations, Applications
and Orientations
Ladies and .Gentlemen : May I
for once,
tired, as one might say, of dry topics, speak
to you about matters which have very little
theoretical importance, but which will be of
interest to you in so far as you are friendlily
disposed towards psycho-analysis? Let us sup
pose that in a moment of idleness you take up a
German or American or English novel, in which
you expect to find a description of men and
conditions as they are today. After reading a
few pages you come upon the first mention of
psycho-analysis, and then soon after upon an
other, even though the context does not seem
to require it. You must not imagine that this
has anything to do with
the application of
depth-psychology, with a view to a better un
derstanding of the characters in the book or
of their behaviour (though, of course, there
are quite serious Hterary works in which this
is attempted). No, such references are for the
most part contemptuous remarks, by means of
which the author seeks to display his wide
reading or his intellectual superiority. And you
will
not always get
the impression that he
really knows what he is talking about. Or,
again, you may go for your recreation to some
social gathering; it need not necessarily be in
Vienna. After a short time the conversation
will turn on psycho-analysis, and you will hear
a great variety of people giving their opinion
upon it, usuaUy in tones of dogmatic certainty.
This judgment is nearly always a derogatory
one, often abusive, and at the very least de
risive. If you are so imprudent as to disclose
the fact that you know something about the
subject, every one rushes up to you, and asks
for information and explanations, until after a
Httle time you are convinced that aU these

[865b]
severe judgments had been made in the ab
sence of any knowledge; that hardly any of
these adversaries have ever had a book about
analysis in their hands, or, if they have, that
they have never been able to overcome the first
resistance which people experience on coming
in contact with a new subject.
You may perhaps expect that an introduction
to psycho-analysis should give you some indi
cation of what arguments you should use in
order to correct these vulgar errors about anal
ysis, what books to recommend for those who
want more knowledge, or even what examples
from your reading and experience you should
bring into the discussion in order to alter the
attitude of your interlocutors. I beg you to do
nothing of the sort. It would be quite useless,
and your wisest course would be to hide your
better knowledge altogether. If that is impos
sible, then restrict yourselves to saying that,
so far as you know, psycho-analysis is a special
branch of science, that it is exceedingly difficult
to understand and to judge, that it is concerned
with very serious matters, so that one cannot
pass it off with a few jokes, and that It would
be better to choose some other topic as a social
pastime. Of course, you will not take part in
any attempts at interpretation if imprudent
people repeat their dreams, and you will resist
the temptation to curry favour for analysis by
giving accounts of cures that it has brought
about.
You may, however, raise the question why
these people, whether they write books or make
conversation, should behave so badly, and you
will incline to the view that, the cause does not
lie entirely with the people themselves, but with
psycho-analysis as well. That is my opinion
too; what you meet with in Hterature and con
versation in the shape of prejudice is the after
effect of an earlier judgment, the judgment,
namely, which the
representatives of official
science have passed upon the young science of
psycho-analysis.
I
have
already complained
about it once before in a historical survey of
the subject, and I shaU not do so again-—per
haps even that was once too often; but indeed
there was no logical blunder, no offence against
decency and good taste which the scientific
opponents of psycho-analysis did not permit
themselves in those days. It was a situation
such as actually occurred in the middle ages,
in which a wrong-doer, or even a mere political
opponent, was put in the piUory and exposed
to the ifi-treatment of the mob. And perhaps
you do not fuUy realize how high up in our

[866a]
society the mob spirit extends, and to what
lengths people will go when they feel that they
are a part of a crowd and superior to personal
responsibility. At the beginning of those times
1 stood more or less alone, and I very soon saw
that polemics would do no good, and that com
plaints and appeals to worthier minds were
senseless, since there were no courts before
which one could plead one's cause. That being
so, I took another path; I made use of applied
psycho-analysis for the first time by explaining
the behaviour of the crowd as an expression of
the same resistance which I had to struggle
against in my individual patients. I kept off all
polemics, and influenced my foUowers, as they
graduaUy gathered, to do the same. This mode
of behaviour was satisfactory. The ban under
which analysis was placed in those days has
since been lifted; but, just as a belief which
has been given up lingers on as a superstition,
just as a theory which science has abandoned
is preserved as a popular belief, so today the
original excommunication of psycho-analysis in
scientific circles survives in the mocking con
tempt of the writers and conversationafists.
You will therefore no longer be surprised at
their behaviour.
You must not, however> expect the good
news that the struggle is at an end, with the
recognition of analysis as a science and its ad
mission as a subject for university study. There
is no question of that; the battle is still going
on, but in a more respectable way. There is
another new factor, and that is that in the
scientific world a kind of buffer state has been
formed
between analysis and its opponents,
consisting,of>people who will allow that there
is something in analysis (and even believe in
it, subject to.the;most diverting reservations),
but who, oh"the.other hand, reject other parts
of it, as they are eager to let everyone know.
What determines their choice is not easy to
guess. It seems to be a matter of personal sym
pathies. Some take objection to sexuality, oth
ers to the unconscious; the existence of sym
bolism seems to be particularly disliked. The
circumstance that the structure of
psycho
analysis, although unfinished, nevertheless al
ready possesses a unifiecl organization from
which one cannot select elements according to
one's whim, seems not to enter the minds of
these eclectics. When I consider these half or
quarter foUowers I never get the impression
from any of them that their rejections are
based on an examination of the material. There
are a great many distinguished men who fall

[866b]
New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis
86s
into this category. They are certainly to be
excused on the ground that their time and their
interests are devoted to other things, to the
subjects, in fact, by the mastery of which they
have achieved so much. But, that being so,
would it not be better for them to reserve their
judgments instead of taking sides so strongly?
In the case of one of these great men, I once
succeeded in making a rapid conversion. He
was a world-famous critic, who had followed
contemporary trends of thought with benevo
lent understanding and prophetic vision. I only
got to know him when he had already passed
his eightieth year, but he was still fascinating
in conversation. You can easily guess to whom
I am referring. And it was not I who raised
the subject of psycho-analysis. He began it by
comparing himself in the most modest way
with myself, saying: "I am only a literary man,
and you are a man of science and a discoverer.
But there is one thing I should like to say to
you: I have never had any sexual feeling for
my mother." "But there's no need at all for
you to have been conscious of it," was my re
ply, "such processes are unconscious in grown
up people." "Oh, so that's your idea," he said,
greatly relieved, and pressed my hand. We
went on talking for a few hours longer on the
best of terms. I heard later that during the few
remaining years of his Hfe he repeatedly ex
pressed himself in friendly terms about anal
ysis, and liked to make use of what was for
him a new word—repression.
A well-known saying enjoins us to learn from
our enemies. I must own that I have never
been able to manage it; but it occurred to me
that it might be instructive for you if I were
to caU up aU the reproaches and objections
which the opponents of psycho-analysis have
leveUed at it, and then point but aU the obvi
ous misrepresentations and logical blunders
which they contain. But on second thought.I
said to myself that it would not be at all inter
esting, but wearisome and disagreeable, and
would, in fact, be precisely what I have taken
such pains to avoid all these years. You will
have to excuse me, therefore, if I refrain from
foUowing up this fine of thought any further
and spare you the judgments of our so-caUed
scientificopponents. After all, we are here deal
ing almost exclusively with people whose sole
claim to be heard rests on their impartiafity—•
which they have preserved by keeping away
from the facts of psycho-analysis. But I am
aware that in other cases you will not let me
get away so cheaply. You will point out that,

[867a]
866
Sigmund Freud
after aU, there are a great many people to
whom my last remark does not apply. These
people, you wiU say, have not kept away from
analytical experience; they have analysed pa
tients, they have perhaps even been analysed
themselves, they were actually my colleagues
for some time, and now they have come to
other conclusions, and formed other theories,
on the basis of which they have left me and
have founded independent schools of psycho
analysis. You wiU expect me to give some ex
planation of the possibility and meaning of
these dissenting movements which have oc
curred so frequently in the history of analysis.
Very well, then, I will try; but I shall only
do it briefly, for it throws less fight upon the
nature of analysis than you might jexpect.I am
sure that what you think of first will be Adler's
Individual Psychology, which in America, for
example, is looked on as being equal in impor
tance to our psycho-analysis and as running on
parallel lines, and is constantly mentioned in
the same breath with it. In reality Individual
Psychology has very little to do with analysis,
but, for certain historical reasons, fives a sort
of parasitic existence at its expense. The quali
fications which we have predicated for this
group of opponents only apply to the founders
of Individual Psychology to a very limited ex
tent. The name itself is unsuitable, and seems
to be a product of embarrassment; we cannot
assent to any interference with its correct appfication as meaning the opposite of Group
Psychology; for the matter of that our own
concern is, first and foremost, the psychology
of the human individual. I am not going into
an objective criticism of Adler's Individual
Psychology today, for that is no part of my
program in these lectures; besides which, I
have already made such an attempt elsewhere,
and I have Httle occasion for altering what I
there said. I will, however, give you an illustra
tion of the impression it makes, by teUing you
of a smaU incident which occurred to me in
my pre-analytic years.
In the neighbourhood of the little Moravian
town in which I was born and which I left as
a child of three years old, there is a modest
health resort, beautifully placed in a setting of
green. During my school years I often spent
my hoHdays there.
Some twenty years later,
the illness of a near relative of mine afforded
me an opportunity of seeing the place again.
In a conversation with the doctor in charge of
the place, who had attended my relative, I en
quired about his dealings with the—I beHeve

[867b]
—Slovakian peasants, who were his only clien
tele during the winter. He told me that his
medical treatment was carried on in the follow
ing way. In his consulting hours the patients
came into his room and formed up in a line.
One after another they came forward and told
him their complaints. One of them might have
pains in the back, or a stomach-ache, or a feel
ing of tiredness in the legs, etc. The doctor then
examined him and, when, he had formed his
conclusions, told him the diagnosis, which was
in every case the same. He translated the word
to me, and what it amounted to was: "be
witched." I was astonished, and asked whether
the patients made no objection to his saying
the same thing to all of his patients. "Oh, no!"
he answered, "they are very much pleased; it
is exactly what they expect. Each one as he
goes back to his place in the fine says to the
others by his looks and gestures: 'There's a fel
low who knows what's what!'" At that time I
Httle thought in what circumstances I should
meet with an analogous situation.
For whether a person is a homosexual, or a
necrophilist, or an anxiety-ridden hysteric, or
a shut-in obsessional, or a raving madman—in
every case the Individual Psychologist of the
Adlerian persuasion will assign as the motive
force of his condition the fact that he wants
to assert himself, to over-compensate for his
inferiority, to be on top, and to move over
from the feminine to the masculine line. We used
to hear exactly the same kind of thing when we
were young students at the hospital. Hysterics,
we were told, produce their symptoms in order
to make themselves interesting and to attract
attention to themselves. It is extraordinary
how these old profundities recur! But even at
the time this Httle bit of psychology did not
seem to us to cover the problem of hysteria; it
left unexplained, for instance, why people who
suffer from it do not make use of some means
for the attainment of their ends. Some element
of this doctrine of the Individual Psychologists
must, of course, be correct, though they regard
this fragmentary explanation as a complete one.
The instinct of self-preservation will attempt
to turn every situation to its own account; the
ego wiU try to get some advantage even out of
being ill. In psycho-analysis we call this the
secondary gain from illness. But indeed, when
one thinks of the facts of masochism, of the
unconscious need for punishment, and of the
neurotic tendency to self-injury, all of which
seem to imply the existence of instinctual im
pulses which run counter to self-preservation,

[868a]
one comes to question even the generalvalidity
of the platitude on which the theoretical struc
ture of Individual Psychology is built. But, to
the mass of mankind, a theory Hke this must
be exceedingly welcome, which takes no com
plications into account, which introduces no
new and difficult concepts, which knows noth
ing of the unconscious, which removes at a
single blow the problem of sexuality that
weighs so heavily on everybody, and which
confines itself to revealing the devices by means
of which people try to make Hfe comfortable.
For the mass of mankind are themselves com
fort-loving; they require only a single reason
to serve as an explanation, they are not grateful
to science for its intricacies, and they Hke to
have simple answers given to their questions
and to feel that their problems are settled once
and for aU. Once one sees how closely Indi
vidual Psychology approximates to the fulfil
ment of these requirements, one cannot help
remembering a couplet from Wallenstein:
If the idea were not so deuced clever,
One might be tempted just to call it stupid.
SpeciaHst criticism, which has been so un
compromisingly opposed to psycho-analysis,
has, in general, handled Individual Psychology
with a velvet glove. It is, indeed, true that in
America one of the most distinguished psychi
atrists pubHshed a paper againstAdler, entitled
Enough, in which he gave strong expression to
his dissatisfaction with the repetition-compul
sion of the Individual Psychologists. If others
have behaved far more kindly, the opposition
to analysis is largely responsible.
I need not say much about other schools that
have split off from us. That such splits have
occurred is no argument for or against the
truth of psycho-analysis. You have only to
think of the strong emotional factors which
make it difficult for many people to co-operate
with others or adopt a subordinate position,
and of the still greater difficulty which is em
bodied in the proverb: "Quot capita tot sensus."1 When the differences of opinion had gone
beyond a certain limit, the best thing to do
was to part company, and thenceforward to go
different ways, especially if the theoretical dif
ference
involved an
alteration in
analytical
technique. Let us take, for example, an analyst
who thinks very little of the influence of the
patient's past, and looks for the cause of a
neurosis exclusively in contemporary motives
and expectations directed towards the future.
*As many interpretations as heads.—Ed.

[868b]
New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis
867
If that is so, he wiH alsoneglect the analysisof
the patient's childhood and start on an alto
gether different technique; and he wiU have to
make up for the absence of the effects of child
hood-analysis by increasing his own didactic
influence and by directly recommending the
adoption of certain aims in life. We, for our
part, would then say: "That may be a philoso
phy, but it is no longer analysis." Or another
analyst may come to hold the view that the
anxiety-experience of birth is the root of all
later neurotic disturbances; in that case he may
think it proper to restrict analysis to the effects
of this one experience, and to promise thera
peutic success after a three to four months'
treatment. You wiU observe that I have chosen
two examples which proceed from diametri
cally opposedpremises.It is an almost universal
characteristic of these dissenting movements
that each of them seizes upon one fragment out
of the wealth of motives found in
psycho
analysis (such, for instance, as the instinct for
the power, the ethical conflict, the mother,
genitality, etc.), and, on the basis of this ap
propriation, makes itself independent. If it
seems to you that such secessions are commoner
today in the history of psycho-analysis than
they are in any other movement of thought,
I do not know whether I should agree with
you. If it be so, we must attribute the respon
sibility to the close relationship between theo
retical outlook and therapeutic practice, which
is to be found in psycho-analysis. Mere differ
ences of opinion would be borne with for far
longer. People like to accuse us psycho-analysts
of intolerance. The only evidence of this dis
agreeable characteristic was precisely our sep
aration from people who thought differently
from ourselves. Apart from that, we have taken
no steps against them; on the contrary, they
are now in clover; they are far better off than
before, because, in parting company with us,
they have in most cases got rid of one of the
burdens under which we groan—the odium of
infantile sexuality, for instance, or the ludicrousness of
symbolism—and they are now
regarded by the world at large as, at all events,
semi-respectable, which we, who remain be
hind, cannot even yet claim to be. It was they
themselves,
moreover,
who — excepting
for
one noteworthy example—effected the separa
tion.
And what more do you ask of us in the name
of tolerance? When any one has expressed an
opinion that we hold to be fundamentally false,
do you wish us to speak to him like this?

[869a]
868
Sigmund Freud
"Thank you so much for contradicting us. You
haye saved us from the danger of self-com
placency, and have given us an opportunity of
proving to the Americans that we really are as
broadminded as they could possibly wish. We do
not believe a word of what you say, but that does
not matter. You are just as right as we are, in
all probability. After all, who can ever know
who is in the right? In spite of our disagree
ment, you must allow us to put forward your
views in our publications. And we hope that
you on your part will be so kind as to support
ours although you disbelieve in them." This
will obviously be the usage of the future in
scientific circles, when the misapplication of
Einstein's theory of relativity has completely
won the day. It is true that, for the moment,
we have not gone quite so far as that. We have
confined ourselves, in the old-fashioned way, to
putting forward only our own convictions; we
expose ourselves to the danger of making mis
takes, for no one can avoid that, and we reject
anything that contradicts our views. As to the
right to change our opinions, if we think we
have found something better, we have made
full use of it in psycho-analysis.
One of the first applications of psycho-anal
ysis was that we were able to understand the
opposition we had to meet on account of bur
psycho-analytic activities. Other applications,
of an objective nature, can lay claim to a more
general interest. Our first intention was, as you
know, to understand the disturbances of the
human mind, because an astonishing experience
had shown us that in this case understanding
and cure go almost hand in hand and that a
practicable path leads from the one to the
other. And for a long time this was our only
intention. Then, however, we came to recog
nize the close relationship, in fact, the under
lying identity, subsisting between pathological
and
so-called normal processes. So psycho
analysis became depth-psychology; arid, since
nothing that man makes or does can be under
stood without the aid of psychology, the ap
plications of psycho-analysis to numerous fields
of knowledge, and especially to
the mental
sciences,
came
about
automatically,
forced
themselves
on
our attention
and demanded
elaboration. Unluckily, the tasks which we now
•undertook brought us up against obstacles,
which, lying as they do in the very nature of
the situation, have not yet been overcome. Such
an application presupposes a technical knowl
edge which the analyst does not possess; while
those who do possess the knowledge—the ex

[869b]
perts—do not know anything bf analysis, and
perhaps do not want to know anything. The
result has been that analysts have entered the
lists in such fields as those of mythology, the
history of civilization, ethnology, the science
of religion, etc., as amateurs, with a more or
less adequate equipment, often collected in a
hurry. In those fields they were treated by the
specialists, who were established there, as no
better than interlopers; and their methods, as
well as their findings, in so far as they at
tracted any attention at all, were, to begin with;
rejected. But the position is steadily improv
ing; in every field, the number of people who
study psycho-analysis with a view to making
use of it in their special researches is growing,
in the same way that colonists take the place
of pioneers. Here we may expect a rich harvest
of new knowledge. Applications of psycho
analysis are always confirmations of it as weU.
In regions where scientific work is more remote
from practical activity, the inevitable differ
ences of opinion will be less embittered.
I feel greatly tempted to take you through
all the applications of psycho-analysis in the
field of mental science. There are things which
every one who has intellectual interests would
think worth knowing, and to hear no more for
a time about abnormalities and illness would
give us a well-earned relief. But I must resist
the temptation; it would once more take us
too far outside the framework of these lectures,
and, to tell you the truth, I should not be
competent to do it. It is true that I took the
first step along some of these lines, but today
I no longer command a view over the whole
field, and I should have to spend much time in
study in order to grasp all that has been added
since I made my first attempts. Those of you
who are disappointed by my refusal can make
up for it by reading our journal, Imago, which
is devoted to the non-medical applications of
analysis.
There is one subject, however, that I cannot
pass by so easily, though this is not because I
have any special understanding of it or have
done much work on it myself. On the contrary,
I have hardly ever occupied myself with it. But
it is of immense importance, and rich in hopes
for the future; perhaps, indeed, it is the most
important of all the activities of analysis. I
refer to the application of psycho-analysis to
education, to the up-bringing of the; next gen
eration. I am at least glad to be* able to say that
my daughter, Anna Freud, has made this her
life-work, and is in this way making good my

[870a]
New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis
869
own neglect of the subject. One can easily see
the path that has led to this appfication of anal
ysis. When, during the treatment of an adult
neurotic, we tried to trace the determination
of his symptoms, we were always led back into
his early childhood. A knowledge of the later
aetiological factors was not sufficient either for
our understanding of his condition or to effect
a cure. The result was that we were forced to
acquaint ourselves with the psychological pe
culiarities of the years of infancy; and we
learned a great many things which could not
have been discovered except through analysis,
and were in a position to set right a number of
generally accepted beliefs about childhood. We
came to see that the first years of infancy (up
to about the age of five) are, for a number
of reasons, of special importance. This is, in
the first place, because they contain the first
expansion of sexuality, which leaves behind
decisive
determinants for
the sexual life of
maturity; and, in the second place, because
the impressions of this period come up against
an unformed and weak ego, upon which they
act like traumas. The ego cannot defend itself
against the emotional storms which they caH
forth except by repression, and in this way it
acquires in childhood aU its predispositions to
subsequent illnesses and disturbances of func
tion. We have come to realize that the difficulty
of childhood consists in the fact that the child
has, in a short span of time, to make its own
the acquisitions
of
a
cultural development
which has extended over tens of thousands of
years; it has, that is, to attain instinctual con
trol and social adaptation, or, at any irate, their
first elements. It can only achieve a part of
this alteration through its own development;
a great deal must be forced upon it by educa^
tion. We are not in the least surprised that
the child often performs.its task only incom
pletely. A great .many children in these early
•years pass through conditions which may be
compared with neuroses, and this is certainly
true of aU those who;develop a manifest illness
later on. In not a few cases the neurotic ill
ness does not wait till they are grown up, but
breaks out in childhood and is a source of great
trouble to parents and doctors.
: We have had no.hesitation in applying ana
lytic therapy to such children as either display
unambiguous neurotic symptoms, or are on the
way to;an\unfavourable character-development.
The anxiety expressed by opponents of analy
sis, that the child might be harmed by the
process, has turned out to be quite unfounded;

[870b]
The advantage gained by this procedure is that
we have been able to confirm in the Hving sub
ject what we have only inferred, as though
from
historical
documents,
in
the
case
of
adults. But the advantages gained by the chil
dren
themselves
was
most
satisfactory. It
turned out that the child is a most favourable
subject for analytic therapy; successes were
radical and permanent. Naturally, one has to
make extensive alterations in the technique of
treatment which has been developed for adults
when one is dealing with children. The child is,
psychologically,
a
different thing
from
the
adult; it does not yet possess a super-ego, it
cannot make much use of the method of free
association, and transference plays a different
part with it, since its real parents are still there.
The internal resistances, against which we have
to fight in the case of adults, are in the case
bf children for the most part replaced by ex
ternal difficulties. If the parents make them
selves into vehicles for the resistance, the aims
of the analysis and even the process of the
analysis itself, are often endangered. For this
reason, it is often necessary to combine a cer
tain amount of analytic influencing of the par
ents with the analysis of the children. On the
other hand, the inevitable differences between
child analysis and adult analysis are diminished
by the fact that many of our patients have
still kept so many of their infantile charactertraits that the
analyst, once more adapting
himself to his patient, cannot avoid making
use of certain parts of the technique of child
analysis in their case too. It is in the nature
of things that child analysis should have be
come the special field of women analysts, and
this wiU no doubt continue to be so.
The view that the majority of our children
pass through a neurotic phase in the course of
their development automatically raises a hy
gienic question. It may be asked whether it
would not be advantageous to come to the aid
of a child with analysis even where there is
no sign of a disturbance, as a precautionary
measure in the interests of its health, just as
nowadays
one
inoculates
healthy
children
against diphtheria, without waiting for them to
fall ill of the disease. The discussion of this
question is today only a matter of academic
interest. I can venture to speak about it to you;
but the greater number of our contemporaries
would regard the mere idea as nothing short of
criminal, and, when one considers the attitude
of most parents towards analysis, one must,:as
yet, give up any hope of its realization..Such

[871a]
870
Sigmund Freud
a prophylactic against nervous disease, which
would probably be very effective, presupposes
an entirely different structure of society. The
application of
psycho-analysis to education
must be looked for today in quite a different
direction. Let us get a clear idea of what the
primary business of education is. The child
has to learn to control its instincts. To grant
it complete freedom, so that it obeys all its
impulses without any restriction, is impossible.
It would be a very instructive experiment for
child-psychologists, but it would make life im
possible for the parents and would do serious
damage to the children themselves, as would
be seen partly at the time, and partly during
subsequent years. The function of education,
therefore, is to inhibit, forbid, and suppress,
and it has at all times carried out this function
to admiration. But we have learnt from analy
sis that it is this very suppression of instincts
that involves the danger of neurotic illness.
You will remember that we have gone into the
question of how this comes about in some de
tail. Education has therefore to steer its way
between the Scylla of giving the instincts free
play and the Charybdis of frustrating them.
Unless the problem is altogether insoluble, an
optimum of education must be discovered,
which will do the most good
and the least
harm. It is a matter of finding out how much
one may forbid, at which times, and by what
methods. And then it must further be consid
ered that the children have very different con
stitutional dispositions, so that the same educa
tional
procedure cannot possibly be equally
good for aUchildren. A moment's consideration
will show us that, so far, education has fulfilled
its function very badly, and has done children
serious injury. If we can find an optimum of
education which will carry out its task ideaUy,
then we may hope to abolish one of the factors
in the aetiology of neurotic illness, viz., the
influence of accidental infantile traumas. The
other factor, the power of a refractory instinc
tual constitution, can never be got rid of by
education. When, therefore, one comes to think
of the difficult tasks with which the educator is
confronted; when one reflects that he has to
recognize the characteristic constitution of each
child, to guess from small indications what is
going on in its unformed mind, to give him
the right amount of love and at the same time
to preserve an effective degree of authority,
then one cannot help saying to oneself that the
only adequate preparation for the profession of
educator is a good grounding in psycho-anal

[871b]
ysis. The best thing would be for him to be
analysed himself, for, after aU, without per
sonal experience one cannot get a grasp of
analysis. The analysis of teachers and educa
tors seems to be a more practicable prophylac
tic measure than the analysis of children them
selves; and there are not such great obstacles
against putting it into practice.
I will only mention, in passing, an indirect
advantage which analysis may bring to the
education of children, an advantage which may
eventually come to have considerable impor
tance. Parents who have experienced an anal
ysis themselves, and who have derived much
benefit from it, among other things an insight
into the mistakes in their own upbringing, will
treat their children with better understanding,
and will spare them a great deal which they were
not spared themselves. ParaUel with the efforts
of the analyst to influence education, run other
investigations into the cause and prevention of
delinquency and
criminology. Here again I
shaU only open the door and show you what
lies behind it, but I shall not take you inside.
If your interest in psycho-analysis is main
tained, you wiU be able to learn a great deal
that is both new and valuable on these subjects.
I cannot, however, leave the theme of educa
tion without mentioning one particular point of
view. It has been said—and no doubt with
justice—that every education is partisan; it
aims at making: the child adapt itself to what
ever social system is the established one, with
out consideration of how valuable or how stable
that system may be. If, it is argued, one is
convinced of the shortcomings of our presentday social arrangements, one cannot think it
right to give them the added support of this
psycho-analytical education of ours. We must
place before it another and a higher aim, one
which is emancipated from the social standards
that are dominent today. I do not feel, how
ever, that this argument is vafid. It is demand
ing more of analysis than its
functions can
justify. The physician who is called in to treat
a case of pneumonia has no need to consider
whether the patient is a good man, a suicide,
or a criminal; whether he deserves to remain
alive, or whether it is for his advantage to do
so. This other aim which it is sought to place
before education would be a partisan one as
well, and it is not the business of the analyst to
decide between parties. I am not now consider
ing the fact that people will refuse to allow
psycho-analysis to have any influence at all on
education if it confesses to aims which are in-

[872a]
New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis
871
compatible with the existing social order. Psy
cho-analytic education wiU be
assuming an
unwarranted responsibility if it sets out to
make its pupils into revolutionaries. It will
have done its task if it sends them away as
healthy and as efficient as possible. There are
enough revolutionary elements contained with
in itself to ensure that no one broughtup under
its influence will in later life be on the side of
reaction and suppression. I should go so far as
to say that revolutionary children are not de
sirable from any point of view.
Ladies and Gentlemen—I shall conclude by
saying a few words on the therapeutic aspect
of psycho-analysis. I discussed the theoretical
side of the subject fifteen years ago, and I
cannot formulate it in any other way today;
but I will say something about the practical
experience which we have had with it during
the interval. You know, of course, that psycho
analysis originated as a therapeutic procedure;
it has gone far beyond that, but it has never
given up its original field of work, and it still
relies upon contact with cfinical material for
its further advances and development. The ac
cumulation of empirical data upon which we
base our theories can be obtained in no other
way. Our therapeutic failures are constantly
setting us new tasks, and the requirements
of real life are an efficient protection against
carrying to excess the speculation which we,
nevertheless,
cannot avoid
in
our
work.
I
have already, in my former lectures, given an
account of the means by which psycho-analy
sis helps the patient, and along what fines;
today we wiU consider
to what
extent it
succeeds.
You are perhaps aware that I have never
been a therapeutic enthusiast; and there is no
danger of my using this as an opportunity for
ringing the praises of analysis in this respect.
I would rather say too little than too much. At
a time when I was still the only analyst, people
who were apparently kindly disposed to my
opinions used to say to me: "That is all very
nice and clever; but show me a case that you
have cured by analysis." This was one of the
many formulas that succeeded one another, as
time went on, whose function it was to put the
inconvenient novelty on one side. Today it is
as out of date as many others; the analyst, like
any other therapeutist, has his collection of
letters of gratitude from patients who have
been cured. And the analogy does not end
there. Psycho-analysis really is a form of ther
apy, just as other methods are. It has its tri

[872b]
umphs, its defeats, its difficulties, its limita
tions, and its indications. There was a time when
people attacked analysis with the accusation
that it was not to" be taken seriously as a
therapy, because it did not venture to publish
any statistics of its successes. Since then, the
Institute of Psycho-Analysis in Berfin, which
was founded by Dr. Max Eitingon, has pub
lished a report of its work during the first ten
years of its existence. The proportion of recov
eries which have been effected give us ground
neither for boasting nor for feeling ashamed.
But such statistics are not instructive, because
the material with which they deal is so hetero
geneous that it would need a very large number
of cases to prove anything. It is better to ex
amine one's own individual experience. As to
that, I may say that I do not think our suc
cesses can
compete with those of Lourdes.
There are so many more people who befieve in
the miracles of the Blessed Virgin than in the
existence of the unconscious. But if we dis
regard supernatural competition, we must com
pare psycho-analysis with other methods of
psycho-therapy. Nowadays one need
hardly
take into consideration organic physical treat
ment of
neurotic conditions. As a
psycho
therapeutic method, analysis does not stand in
opposition to other methods employed in this
branch of medicine; it does not invalidate them
nor does it exclude them. There would be no
theoretical objection to a physician who de
scribed himself as a psycho-therapeutist using
analysis
upon
his
patients
alongside
other
therapeutic methods, according to the peculiar
character of the case and the favourable or
unfavourable nature of the circumstances. In
actual fact, it is the question of technique
which renders necessary the specialization of
medical practice. So, for example, it became
necessary to separate surgery and orthopaedics.
The practice of psycho-analysis is difficult and
exacting! It cannot well be dealt with like a
pair of spectacles, which can be put on for
reading and taken off when one wants to go
for a walk. As a rule, psycho-analysis either
possesses the doctor entirely or not at all. The
psycho-therapeutists who occasionally make
use of analysis do not, as far as my experience
goes, stand on a firm analytical basis; they
have not accepted analysis as a whole, but have
watered it down,
and perhaps removed its
sting; they cannot be counted as analysts. In
my opinion this is to be regretted; but a co
operation in medical practice between an ana
lyst and a psycho-therapeutist who limits him-

[873a]
872
Sigmund
self to other methods, would be altogether
advantageous.
Compared with
other psycho-therapeutic
procedures, psycho-analysis is far and awaythe
most powerful. That is quite as it should be,
since it costs the most trouble and time, and
one would not make use of it for slight cases;
in suitable cases, one can remove disturbances
and bring about alterations which could not be
hoped for in pre-analytic times. But it has also
perfectly clearly felt limitations. The thera
peutic ambitions of many of my followers have
led them to be at great pains to remove such
hindrances, so that all neurotic disturbances
might be curable by means of psycho-analysis.
They have attempted to compress the work of
analysis into a shorter period, to intensify the
transference so that it should be superior to
any resistance, and to combine other methods
of influence with analysis in order to obtain a
cure. These enterprises are no doubt praise
worthy, but in my opinion they are in vain.
They also involve the danger of oneself being
drawn away from analysis and of drifting into
a boundless sea of experimentation. The expec
tation that we shall be able to cure aU neurotic
symptoms is, I suspect, derived from the lay
belief that neuroses are
entirely superfluous
things which have no right whatever to exist.
As a matter of fact, they are serious, constitu
tionally determined affections, which are sel
dom restricted to a few outbreaks, but make
themselves felt as a rule over long periods of
Hfe, or even throughout its entire extent. Our
analytic experience that we can influence them
to a far-reaching degree, if we can get hold of
the historical precipitating causes and the in
cidental accessory factors, has made us neglect
the constitutional factor in
our therapeutic
practice. And we are in fact powerless to deal
with it; but in our theory we ought always to
bear it in mind. In any case, the complete in
accessibility of the psychoses to analytic ther
apy should, in view of their close relationship
to the neuroses, moderate our optimism in
regard to the latter. The therapeutic efficiency
of psycho-analysis is limited by a whole series
of important factors, which can scarcely be
dealt with at all. With children, where one
might hope to
have the greatest successes,
there are the external difficulties of the paren
tal situation; yet, after all, these are bound up
with the very fact of being a
child.
With
adults we are primarily concerned with two
factors, the degree of their mental rigidity and
the form of their disease with all the deeper-

[873b]
Freud
seated determinants that He behind it. The for
mer of these is often unjustifiably overlooked.
However great the plasticity of mental life
may be, and however great the possibility of
reviving past states, not everything can
be
brought to life again. A great many alterations
seem final, and correspond to scars left behind
by processes which have run their course. In
other cases one gets an impression of a general
rigidity of the whole mind; mental processes,
which one could very well redirect into other
channels, seem incapable of leaving their old
courses. But perhaps this is the same as what
we have said already, but looked at from an
other point of view. Only too often one seems
to see that the therapeutic process is merely
lacking in the necessary motive force to enable
it to bring about the alteration. Some specific
tendency, some particular instinctual compo
nent, is too
strong in comparison with
the
counter-forces that we can mobifize against it.
This is quite generally so in the case of the
psychoses. We understand them in so far as
we know quite well where we ought to apply
the levers, but they are not able to lift the
weight. In this connection we may hope that
in the future our knowledge of the action of
hormones—you know, of course, what they are
—will provide us with a means of coping suc
cessfully with the quantitative factors involved
in these diseases; but today we are far from
having reached that desirable goal. I can under
stand that the uncertainty prevailing in all
these matters is a constant incentive towards
perfecting the technique of analysis, especially
in the matter of the transference. The beginner
in analysis, in particular, will be in doubt, when
he is unsuccessful, whether he ought to blame
the peculiarity of the case or his own unskilful
handling of the therapeutic procedure. But, as
I have said already, I do not think that there
is much to be gained by directing one's energies
along these channels.
The other Hmitation to analytical successes is
imposed by the form of the disease. You know
already that the field in which analytical ther
apy can be applied is that of the transferenceneuroses, phobias, hysterias, obsessional neu
roses, and, besides these, such abnormalities of
character as have been developed instead of
these diseases. Everything other than these,
such as narcissistic or psychotic conditions, is
more or less unsuitable. Now it would be per
fectly legitimate to save oneself from failures
by carefully excluding such cases. If this pre
caution were taken, the statistics of analysis

[874a]
New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis
873
would be very much improved. Yes; but this
is not so easy.as it seems. Our diagnoses can
very often only be made ex post facto. They
are like the test for "witch-finding applied by
the Scottish king, of which I have read in one
of Victor Hugo's books. This king declared
that he had an infallible method for detecting
witches-. He put them to simmer in a cauldron
of boiling water, and then tasted the soup.
According to the taste he could say "that was.
a witch," or "that was not a witch." The same
thing happens with us, except that it is we who
are the sufferers. We cannot give an opinion
about a patient who comes for treatment, or a
candidate for training, until we have studied
him analytically for some weeks or months. We
are, in fact, always buying a pig in a poke. The
subject comes to us with undefined, general
troubles which do not allow of any certain
diagnosis. After a period of probation, it may
turn out that the case is an unsuitable one.
Then, if he is a candidate, we send him away;
or, if he is a patient, we keep him on a little
while to see whether we cannot take a more fa
vourable view
of him. The patient has his
revenge by swelling our list of failures, and the
rejected candidate, it may be (if he is para
noid), by writing psycho-analytical books him
self. You will observe that our caution has not
been of much value to us.
I am afraid these details will have gone be
yond the scope of your interests. But I should
be even more distressed if you were to think
that I
intend to diminish your respect for
psycho-analysis as
a
therapeutic procedure.
Perhaps I have reaUy set about the business
clumsily.
I wanted, you see, to achieve the
opposite: to excuse the therapeutic limitations
of analysis by indicating how unavoidable they
are. With the same object in view, let me turn
to another point, namely the complaint that
analytic treatment takes up a disproportion
ately long time. The answer to that is that
psychological changes only come about very
slowly; if they occur quickly and suddenly it
is a bad sign. It is true that the treatment of
a serious neurosis may easily last several years,
but, if a successful result is achieved, you must
ask yourselves how long the illness itself would
otherwise have lasted. It would probably have
lasted a decade for every year of treatment,
which means that the illness would never have
passed off at all, as we so often find in un
treated cases. In many instances we have rea
sons for resuming an analysis after an interval
of many years; new events in the patient's life

[874b]
have called out in him new pathological reac
tions, though in the meantime he has
been
perfectly healthy. The first analysis had not
actually brought all his pathological disposi
tions to the surface, and it was natural that the
analysis should have been broken off as soon
as it was successful. There are also people who
are so seriously afflicted that they have to be
kept under analytic care throughout their whole
lives and taken back into analysis from time
to time; but such people would otherwise be
incapable of carrying on their lives at all, and
one must be thankful that they can be kept
going by means of this intermittent and recur
rent treatment. The analysis of characterblogical disturbances, too, involves a lengthy treat
ment but it is often successful; and it may be
asked whether there is any other form of treat
ment that could even attempt to deal with this
problem. Therapeutic ambition may make us
feel unsatisfied with these results, but after all
we have the examples of tuberculosis and lupus
before us, which teach us that one can only
meet with success if the treatment is adapted
to the character of the disease.
I have told you that psycho-analysis began
as a therapeutic procedure, but it is not in
that light that I wanted to recommend it to
your interest, but because of the truths it con
tains, because of the information it gives us
about that which is bf the greatest importance
to mankind, namely his own nature, and be
cause of the connections it has shown to exist
between the most various of his activities. As
a
form of therapy it is one among many,
though certainly prima inter pares.1 If it had
no therapeutic value, it would not have been
discovered from
clinical material and would
not have continued to develop for more than
thirty years.
LECTURE 35
A Philosophy of Life
Ladies and Gentlemen : In the last lecture we
were occupied with trivial everyday affairs,
with putting, as it were, our modest house in
order. We will now take a bold step, and risk
an answer to a question which has repeatedly
been raised in non-analytic quarters, namely,
the question whether psycho-analysis leads to
any particular Weltanschauung, and if so, to
what.
Weltanschauung is, I am afraid, a specifically
German notion, which it would be difficult to
1 Chief among equals.—Ed.

[875a]
874
Sigmund
translate into a foreign language. If I attempt
to give you a definition of the word, it can
hardly fail to strike you as inept. By Welt
anschauung, then, I mean an intellectual con
struction, which gives a unified solution of
all the problems of our existence in virtue of
a comprehensive hypothesis, a construction,
therefore, in which no question is left open
and in which everything in which we are inter
ested finds a place. It is easy to see that the
possession of such a Weltanschauung is one of
the ideal wishes of mankind. When one believes
in such a thing, one feels secure in life, one
knows what one ought to strive after, and how
one ought to organize one's emotions and in
terests to the best purpose.
If that is what is meant by a Weltanschau
ung, then the question is an easy one for
psycho-analysis to answer. As a specialized
science, a branch of psychology—depth-psy
chology or psychology of the unconscious—it
is quite unsuited to form a Weltanschauung of
its own; it must accept that of science in
general. The scientific Weltanschauung is, how
ever, markedly at variance with our definition.
The unified nature of the explanation of the
universe is, it is true, accepted by science, but
only as a program whose fulfilment is post
poned to the
future. Otherwise it is distin
guished by negative characteristics, by a limita
tion to what is, at any given time, knowable,
and a categorical rejection of certain elements
which are afien to it. It asserts that there is no
other source of knowledge of the universe, but
the intellectual manipulation of carefully veri
fied observations, in fact, what is called re
search, and that no knowledge can be obtained
from revelation, intuition, or
inspiration. It
appears that this way of looking at things came
very near to receiving general acceptance dur
ing the last century or two. It has been reserved
for the present century to raise the objection
that such a Weltanschauung is both empty and
unsatisfying, that it overlooks aU the spiritual
demands of man, and all the needs of the hu
man mind.
This objection cannot be too strongly repu
diated. It cannot be supported for a moment,
for the spirit and the mind are the subject of
scientific investigation in exactly the same way
as any non-human entities. Psycho-analysis has
a peculiar right to speak on behalf of the sci
entific Weltanschauung in this connection, be
cause it cannot be accused of neglecting the
part occupied by the mind in the universe. The
contribution of psycho-analysis to science con-

[875b]
F*EUD
sists precisely in having extended research to
the region of the mind. Certainly without such
a psychology, science would be very incom
plete. But if we add to science the investigation
of the intellectual and emotional functions of
men (and animals), we find that nothing has
been altered as regards the general position of
science, that there are no new sources of knowl
edge or methods of research.
Intuition and
inspiration would be such, if they existed; but
they can safely be counted as illusions, as ful
filments of wishes. It is easy to see, moreover,
that the qualities which, as we have shown, are
expected of a Weltanschauung have a purely
emotional basis. Science takes account of the
fact that the mind of man creates such de
mands and is ready to trace their source, but
it has not the sfightest ground
for thinking
them justified. On the contrary, it does well to
distinguish carefully between illusion (the re
sults of emotional demands of that kind) and
knowledge.
This does not at all imply that we need push
these wishes contemptuously aside, or under
estimate their value in the lives of human be
ings. We are prepared to take notice of the
fulfilments they have achieved for themselves
in the creations of art and in the systems bf
religion and philosophy; but we cannot over
look the fact that it would be wrong and highly
inexpedient to allow such things to be carried
over into the domain of knowledge. For in that
way one would open the door which gives ac
cess to the region of the psychoses, whether
individual or group psychoses, and one would
drain off from these tendencies valuable energy
which is directed towards reaHty and which
seeks by means of reaHty to satisfy wishes and
needs as far as this is possible.
From the point of view of science we must
necessarily make use of our critical powers in
this direction, and not be afraid to reject and
deny. It is inadmissible to declare that science
is one field of human intellectual activity, ahd
that refigion and philosophy are others, at least
as valuable, and that science has no business to
interfere with the other two, that they rail have
an equal claim to truth, and that every one is
free to choose whence he shall draw his con
victions and in what he shaU place his befief.
Such an attitude is considered particularly re
spectable,
tolerant,
broad-minded,
and
free
from narrow prejudices. Unfortunately it is not
tenable; it shares aU the pernicious qualities
of an entirely unscientific Weltanschauung and
in practice comes to much the same thing. The

[876a]
New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis
875
bare fact is that truth cannot be tolerant and
cannot admit compromise or limitations, that
scientific research looks on the whole field of
human activity as its own, and must adopt an
uncompromisingly critical attitude towards any
other power that seeks to usurp any part of its
province.
Of the three forces which can dispute the
position of science, religion alone is a really
serious enemy. Art is almost always harmless
and beneficent, it does not seek to be anything
else but an iUusion. Save in the case of a few
people who are, one might say, obsessed by
Art, it never dares to make any attacks on the
realm of reality. Philosophy is not opposed to
science'; it-behaves itself as.if it were a science,
and to a
certain extent it makes use of the
same methods; but it
parts
company with
science, in that it clings to the iUusion that
it can produce a complete and coherent picture
of the universe, though in fact that picture
must needs faU to pieces with every new ad
vance in our knowledge. Its methodological
error lies in the fact that it over-estimates the
epistemological value of our logical operations,
and to a certain extent admits the vafidity of
other sources of knowledge, such as intuition.
And often enough
one
feels that the poet
Heine is not unjustified when he says of the
philosopher:
With his night-cap and his night-shirt tatters,
He botches up the loop-holes in the structure of
the world.
But philosophy has no immediate influence
on the great majority of mankind; it interests
only a small number even of the thin upper
stratum of intellectuals, while all the rest find
it beyond them. In contradistinction to phi
losophy, refigion is a tremendous force, which
exerts its power over the strongest emotions of
human beings. As we know, at one time it in
cluded everything that played any part in the
mental life of mankind, that it took the place
of science, when as yet science hardly existed,
and that it built up a Weltanschauung of in
comparable consistency and coherence which,
although it has been severely shaken, has lasted
to this day.
If one wishes to form a true estimate of the
full grandeur of religion, one must keep in
mind what it undertakes to do
for men. It
gives them information about the source and
origin of the universe, it assures them of pro
tection and final happiness amid the changing
vicissitudes of Hfe, and it guides their thoughts

[876b]
and actions by means of precepts which are
backed by the whole force of its authority. It
fulfils, therefore, three functions. In the first
place, it satisfies man's desire for knowledge;
it is here doing the same thing that science
attempts to accomplish by its own methods,
and here, therefore, enters into rivalry with it.
It is to the second function that it performs,
that religion no doubt owes the greater part
of its influence. In so far as religion brushes
away men's fear of the dangers and vicissitudes
of Hfe, in so far as it assures them of a happy
ending, and comforts them in their misfor
tunes, science cannot compete with it. Science,
it is true, teaches how one can avoid certain
dangers and how one can combat many suffer
ings with success; it would be quite untrue to
deny that science is a powerful aid to human
beings, but in many cases it has to leave them
to their suffering, and can only advise them to
submit to the inevitable. In the performance
of its third function, the provision of precepts,
prohibitions, and restrictions, religion is fur
thest removed from science. For science is con
tent with discovering and stating the facts. It
is true that, from the applications of science,
rules and recommendations for behaviour may
be deduced. In certain circumstances they may
be the same as those which are laid down by
refigion, but even so the reasons for them wiU
be different.
It is not quite clear why religion should
combine these three functions. What has the
explanation of the origin of the universe to do
with the inculcation of certain ethical pre
cepts? Its assurances of protection and hap
piness are more closely connected with these
precepts. They are the reward for the fulfil
ment of the commands; only he who obeys
them can count on receiving these benefits,
while punishment awaits the disobedient. For
the matter of that, something of the same kind
applies to science; for it declares that any one
who disregards its inferences is liable to suffer
for it.
One can only understand this remarkable
combination of teaching, consolation, and pre
cept in religion, if one subjects it to genetic
analysis. We may begin with the most remark
able item of the three, the teaching about the
origin of the universe—for why should a cos
mogony be a regular element of religious sys
tems? The doctrine is that the universe was
created by a being similar to man, but greater
in every respect, in power, wisdom, and strength
of passion, in fact by an idealized superman.

[877a]
876
Sigmund
Where you have animals as creators of the
universe, you have indications of the influence
of Totemism, which I shall touch on later, at
any rate with a brief remark. It is interesting
to notice that this creator of the universe is
always a single god, even when many gods are
befieved in. Equally interesting is the fact that
the creator is nearly always a male, although
there is no lack of indication of the existence
of female deities and many mythologies make
the creation of the world begin precisely with
a male god triumphing over a female goddess,
who is degraded into a monster. This raises the
most fascinating minor problems, but we must
hurry on. The rest of our enquiry is made
easy because this God-Creator is openly caUed
Father. Psycho-analysis concludesthat he really
is the father, clothed in the grandeur in which
he once appeared to the small child. The reHgious man's picture of the creation of the
universe is the same as his picture of his own
creation.
If this is so, then it is easy to understand
how it is that the comforting promises of pro
tection and the severe ethical commands are
found together with the cosmogony. For the
same individual, to whom the child owes its
own existence, the father (or, more correctly,
the parental function which is composed of
the father and the mother), has protected and
watched over the weak and helpless child, ex
posed as it is to all the dangers which threaten
in the external world; in its father's care it has
felt itself safe. Even the grown man, though
he may know that he possesses greater strength,
and though he has
greater insight into the
dangers of life, rightly feels that fundamentally
he is just as helpless and unprotected as he
was in childhood and that in relation to the ex
ternal world he is stiU a child. Even now, there
fore, he cannot give up the protection which
he has enjoyed as a child. But he has long ago
reafized that his father is a being with strictly
limited powers and by no means endowed with
every desirable attribute. He therefore looks
back to the memory-image of the overrated
father of his childhood, exalts it into a deity,
and brings it into the present and into reaHty.
The emotional strength of this memory-image
and the lasting nature of his need for protection
are the two supports of his belief in God.
The third main point of the religious pro
gram, its ethical precepts, can also be related
without any difficulty to the situation of child
hood. In a famous passage, which I have al
ready quoted in an earHer lecture, the philoso-

[877b]
Freud
pher Kant speaks of the starry heaven above us
and the moral law within us as the strongest
evidence for the greatness of God. However
odd it may sound to put these two side by
side—for what can the heavenly bodies have
to do with the question whether one man loves
another or kills him?—nevertheless it touches
on a great psychological truth. The same father
(the parental function) who gave the child his
life and preserved it from the dangers which
that life involves, also taught it what it may or
may not do, made it accept certain Hmitations
of its instinctual wishes, and told it what con
sideration it would be expected to show to
wards its parents and brothers and sisters, if it
wanted to be tolerated and liked as a member
of the family circle, and later on of more ex
tensive groups. The child is brought up to
know its social duties by means of a system of
love-rewards and punishments, and in this way
it is taught that its security in life depends on
its parents (and, subsequently, other people)
loving it and being able to believe in its love
for them. This whole state of affairs is carried
over by the grown man unaltered into his re
ligion. The prohibitions and commands of his
parents live on in his breast as his moral con
science ; God rules the world of men with the
help of the same system of rewards and punish
ments, and the degree of protection and happi
ness which each individual enjoys, depends on
his fulfilment of the demands of morality; the
feeling of security, with which he fortifies him
self against the dangers both of the external
world and of his human environment, is founded
on his love of God and the consciousness of
God's love for him. Finally, he has in prayer
a direct influence on the divine wiU, and in
that way insures for himself a share in the
divine omnipotence.
I am sure that while you have been fistening to me, a whole host of questions must have
come into your minds which you would like to
have answered. I
cannot undertake to do so
here and now, but I am perfectly certain that
none of these questions of detail would shake
our thesis that the religious Weltenschauung
is determined by the situation that subsisted in
our childhood. It is therefore all the more re
markable that, in spite of its infantile char
acter, it nevertheless has a forerunner. There
was, without doubt, a time when there were no
religions and no gods. It is known as the age of
animism. Even at that time the world was full
of spirits In the semblance of men (demons, as
we call them), and aU the objects in the ex-

[878a]
New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis
877
temal world were their dwelling-place or per
haps identical with them, but there was no
supreme power which had created them all,
which controlled them, and to which it was
possible to turn for protection and aid. The
demons of animism were
usually hostile to
man, but it seems as though man had more
confidence in himself in those days than later
on. He was no doubt in constant terror of these
evil spirits, but he defended himself against
them by means of certain actions to which he
ascribed the power to drive them away. Nor
did he think himself entirely powerless in other
ways. If he wanted something from nature—
rain, for instance—he did not direct a prayer
to the weather-god, but used a spell, by means
of which he expected to exert a direct influence
over nature; he himself made something which
resembled rain. In his fight against the powers
of the surrounding world, his first weapon was
magic, the first forerunner of our modern tech
nology. We suppose that this confidence in
magic is derived from the overestimation of
the individual's own
intellectual operations,
from the belief in the omnipotence of thoughts,
which, incidentaUy, we come across again in
our obsessional neurotics. We may imagine that
the men of that time were particularly proud
of their acquisition of speech, which must have
been accompanied by a great facilitation of
thought. They attributed magic power to the
spoken word. This feature was later on taken
over by religion. "And God said: Let there be
light, and there was light." But the fact of
magic actions shows that animistic man did
not rely entirely on the force of his own wishes.
On the contrary, he depended for success upon
the performance of an action, which would
cause Nature to imitate it. If he wanted it to
rain,
he
himself poured
out
water;
if he
wanted to stimulate the soil to fertifity, he of
fered it a performance of sexual intercourse in
the fields.
You know how tenaciously anything that has
once found psychological expression persists.
You will, therefore, not be surprised to hear
that a great many manifestations of animism
have lasted up to the present day, mostly as
what are called superstitions, side by side with
and behind religion. But more than that, you
can hardly avoid coming to the conclusion that
our philosophy has preserved essential traits
Of animistic modes of thought, such as the
overestimation of the magic of words and the
belief that real processes in the external world
is, to be sure, an animism without magical prac
tices. On the other hand we should expect to
find that in the age of animism there must al
ready have been some kind of morality, some
rules governing the intercourse of men with
one another. But there is no evidence that they
were closely bound up with animistic beliefs.
Probably they were the immediate expression
of the distribution of power and of practical
necessities.
It would be very interesting to know what
determined the transition from animism to re
ligion; but you may imagine in what darkness
this earliest epoch in the evolution of the hu
man mind is still shrouded. It seems to be a
fact that the earliest form in which religion
appeared was the remarkable one of totemism,
the worship of animals, in the train of which
followed the first ethical commands, the taboos.
In a book called Totem and Taboo, I once
worked out a suggestion, in accordance with
which this change is to be traced back to an
upheaval in the
relationships in the human
family. The main achievement of refigion, as
compared with animism, Hes in the psychic
binding of the fear of demons. Nevertheless,
the evil spirit stiU has a place in the religious
system as a relic of the previous age.
So much for the pre-history of the religious
Weltanschauung. "Let us now turn to consider
what has happened since, and what is still going
on under our own eyes. The scientific spirit,
strengthened by the observation of
natural
processes, began in the course of time to treat
religion as a human matter, and to subject it to
a
critical examination. This test it failed to
pass. In the first place, the accounts of mira
cles roused a feeling of surprise and disbelief,
since they contradicted everything that sober
observation had taught, and betrayed all too
clearly the influence of human imagination. In
the next place, its account of the nature of the
universe had to be rejected, because it showed
evidence of a lack of knowledge which bore
the stamp of earlier days, and because, owing
to increasing familiarity with the laws of na
ture, it had lost its authority. The idea that the
universe came into being through an act of
generation or creation, analogous to that which
produces an individual human being, no longer
seemed to be the most obvious and self-evident
hypothesis; for the distinction between living
and sentient beings and inanimate nature had
become apparent to the human mind, and had
made it impossible to retain the original anifollow the lines laid down by our thoughts. It
mistic theory. Besides this, one must not over-

[879a]
878
Sigmund
look the influence of the comparative study of
different religious systems, and the impression
they give of mutual exclusiveness and intol
erance.
Fortified by these preliminary efforts, the
scientific spirit at last summoned up courage to
put to thetest the mostimportant and the most
emotionally significant elementsof the religious
Weltanschauung. The truth could have been
seen at any time, but it was long before any
one dared to say it aloud: the assertions made
by religion that it could give protection and
happiness to men, if they would only fulfil
certain ethical obligations, were unworthy of
belief. It seems not to be true that there is a
power in the universe, which watches over the
well-being of every individual with parental
care and bringsall his concerns to a happy end
ing. On the contrary, the destinies of man are
incompatible with a universal principle of be
nevolence or with—what is to some degree con
tradictory—a universal principle of justice.
Earthquakes, floods, and fires do not differenti
ate between the good and devout man, and the
sinner and unbeliever. And, even if we leave
inanimate nature out of account and consider
the destinies of individual men in so far as
they depend on their relations with others of
their own kind, it is by no means the rule that
virtue is rewarded and wickedness punished,
but it happens often enough that the violent,
the crafty, and the unprincipled seize the de
sirable goods of the earth for themselves, while
the pious go empty away. Dark, unfeeling, and
unloving powers determine human destiny; the
system of rewards and punishments, which, ac
cording to religion, governs the world, seems
to have no existence. This is another occasion
for abandoning a portion of the animism which
has found refuge in religion.
The last contribution to the criticism of the
refigious Weltanschauung has been made by
psycho-analysis, which has traced the origin of
religion to the helplessness of childhood, and its
content to the persistence of the wishes and
needs of childhood into maturity. This does not
precisely imply a refutation of religion, but it
is a necessary rounding off of our knowledge
about it, and, at least on one point, it actually
contradicts it, for religion lays claim to a divine
origin. This claim, to be sure, is not false if
our interpretation of God is accepted.
The final judgment of science on the religious
Weltanschauung, then, runs as follows. While
the different refigions wrangle with one another
as to which of them is in possession of the

[879b]
Freud
truth, in our view the truth of religionmay be
altogether disregarded. Religion is an attempt
to get control over the sensory world, in which
we are placed, by means of the wish-world,
which we have developed inside us as a result
of biological and psychological necessities. But
it cannot achieve its end. Its doctrines carry
with them the stamp of the times in which they
originated, the ignorant childhood days of the
human race. Its consolations deserve no trust.
Experience teaches us that the world is not a
nursery. The ethical commands, to which re
ligion seeks to lend its weight, require some
other foundations instead, for human society
cannot do without them, and it is dangerous to,
fink up obedience to them with refigious belief.
If one attempts to assign to religion its, place,
in man's evolution, it seems not so much to be
a lasting acquisition, as a parallel to the neurosis
which the civilized individual must pass through
on his way from childhood to maturity.
You are, of course, perfectly free to criticise
this account of mine, and I am prepared to
meet you half way. What I have said about the
gradual crumbling of
the
religious
Weltan
schauung was no doubt an incomplete abridge
ment of the whole story; the order of the sepa
rate events was not quite correctly given, and
the co-operation of various forces towards the
awakening
of
the
scientific
spirit
was
not
traced.
I
have also left out of account the
alterations which occurred in the religious Welt
anschauung itself, both during the period of its
unchallenged authority and afterwards under
the influence of awakening criticism. FinaUy I
have, strictly speaking, limited my remarks to
one single form of religion, that of the Western
peoples. I have, as it were, constructed a layfigure
for the purposes of a demonstration
which I desired to be as rapid and as impressive
as possible. Let us leave on one side the ques
tion of whether my knowledge would in any
case have been sufficient to enable me to do
it better or more completely. I am aware that
you can find all that I have said elsewhere, and
find it better said; none of it is new. But I am
firmly convinced that the most careful elabora
tion of the material upon which the problems
of religion are based would not shake these
conclusions.
As you know, the struggle between the scien
tific spirit and the religious Weltanschauung is
not yet at an end; it is still going on under our
very eyes today. However little psycho-analysis
may make use as a rule of polemical weapons,
we will not deny ourselves the pleasure of look-

[880a]
New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis
879
ing into this conflict. IncidentaUy, we may per
haps arrive at a clearer understanding of our
attitude
towards
the
Weltanschauung.
You
will see how easily some of the arguments
which are brought forward by the supporters
of religion can be disproved; though others
may succeed in escaping refutation.
The first objection that one hears is to the
effect that it is an impertinence on the part of
science to take religion as a subject for its
investigations, since refigion is something su
preme, something superior to the capacities of
the human understanding,
something which
must not be approached with the sophistries of
criticism. In other words, science is not compe
tent to sit in judgment on religion. No doubt it
is quite useful and valuable, so long as it is re
stricted to its own province; but religion does
not lie in that province, and with religion it
can have nothing to do. If we are not deterred
by this
brusque
dismissal, but
enquire on
what grounds religion bases its claim to an
exceptional position among human concerns,
the answer we receive, if indeed we are hon
oured with an answer at all, is that religion
cannot be measured by human standards, since
it is of divine origin, and has been revealed to
us by a spirit which the human mind cannot
grasp. It might surely be thought that nothing
could be more easily refuted than this argu
ment ; it is an obvious petitio principii, a "beg
ging of the question." The point which is being
called in question is whether there is a divine
spirit and a revelation; and it surely cannot
be a conclusive reply to say that the question
cannot be asked, because the Deity cannot be
called in question. What is happening here is
the same kind of thing as we meet with occa
sionally in our analytic work. If an otherwise
intelligent patient denies a suggestion on par
ticularly stupid grounds, his imperfect logic is
evidence for the existence of a particularly
strong motive for his making the denial, a mo
tive which can only be of an affective nature and
serve to bind an emotion.
Another sort of answer may be given, in
which a motive of this kind is openly admitted.
Religion must not be critically examined, be
cause it is the highest, most precious, and no
blest thing that the mind of man has brought
forth, because it gives expression to the deep
est feelings, and is the only thing that makes
the world bearable and
life worthy of hu
manity. To this we need not reply by disputing
this estimate of religion, but rather by drawing
attention to another aspect of the matter. We

[880b]
should point out that it is not a question of
the scientific spirit encroaching upon the sphere
of religion, but of religion encroaching upon
the sphere of scientific thought. Whatever value
and importance religion may have, it has no
right to set any limits to thought, and there
fore has no right to except itself from the
appfication of thought.
Scientific thought is, in its essence, no dif
ferent from the normal process of thinking,
which we aU, believers and unbelievers, alike,
make use of when we are going about our busi
ness in everyday life. It has merely taken a
special form in certain respects: it extends its
interest to things which have no immediate
obvious utility, it endeavours to eliminate per
sonal factors and emotional influences, it care
fully examines the trustworthiness of the sense
perceptions on which it bases its conclusions, it
provides itself with new perceptions which are
not obtainable by everyday means, and isolates
the determinants of these new experiences by
purposely varied experimentation. Its aim is
to arrive at correspondence with reality, that
is to say with what exists outside us and inde
pendently of us, and, as experience has taught
us, is decisive for the fulfilment or frustration
of our desires. This correspondence with the
real external world we call truth. It is the aim
of scientific work, even when the practical
value of that work does not interest us. When,
therefore, religion claims that it can take the
place of science and that, because it is benefi
cent and ennobling, it must therefore be true,
that claim is, in fact, an encroachment which,
in the interests of every one, should be resisted.
It is asking a great deal of a man, who has
learned to regulate his everyday affairs in ac
cordance with the rules of experience and with
due regard to reality, that he should entrust
precisely what affects him most nearly to the
care of an authority which claims as its pre
rogative freedom from all the rules of rational
thought. And, as for the protection that re
ligion promises its believers, I hardly think
that any of us would be willing even to enter
a motor-car, if the driver informed us that he
drove without allowing himself to be distracted
by traffic regulations, but in accordance with
the impulses of an exalted imagination.
And indeed the ban which religion has im
posed upon thought in the interests of its own
preservation is by no means without danger
both for the individual and for society. Ana
lytic experience has taught us that such pro
hibitions, even though they were originaUy

[881a]
880
Sigmund
confined to some particular field, have a tend
ency to spread, and then, become the cause of
severe-inhibitions in people's lives. In women,
a process of thissortcan be observed to follow
from the prohibition against their occupying
themselves, even in thought, with the sexual
side of their nature. The biographies of almost
all the eminent people of past times show the
disastrous results of the inhibition of thought
by religion. Intellect, on the other hand—or
rather, to caU it by a more famifiarname, rea
son—is among the forces which may be ex
pectedto exert a unifying influence upon men
—creatures who can be held together only with
the greatest difficulty, and whom it is therefore
scarcely possible to control. Think how impos
sible human society would be if every one had
his own particular multiplication table and his
own private units of weight and length. Our
best hope for the future is that the intellect—
the scientific spirit, reason—should in time es
tablish a dictatorship over the human mind.
The very nature of reason is a guarantee that
it would not fail to concede to human emotions,
and to aUthat is determined by them, the posi
tion to which they are entitled. But the com
mon pressure exercised by such a domination
of reasonwould prove to be the strongestunify
ing force among men, and would prepare the
way for furtherunifications. Whatever, likethe
ban laid uponthoughtby religion, opposes such
a development is a danger for the future of
mankind.
The question maynow be askedwhyreligion
does not put an end to this losing fight by
openly declaring: "It is a fact that I cannot
give you what men commonly call truth; to
obtain that, you must go to science. But what
I have to give you is incomparably more beau
tiful, morecomforting andmore ennobling than
anything that you could ever get from science.
And I therefore say to you that it is true in a
different and higher sense." The answer is easy
to find. Religion cannot make this admission,
because if it did it would lose all influence over
the mass of mankind. The ordinary man knows
only one truth—truth in the ordinary sense
of the word. What may be meant by a higher,
or a highest, truth, he cannot imagine. Truth
seems to him as little capable of having degrees
as death, and the necessary leap from the beau
tiful to the true is one that he cannot make.
Perhaps you will agree with me in thinking
that he is right in this.
The struggle, therefore, is not yet at an end.
The followers of the religious Weltanschauung
act in accordance with the old maxim: the best

[881b]
Freud
defence is attack. "What," they ask, "is this
science that presumes to depreciate our re
ligion, which has brought salvation and com
fort to milfions of men for many thousands of
years? What has science for its part so far
accompHshed? What more can be expected of
it? On it own admission, it is incapable of
comforting or ennobling us. We will leave that
on one side, therefore, though it is by no means
easy to give up such benefits. But what of its
teaching? Can it tell us how the world began,
and what fate is in store for it? Can it even
paint for us a coherent picture of the universe,
and show us where the unexplained phenomena
of life fit in, and how spiritual forces are able
to operate on inert matter? If it could do that,
we should not refuse it our respect. But it has
done nothing of the sort, not one single prob
lem of this kind has it solved. It gives us frag--
ments of alleged knowledge, which it cannot
harmonize with one another, it collects obser
vations of
uniformities from the totafity of
events, and dignifies them with the name of
laws and subjects them to its hazardous inter
pretations. And with what a small degree of
certitude does it establish its conclusions! All
that it teaches is only provisionaUy true; what
is prized today as the highest wisdom is over
thrown tomorrow and experimentally replaced
by something else. The latest error is then
given the name of truth. And to this truth we
are asked to sacrifice our highest good!"
Ladies and Gentlemen—in so far as you your
selves are supporters of the scientific Weltan
schauung, I do not think you will be very pro
foundly shaken by this critic's attack. In Im
perial Austria an anecdote was once current
which I should like to caU to mind in this con
nection. On one occasion the old Emperor was
receiving a deputation from a political party
which he disliked: "This is no longer ordinary
opposition," he burst out, "this is factious op
position." In just the same way you will find
that the reproaches made against science for
not having solved the riddle of the universe are
unfairly and spitefully exaggerated. Science has
had
too
little time
for
such
a
tremendous
achievement. It is still very young, a recently
developed human activity.
Let us
bear in
mind, to mention only a few dates, that only
about three hundred years have passed since
Kepler discovered the laws of planetary move
ment; the life of Newton, who spfit up fight
into the colours of the spectrum and put for
ward the theory of gravitation, came to end
in 1727, that is to say a little more than two
hundred years ago; and Lavoisier discovered

[882a]
New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis
881
oxygen shortly before the French Revolution.
I may be a very old man today, but the life of
an individual man is very short in comparison
with the duration of human development, and
it is a fact that I was alive when Charles Dar
win published his work on the origin of species.
In the same year, 1859, Pierre Curie, the dis
coverer of radium, was born. And if you go
back to the beginnings of exact natural science
among
the
Greeks,
to
Archimedes,
or
to
Aristarchus of Samos (around 250 b.c.) the fore
runner of Copernicus, or even to the tentative
origins of astronomy among the Babylonians,
you will only be covering a very small portion
of the period which anthropology requires for
the evolution of man from his original ape-like
form, a period which certainly embraces more
than a hundred thousand years. And it must
not be
forgotten that the last century has
brought with it such a quantity of new dis
coveries and such a great acceleration of sci
entific progress that we haye every reason to
look forward with confidence to the future of
science.
It has to be admitted that the other objec
tions are valid within certain limits. Thus it is
true that the path of science is slow, tentative
and laborious. That cannot be denied or altered.
No wonder that the gentlemen of the opposition
are dissatisfied; they are spoilt, they have had
an easier time of it with their revelation. Prog
ress in scientific work is made in just the same
way as in analysis. The analyst brings expec
tations with him to his work, but he must keep
them in the background. He discovers some
thing new by observation, now here and now
there, and at first the bits do not fit together.
He puts forward suppositions, he brings con
structions to one's aid, and gives them up if
they are not confirmed, he must have a great
deal of patience, must be prepared for all possibifities, and must not jump at conclusions for
fear of their leading him to overlook new and
unexpected factors. And in the end the whole
expenditure of effort is rewarded, the scattered
discoveries faU into place, and he obtains an
understanding of
a
whole
chain
of
mental
events; he has finished one piece of work and
is ready for the next. But the analyst is unlike
other scientific workers in this one respect,
that he has to do without the help which ex
periment can bring to research.
But the criticism of science which I
have
quoted also contains a great deal of exagger
ation. It is not true to say that it swings blindly
from one attempt tb another, and exchanges
one error for the next. As a rule, the man of

[882b]
science works like a sculptor with a clay model,
who persistently alters the first rough sketch,
adds to it and takes away from it, until he has
obtained a satisfactory degree of similarity to
some object, whether seen or imagined. And,
moreover, at least in the older and more mature
sciences, there is already a solid foundation of
knowledge, which is now only modified and
elaborated
and
no
longer
demoHshed. The
outlook, in fact, is not so bad in the world of
science.
And finaUy, what is the purpose of all these
passionate disparagements of science? In spite
of its present incompleteness and its inherent
difficulties, we could not do without it and could
not put anything else in its place. There is no
limit to the improvement of which it is capable,
and this can certainly not be said of the re
ligious Weltanschauung. The latter is complete
in its essentials; if it is an error, it must re
main one for ever. No attempt to minimize the
importance of science can alter the fact that it
attempts to take into account our dependence
on the real external world, while refigion is
illusion, and it derives its strength from the
fact that it falls in with our instinctual de
sires.
I must now go on to mention some other
types of Weltanschauung which are in opposi
tion to the scientific one; I do so, however,
unwillingly, because I know that I am not com
petent to form a .judgment upon them. I hope,
therefore, that you ;wHl bear this confession in
mind in listening to what I have to say, and
that if your interest is aroused you will go else
where for more trustworthy information.
In the first place, I ought at this point to
name the various philosophical systems which
have ventured to draw a picture of the world,
as it is reflected in the minds of thinkers whose
eyes are as a rule turned away from it. But 1
have already attempted to give a general char
acterization of philosophy and its methods, and
I believe I am more unfitted than almost any
one to pass the individual systems under review.
I shall ask you, therefore, instead to turn your
attention to two other phenomena which, par
ticularly in these days, cannot be ignored.
The Weltanschauung to which I shaU first
refer is, as it were, a counterpart of political
anarchism, and may perhaps have emanated
from it. No doubt there have been intellectual
nihilists of this kind before, but at the present
day the theory of relativity of modern physics
seems to have gone to their heads. It is true
that they start out from science, but they suc
ceed in forcing it to cut the ground from under

[883a]
882
Sigmund Freud
its ownfeet, to commit suicide, asit were; they
make it dispose of itself by getting it to refute
its own premises. One often has an impression
that this nihifism is only a temporary attitude,
which wiU only be kept up until this task has
been completed. When once science has been
got rid of, some kind of mysticism, or, indeed,
the oldreligious Weltanschauung, canspring up
in the space that hasbeen left vacant. Accord
ingto this anarchistic doctrine, thereis no such
thing as truth, no assured knowledge of the ex
ternal world. What we give out as scientific
truth is onlythe product of our ownneeds and
desires, as they are formulated under varying
external conditions; that is to say, it is illusion
once more. Ultimately we find only what we
need to find, and see only what we desire to
see. We can do nothing else. And since the
criterion of truth, correspondence with an ex
ternal world, disappears, it is absolutely im
material what views we accept. AU of them are
equally true and false. And no one has a right
to accuse any one else of error.
For a mind which is interested in epistemology,it wouldbe temptingto enquire into the
contrivances and sophistries by means of which
the anarchists manage to elicit a final product
of this kind from science. One would no doubt
be brought up against situations like the one
involved in the familiar example of the Cretan
who says that all Cretans areliars. But I am not
desirous, nor am I capable, of goingdeeperinto
this. I will merely remark that the anarchistic
theory only retains its remarkable air of su
periority solongasit is concerned with opinions
about abstract things;
it breaks down
the
-moment it comes.in contact with practical life.
Now the behaviour of men is guided by their
opinions and knowledge, andthe same scientific
spirit which speculates about the structure of
the atom or the origin of man is concerned in
the building of a bridge that wiU bear its load.
If it were really a matter of indifference what
we believed, if there were no knowledge which
was distinguished from among our opinions by
the fact that it corresponds with reality, then
we might just as well build our bridges of card
board as of stone, or inject a tenth of a gramme
of morphia into a patient instead of a hun
dredth, or take tear-gas as a narcotic instead
of ether. But the intellectual anarchists them
selves would strongly repudiate such practical
applications of their theory.
The other opposing Weltanschauung is to be
taken far more seriously, and in this case I
very deeply
regret the insufficiency of my

[883b]
knowledge. I dare say that you know more
about this subject than I do and that you have
long ago taken up your position for or against
Marxism. The investigations of Karl Marx into
the economic structure of society and into the
influence of various forms of economic organi
zation upon all departments of human Hfe have,
in our day, acquired an authority that cannot
be denied. How far they are right or wrong in
detail, I naturally do not know. I gather that it
is not easy even for better informed people to
decide.
Some
of the
propositions in Marx's
theory seem strange to me, such as that the
evolution of forms of society is a process of
natural history, or that the changes in social
stratification proceed from one another in the
manner of a dialectical process. I am by no
means certain that I understand these state
ments rightly; moreover, they do not sound
materialistic but like traces of the obscure He
gelian philosophy under the influence of which
Marx at one time passed. I do not know how I
can throw off the view which I share with other
laymen, who are inclined to trace back the
formation of classes in society to the struggles
which went on from the beginning of history
between various human hordes. These hordes
differed to a slight degree from one another;
and it is my view that social differences go back
to these original differences of tribe or race.
Psychological factors, such as the amount of
constitutional aggressiveness and also the de
gree of cohesion within the horde, and material
factors, such as the possession of better weap
ons, decided the victory. When they came to
five together in the same territory, the victors
became the masters and conquered the slaves.
There is no sign in all this of natural laws or
conceptual modifications; on the other hand,
we cannot fail to recognize the influence which
the
progressive control over natural forces
exerts on the social relationships between men,
since men always place their newly won powers
at the service of their aggressiveness, and use
them against one another. The introduction of
metals, of bronze and iron, put an end to whole
cultural epochs and their social institutions. I
really believe that gun-powder and fire-arms
overthrew
chivalry and
the
domination of
the aristocracy, and that the Russian des
potism was already doomed before the war
was
lost,
since
no
amount
of
in-breeding
among the rufing famifies of Europe could
have
produced
a
race
of
Tsars
capable
of
withstanding
the
explosive
force
of
dynamite.

[884a]
New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis
883
It may be, indeed, that with the present
economic crisis which followed upon the Great
War, we are merely paying the price of our
latest triumph over nature, the conquest of the
air. This does not sound very convincing, but
at least the first links in the chain of argument
are clearly-recognizable. The policy of England
was based on the security guaranteed by the
seas which encircle her coasts. The moment
Bleriot flew over the Channel in his aeroplane,
this protective isolation was broken through;
and on the night on which, in a time of peace,
a German Zeppelin made an experimental cruise
over London, war against Germany became a
certainty.1 Nor must the threat of submarines
be forgotten in this connection..
I am almost ashamed of treating a theme of
such importance and complexity in such a
slight and inadequate manner, and I am also
aware that I have not said anything that is new
to you. I only wanted to call your attention to
the fact that the factor of man's control over
nature, from which he obtains his weapons for
his struggle with his feUow-men, must of neces
sity also affect his economic arrangements. We
seem to have travelled a long way from the
problems of a Weltanschauung, but we shall
soon come back to the point. The strength of
Marxism obviously does not lie in its view of
history, or in the prophecies about the future
which it bases upon that view, but in its clear
insight into the determining influence which is
exerted by the economic conditions of man up
on his intellectual, ethical, and artistic reactions.
A whole collection of correlations and causal
sequences
were
thus
discovered
which had
hitherto been almost completely disregarded.
But it cannot be assumed that economic mo
tives are the only ones which determine the
behaviour of men in society. The unquestion
able fact that different individuals, races, and
nations
behave
differently
under the
same
economic conditions, in itself proves that the
economic factor cannot be the sole determinant.
It is quite impossible to understand how psy
chological factors can be overlooked where the
reactions of Hving human beings are involved;
for not only were such factors already con
cerned in the establishment of these economic
conditions, but, even in obeyingthese conditions,
men can do no more than set their original
instinctual impulses in motion—their self-pre
servative instinct, their love of aggression, their
need for love, and their impulse to
attain
11 was informed of this in the first year of the war
on
trustworthy authority.

[884b]
pleasure and avoid pain. In an earlier lecture,
we have emphasised the importance of the part
played by the super-ego, which represents tra
dition and the ideals of the past, and which
will resist for some time the pressure exerted
by new economic situations. And, finally, we
must not forget that the mass of mankind, sub
jected though they are to economic necessities,
are borne on by a process of cultural develop
ment—some call it civilization—which is no
doubt influenced by all the other factors, but is
certainly equally independent of them in its
origin; it is comparable to an organic process,
and is quite capable of itself having an effect
upon the other factors. It displaces the aims of
the instincts,, and causes men to rebel against
what has hitherto been tolerable; and, more
over, the progressive strengthening of the scien
tific spirit seems to be an essential part of it.
If any one were in a position to show in detail
how these different factors—the general human
instinctual disposition, its racial variations, and
its
cultural modifications—behave under the
influence of varying social organization, pro
fessional activities, and methods of subsistence,
how these factors inhibit or aid one another—
if, I say, any one could show this, then he would
not only have improved Marxism but would
have made it into a true social science. For
sociology, which deals with the behaviour of
man in society, can be nothing other than
applied psychology. Strictly speaking, indeed,
there are only two sciences—psychology, pure
and applied, and natural science.
When at last the far-reaching importance of
economic conditions began to be realized, the
temptation arose to bring about an alteration
in them by means of revolutionary interference,
instead of leaving the change to the course of
historical development. Theoretical Marxism,
as put into effect in Russian Bolshevism, has
acquired the energy, the comprehensiveness,
and the exclusiveness of a Weltanschauung;
but at the same time it has acquired an almost
uncanny resemblance to what it is opposing.
Originally it was itself a part of science, and,
in its realization, was built up on science and
technology; but it has nevertheless established
a ban upon thought, which is as inexorable as
was formerly that of religion. All critical ex
amination of the Marxist theory is forbidden;
doubts of its validity are as vindictively pun
ished
as heresy once was by the
Cathofic
Church. The works of Marx, as the source of
revelation, have taken the place of the Bible
and the Koran, although they are no freer from

[885a]
884
Sigmund
contradictions and obscurities than these earlier
holy books.
And although practical Marxism has remorse
lessly swept away all idealistic systems and
illusions, it has nevertheless developed illusions
itself, whichare no lessdubiousand unverifiable
than their predecessors. It hopes, in the course
of a few generations, so to alter men that they
wfil be able to live together in the new order of
society almost without friction, and that they
wiU do their work voluntarily. In the mean
time, it moves elsewhere the instinctual bar
riers which are essential in any society, it directs
outwards the
aggressive
tendencies, which
threaten every human community, and finds its
support in the hostility of the poor against the
rich, and of the hitherto powerless against the
former holders of power. But such an alteration
in human nature
is very
improbable.
The
enthusiasm with which the mob follow the
Bolshevist lead at present, so long as the new
order is incomplete and threatened from out
side, gives no guarantee for the future, when it
will be fully established and no longer in dan
ger. In exactly the same way as religion,
Bolshevism is obliged to compensate its believers for the sufferings and deprivations of
the present life, by promising them a better
Hfe hereafter, in which there will be no un
satisfied needs. It is true that this paradise is
to be in this world; it will be established on
earth, and wfilbe inaugurated within a measur
able time. But let us remember that the Jews,
whose religion knows nothing of a life beyond
the grave, also expected the coming of the
Messiah here on earth, and that the Christian
Middle Ages constantly befieved that the King
dom of God was at hand.
There is no doubt what the answer of Bol
shevism to these criticisms will be. "Until men
have changed their nature," it wiU say, "one
must employ the methods which are effective
with them today. One cannot do without com-;
pulsion in their education or a ban upon think
ing or the application of force even to the
spilling of blood; and if one did not awake in
them the illusions you speak of, one would not
be able to bring them to submit to this com
pulsion." And it might politely ask us to say
how else it could be done. At this point we
should be defeated. I should know of no advice
to give. I should admit that the conditions of
this experiment would have restrained me, and
people like me, from undertaking it.; but we
are not the only ones concerned. There are alsb
men of action, unshakable in their convictions,

[885b]
Freud
impervious to doubt,
and insensitive to the
sufferings of anyone who stands between them
and their goal. It is owing to such men that the
tremendous attempt to institute a new order
of society of this kind is actually being carried
out in Russia now. At a time when great nations
are declaring that they expect to find their
salvation solely from a steadfast adherence to
Christian piety,
the upheaval in Russia—in
spite of all its distressing features—seems to
bring a promise of a better future. Unfor
tunately, neither our own misgivings nor the
fanatical belief of the other side give us any
hint of how the experiment will turn out. The
future will teach us. Perhaps it will show that
the attempt has been made prematurely, and
that
a
fundamental
alteration of
the social
order will have little hope of success until new
discoveries
are made that will increase
our
control over the forces of nature, and so make
easier the satisfaction of our needs. It may be
that only then will it be possible for a new
order of society to emerge which wiU not only
banish the material wants of the masses, but at
the same time meet the cultural requirements
of individual men. But even so, we shall still
have to struggle for an indefinite length of time
with the difficulties which the intractable nature
bf man puts in the way of every kind of social
community,
j
Ladies and Gentlemen—Let me in conclusion
sum up what I had to say about the relation of
psycho-analysis to the question of a Weltan
schauung. Psycho-analysis is not, in my opinion,
in a position to create a Weltanschauung of its
own. It has no need to do so, for it is a branch
of science and can subscribe to the scientific
Weltanschauung. The latter, however, hardly
merits such a high-sounding name, for it does
not take everything into its scope, it is incom
plete, and it makes no claim to being compre
hensive or to constituting a system. Scientific
thought is still in its infancy; there are very
many of the great problems with which it has
as yet been unable to cope. A Weltanschauung
based upon science has, apart from the em
phasis it lays upon the real world, essentially
negative characteristics, such as that it limits
itself to truth and rejects illusions. Those of
our fellow-men who are dissatisfied with this
state of things and who desire something more
for their momentary peace of mind may look
for it
where they can find it. We shall not
blame them for doing so; but we cannot help
them and cannot change our own way of think
ing on their account.
Printed in the U.S.A.

[886a]
GREAT BOOKS
OF THE WESTERN WORLD
Design and Typography by Rudolph Ruzicka
Cover Stamping Design for Founders' Edition by HenryHarringer
Composition and Engravings by
The Lakeside Press: R. R. Donnelley &Sons Company
Chicago, Illinois, and Crawfordsville, Indiana
With these exceptions:
Volume 39: Adam Smith; Volume 54: Freud
Composition by Poole Bros., Inc.
Chicago, Illinois
Printing Plates by
Advance Independent Electrotype Company, Inc»
Indianapolis, Indiana
Further exceptions:
Volume 16: Ptolemy, Copernicus, Kepler;
Volume 17: Plotinus; Volume 21: Dante;Volume 42:Kant
Composition by Dayton's Typographical Service
Dayton, Ohio
Volumes 26-27: Shakespeare
Composition by Linxweiler Printing Company
Decatur, Illinois
Printing and Binding by KlNGSPORT PRESS, INC.
Kingsport, Tennessee

[886b]
