53*53*53*53*53*53*53*5 


*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*55*53*53*55*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*55*53 


4S^g;*a*^S*^*iS*53*53*53*53**3*53*53*55*53*53*53*53*53*53*55*53*53*53*53*53*53*k*53*53*53*53*53*53 


t5?S 


*5??  GREAT  BOOKS  OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD 


7^7^ 


7=^7^ 


7^7^ 

7^757 


7^7^ 


^^77^7* 

7^7=^ 

^7^ 

7^7=^ 


^7^ 

^55» 

^7^7=^ 

K^S5» 

^7^7^ 

77p7^P~ 

^7^7^" 

7^7^ 

7^7=^ 

^7^7^” 


^7^ 

T^PTTP" 


^^7^- 

7^7^~ 

5^7^ 


=^7=^ 


Introductory  Volumes: 

1.  The  Great  Conversation 

2.  The  Great  Ideas  I 

3.  The  Great  Ideas  II 


4.  HOMER 

5.  AESCHYLUS 
SOPHOCLES 
EURIPIDES 
ARISTOPHANES 

6.  HERODOTUS 
THUCYDIDES 

7.  PLATO 

8.  ARISTOTLE  I 

9.  ARISTOTLE  II 

10.  HIPPOCRATES 
GALEN 

11.  EUCLID 
ARCHIMEDES 
APOLLONIUS 
NICOMACHUS 


12.  LUCRETIUS 
EPICTETUS 
MARCUS  AURELIUS 

13.  VIRGIL 

14.  PLUTARCH 

15.  TACITUS 

16.  PTOLEMY 
COPERNICUS 
KEPLER 

17.  PLOTINUS 

18.  AUGUSTINE 

19.  THOMAS  AQUINAS  I 

20.  THOMAS  AQUINAS  II 

21.  DANTE 

22.  CHAUCER 

23.  MACHIAVELLI 
HOBBES 

24.  RABELAIS 

25.  MONTAIGNE 

26.  SHAKESPEARE  I 

27.  SHAKESPEARE  II 


^55 

53*53 


53*53 


53*53 


53*53 


53*53 


53*53 

53*53 

53*53 

53*53 

«*^ 

53*53 

53*53 

53*53 


53*53 

53*53 


•53*55 


•53*55 


*53*53* 

*53*53* 

*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53 

*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53 

*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53 

*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53 

553*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53*53 


53*53 


»  great  books  of  the  western  world 


& 


» 


» 


«£ 

|| 

i£ 


28.  GILBERT 
GALILEO 
HARVEY 


29.  CERVANTES 

30.  FRANCIS  BACON 


31.  DESCARTES 
SPINOZA 


32.  MILTON 

33.  PASCAL 


34.  NEWTON 
HUYGENS 


35.  LOCKE 
BERKELEY 
HUME 


36.  SWIFT 
STERNE 


37.  FIELDING 


38.  MONTESQUIEU 
ROUSSEAU 


39.  ADAM  SMITH 


40.  GIBBON  I 


41.  GIBBON  II 

42.  KANT 


55^^-; 


43.  AMERICAN  STATE 
PAPERS 

THE  FEDERALIST 
J.  S.  MILL 


Kgi  —  *  -^-‘J  - 


44.  BOSWELL 


45.  LAVOISIER 
FOURIER 
FARADAY 


46.  HEGEL 

47.  GOETHE 

48.  MELVILLE 

49.  DARWIN 


50.  MARX 
ENGELS 


51.  TOLSTOY 

52.  DOSTOEVSKY 

53.  WILLIAM  JAMES 


vS^= £SSS 


SS^jSS 


54.  FREUD 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2010 


http://www.archive.org/details/greatbooksofwest44hutc 


* 


«• 


GREAT  BOOKS 
OF  THE  WESTERN  WORLD 

ROBERT  MAYNARD  HUTCHINS,  EDITOR  IN  CHIEF 


44. 

BOSWELL 


Mortimer  J.  Adler,  Associate  Editor 

Members  of  the  Advisory  Board:  Stringfellow  Barr,  Scott  Buchanan,  John  Erskine, 
Clarence  H.  Faust,  Alexander  Meiklejohn,  Joseph  J.  Schwab,  Mark  Van  Doren. 
Editorial  Consultants:  A.  F.  B.  Clark,  F.  L.  Lucas,  Walter  Murdoch. 
Wallace  Brockway,  Executive  Editor 


Life  of 

SAMUEL  JOHNSON  TIT) 

By  James  Boswell 


William  Benton,  Publisher 
ENCYCLOPEDIA  BRITANNICA,  INC. 
CHICAGO  •  LONDON  •  TORONTO 


Copyright  in  the  united  states  of  America,  1952, 

BY  ENCYCLOPEDIA  BRITANNICA,  INC. 

Copyright  1952.  Copyright  under  international  copyright  union  by 

ENCYCLOPEDIA  BRITANNICA,  INC.  ALL  RIGHTS  RESERVED  UNDER  PAN  AMERICAN 
COPYRIGHT  CONVENTIONS  BY  ENCYCLOPEDIA  BRITANNICA,  INC. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 

James  Boswell,  1740-1795 


James  Boswell,  who  always  considered  his  life 
“one  of  the  most  romantic,”  took  great  satisfac¬ 
tion  in  his  distinguished  lineage  and  was  con¬ 
stantly  alluding  to  the  “blood  of  Bruce  in  my 
veins”  and  to  Thomas  Boswell  who  fell  on  the 
field  of  Flodden.  His  grandfather  had  built  up  a 
substantial  legal  practice  at  the  Scottish  bar,  and 
his  father,  also  an  advocate,  on  his  elevation  to 
the  supreme  court,  became  Lord  Auchinleck, 
taking  the  name  of  his  Ayrshire  property.  It  was 
Lord  Auchinleck’s  desire  that  his  eldest  son 
should  become  a  lawyer,  and  he  was  according¬ 
ly  sent  to  Edinburgh  and  later  to  Glasgow, 
where  he  studied  rhetoric  and  moral  philoso¬ 
phy  under  Adam  Smith. 

At  Edinburgh,  Boswell  made  the  acquaintance 
of  the  Reverend  William  Temple  to  whom,  in  a 
correspondence  of  thirty-seven  years,  he  poured 
out  his  “weak  distemper’d  soul  that  swells  in  sud¬ 
den  gusts  and  sinks  again  in  calms.”  He  called 
upon  David  Hume,  then  residing  in  the  city,  and 
found  him  “  a  very  proper  person  for  a  young  man 
to  cultivate  an  acquaintance  with.”  Constrained 
to  study  law  with  his  father  after  a  brief  jaunt  to 
London,  where  he  had  “got  his  mind  filled  with 
the  most  gayeideas,”  he  sought  out  the  company 
of  such  celeb  rities  as  he  found  in  the  northern 
capital  and  “got  into  an  excellent  method  of  tak¬ 
ing  down  conversations.”  At  length  in  1763,  by 
agreeing  to  relinquish  his  plan  to  enter  the  Guard, 
he  obtained  his  father’s  permission  to  complete 
his  legal  studies  at  Utrecht. 

For  Boswell  1763  was  a  “memorable  year” 
since,  in  it,  he  made  the  acquaintance  of  Samuel 
Johnson.  On  Monday,  the  sixteenth  of  May,  he 
was  sitting  in  the  back  parlour  of  Mr.  Davies’ 
bookstore,  whenjohnsoncame  unexpectedly  into 
the  shop.  Davies  perceived  him  through  the  glass 
door  and  pointed  him  out  to  Boswell 4  { in  the  man¬ 
ner  of  Horatio,  when  he  addresses  Hamlet  on  the 
appearance  of  his  father’s  ghost.”  Boswell  at  this 
first  encounter  was  thoroughly  snubbed,  but  with 
“characteristical”  resilience,  bolstered  by  Tom 
Davies’  assurance:  “ Don’t  be  uneasy:  I  can  see 
he  likes  you  very  well,”  he  called  on  Johnson 
eight  days  later.  On  this  occasion  Johnson  pressed 
him  to  stay;  on  the  thirteenth  of  June  he  said, 
“Come  to  me  as  often  as  you  can”;  on  the  twenty- 


fifth  of  June,  Boswell  gave  the  great  man  a  little 
sketch  of  his  own  life ,  and  J  ohnson  exclaimed  with 
warmth,  “Give  me  your  hand;  I  have  taken  a 
liking  to  you.”  In  August,  when  Boswell  set  out 
for  Utrecht,  Johnson  accompanied  him  as  far  as 
Harwich. 

After  a  winter  divided  between  study  of  the 
law  and  the  company  of  “many  beautiful  and 
amiable  ladies,”  Boswell  embarked  on  a  two- 
year  tour  of  the  continent,  where  he  forced  his 
acquaintance  on  such  leading  figures  as  Voltaire 
and  Rousseau  and  proceeded  to  “Boswellize” 
them,  drawing  them  out  on  various  subjects. 
Desiring  “something  more  than  just  the  common 
course,”  he  determined  to  visit  Corsica,  which 
appealed  to  him  because  it  was  a  nation  “actu¬ 
ally  fighting  for  liberty,”  where,  the  inhabitants 
lived  in  a  “state  of  nature.”  From  Rousseau,  he 
obtained  a  letter  of  introduction  to  the  leader  of 
the  Corsican  insurgents,  Pascal  Paoli,  whose  so¬ 
ciety  he  cultivated  with  that  minute  and  skilful 
care  which  he  was  afterwards  to  bestow  upon 
Johnson. 

Corsica  was  a  turning  point;  “  I  got  upon  a  rock 
in  Corsica  and  jumped  into  the  middle  of  life,” 
Boswell  later  wrote  to  Paoli.  He  returned  to  Eng¬ 
land  as  “  Corsica  Boswell”  and,  in  the  full  regalia 
of  a  Corsican  chieftain,  obtained  an  interview 
with  William  Pitt  on  behalf  of  that  “oppressed 
nation.”  Politically  his  advocacy  was  a  failure; 
“We  cannot  be  so  foolish,”  said  Lord  Holland, 
“as  to  go  to  war  because  Mr.  Boswell  has  been 
to  Corsica.”  An  immediate  success,  however,  was 
his  Account  of  Corsica ,  Journal  of  a  Tour  to  that  Is¬ 
land,  and  Memoirs  of  Pascal  Paoli  { 1 768),  which  won 
even  the  grudging  praise  of  Gray:  “any  fool  may 
write  a  most  valuable  book  by  chance,  if  he  will 
only  tell  us  what  he  heard  and  saw  with  veracity .” 
But  Johnson  was  tired  of  Corsica;  “Empty  your 
head  of  Corsica,”  he  directed  Boswell. 

In  accordance  with  the  terms  of  the  agreement 
with  his  father,  Boswell  returned  to  Edinburgh 
and  in  July,  1 766,  was  admitted  to  the  Scottish 
bar.  “What  strength  of  mind  you  have  had !”  was 
Boswell’s  comment  on  his  early  legal  work.  He 
had  hoped,  too,  that  the  “character  to  support,” 
which  his  successful  authorship  of  Account  of  Cor¬ 
sica  had  given  him,  would  furnish  the  incentive 


v 


BIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 


vi 

to  “a  better  course  of  life.55  But  the  long  list  of 
encounters  with  “little  charmers55  and  heiresses, 
which  fill  his  letters  to  Temple  at  this  time, 
attest  to  his  failure.  Despite  his  reluctance  to 
“resign  his  liberty  for  life  to  one  Woman,55  he 
married  his  cousin  Margaret  Montgomerie 
in  1769. 

For  two  years  after  his  marriage  he  continued 
to  practise  law  in  Edinburgh  but  in  1 772  he  was 
again  in  London  with  his  biographical  notebook. 
Upon  Johnson’s  recommendation  he  was  elected 
to  the  Club.  In  August  of  1773,  the  Great  Lexi¬ 
cographer,  then  well  over  sixty,  suddenly  con¬ 
sented  to  Boswell’s  constantly  urged  project  of  a 
tour  through  Scotland.  Boswell  carefully  planned 
the  expedition  down  to  the  last  detail  and  in  every 
way  extended  himself  to  entertain  his  friend.  “It 
is  very  convenient  to  travel  with  him,55  Johnson 
wrote  Mrs.  Thrale,  “for  there  is  no  house  where 
he  is  not  received  with  kindness  and  respect.  He 
has  better  faculties  than  I  imagined.”  There  was 
no  qualification  in  Boswell’s  appreciation  of  the 
uncouth  old  man,  whom  his  father  described  as 
“an  auld  dominie,  who  keepit  a  schule  and  ca’d 
it  an  academy,”  and  his  wife  called  a  bear.  He 
wrote  in  the  day-by-day  account  of  their  travels, 
Journal  of  a  Tour  to  the  Hebrides :  “Had  I  not  Dr. 
Johnson  to  contemplate,  I  should  have  sunk  into 
dejection  but  his  firmness  supported  me.  I  looked 
at  him  as  a  man,  whose  head  is  turning  giddy  at 
sea,  looks  at  a  rock.” 

The  years  following  the  tour  to  the  Hebrides 
were  increasingly  a  story  of  quarrels  with  his 


father,  financial  worries,  alcoholism,  and  melan¬ 
cholia,  the  “black  dog”  of  hypochondria,  as  Bos¬ 
well  described  it.  Signing  himself  “The  Hypo- 
chondriack,”  he  contributed  a  series  of  some 
seventy  essays  on  various  moral  and  religious  sub¬ 
jects  to  the  London  Magazine.  On  June  30,  1784, 
Boswell  and  Johnson  dined  at  Sir  Joshua  Rey¬ 
nolds’  and  rode  home  together.  Boswell  recalled 
the  old  man’s  “fare  you  well”  and  how,  without 
looking  back,  he  had  “sprung  away  with  a  kind 
ofpathetick  briskness.”  He  had  not  accompanied 
Johnson  into  the  house  “from  an  apprehension 
that  my  spirits  would  sink,”  and,  although  John¬ 
son  did  not  die  until  December,  Boswell  never 
saw  him  again. 

During  the  years  after  Johnson’s  death,  Bos¬ 
well  attempted  unsuccessfully  to  enter  parlia¬ 
ment  and  to  build  up  a  law  practice  in  England, 
nourishing  “the  delusion”  for  the  rest  of  his  life 
“that  practice  may  come  at  any  time.”  Pains¬ 
takingly  he  labored  on  his  biography  of  Johnson, 
“arranging  a  prodigious  multiplicity  of  mate¬ 
rials,  supplying  omissions,  searching  for  papers 
buried  in  different  masses.”  After  the  death  of  his 
wife  in  1789,  he  sank  further  into  melancholia 
and  alcoholism,  always  vowing  reform.  Neither 
the  critics’  universal  praise  of  his  Tour  to  the  Heb¬ 
rides  (1785)  and  The  Life  of  Samuel  Johnson  (1791), 
nor  the  “several  matrimonial  schemes”  he  enter¬ 
tained  from  time  to  time,  could  keep  him  his 
“fluttering  self”  for  long.  He  died  in  London,  of 
a  complication  of  disorders,  on  May  1 9, 1 795,  and 
was  buried  in  Auchinleck. 


CONTENTS 


Biographical  Note . v 

Dedication  to  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  .  .  ix 

Advertisements . xi 

A  Chronological  Catalogue  of  the  Prose 
Works  of  Samuel  Johnson,  LL.D. .  .  .  xiv 

Life  of  Samuel  Johnson . 1-587 

Index . 589 


vii 


DEDICATION  TO 
SIR  JOSHUA  REYNOLDS 


My  Dear  Sir, 

Every  liberal  motive  that  can  actuate  an  Authour  in  the  dedication  of  his 
labours,  concurs  in  directing  me  to  you,  as  the  person  to  whom  the  following 
Work  should  be  inscribed. 

If  there  be  a  pleasure  in  celebrating  the  distinguished  merit  of  a  contem¬ 
porary,  mixed  with  a  certain  degree  of  vanity  not  altogether  inexcusable,  in 
appearing  fully  sensible  of  it,  where  can  I  find  one,  in  complimenting  whom  I 
can  with  more  general  approbation  gratify  those  feelings?  Your  excellence  not 
only  in  the  Art  over  which  you  have  long  presided  with  unrivalled  fame,  but 
also  in  Philosophy  and  elegant  Literature,  is  well  known  to  the  present,  and 
will  continue  to  be  the  admiration  of  future  ages.  Your  equal  and  placid  tem¬ 
per,  your  variety  of  conversation,  your  true  politeness,  by  which  you  are  so 
amiable  in  private  society,  and  that  enlarged  hospitality  which  has  long  made 
your  house  a  common  centre  of  union  for  the  great,  the  accomplished,  the 
learned,  and  the  ingenious;  all  these  qualities  I  can,  in  perfect  confidence  of 
not  being  accused  of  flattery,  ascribe  to  you. 

If  a  man  may  indulge  an  honest  pride,  in  having  it  known  to  the  world, 
that  he  has  been  thought  worthy  of  particular  attention  by  a  person  of  the 
first  eminence  in  the  age  in  which  he  lived,  whose  company  has  been  uni¬ 
versally  courted,  I  am  justified  in  availing  myself  of  the  usual  privilege  of  a 
Dedication,  when  I  mention  that  there  has  been  a  long  and  uninterrupted 
friendship  between  us. 

If  gratitude  should  be  acknowledged  for  favours  received,  I  have  this  op¬ 
portunity,  my  dear  Sir,  most  sincerely  to  thank  you  for  the  many  happy  hours 
which  I  owe  to  your  kindness, — for  the  cordiality  with  which  you  have  at  all 
times  been  pleased  to  welcome  me, — for  the  number  of  valuable  acquaint¬ 
ances  to  whom  you  have  introduced  me, — for  the  nodes  coenreque  Deum ,  which  I 
have  enjoyed  under  your  roof. 

If  a  work  should  be  inscribed  to  one  who  is  master  of  the  subject  of  it,  and 
whose  approbation,  therefore,  must  ensure  it  credit  and  success,  the  Life  of 
Dr.  Johnson  is,  with  the  greatest  propriety,  dedicated  to  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds, 
who  was  the  intimate  and  beloved  friend  of  that  great  man;  the  friend,  whom 
he  declared  to  be  “the  most  invulnerable  man  he  knew;  whom,  if  he  should 
quarrel  with  him,  he  should  find  the  most  difficulty  how  to  abuse.55  You,  my 
dear  Sir,  studied  him,  and  knew  him  well:  you  venerated  and  admired  him. 
Yet,  luminous  as  he  was  upon  the  whole,  you  perceived  all  the  shades  which 
mingled  in  the  grand  composition;  all  the  little  peculiarities  and  slight  blem¬ 
ishes  which  marked  the  literary  Colossus.  Your  very  warm  commendation  of 
the  specimen  which  I  gave  in  my  Journal  of  a  Tour  to  the  Hebrides ,  of  my  being 


IX 


X 


DEDICATION 


able  to  preserve  his  conversation  in  an  authentick  and  lively  manner,  which 
opinion  the  Publick  has  confirmed,  was  the  best  encouragement  for  me  to  per¬ 
severe  in  my  purpose  of  producing  the  whole  of  my  stores. 

In  one  respect,  this  Work  will,  in  some  passages,  be  different  from  the  former. 
In  my  Tour ,  I  was  almost  unboundedly  open  in  my  communications,  and 
from  my  eagerness  to  display  the  wonderful  fertility  and  readiness  of  Johnson’s 
wit,  freely  shewed  to  the  world  its  dexterity,  even  when  I  was  myself  the  ob¬ 
ject  of  it.  I  trusted  that  I  should  be  liberally  understood,  as  knowing  very  well 
what  I  was  about,  and  by  no  means  as  simply  unconscious  of  the  pointed 
effects  of  the  satire.  I  own,  indeed,  that  I  was  arrogant  enough  to  suppose  that 
the  tenour  of  the  rest  of  the  book  would  sufficiently  guard  me  against  such  a 
strange  imputation.  But  it  seems  I  judged  too  well  of  the  world;  for,  though  I 
could  scarcely  believe  it,  I  have  been  undoubtedly  informed,  that  many  per¬ 
sons,  especially  in  distant  quarters,  not  penetrating  enough  into  Johnson’s 
character,  so  as  to  understand  his  mode  of  treating  his  friends,  have  arraigned 
my  judgement,  instead  of  seeing  that  I  was  sensible  of  all  that  they  could  observe. 

It  is  related  of  the  great  Dr.  Clarke,  that  when  in  one  of  his  leisure  hours 
he  was  unbending  himself  with  a  few  friends  in  the  most  playful  and  frolick- 
some  manner,  he  observed  Beau  Nash  approaching;  upon  which  he  suddenly 
stopped: — “My  boys,  (said  he,)  let  us  be  grave:  here  comes  a  fool.”  The  world, 
my  friend,  I  have  found  to  be  a  great  fool,  as  to  that  particular,  on  which  it 
has  become  necessary  to  speak  very  plainly.  I  have,  therefore,  in  this  Work 
been  more  reserved;  and  though  I  tell  nothing  but  the  truth,  I  have  still  kept 
in  my  mind  that  the  whole  truth  is  not  always  to  be  exposed.  This,  however,  I 
have  managed  so  as  to  occasion  no  diminution  of  the  pleasure  which  my  book 
should  afford;  though  malignity  may  sometimes  be  disappointed  of  its  grati¬ 
fications. 

I  am,  my  dear  Sir, 

Your  much  obliged  friend, 

And  faithful  humble  servant, 

James  Boswell 


London,  April  20,  1791 


ADVERTISEMENTS 


Advertisement  to  the  First  Edition 

I  at  last  deliver  to  the  world  a  Work  which  1  have  long 
promised ,  and  of  which ,  1  am  afraid ,  too  high  expec¬ 
tations  have  been  raised.  The  delay  of  its  publication 
must  be  imputed ,  in  a  considerable  degree ,  to  the  ex¬ 
traordinary  zeal  which  has  been  shewn  by  distinguished 
persons  in  all  quarters  to  supply  me  with  additional  in¬ 
formation  concerning  its  illustrious  subject;  resembling 
in  this  the  grateful  tribes  of  ancient  nations ,  of  which 
every  individual  was  eager  to  throw  a  stone  upon  the 
grave  of  a  departed  Hero ,  and  thus  to  share  in  the  pious 
office  of  erecting  an  honourable  monument  to  his  mem¬ 
ory. 

The  labour  and  anxious  attention  with  which  I  have 
collected  and  arranged  the  materials  of  which  these  vol¬ 
umes  are  composed ,  will  hardly  be  conceived  by  those 
who  read  them  with  careless  facility.  The  stretch  of 
mind  and  prompt  assiduity  by  which  so  many  conver¬ 
sations  were  preserved ,  I  myself ,  at  some  distance  of 
time ,  contemplate  with  wonder;  and  I  must  be  allowed 
to  suggest ,  that  the  nature  of  the  work ,  in  other  respects , 
as  it  consists  of  innumerable  detached  particulars ,  all 
which ,  even  the  most  minute ,  1  have  spared  no  pains  to 
ascertain  with  a  scrupulous  authenticity ,  has  occasioned 
a  degree  of  trouble  far  beyond  that  of  any  other  species 
of  composition.  Were  I  to  detail  the  books  which  I  have 
consulted ,  and  the  inquiries  which  I  have  found  it  neces¬ 
sary  to  make  by  various  channels ,  I  should  probably  be 
thought  ridiculously  ostentatious.  Let  me  only  observe , 
as  a  specimen  of  my  trouble ,  that  1  have  sometimes  been 
obliged  to  run  half  over  London ,  in  order  to  fix  a  date 
correctly;  which ,  when  I  had  accomplished ,  I  well  knew 
would  obtain  me  no  praise,  though  a  failure  would  have 
been  to  my  discredit.  And  after  all,  perhaps,  hard  as  it 
may  be,  I  shall  not  be  surprized  if  omissions  or  mis¬ 
takes  be  pointed  out  with  invidious  severity.  I  have  also 
been  extremely  careful  as  to  the  exactness  of  my  quota¬ 
tions;  holding  that  there  is  a  respect  due  to  the  publick 
which  should  oblige  every  Authour  to  attend  to  this,  and 
never  to  presume  to  introduce  them  with, — “I  think  I 
have  read”; — or, — ccIf  I  remember  right”; — 
when  the  originals  may  be  examined. 

1  beg  leave  to  express  my  warmest  thanks  to  those 
who  have  been  pleased  to  favour  me  with  communica¬ 
tions  and  advice  in  the  conduct  of  my  Work.  But  1  can¬ 
not  sufficiently  acknowledge  my  obligations  to  my  friend 


Mr.  Malone,  who  was  so  good  as  to  allow  me  to  read 
to  him  almost  the  whole  of  my  manuscript,  and  make 
such  remarks  as  were  greatly  for  the  advantage  of  the 
Work;  though  it  is  but  fair  to  him  to  mention,  that 
upon  many  occasions  I  differed  from  him,  and  followed 
my  own  judgement.  1  regret  exceedingly  that  I  was  de¬ 
prived  of  the  benefit  of  his  revision,  when  not  more  than 
one  half  of  the  book  had  passed  through  the  press;  but 
after  having  completed  his  very  laborious  and  admirable 
edition  of  Shakspeare,/<9r  which  he  generously  would 
accept  of  no  other  reward  but  that  fame  which  he  has  so 
deservedly  obtained,  he  fulfilled  his  promise  of  a  long- 
wished-for  visit  to  his  relations  in  Ireland;  from  whence 
his  safe  return  finibus  Atticis  is  desired  by  his  friends 
here,  with  all  the  classical  ardour  of  Sic  te  Diva  po- 
tens  Cypri;/or  there  is  no  man  in  whom  more  elegant 
and  worthy  qualities  are  united;  and  whose  society, 
therefore,  is  more  valued  by  those  who  know  him. 

It  is  painful  to  me  to  think,  that  while  I  was  carrying 
on  this  Work,  several  of  those  to  whom  it  would  have 
been  most  interesting  have  died.  Such  melancholy  disap¬ 
pointments  we  know  to  be  incident  to  humanity;  but  we 
do  not  feel  them  the  less.  Let  me  particularly  lament  the 
Reverend  Thomas  Warton,  and  the  Reverend  Dr. 
Adams.  Mr.  Warton,  amidst  his  variety  of  genius 
and  learning,  was  an  excellent  Biographer.  His  contri¬ 
butions  to  my  Collection  are  highly  estimable;  and  as 
he  had  a  true  relish  of  my  Tour  to  the  Hebrides,  1 
trust  I  should  now  have  been  gratified  with  a  larger 
share  of  his  kind  approbation.  Dr.  Adams,  eminent  as 
the  Head  of  a  College,  as  a  writer,  and  as  a  most  amia¬ 
ble  man,  had  known  Johnson  from  his  early  years, 
and  was  his  friend  through  life.  What  reason  I  had  to 
hope  for  the  countenance  of  that  venerable  Gentleman  to 
this  Work,  will  appear  from  what  he  wrote  to  me  upon 
a  former  occasion  from  Oxford,  November  ij,  1785: 
Dear  Sir,  I  hazard  this  letter,  not  knowing 
where  it  will  find  you,  to  thank  you  for  your  very 
agreeable  Tour,  which  I  found  here  on  my  re¬ 
turn  from  the  country,  and  in  which  you  have 
depicted  our  friend  so  perfectly  to  my  fancy,  in 
every  attitude,  every  scene  and  situation,  that  I 
have  thought  myself  in  the  company,  and  of  the 
party  almost  throughout.  It  has  given  very  gen¬ 
eral  satisfaction ;  and  those  who  have  found  most 
fault  with  a  passage  here  and  there,  have  agreed 
that  they  could  not  help  going  through,  and  be¬ 
ing  entertained  with  the  whole.  I  wish,  indeed* 


xi 


ADVERTISEMENTS 


some  few  gross  expressions  had  been  softened, 
and  a  few  of  our  hero’s  foibles  had  been  a  little 
more  shaded;  but  it  is  useful  to  see  the  weak¬ 
nesses  incident  to  great  minds;  and  you  have 
given  us  Dr.  Johnson’s  authority  that  in  history 
all  ought  to  be  told. 

Such  a  sanction  to  my  faculty  of  giving  a  just  repre¬ 
sentation  of  Dr.  Johnson  I  could  not  conceal.  Nor  will 
I  suppress  my  satisfaction  in  the  consciousness ,  that  by 
recording  so  considerable  a  portion  of  the  wisdom  and 
wit  of“  the  brightest  ornament  of  the  eighteenth 
century,”1  I  have  largely  provided  for  the  instruction 
and  entertainment  of  mankind. 

London,  April  20,  1791. 

Advertisement  to  the  Second  Edition 

That  I  was  anxious  for  the  success  of  a  Work  which 
had  employed  much  of  my  time  and  labour ,  I  do  not 
wish  to  conceal:  but  whatever  doubts  I  at  any  time  en¬ 
tertained. ,  have  been  entirely  removed  by  the  very  favour¬ 
able  reception  with  which  it  has  been  honoured.  That 
reception  has  excited  my  best  exertions  to  render  my  Book 
more  perfect;  and  in  this  endeavour  I  have  had  the  as¬ 
sistance  not  only  of  some  of  my  particular  friends ,  but 
of  many  other  learned  and  ingenious  men,  by  which  I 
have  been  enabled  to  rectify  some  mistakes ,  and  to  en¬ 
rich  the  Work  with  many  valuable  additions.  These  I 
have  ordered  to  be  printed  separately  in  quarto ,  for  the 
accommodation  of  the  purchasers  of  the  first  edition. 
May  1  be  permitted  to  say  that  the  typography  of  both 
editions  does  honour  to  the  press  of  Mr.  Henry  Bald¬ 
win,  now  Master  of  the  Worshipful  Company  of  Sta¬ 
tioners,  whom  I  have  long  known  as  a  worthy  man  and 
an  obliging  friend. 

In  the  strangely  mixed  scenes  of  human  existence , 
our  feelings  are  often  at  once  pleasing  and  painful.  Of 
this  truth,  the  progress  of  the  present  Work  furnishes  a 
striking  instance.  It  was  highly  gratifying  to  me  that 
my  friend,  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  to  whom  it  is  in¬ 
scribed,  lived  to  peruse  it,  and  to  give  the  strongest  testi¬ 
mony  to  its  fidelity ;  but  before  a  second  edition,  which 
he  contributed  to  improve,  could  be  finished,  the  world 
has  been  deprived  of  that  most  valuable  man;  a  loss  of 
which  the  regret  will  be  deep,  and  lasting,  and  extensive, 
proportionate  to  the  felicity  which  he  diffused  through  a 
wide  circle  of  admirers  and  friends. 

In  reflecting  that  the  illustrious  subject  of  this  Work, 
by  being  more  extensively  and  intimately  known ,  how¬ 
ever  elevated  before,  has  risen  in  the  veneration  and  love 
of  mankind,  I  feel  a  satisfaction  beyond  what  fame  can 
afford.  We  cannot ,  indeed,  too  much  or  too  often  ad¬ 
mire  his  wonderful  powers  of  mind,  when  we  consider 
that  the  principal  store  of  wit  and  wisdom  which  this 
Work  contains,  was  not  a  particular  selection  from  his 

JSee  Mr.  Malone’s  Preface  to  his  edition  of 
Shakspeare. 


general  conversation,  but  was  merely  his  occasional  talk 
at  such  times  as  I  had  the  good  fortune  to  be  in  his  com¬ 
pany;  and,  without  doubt,  if  his  discourse  at  other  peri¬ 
ods  had  been  collected  with  the  same  attention,  the 
whole  tenor  of  what  he  uttered  would  have  been  found 
equally  excellent. 

His  strong,  clear,  and  animated  enforcement  of  re¬ 
ligion,  morality,  loyalty,  and  subordination,  while  it 
delights  and  improves  the  wise  and  the  good,  will,  I 
trust,  prove  an  effectual  antidote  to  that  detestable 
sophistry  which  has  been  lately  imported  from  France , 
under  the false  name  of  Philosophy,  and  with  a  malig¬ 
nant  industry  has  been  employed  against  the  peace,  good 
order ,  and  happiness  of  society,  in  our  free  and  pros¬ 
perous  country;  but  thanks  be  to  God,  without  produc¬ 
ing  the  pernicious  effects  which  were  hoped  for  by  its 
propagators. 

It  seems  to  me,  in  my  moments  of  self-complacency, 
that  this  extensive  biographical  work,  however  inferior 
in  its  nature,  may  in  one  respect  be  assimilated  to  the 
Odyssey.  Amidst  a  thousand  entertaining  and  in¬ 
structive  episodes  the  Hero  is  never  long  out  of  sight; 
for  they  are  all  in  some  degree  connected  with  him;  and 
He,  in  the  whole  course  of  the  History,  is  exhibited  by 
the  Authour  for  the  best  advantage  of  his  readers. 

— Quid  virtus  et  quid  sapientia  possit, 

Utile  proposuit  nobis  exemplar  Ulyssen. 

Should  there  be  any  cold-blooded  and  morose  mortals 
who  really  dislike  this  Book,  I  will  give  them  a  story  to 
apply.  When  the  great  Duke  of  Marlborough,  ac¬ 
companied  by  Lord  Cadogan,  was  one  day  recon- 
noitering  the  army  in  Flanders,  a  heavy  rain  came  on, 
and  they  both  called for  their  cloaks.  Lord  Cadogan’s 
servant,  a  good  humoured  alert  lad ,  brought  his  Lord¬ 
ship's  in  a  minute.  The  Duke's  servant,  a  lazy  sulky 
dog,  was  so  sluggish,  that  his  Grace  being  wet  to  the 
skin,  reproved  him,  and  had  for  answer  with  a  grunt, 
“/  came  as  fast  as  I  could,"  upon  which  the  Duke 
calmly  said,  “Cadogan,  I  would  not  for  a  thousand 
pounds  have  that  fellow's  temper." 

There  are  some  men,  I  believe,  who  have,  or  think 
they  have,  a  very  small  share  of  vanity.  Such  may  speak 
of  their  literary  fame  in  a  decorous  style  of  diffidence. 
But  I  confess,  that  I  am  so  formed  by  nature  and  by 
habit,  that  to  restrain  the  effusion  of  delight,  on  having 
obtained  such  fame,  to  me  would  be  truly  painful.  Why 
then  should  I  suppress  it?  Why  “ out  of  the  abundance 
of  the  heart"  should  I  not  speak?  Let  me  then  mention 
with  a  warm,  but  no  insolent  exultation ,  that  I  have 
been  regaled  with  spontaneous  praise  of  my  work  by 
many  and  various  persons  eminent  for  their  rank,  learn¬ 
ing,  talents  and  accomplishments;  much  of  which  praise 
I  have  under  their  hands  to  be  reposited  in  my  archives 
at  Auchinleck.  An  honourable  and  reverend  friend 
speaking  of  the  favourable  reception  of  my  volumes , 


ADVERTISEMENTS 


even  in  the  circles  of  fashion  and  elegance ,  said  to  me , 
“you  have  m.ade  them  all  talk  Johnson” — Tes ,  I  may 
add ,  I  have  Johnsonised  the  land;  and  I  trust  they 
will  not  only  talk,  but  think,  Johnson, 

To  enumerate  those  to  whom  I  have  been  thus  in¬ 
debted ,  would  be  tediously  ostentatious.  I  cannot  how¬ 
ever  but  name  one  whose  praise  is  truly  valuable ,  not 
only  on  account  of  his  knowledge  and  abilities ,  but  on 
account  of  the  magnificent ,  yet  dangerous  embassy ,  in 
which  he  is  now  employed ,  which  makes  everything 
that  relates  to  him  peculiarly  interesting.  Lord  Ma¬ 
cartney  favoured  me  with  his  own  copy  of  my  book , 
with  a  number  of  notes,  of  which  I  have  availed  myself. 
On  the first  leaf  I  found  in  his  Lordship's  hand-writing , 
an  inscription  of  such  high  commendation ,  that  even  I, 
vain  as  I  am,  cannot  prevail  on  myself  to  publish  it. 
[July  i,  1793.] 

Advertisement  to  the  Third  Edition 

Several  valuable  letters,  and  other  curious  matter,  hav¬ 
ing  been  communicated  to  the  Author  too  late  to  be  ar¬ 
ranged  in  that  chronological  order  which  he  had  en¬ 
deavoured  uniformly  to  observe  in  his  work,  he  was 
obliged  to  introduce  them  in  his  Second  Edition ,  by  way 
of  Addenda,  as  commodiously  as  he  could.  In  the  pres¬ 
ent  edition  these  have  been  distributed  in  their  proper 
places.  In  revising  his  volumes  for  a  new  edition,  he 
had  pointed  out  where  some  of  these  materials  should  be 
inserted;  but  unfortunately  in  the  midst  of  his  labours, 
he  was  seized  with  a  fever,  of  which,  to  the  great  regret 
of  all  his  friends,  he  died  on  the  ig  th  of  May,  1 795. 
All  the  Notes  that  he  had  written  in  the  margin  of  the 


xiii 

copy  which  he  had  in  part  revised,  are  here  faithfully 
preserved;  and  a  few  new  Notes  have  been  added,  prin¬ 
cipally  by  some  of  those  friends  to  whom  the  Author  in 
the  former  editions  acknowledged  his  obligations.  Those 
subscribed  with  the  letter  B,  were  communicated  by  Dr. 
Burney:  those  to  which  the  letters  J  B  are  annexed,  by 
the  Rev.  J.  Blake  way,  of  Shrewsbury,  to  whom  Mr. 
Boswell  acknowledged  himself  indebted  for  some  ju¬ 
dicious  remarks  on  the  first  edition  of  his  work:  and  the 
letters  J  B — O.  are  annexed  to  some  remarks  furnished 
by  the  Author's  second  son,  a  Student  of  Brazen-Nose 
College  in  Oxford.  Some  valuable  observations  were 
communicated  by  James  Bindley,  Esq.  First  Com¬ 
missioner  in  the  Stamp-Office,  which  have  been  ac¬ 
knowledged  in  their  proper  places.  For  all  those  with¬ 
out  any  signature,  Mr.  Malone  is  answerable. — 
Every  new  remark,  not  written  by  the  Author,  for  the 
sake  of  distinction  has  been  enclosed  within  crotchets:  in 
one  instance,  however,  the  printer  by  mistake  has  affixed 
this  mark  to  a  note  relative  to  the  Rev.  Thomas  Fysche 
Palmer,  which  was  written  by  Mr.  Boswell,  and 
therefore  ought  not  to  have  been  thus  distinguished. 

I  have  only  to  add,  that  the  proof-sheets  of  the  pres¬ 
ent  edition  not  having  passed  through  my  hands,  I  am 
not  answerable  for  any  typographical  err  ours  that  may 
be  found  in  it.  Having,  however,  been  printed  at  the 
very  accurate  press  of  Mr.  Baldwin,  I  make  no  doubt 
it  will  be  found  not  less  perfect  than  the  former  edition; 
the  greatest  care  having  been  taken,  by  correctness  and 
elegance  to  do  justice  to  one  of  the  most  instructive  and 
entertaining  works  in  the  English  language. 

April  8,  1 799  Edmond  Malone 


A  CHRONOLOGICAL  CATALOGUE  OF  THE 
PROSE  WORKS'  OF  SAMUEL  JOHNSON,  LL.D. 


[N.B.  To  those  which  he  himself  acknowledged 
is  added  acknowl.  To  those  which  may  be  fully  be¬ 
lieved  to  be  his  from  internal  evidence,  is  added 
intern.  evid.\ 

1 735*  Abridgement  and  translation  of  Lobo’s  Voy¬ 
age  to  Abyssinia,  acknowl . 

1 738.  Part  of  a  translation  of  Father  Paul  Sarpi’s 
History  oj  the  Council  of  Trent,  acknowl.  [N.  B. 
As  this  work  after  some  sheets  were  printed, 
suddenly  stopped,  I  know  not  whether  any 
part  of  it  is  now  to  be  found.] 

For  The  Gentleman's  Magazine. 

“Preface.”  intern,  evid. 

“Life  of  Father  Paul.”  acknowl. 

1739.  A  Complete  Vindication  of  the  Licenser  of  the 
Stage  from  the  malicious  and  scandalous  Aspersions 
of  Air.  Brooke ,  Author  of  Gustavus  Vasa,  ac¬ 
knowl. 

Marmor  Norfolciense:  or ,  an  Essay  on  an  Ancient 
Prophetical  Inscription  in  Monkish  Rhyme ,  lately 
Discovered  near  Lynn  in  Norfolk,  by  "Probus  Bri- 
tannicus.  acknowl. 

For  The  Gentleman's  Magazine 
“Life  of  Boerhaave.”  acknowl. 

“Address  to  the  Reader.”  intern .  evid. 
“Appeal  to  the  publick  in  behalf  of  the  Edi¬ 
tor.  intern,  evid . 

“Considerations  on  the  case  of  Dr.  Trapp’s 
Sermons;  a  plausible  attempt  to  prove  that 
an  authour’s  work  may  be  abridged  without 
injuring  his  property.”  acknowl. 

1 740.  For  The  Gentleman's  Magazine. 

“Preface.”  intern,  evid. 

“Life  of  Admiral  Drake.”  acknowl. 

“Life  of  Admiral  Blake.”  acknowl. 

“Life  of  Philip  Baretier.”  acknowl. 

“Essay  on  Epitaphs.”  acknowl. 

XI  do  not  here  include  his  Poetical  Works;  for, 
excepting  his  Latin  Translation  of  Pope’s  Messiah , 
his  London ,  and  his  V anity  of  Human  Wishes  imitated 
from  Juvenal;  his  Prologue  on  the  opening  of 
Drury-Lane  Theatre  by  Mr.  Garrick,  and  his  Irene , 
a  Tragedy ,  they  are  very  numerous,  and  in  general 
short;  and  I  have  promised  a  complete  edition  of 
them,  in  which  I  shall  with  the  utmost  care  ascer¬ 
tain  their  authenticity,  and  illustrate  them  with 
notes  and  various  readings. 


1741.  For  The  Gentleman's  Magazine . 

“Preface.”  intern,  evid. 

“A  free  translation  of  the  Jests  of  Hierocles, 
with  an  Introduction.”  intern,  evid. 

“Debate  on  the  Humble  Petition  and  Advice  of 
the  Rump  Parliament  to  Cromwell  in  1657, 
to  assume  the  Title  of  King;  abridged,  metho¬ 
dized  and  digested.”  intern,  evid. 
“Translation  of  Abbe  Guyon’s  Dissertation 
on  the  Amazons.”  intern,  evid. 

“Translation  of  Fontenelle’s  Panegyrick  on 
Dr.  Morin.”  intern .  evid . 

1742.  For  The  Gentleman's  Magazine. 

“Preface.”  intern,  evid. 

“Essay  on  the  Account  of  the  Conduct  of  the 
Duchess  of  Marlborough.”  acknowl. 

“An  Account  of  the  Life  of  Peter  Burman.” 
acknowl. 

“The  Life  of  Sydenham,  afterwards  prefixed 
to  Dr.  Swan’s  Edition  of  his  Works.”  acknowl. 
“Proposals  for  printing  Bibliotheca  Har- 
leiana,  or  a  Catalogue  of  the  Library  of  the 
Earl  of  Oxford,”  afterwards  prefixed  to  the 
first  Volume  of  that  Catalogue,  in  which  the 
Latin  Accounts  of  the  Books  were  written  by 
him.  acknowl. 

Abridgement  entitled,  “Foreign  History,” 
intern,  evid. 

“Essay  on  the  Description  of  China,  from 
the  French  of  Du  Halde.”  intern,  evid. 

1743.  Dedication  to  Dr.  Mead  of  Dr.  James’s  Me¬ 
dicinal  Dictionary,  intern,  evid. 

For  The  Gentleman's  Magazine. 

“Preface.”  intern,  evid. 

“Parliamentary  Debates  under  the  Name  of 
Debates  in  the  Senate  of  Lilliput,”  from  Nov. 
19,  1740,  to  Feb.  23,  1742-3,  inclusive,  ac¬ 
knowl. 

“Considerations  on  the  Dispute  between 
Crousaz  and  Warburton  on  Pope’s  Essay  on 
Man."  intern,  evid. 

A  Letter  announcing  that  the  Life  of  Mr. 
Savage  was  speedily  to  be  published  by  a 
person  who  was  favoured  with  his  Confi¬ 
dence.  intern,  evid. 

Advertisement  for  Osborne  concerning  the 
Harleian  Catalogue,  intern,  evid. 

1  744.  Life  of  Richard  Savage,  acknowl. 

Preface  to  the  Harleian  Aliscellany.  acknowl. 


XIV 


XV 


CATALOGUE  OF 

For  The  Gentleman's  Magazine.  . 

Preface,  intern,  evid. 

1745.  Miscellaneous  Observations  on  the  Tragedy  of 
Macbeth,  with  remarks  on  Sir.  T.H.'s[Sir  Thomas 
Hammer' s\  Edition  of  Shakspeare  and  proposals 
for  a  new  Edition  of  that  Poet,  acknowl. 

1 747.  Plan  for  a  Dictionary  of  the  English  Language , 
addressed  to  Philip  Dormer,  Earl  of  Chester¬ 
field.  acknowl . 

1 748.  For  The  Gentleman's  Magazine. 

“Life  of  Roscommon.”  acknowl. 

Foreign  History,  November,  intern,  evid. 

For  Dodsley’s  Preceptor 
“Preface.”  acknowl. 

“The  Vision  of  Theodore  the  Hermit.”  ac¬ 
knowl. 

1750.  The  Rambler,  the  first  Paper  of  which  was 
published  20th  of  March  this  year,  and  the 
last  17th  of  March,  1752,  the  day  on  which 
Mrs.  Johnson  died,  acknowl. 

Letter  in  The  General  Advertiser  to  excite  the 
attention  of  the  publick  to  the  performance 
of  Comus,  which  was  next  day  to  be  acted 
at  Drury-Lane  Playhouse  for  the  benefit 
of  Milton’s  granddaughter,  acknowl. 

Preface  and  Postscript  to  Lauder’s  pamphlet 
entitled,  An  Essay  on  Milton's  Use  and  Imitation 
of  the  Moderns  in  his  Paradise  Lost,  acknowl. 

1751.  “Life  of  Cheynel”  in  the  Miscellany  called 
The  Student,  acknowl . 

Letter  for  Lauder,  addressed  to  the  Reverend 
Dr.  John  Douglas,  acknowledging  his  Fraud 
concerning  Milton  in  Terms  of  suitable  Con¬ 
trition.  acknowl. 

Dedication  to  the  Earl  of  Middlesex  of  Mrs. 
Charlotte  Lennox’s  Female  Quixote,  intern . 
evid. 

1753.  Dedication  to  John  Earl  of  Orrery,  of  Shaks¬ 
peare  Illustrated ,  by  Mrs.  Charlotte  Lennox. 
acknowl . 

During  this  and  the  following  year  he  wrote 
and  gave  to  his  much  loved  friend  Dr.  Bath¬ 
urst  the  papers  in  The  Adventurer,  signed  T. 
acknowl. 

1 754.  Life  of  Edw.  Cave  in  The  Gentleman's  Maga¬ 
zine.  acknowl . 

1755.  A  Dictionary,  with  a  Grammar  and  History,  of 
the  English  Language,  acknowl. 

An  Account  of  an  Attempt  to  ascertain  the  Longi¬ 
tude  at  Sea,  by  an  exact  Theory  of  the  Variations 
of  the  Magnetical  Needle ,  with  a  Table  of  the 
Variations  at  the  most  remarkable  Cities  in  Eu¬ 
rope,  from  the  year  1660  to  1680.  acknowl.  This 
he  wrote  for  Mr.  Zachariah  Williams,  an  in¬ 
genious  ancient  Welch  Gentleman,  father  of 
Mrs.  Anna  Williams  whom  he  for  many 
years  kindly  lodged  in  his  House.  It  was  pub¬ 
lished  with  a  Translation  into  Italian  by  Si¬ 
gnor  Baretti.  In  a  Copy  of  it  which  he  pre¬ 
sented  to  the  Bodleian  Library  at  Oxford,  is 
pasted  a  Character  of  the  late  Mr.  Zacha- 


PROSE  WORKS 

riah  Williams,  plainly  written  by  Johnson. 

intern,  evid. 

1 756.  An  Abridgement  of  his  Dictionary,  acknowl. 
Several  Essays  in  The  Universal  Visiter,  which 
there  is  some  difficulty  in  ascertaining.  All 
that  are  marked  with  two  Asterisks  have  been 
ascribed  to  him,  although  I  am  confident 
from  internal  evidence,  that  we  should  ex¬ 
cept  from  these  “The  Life  of  Chaucer,”  “Re¬ 
flections  on  the  State  of  Portugal,”  and  “An 
Essay  on  Architecture”:  And  from  the  same 
evidence  I  am  confident  that  he  wrote  “Fur¬ 
ther  Thoughts  on  Agriculture,”  and  “A  Dis¬ 
sertation  on  the  State  of  Literature  and  Au- 
thours.”  The  “Dissertation  on  the  Epitaphs 
written  by  Pope”  he  afterwards  acknowl¬ 
edged,  and  added  to  his  Idler. 

Life  of  Sir  Thomas  Browne,  prefixed  to  a  new 
edition  of  his  Christian  Morals,  acknowl . 

In  The  Literary  Magazine;  Or,  Universal  Re¬ 
view,  which  began  in  January,  1756,  his 
Original  Essays  are: 

“Preliminary  Address.”  intern  evid. 

“An  Introduction  to  the  Political  State  of 
Great  Britain.”  intern,  evid. 

“Remarks  on  the  Militia  Bill.”  intern,  evid. 
“Observations  on  his  Britannick  Majesty’s 
Treaties  with  the  Empress  of  Russia  and  the 
Landgrave  of  Hesse  Cassel.”  intern,  evid. 
“Observations  on  the  Present  State  of  Af¬ 
fairs.”  intern,  evid. 

“Memoirs  of  Frederick  III,  King  of  Prus¬ 
sia.”  intern .  evid. 

In  the  same  Magazine  his  Reviews  are  of  the 
following  books: 

“Birch’s  History  of  the  Royal  Society." — 
“Browne’s  Christian  Morals ." — “Warton’s 
Essay  on  the  Writings  and  Genius  of  Pope,  vol. 
1.” — “Hampton’s  Translation  of  Polybius.” 
— “Sir  Isaac  Newton’s  Arguments  in  Proof  of  a 
Diety .” — “Borlase’s  History  of  the  Isles  of 
Scilly." — “Home’s  Experiments  on  Bleaching." 
— “Browne’s  History  of  Jamaica." — “Hales 
On  Distilling  Sea  Water,  Ventilators  in  Ships, 
and  Curing  an  III  Taste  in  Milk." — “Lucas’s 
Essay  on  Waters." — “Keith’s  Catalogue  of  the 
Scottish  Bishops."  —  “ Philosophical  Transac - 
tions,  vol.  xlix.” — “ Miscellanies  by  Elizabeth 
Harrison.” — “Evans’s  Map  and  Account  of 
the  Middle  Colonies  in  America ." — uThe  Cadet, 
a  Military  Treatise."  — “The  Conduct  of  the 
Ministry  Relating  to  the  Present  War  Im¬ 
partially  Examined.”  intern,  evid. 

“Mrs.  Lennox’s  Translation  of  Sully’s  Mem¬ 
oirs." — “Letter  on  the  Case  of  Admiral 
Byng.” — “Appeal  to  the  People  concerning 
Admiral  Byng.” — “Hanway’s  Eight  Days' 
Journey,  and  Essay  on  Tea." — “Some  further 
Particulars  in  Relation  to  the  Case  of  Ad¬ 
miral  Byng,  by  a  Gentleman  of  Oxford.” 
acknowl . 


XVI 


CATALOGUE  OF  PROSE  WORKS 


Mr.  Jonas  Hanway  having  written  an  angry 
Answer  to  the  Review  of  his  Essay  on  Tea , 
Johnson  in  the  same  Collection  made  a  Re¬ 
ply  to  it.  acknowl.  This  is  the  only  instance,  it 
is  believed,  when  he  condescended  to  take 
notice  of  any  thing  that  had  been  written 
against  him;  and  here  his  chief  intention 
seems  to  have  been  to  make  sport. 
Dedication  to  the  Earl  of  Rochford  of,  and 
Preface  to,  Mr.  Payne's  Introduction  to  the 
Game  of  Draughts,  acknowl. 

Introduction  to  The  London  Chronicle ,  an  Eve¬ 
ning  Paper  which  still  subsists  with  deserved 
credit,  acknowl . 

1757.  Speech  on  the  Subject  of  an  Address  to  the 
Throne  after  the  Expedition  to  Rochefort; 
delivered  by  one  of  his  Friends  in  some  pub- 
lick  Meeting:  it  is  printed  in  The  Gentleman's 
Magazine  for  October,  1 785.  intern,  evid . 

The  first  two  Paragraphs  of  the  Preface  to 
Sir  William  Chambers’s  Designs  of  Chinese 
Buildings,  &c.  acknowl. 

1 758.  The  Idler ,  which  began  April  5,  in  this  year, 
and  was  continued  till  April  5,  1 760.  acknowl. 
An  Essay  on  the  “Bravery  of  the  English 
Common  Soldiers”  was  added  to  it  when 
published  in  volumes,  acknowl. 

1 759.  Rasselas  Prince  of  Abyssinia,  A  Tale,  acknowl. 
Advertisement  for  the  Proprietors  of  The 
Idler  against  certain  Persons  who  pirated 
those  Papers  as  they  came  out  singly  in  a 
Newspaper  called  The  Universal  Chronicle;  Or, 
Weekly  Gazette,  intern,  evid . 

For  Mrs.  Charlotte  Lennox’s  English  Ver¬ 
sion  of  Brumoy, — “A  Dissertation  on  the 
Greek  Comedy,”  and  “The  General  Con¬ 
clusion  of  the  Book.”  intern,  evid. 
Introduction  to  The  World  Displayed,  a  Col¬ 
lection  of  Voyages  and  Travels,  acknowl. 

Three  Letters  inThe  Gazetteer ,  concerning  the 
best  plan  for  Black-friars  Bridge,  acknowl. 

1760.  An  Address  of  the  Painters  to  George  III  on  his 
Accession  to  the  Throne  of  these  Kingdoms,  intern, 
evid. 

Dedication  of  Baretti’s  Italian  and  English 
Dictionary  to  the  Marquis  of  Abreu,  then  En¬ 
voy-Extraordinary  from  Spain  at  the  Court 
of  Great-Britain.  intern,  evid. 

Review  in  The  Gentleman's  Magazine  of  Mr. 
Tyler’s  acute  and  able  Vindication  of  Mary 
Queen  of  Scots,  acknowl. 

Introduction  to  the  Proceedings  of  the  Commit¬ 
tee  for  Cloathing  the  French  Prisoners,  acknowl. 

1761.  Preface  to  Rolt’s  Dictionary  of  Trade  and  Com¬ 
merce.  acknowl. 

Corrections  and  Improvements  for  Mr. 
Gwyn  the  Architect’s  Pamphlet,  entitled 
Thoughts  on  the  Coronation  of  George  III  acknowl. 

1762.  Dedication  to  the  King  of  the  Reverend  Dr. 
Kennedy’s  Complete  System  of  Astronomical 
Chronology ,  unfolding  the  Scriptures.  Quarto  edi¬ 
tion.  acknowl. 


Concluding  paragraph  of  that  work,  intern. 

evid. 

Preface  to  the  Catalogue  of  the  Artists'  Exhibi¬ 
tion.  intern,  evid. 

1763.  Character  of  Collins  in  The  Poetical  Calendar , 
published  by  Fawkes  and  Woty.  acknowl. 
Dedication  to  the  Earl  of  Shaftesbury  of  the 
edition  of  Roger  Ascham’s  English  Works, 
published  by  the  Reverend  Mr.  Bennet.  ac¬ 
knowl. 

The  Life  of  Ascham,  also  prefixed  to  that 
edition,  acknowl. 

Review  of  Telemachus,  a  Masque,  by  the  Rev¬ 
erend  George  Graham  of  Eton  College,  in 
The  Critical  Review,  acknowl. 

Dedication  to  the  Queen  of  Mr.  Hoole’s 
Translation  of  Tasso,  acknowl. 

Account  of  the  Detection  of  the  Imposture 
of  the  Cock-Lane  Ghost,  published  in  the 
newspapers  and  Gentleman's  Magazine,  ac¬ 
knowl. 

1 764.  Part  of  a  Review  of  Grainger’s  Sugar  Cane ,  a 
Poem ,  in  The  London  Chronicle,  acknowl. 
Review  of  Goldsmith’s  Traveller,  a  Poem,  in 
The  Critical  Review,  acknowl . 

1 765.  The  Plays  of  William  Shakspeare,  in  eight  vol¬ 
umes,  8vo.,  with  Notes,  acknowl. 

1 766.  “The  Fountains,”  a  Fairy  Tale,  in  Mrs.  Wil¬ 
liams’s  Miscellanies,  acknowl. 

1767.  Dedication  to  the  King  of  Mr.  Adams’s 
Treatise  on  the  Globes,  acknowl. 

1769.  Character  of  the  Reverend  Mr.  Zachariah 
Mudge,  in  The  London  Chronicle,  acknowl. 

1770.  The  False  Alarm,  acknowl. 

1771.  Thoughts  on  the  Late  Transactions  respecting 
Falkland's  Islands,  acknowl. 

1772.  Defence  of  a  Schoolmaster;  dictated  to  me 
for  the  House  of  Lords,  acknowl. 

Argument  in  Support  of  the  Law  of  Vicious 
Intromission;  dictated  to  me  for  the  Court  of 
Session  in  Scotland,  acknowl. 

1 773*  Preface  to  Macbean’s  Dictionary  of  Ancient 
Geography,  acknowl. 

Argument  in  Favour  of  the  Rights  of  Lay 
Patrons;  dictated  to  me  for  the  General  As¬ 
sembly  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  acknowl. 
*774*  T/z<?  Patriot,  acknowl. 

1775.  A  Journey  to  the  Western  Islands  of  Scotland,  ac¬ 
knowl. 

Proposals  for  Publishing  the  Works  of  Airs.  Char¬ 
lotte  Lennox ,  in  Three  Volumes  Quarto,  acknowl. 
Preface  to  Baretti’s  Easy  Lessons  in  Italian  and 
English,  intern,  evid. 

Taxation  no  Tyranny;  an  Answer  to  the  Resolu¬ 
tions  and  Address  of  the  American  Congress,  ac¬ 
knowl. 

Argument  on  the  Case  of  Dr.  Memis ;  dictated  to 
me  for  the  Court  of  Session  in  Scotland,  ac¬ 
knowl. 

Argument  to  prove  that  the  Corporation  of 
Stirling  was  corrupt;  dictated  to  me  for  the 
House  of  Lords,  acknowl. 


CATALOGUE  OF 

1776.  Argument  in  Support  of  the  Right  of  Im¬ 
mediate,  and  Personal  Reprehension  from 
the  Pulpit;  dictated  to  me.  acknowl. 

Proposals  for  Publishing  an  Analysis  of  the  Scotch 
Celtick  Language ,  by  the  Reverend  William  Shaw . 
acknowl. 

1777.  Dedication  to  the  King  of  the  Posthumous 
Works  of  Dr.  Pearce,  Bishop  of  Rochester. 
acknowl. 

Additions  to  the  Life  and  Character  of  that 
Prelate;  prefixed  to  those  Works,  acknowl . 
Various  Papers  and  Letters  in  Favour  of  the 
Reverend  Dr.  Dodd,  acknowl. 

1780.  Advertisement  for  his  Friend  Mr.  Thrale  to 
the  Worthy  Electors  of  the  Borough  of  South¬ 
wark.  acknowl. 

The  first  Paragraph  of  Mr.  Thomas  Davies’s 
Life  of  Garrick,  acknowl. 

1781.  Prefaces  Biographical  and  Critical  to  the  Works  of 
the  English  Poets;  afterwards  published  with 
the  title  of  Lives  of  the  English  Poets,  acknowl. 
Argument  on  the  Importance  of  the  Regis¬ 
tration  of  Deeds;  dictated  to  me  for  an  Elec¬ 
tion  Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons. 
acknowl. 

On  the  Distinction  between  Tory  and  Whig; 
dictated  to  me.  acknowl. 

On  Vicarious  Punishments,  and  the  great 
Propitiation  for  the  Sins  of  the  World,  by 
Jesus  Christ;  dictated  to  me.  acknowl. 
Argument  in  favour  of  Joseph  Knight,  an 
African  Negro,  who  claimed  his  Liberty  in 
the  Court  of  Session  in  Scotland,  and  ob¬ 
tained  it;  dictated  to  me.  acknowl. 

Defence  of  Mr.  Robertson,  Printer  of  The 
Caledonian  Mercury ,  against  the  Society  of 
Procurators  in  Edinburgh,  for  having  inserted 
in  his  Paper  a  ludicrous  Paragraph  against 
them;  demonstrating  that  it  was  not  an  in¬ 
jurious  Libel;  dictated  to  me.  acknowl. 

1782.  The  greatest  part,  if  not  the  whole,  of  a  Re¬ 
ply,  by  the  Reverend  Mr.  Shaw,  to  a  Person 


PROSE  WORKS  xvii 

at  Edinburgh,  of  the  Name  of  Clark,  refut¬ 
ing  his  arguments  for  the  authenticity  of  the 
Poems  published  by  Mr.  James  Macpherson 
as  Translations  from  Ossian.  intern,  evid . 

1 784.  List  of  the  Authours  of  the  Universal  History, 
deposited  in  the  British  Museum,  and  printed 
in  The  Gentleman's  Magazine  for  December, 
this  year,  acknowl. 

Various  Tears. 

Letters  to  Mrs.  Thrale.  acknowl. 

Prayers  and  Meditations,  which  he  delivered  to 
the  Rev.  Mr.  Strahan,  enjoining  him  to  pub¬ 
lish  them,  acknowl. 

Sermons  left  for  publication  by  John  Taylor, 
LL.D.  Prebendary  of  Westminster,  and  given 
to  the  World  by  the  Reverend  Samuel 
Hayes,  A.M.  intern,  evid. 

Such  was  the  number  and  variety  of  the  prose 
works  of  this  extraordinary  man,  which  I  have 
been  able  to  discover,  and  am  at  liberty  to  men¬ 
tion;  but  we  ought  to  keep  in  mind,  that  there 
must  undoubtedly  have  been  many  more  which 
are  yet  concealed;  and  we  may  add  to  the  account, 
the  numerous  Letters  which  he  wrote,  of  which  a 
considerable  part  are  yet  unpublished.  It  is  hoped 
that  those  persons  in  whose  possession  they  are, 
will  favour  the  world  with  them. 

James  Boswell 

After  my  death  I  wish  no  other  herald , 

No  other  speaker  of  my  living  actions , 

To  keep  mine  honour  from  corruption , 

But  such  an  honest  chronicler  as  Griffith.1 

Shakspeare,  Henry  VIII.  [Act  IV.  Sc.  ii.] 

JSee  Dr.  Johnson’s  letter  to  Mrs.  Thrale,  dated 
Ostick  in  Skie,  September  30,  1773: — “Boswell 
writes  a  regular  Journal  of  our  travels,  which  I 
think  contains  as  much  of  what  I  say  and  do,  as  of 
all  other  occurrences  together;  for  such  a  faithful 
chronicler  is  Griffith .’  ” 


THE  LIFE  OF 
SAMUEL  JOHNSON,  LL.D. 


io  write  the  Life  of  him  who  excelled  all 
mankind  in  writing  the  lives  of  others,  and  who, 
whether  we  consider  his  extraordinary  endow¬ 
ments,  or  his  various  works,  has  been  equalled 
by  few  in  any  age,  is  an  arduous,  and  may  be 
reckoned  in  me  a  presumptuous  task. 

Had  Dr.  Johnson  written  his  own  life,  in  con¬ 
formity  with  the  opinion  which  he  has  given,1 
that  every  man’s  life  may  be  best  written  by 
himself;  had  he  employed  in  the  preservation  of 
his  own  history,  that  clearness  of  narration  and 
elegance  of  language  in  which  he  has  embalmed 
so  many  eminent  persons,  the  world  would  prob¬ 
ably  have  had  the  most  perfect  example  of  bi¬ 
ography  that  was  ever  exhibited.  But  although 
he  at  different  times,  in  a  desultory  manner, 
committed  to  writing  many  particulars  of  the 
progress  of  his  mind  and  fortunes,  he  never  had 
persevering  diligence  enough  to  form  them  into 
a  regular  composition.  Of  these  memorials  a 
few  have  been  preserved;  but  the  greater  part 
was  consigned  by  him  to  the  flames,  a  few  days 
before  his  death. 

As  I  had  the  honour  and  happiness  of  enjoy¬ 
ing  his  friendship  for  upwards  of  twenty  years; 
as  I  had  the  scheme  of  writing  his  life  constantly 
in  view;  as  he  was  well  apprised  of  this  circum¬ 
stance,  and  from  time  to  time  obligingly  satis¬ 
fied  my  inquiries,  by  communicating  to  me  the 
incidents  of  his  early  years;  as  I  acquired  a  facil¬ 
ity  in  recollecting,  and  was  very  assiduous  in  re¬ 
cording  his  conversation,  of  which  the  extraor¬ 
dinary  vigour  and  vivacity  constituted  one  of 
the  first  features  of  his  character;  and  as  I  have 
spared  no  pains  in  obtaining  materials  concern¬ 
ing  him,  from  every  quarter  where  I  could  dis¬ 
cover  that  they  were  to  be  found,  and  have  been 
favoured  with  the  most  liberal  communications 
by  his  friends;  I  flatter  myself  that  few  biogra¬ 


i  The  Idler ,  No.  84. 


phers  have  entered  upon  such  a  work  as  this, 
with  more  advantages;  independent  of  literary 
abilities,  in  which  I  am  not  vain  enough  to  com¬ 
pare  myself  with  some  great  names  who  have 
gone  before  me  in  this  kind  of  writing. 

Since  my  work  was  announced,  several  Lives 
and  Memoirs  of  Dr.  Johnson  have  been  pub¬ 
lished,  the  most  voluminous  of  which  is  one  com¬ 
piled  for  the  booksellers  of  London,  by  Sir  John 
Hawkins,  Knight,2  a  man,  whom,  during  my 
long  intimacy  with  Dr.  Johnson,  I  never  saw  in 
his  company,  I  think  but  once,  and  I  am  sure 
not  above  twice.  Johnson  might  have  esteemed 
him  for  his  decent,  religious  demeanour,  and  his 
knowledge  of  books  and  literary  history;  but 
from  the  rigid  formality  of  his  manners,  it  is  evi¬ 
dent  that  they  never  could  have  lived  together 
with  companionable  ease  and  familiarity;  nor 
had  Sir  John  Hawkins  that  nice  perception 
which  was  necessary  to  mark  the  finer  and  less 
obvious  parts  of  Johnson’s  character.  His  being 
appointed  one  of  his  executors,  gave  him  an  op¬ 
portunity  of  taking  possession  of  such  fragments 

2The  greatest  part  of  this  book  was  written 
while  Sir  John  Hawkins  was  alive;  and  I  avow, 
that  one  object  of  my  strictures  was  to  make  him 
feel  some  compunction  for  his  illiberal  treatment 
of  Dr.  Johnson.  Since  his  decease,  I  have  sup¬ 
pressed  several  of  my  remarks  upon  his  work.  But 
though  I  would  not  “war  with  the  dead”  offensive¬ 
ly ,  I  think  it  necessary  to  be  strenuous  in  defence  of 
my  illustrious  friend,  which  I  cannot  be  without 
strong  animadversions  upon  a  writer  who  has 
greatly  injured  him.  Let  me  add,  that  though  I 
doubt  I  should  not  have  been  very  prompt  to  grat¬ 
ify  Sir  John  Hawkins  with  any  compliment  in  his 
life-time,  I  do  now  frankly  acknowledge,  that,  in 
my  opinion,  his  volume,  however  inadequate  and 
improper  as  a  life  of  Dr.  Johnson,  and  however  dis¬ 
credited  by  unpardonable  inaccuracies  in  other 
respects,  contains  a  collection  of  curious  anecdotes 
and  observations,  which  few  men  but  its  author 
could  have  brought  together. 


I 


BOSWELL 


2 

of  a  diary  and  other  papers  as  were  left ;  of  which, 
before  delivering  them  up  to  the  residuary  lega¬ 
tee,  whose  property  they  were,  he  endeavoured 
to  extract  the  substance.  In  this  he  has  not  been 
very  successful,  as  I  have  found  upon  a  perusal 
of  those  papers,  which  have  been  since  trans¬ 
ferred  to  me.  Sir  John  Hawkins’s  ponderous  la¬ 
bours,  I  must  acknowledge,  exhibit  a  farrago,  of 
which  a  considerable  portion  is  not  devoid  of 
entertainment  to  the  lovers  of  literary  gossiping; 
but  besides  its  being  swelled  out  with  long  un¬ 
necessary  extracts  from  various  works  (even  one 
of  several  leaves  from  Osborne’s  Harleian  Cata¬ 
logue,  and  those  not  compiled  by  Johnson,  but 
by  Oldys),  a  very  small  part  of  it  relates  to  the 
person  who  is  the  subject  of  the  book;  and,  in 
that,  there  is  such  an  inaccuracy  in  the  state¬ 
ment  of  facts,  as  in  so  solemn  an  authour  is  hard¬ 
ly  excusable,  and  certainly  makes  his  narrative 
very  unsatisfactory.  But  what  is  still  worse,  there 
is  throughout  the  whole  of  it  a  dark  uncharita¬ 
ble  cast,  by  which  the  most  unfavourable  con¬ 
struction  is  put  upon  almost  every  circumstance 
in  the  character  and  conduct  of  my  illustrious 
friend;  who,  I  trust,  will,  by  a  true  and  fair  de¬ 
lineation,  be  vindicated  both  from  the  injurious 
misrepresentations  of  this  authour,  and  from 
the  slighter  aspersions  of  a  lady  who  once  lived 
in  great  intimacy  with  him. 

There  is,  in  the  British  Museum,  a  letter  from 
Bishop  Warburton  to  Dr.  Birch,  on  the  subject 
of  biography;  which,  though  I  am  aware  it  may 
expose  me  to  a  charge  of  artfully  raising  the  val¬ 
ue  of  my  own  work,  by  contrasting  it  with  that 
of  which  I  have  spoken,  is  so  well  conceived  and 
expressed,  that  I  cannot  refrain  from  here  in¬ 
serting  it: 

I  shall  endeavour,  (says  Dr.  Warburton,)  to 
give  you  what  satisfaction  I  can  in  any  thing 
you  want  to  be  satisfied  in  any  subject  of  Milton, 
and  am  extremely  glad  you  intend  to  write  his 
life.  Almost  all  the  life-writers  we  have  had  be¬ 
fore  Toland  and  Desmaiseaux,  are  indeed 
strange  insipid  creatures;  and  yet  I  had  rather 
read  the  worst  of  them,  than  be  obliged  to  go 
through  with  this  of  Milton’s,  or  the  other’s  life 
of  Boileau,  where  there  is  such  a  dull,  heavy 
succession  of  long  quotations  of  disinteresting 
passages,  that  it  makes  their  method  quite  nau¬ 
seous.  But  the  verbose,  tasteless  Frenchman 
seems  to  lay  it  down  as  a  principle,  that  every 
life  must  be  a  book,  and  what’s  worse,  it  proves 
a  book  without  a  life;  for  what  do  we  know  of 
Boileau,  after  all  his  tedious  stuff?  You  are  the 
only  one  (and  I  speak  it  without  a  compliment) 
that  by  the  vigour  of  your  stile  and  sentiments, 
and  the  real  importance  of  your  materials,  have 
the  art,  (which  one  would  imagine  no  one  could 


have  missed,)  of  adding  agreements  to  the  most 
agreeable  subject  in  the  world,  which  is  literary 
history.1 
Nov.  24,  1737 

Instead  of  melting  down  my  materials  into 
one  mass,  and  constantly  speaking  in  my  own 
person,  by  which  I  might  have  appeared  to  have 
more  merit  in  the  execution  of  the  work,  I  have 
resolved  to  adopt  and  enlarge  upon  the  excel¬ 
lent  plan  of  Mr.  Mason,  in  his  Memoirs  of  Gray. 
Wherever  narrative  is  necessary  to  explain,  con¬ 
nect,  and  supply,  I  furnish  it  to  the  best  of  my 
abilities;  but  in  the  chronological  series  of  John¬ 
son’s  life,  which  I  trace  as  distinctly  as  I  can, 
year  by  year,  I  produce,  wherever  it  is  in  my 
power,  his  own  minutes,  letters  or  conversation, 
being  convinced  that  this  mode  is  more  lively, 
and  will  make  my  readers  better  acquainted  with 
him,  than  even  most  of  those  were  who  actually 
knew  him,  but  could  know  him  only  partially; 
whereas  there  is  here  an  accumulation  of  intel¬ 
ligence  from  various  points,  by  which  his  char¬ 
acter  is  more  fully  understood  and  illustrated. 

Indeed  I  cannot  conceive  a  more  perfect 
mode  of  writing  any  man’s  life,  than  not  only 
relating  all  the  most  important  events  of  it  in 
their  order,  but  interweaving  what  he  privately 
wrote,  and  said,  and  thought;  by  which  man¬ 
kind  are  enabled  as  it  were  to  see  him  live,  and 
to  “live  o’er  each  scene”  with  him,  as  he  actu¬ 
ally  advanced  through  the  several  stages  of  his 
life.  Had  his  other  friends  been  as  diligent  and 
ardent  as  I  was,  he  might  have  been  almost  en¬ 
tirely  preserved.  As  it  is,  I  will  venture  to  say 
that  he  will  be  seen  in  this  work  more  com¬ 
pletely  than  any  man  who  has  ever  yet  lived. 

And  he  will  be  seen  as  he  really  was;  for  I 
profess  to  write,  not  his  panegyrick,  which 
must  be  all  praise,  but  his  Life;  which,  great 
and  good  as  he  was,  must  not  be  supposed  to 
be  entirely  perfect.  To  be  as  he  was,  is  indeed 
subject  to  panegyrick  enough  to  any  man  in 
this  state  of  being;  but  in  every  picture  there 
should  be  shade  as  well  as  light,  and  when  I 
delineate  him  without  reserve,  I  do  what  he 
himself  recommended,  both  by  his  precept 
and  his  example. 

“If  the  biographer  writes  from  personal  knowl¬ 
edge,  and  makes  haste  to  gratify  the  publick  cu¬ 
riosity,  there  is  danger  lest  his  interest,  his  fear, 
his  gratitude,  or  his  tenderness  overpower  his  fi¬ 
delity,  and  tempt  him  to  conceal,  if  not  to  in¬ 
vent.  There  are  many  who  think  it  an  act  of  pi¬ 
ety  to  hide  the  faults  or  failings  of  their  friends, 

xBrit.  Mus.  4320,  Ayscough’s  CataL,  Sloane 
MSS. 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


even  when  they  can  no  longer  suffer  by  their  de¬ 
tection;  we  therefore  see  whole  ranks  of  charac¬ 
ters  adorned  with  uniform  panegyrick,  and  not 
to  be  known  from  one  another  but  by  extrinsick 
and  casual  circumstances.  ‘Let  me  remember, 
(says  Hale,)  when  I  find  myself  inclined  to  pity 
a  criminal,  that  there  is  likewise  a  pity  due  to 
the  country.’  If  we  owe  regard  to  the  memory 
of  the  dead,  there  is  yet  more  respect  to  be 
paid  to  knowledge,  to  virtue  and  to  truth.”1 

What  I  consider  as  the  peculiar  value  of  the 
following  work,  is,  the  quantity  it  contains  of 
Johnson’s  conversation;  which  is  universally  ac¬ 
knowledged  to  have  been  eminently  instructive 
and  entertaining;  and  of  which  the  specimens 
that  I  have  given  upon  a  former  occasion,  have 
been  received  with  so  much  approbation,  that  I 
have  good  grounds  for  supposing  that  the  world 
will  not  be  indifferent  to  more  ample  communi¬ 
cations  of  a  similar  nature. 

That  the  conversation  of  a  celebrated  man,  if 
his  talents  have  been  exerted  in  conversation, 
will  best  display  his  character,  is,  I  trust,  too  well 
established  in  the  judgement  of  mankind,  to  be 
at  all  shaken  by  a  sneering  observation  of  Mr. 
Mason,  in  his  Memoirs  of  Mr.  William  Whitehead , 
in  which  there  is  literally  no  Life ,  but  a  mere  dry 
narrative  of  facts.  I  do  not  think  it  was  quite 
necessary  to  attempt  a  depreciation  of  what  is 
universally  esteemed,  because  it  was  not  to  be 
found  in  the  immediate  object  of  the  ingenious 
writer’s  pen;  for  in  truth,  from  a  man  so  still  and 
so  tame,  as  to  be  contented  to  pass  many  years 
as  the  domestick  companion  of  a  superannuated 
lord  and  lady,  conversation  could  no  more  be 
expected,  than  from  a  Chinese  mandarin  on  a 
chimney-piece,  or  the  fantastick  figures  on  a  gilt 
leather  skreen. 

If  authority  be  required,  let  us  appeal  to  Plu¬ 
tarch,  the  prince  of  ancient  biographers.  0 vt€ 
rats  km^avedTarais  Trpa%e<n  i ravTOOS  eveari 
or)\o)ais  dperfjs  77  aaidas,  aXXa  irpaypa  fipaxv 
7 roXXa/as,  /cat  prjpa,  /cal  TratSta  res  epc^aaiv 
ijdovs  kiroiri<jev  paWov  rj  paxou  pvpioveKpoi ,  /cal 
7rapara£eis  a l  peyLcrrat,  /cal  TrohiopKiai  iroXecov. 
“Nor  is  it  always  in  the  most  distinguished  at- 
chievements  that  men’s  virtues  or  vices  may  be 
best  discerned;  but  very  often  an  action  of  small 
note,  a  short  saying,  or  a  jest,  shall  distinguish  a 
person’s  real  character  more  than  the  greatest 
sieges,  or  the  most  important  battles.”2 

To  this  may  be  added  the  sentiments  of  the 
very  man  whose  life  I  am  about  to  exhibit. 

1The  Rambler ,  No.  60. 

2Plutarch’s  Alexander  [i],  Langhorne’s  transla¬ 
tion. 


“The  business  of  the  biographer  is  often  to 
pass  slighdy  over  those  performances  and  inci¬ 
dents  which  produce  vulgar  greatness,  to  lead 
the  thoughts  into  domestick  privacies,  and  dis¬ 
play  the  minute  details  of  daily  life,  where 
exteriour  appendages  are  cast  aside,  and  men 
excel  each  other  only  by  prudence  and  by 
virtue.  The  account  of  Thuanus  is  with  great 
propriety  said  by  its  authour  to  have  been 
written,  that  it  might  lay  open  to  posterity 
the  private  and  familiar  character  of  that  man, 
cujus  ingenium  et  candorem  ex  ipsius  scriptis  sunt 
olim  semper  miraturi ,  whose  candour  and  genius 
will  to  the  end  of  time  be  by  his  writings  pre¬ 
served  in  admiration. 

“There  are  many  invisible  circumstances, 
which  whether  we  read  as  enquirers  after  natur¬ 
al  or  moral  knowledge,  whether  we  intend  to 
enlarge  our  science,  or  increase  our  virtue,  are 
more  important  than  publick  occurrences.  Thus 
Sallust,  the  great  master  of  nature,  has  not  for¬ 
got  in  his  account  of  Catiline  to  remark,  that  his 
walk  was  now  quick,  and  again  slow,  as  an  indi¬ 
cation  of  a  mind  revolving  with  violent  commo¬ 
tion.  Thus  the  story  of  Melanchthon  affords  a 
striking  lecture  on  the  value  of  time,  by  inform¬ 
ing  us,  that  when  he  had  made  an  appointment, 
he  expected  not  only  the  hour,  but  the  minute 
to  be  fixed,  that  the  day  might  not  run  out  in 
the  idleness  of  suspence;  and  all  the  plans  and 
enterprises  of  De  Witt  are  now  of  less  importance 
to  the  world  than  that  part  of  his  personal  char¬ 
acter,  which  represents  him  as  careful  of  his 
health,  and  negligent  of  his  life. 

“But  biography  has  often  been  allotted  to  writ¬ 
ers,  who  seem  very  little  acquainted  with  the  na¬ 
ture  of  their  task,  or  very  negligent  about  the 
performance.  They  rarely  afford  any  other  ac¬ 
count  than  might  be  collected  from  publick  pa¬ 
pers,  but  imagine  themselves  writing  a  life,  when 
they  exhibit  a  chronological  series  of  actions  or 
preferments;  and  have  so  little  regard  to  the 
manners  or  behaviour  of  their  heroes,  that  more 
knowledge  may  be  gained  of  a  man’s  real  char¬ 
acter,  by  a  short  conversation  with  one  of  his 
servants,  than  from  a  formal  and  studied  narra¬ 
tive,  begun  with  his  pedigree,  and  ended  with 
his  funeral. 

“There  are  indeed,  some  natural  reasons  why 
these  narratives  are  often  written  by  such  as  were 
not  likely  to  give  much  instruction  or  delight, 
and  why  most  accounts  of  particular  persons  are 
barren  and  useless.  If  a  life  be  delayed  till  inter¬ 
est  and  envy  are  at  an  end,  we  may  hope  for  im¬ 
partiality,  but  must  expect  little  intelligence;  for 
the  incidents  which  give  excellence  to  biogra- 


BOSWELL 


4 

phy  are  of  a  volatile  and  evanescent  kind,  such 
as  soon  escape  the  memory,  and  are  transmitted 
by  tradition.  We  know  how  few  can  pourtray  a 
living  acquaintance,  except  by  his  most  promi¬ 
nent  and  observable  particularities,  and  the 
grosser  features  of  his  mind;  and  it  may  be  easi¬ 
ly  imagined  how  much  of  this  little  knowledge 
may  be  lost  in  imparting  it,  and  how  soon  a  suc¬ 
cession  of  copies  will  lose  all  resemblance  of  the 
original. 5,1 

1  am  fully  aware  of  the  objections  which  may 
be  made  to  the  minuteness  on  some  occasions  of 
my  detail  of  Johnson’s  conversation,  and  how 
happily  it  is  adapted  for  the  petty  exercise  of  ridi¬ 
cule,  by  men  of  superficial  understanding  and  lu¬ 
dicrous  fancy;  but  I  remain  firm  and  confident  in 
my  opinion,  that  minute  particulars  are  frequent¬ 
ly  characteristic^  and  always  amusing,  when 
they  relate  to  a  distinguished  man.  I  am  therefore 
exceedingly  unwilling  that  any  thing,  however 
slight,  which  my  illustrious  friend  thought  it 
worth  his  while  to  express,  with  any  degree  of 
point,  should  perish.  For  this  almost  supersti¬ 
tious  reverence,  I  have  found  very  old  and  ven¬ 
erable  authority,  quoted  by  our  great  modern 
prelate,  Seeker,  in  whose  tenth  sermon  there  is 
the  following  passage: 

“ Rabbi  David  Kimchi ,  a  noted  Jewish  Com¬ 
mentator,  who  lived  about  five  hundred  years 
ago,  explains  that  passage  in  the  first  Psalm, 
‘i/A  leaf  also  shall  not  wither 9  from  Rabbins  yet 
older  than  himself,  thus:  That  ‘ even  the  idle  talk9, 
so  he  expresses  it,  ‘o/  a  good  man  ought  to  be  regard¬ 
ed9 ;  the  most  superfluous  things  he  saith  are  al¬ 
ways  of  some  value.  And  other  ancient  authours 
have  the  same  phrase,  nearly  in  the  same 
sense.” 

Of  one  thing  I  am  certain,  that  considering 
how  highly  the  small  portion  which  we  have  of 
the  table-talk  and  other  anecdotes  of  our  cele¬ 
brated  writers  is  valued,  and  how  earnestly  it  is 
regretted  that  we  have  not  more,  I  am  justified 
in  preserving  rather  too  many  of  Johnson’s  say¬ 
ings,  than  too  few;  especially  as  from  the  diver¬ 
sity  of  dispositions  it  cannot  be  known  with 
certainty  beforehand,  whether  what  may  seem 
trifling  to  some,  and  perhaps  to  the  collector 
himself,  may  not  be  most  agreeable  to  many;  and 
the  greater  number  that  an  authour  can  please 
in  any  degree,  the  more  pleasure  does  there  arise 
to  a  benevolent  mind. 

To  those  who  are  weak  enough  to  think  this  a 
degrading  task,  and  the  time  and  labour  which 
have  been  devoted  to  it  misemployed,  I  shall 
content  myself  with  opposing  the  authority  of 

lThe  Rambler,  No.  6o. 


[i?°9 

the  greatest  man  of  any  age,  Julius  Caesar,  of 
whom  Bacon  observes,  that  “in  his  book  of  Apo¬ 
thegms  which  he  collected,  we  see  that  he  es¬ 
teemed  it  more  honour  to  make  himself  but  a 
pair  of  tables,  to  take  the  wise  and  pithy  words 
of  others,  than  to  have  every  word  of  his  own  to 
be  made  an  apothegm  or  an  oracle.”2 

Having  said  thus  much  by  way  of  introduction, 
I  commit  the  following  pages  to  the  candour  of 
the  Publick. 

Samuel  Johnson  was  born  at  Lichfield,  in 
Staffordshire,  on  the  i8th  of  September,  N.S., 
1 709;  and  his  initiation  into  the  Christian  Church 
was  not  delayed;  for  his  baptism  is  recorded,  in 
the  register  of  St.  Mary’s  parish  in  that  city,  to 
have  been  performed  on  the  day  of  his  birth.  His 
father  is  there  stiled  Gentleman,  a  circumstance 
of  which  an  ignorant  panegyrist  has  praised  him 
for  not  being  proud;  when  the  truth  is,  that  the 
appellation  of  Gentleman,  though  now  lost  in 
the  indiscriminate  assumption  of  Esquire ,  was 
commonly  taken  by  those  who  could  not  boast 
of  gentility.  His  father  was  Michael  Johnson,  a 
native  of  Derbyshire,  of  obscure  extraction, 
who  settled  in  Lichfield,  as  a  bookseller  and  sta¬ 
tioner.  His  mother  was  Sarah  Ford,  descended 
of  an  ancient  race  of  substantial  yeomanry  in 
Warwickshire.  They  were  well  advanced  in 
years  when  they  married,  and  never  had  more 
than  two  children,  both  sons;  Samuel,  their  first 
born,  who  lived  to  be  the  illustrious  character 
whose  various  excellence  I  am  to  endeavour  to 
record,  and  Nathanael,  who  died  in  his  twenty- 
fifth  year. 

Mr.  Michael  Johnson  was  a  man  of  a  large 
and  robust  body,  and  of  a  strong  and  active 
mind;  yet,  as  in  the  most  solid  rocks  veins  of 
unsound  substance  are  often  discovered,  there 
was  in  him  a  mixture  of  that  disease,  the  nature 
of  which  eludes  the  most  minute  enquiry,  though 
the  effects  are  well  known  to  be  a  weariness  of 
life,  an  unconcern  about  those  things  which  agi¬ 
tate  the  greater  part  of  mankind,  and  a  general 
sensation  of  gloomy  wretchedness.  From  him 
then  his  son  inherited,  with  some  other  quali¬ 
ties,  “a  vile  melancholy,”  which  in  his  too 
strong  expression  of  any  disturbance  of  the 
mind,  “made  him  mad  all  his  life,  at  least  not 
sober.”3  Michael  was,  however,  forced  by  the 
narrowness  of  his  circumstances  to  be  very  dili¬ 
gent  in  business,  not  only  in  his  shop,  but  by 
occasionally  resorting  to  several  towns  in  the 

2Bacon’s  Advancement  of  Learning,  Book  1  [vii  25]. 

3 Journal  of  a  Tour  to  the  Hebrides,  3rd  edit.,  p.  213 
[Sept.  16]. 


1712]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


neighbourhood,1  some  of  which  were  at  a  con¬ 
siderable  distance  from  Lichfield.  At  that  time 
booksellers’  shops  in  the  provincial  towns  of 
England  were  very  rare,  so  that  there  was  not 
one  even  in  Birmingham,  in  which  town  old 
Mr.  Johnson  used  to  open  a  shop  every  market- 
day.  He  was  a  pretty  good  Latin  scholar,  and  a 
citizen  so  creditable  as  to  be  made  one  of  the 
magistrates  of  Lichfield;  and,  being  a  man  of 
good  sense,  and  skill  in  his  trade,  he  acquired  a 
reasonable  share  of  wealth,  of  which  however 
he  afterwards  lost  the  greatest  part,  by  engaging 
unsuccessfully  in  a  manufacture  of  parchment. 
He  was  a  zealous  high-church  man  and  royalist, 
and  retained  his  attachment  to  the  unfortunate 
house  of  Stuart,  though  he  reconciled  himself, 
by  casuistical  arguments  of  expediency  and  ne¬ 
cessity,  to  take  the  oaths  imposed  by  the  pre¬ 
vailing  power. 

There  is  a  circumstance  in  his  life  somewhat 
romantick,  but  so  well  authenticated,  that  I 
shall  not  omit  it.  A  young  woman  of  Leek,  in 
Staffordshire,  while  he  served  his  apprentice¬ 
ship  there,  conceived  a  violent  passion  for  him; 
and  though  it  met  with  no  favourable  return, 
followed  him  to  Lichfield,  where  she  took  lodg¬ 
ings  opposite  to  the  house  in  which  he  lived,  and 
indulged  her  hopeless  flame.  When  he  was  in¬ 
formed  that  it  so  preyed  upon  her  mind  that  her 
life  was  in  danger,  he  with  a  generous  humanity 
went  to  her  and  offered  to  marry  her,  but  it  was 
then  too  late:  her  vital  power  was  exhausted; 
and  she  actually  exhibited  one  of  the  very  rare 
instances  of  dying  for  love.  She  was  buried  in 
the  cathedral  of  Lichfield;  and  he,  with  a  tender 
regard,  placed  a  stone  over  her  grave  with  this 
inscription: 

Here  lies  the  body  of 
Mrs.  Elizabeth  Blaney,  a  stranger. 

She  departed  this  life 
20  of  September,  1694. 

Johnson’s  mother  was  a  woman  of  distin¬ 
guished  understanding.  I  asked  his  old  school¬ 
fellow,  Mr.  Hector,  surgeon  of  Birmingham,  if 
she  was  not  vain  of  her  son.  He  said  “she  had 

Extract  of  a  letter,  dated  “Trentham,  St.  Pe¬ 
ter’s  day,  1716,”  written  by  the  Rev.  George  Plax- 
ton,  Chaplain  at  that  time  to  Lord  Gower,  which 
may  serve  to  show  the  high  estimation  in  which  the 
father  of  our  great  Moralist  was  held:  “Johnson, 
the  Litchfield  Librarian,  is  now  here;  he  propa¬ 
gates  learning  all  over  this  diocese,  and  advanceth 
knowledge  to  its  just  height;  all  the  Clergy  here  are 
his  Pupils,  and  suck  all  they  have  from  him;  Allen 
cannot  make  a  warrant  without  his  precedent,  nor 
our  quondam  John  Evans  draw  a  recognizance 
sine  direction e  Michaelis .”  The  Gentleman’s  Magazine , 
October,  1791. 


too  much  good  sense  to  be  vain,  but  she  knew 
her  son’s  value.”  Her  piety  was  not  inferiour  to 
her  understanding;  and  to  her  must  be  ascribed 
those  early  impressions  of  religion  upon  the 
mind  of  her  son,  from  which  the  world  after¬ 
wards  derived  so  much  benefit.  He  told  me,  that 
he  remembered  distinctly  having  had  the  first 
notice  of  Heaven,  “a  place  to  which  good  peo¬ 
ple  went,”  and  hell,  “a  place  to  which  bad  peo¬ 
ple  went,”  communicated  to  him  by  her,  when 
a  little  child  in  bed  with  her;  and  that  it  might 
be  the  better  fixed  in  his  memory,  she  sent  him 
to  repeat  it  to  Thomas  Jackson,  their  man-ser¬ 
vant;  he  not  being  in  the  way,  this  was  not 
done,  but  there  was  no  occasion  for  any  artificial 
aid  for  its  preservation. 

In  following  so  very  eminent  a  man  from  his 
cradle  to  his  grave,  every  minute  particular, 
which  can  throw  light  on  the  progress  of  his 
mind,  is  interesting.  That  he  was  remarkable, 
even  in  his  earliest  years,  may  easily  be  sup¬ 
posed;  for  to  use  his  own  words  in  his  Life  of 
Sydenham, 

“That  the  strength  of  his  understanding,  the 
accuracy  of  his  discernment,  and  ardour  of  his 
curiosity,  might  have  been  remarked  from  his 
infancy,  by  a  diligent  observer,  there  is  no  rea¬ 
son  to  doubt.  For,  there  is  no  instance  of  any 
man,  whose  history  has  been  minutely  related, 
that  did  not  in  every  part  of  life  discover  the 
same  proportion  of  intellectual  vigour.” 

In  all  such  investigations  it  is  certainly  unwise 
to  pay  too  much  attention  to  incidents  which 
the  credulous  relate  with  eager  satisfaction,  and 
the  more  scrupulous  or  witty  enquirer  considers 
only  as  topicks  of  ridicule:  Yet  there  is  a  tradi¬ 
tional  story  of  the  infant  Hercules  of  toryism,  so 
curiously  characteristick,  that  I  shall  not  with¬ 
hold  it.  It  vvas  communicated  to  me  in  a  letter 
from  Miss  Mary  Adye,  of  Lichfield: 

“When  Dr.  Sacheverel  was  at  Lichfield,  John¬ 
son  was  not  quite  three  years  old.  My  grandfa¬ 
ther  Hammond  observed  him  at  the  cathedral 
perched  upon  his  father’s  shoulders,  listening 
and  gaping  at  the  much  celebrated  preacher. 
Mr.  Hammond  asked  Mr.  Johnson  how  he 
could  possibly  think  of  bringing  such  an  infant 
to  church,  and  in  the  midst  of  so  great  a  croud. 
He  answered,  because  it  was  impossible  to  keep 
him  at  home;  for,  young  as  he  was,  he  believed 
he  had  caught  the  publick  spirit  and  zeal  for 
Sacheverel,  and  would  have  staid  for  ever  in  the 
church,  satisfied  with  beholding  him.” 

Nor  can  I  omit  a  little  instance  of  that  jealous 
independence  of  spirit,  and  impetuosity  of  tem¬ 
per,  which  never  forsook  him.  The  fact  was  ac- 


6  BOSWELL  [1712 


knowledged  to  me  by  himself,  upon  the  author¬ 
ity  of  his  mother.  One  day,  when  the  servant 
who  used  to  be  sent  to  school  to  conduct  him 
home,  had  not  come  in  time,  he  set  out  by  him¬ 
self,  though  he  was  then  so  near-sighted,  that  he 
was  obliged  to  stoop  down  on  his  hands  and 
knees  to  take  a  view  of  the  kennel  before  he  ven¬ 
tured  to  step  over  it.  His  school-mistress,  afraid 
that  he  might  miss  his  way,  or  fall  into  the  ken¬ 
nel,  or  be  run  over  by  a  cart,  followed  him  at 
some  distance.  He  happened  to  turn  about  and 
perceive  her.  Feeling  her  careful  attention  as  an 
insult  to  his  manliness,  he  ran  back  to  her  in  a 
rage,  and  beat  her,  as  well  as  his  strength  would 
permit. 

Of  the  power  of  his  memory,  for  which  he 
was  all  his  life  eminent  to  a  degree  almost  in¬ 
credible,  the  following  early  instance  was  told 
me  in  his  presence  at  Lichfield,  in  1776,  by  his 
step-daughter,  Mrs.  Lucy  Porter,  as  related  to 
her  by  his  mother.  When  he  was  a  child  in  petti¬ 
coats,  and  had  learnt  to  read,  Mrs.  Johnson  one 
morning  put  the  common  prayerbook  into  his 
hands,  pointed  to  the  collect  for  the  day,  and 
said,  “Sam,  you  must  get  this  by  heart.”  She 
went  up  stairs,  leaving  him  to  study  it:  But  by 
the  time  she  had  reached  the  second  floor,  she 
heard  him  following  her.  “What’s  the  matter?” 
said  she.  “I  can  say  it,”  he  replied;  and  repeated 
it  distinctly,  though  he  could  not  have  read  it 
more  than  twice. 

But  there  has  been  another  story  of  his  infant 
precocity  generally  circulated,  and  generally 
believed,  the  truth  of  which  I  am  to  refute  upon 
his  own  authority.  It  is  told,1  that,  when  a  child 
of  three  years  old,  he  chanced  to  tread  upon  a 
duckling,  the  eleventh  of  a  brood,  and  killed  it; 
upon  which,  it  is  said,  he  dictated  to  his  mother 
the  following  epitaph: 

Here  lies  good  master  duck. 

Whom  Samuel  Johnson  trod  on; 

If  it  had  liv'd,  it  had  been  good  luck, 

For  then  we’d  had  an  odd  one. 

There  is  surely  internal  evidence  that  this  litde 
composition  combines  in  it,  what  no  child  of 
three  years  old  could  produce,  without  an  ex¬ 
tension  of  its  faculties  by  immediate  inspiration; 
yet  Mrs.  Lucy  Porter,  Dr.  Johnson’s  stepdaugh¬ 
ter,  positively  maintained  to  me,  in  his  pres¬ 
ence,  that  there  could  be  no  doubt  of  the  truth 
of  this  anecdote,  for  she  had  heard  it  from  his 
mother.  So  difficult  is  it  to  obtain  an  authentick 
relation  of  facts,  and  such  authority  may  there 

1  Anecdotes  of  Dr.  Johnson,  by  Hester  Lynch  Picz- 
zi,  p.  1 1.  Life  of  Dr.  Johnson ,  by  Sir  John  Hawkins, 

p.  6. 


be  for  errour;  for  he  assured  me,  that  his  father 
made  the  verses,  and  wished  to  pass  them  for  his 
child’s.  He  added,  “my  father  was  a  foolish  old 
man;  that  is  to  say,  foolish  in  talking  of  his  chil¬ 
dren.”2 

Young  Johnson  had  the  misfortune  to  be 
much  afflicted  with  the  scrophula,  or  king’s 
evil,  which  disfigured  a  countenance  naturally 
well  formed,  and  hurt  his  visual  nerves  so  much, 
that  he  did  not  see  at  all  with  one  of  his  eyes, 
though  its  appearance  was  little  different  from 
that  of  the  other.  There  is  amongst  his  prayers, 
one  inscribed  “When  my  eye  was  restored  to  its 
use,”3  which  ascertains  a  defect  that  many  of 
his  friends  knew  he  had,  though  I  never  per¬ 
ceived  it.4  I  supposed  him  to  be  only  near¬ 
sighted;  and  indeed  I  must  observe,  that  in  no 
other  respect  could  I  discern  any  defect  in  his 
vision;  on  the  contrary,  the  force  of  his  atten¬ 
tion  and  perceptive  quickness  made  him  see  and 
distinguish  all  manner  of  objects,  whether  of  na¬ 
ture  or  of  art,  with  a  nicety  that  is  rarely  to  be 
found.  When  he  and  I  were  travelling  in  the 
Highlands  of  Scotland,  and  I  pointed  out  to 
him  a  mountain  which  I  observed  resembled  a 
cone,  he  corrected  my  inaccuracy,  by  shewing 
me,  that  it  was  indeed  pointed  at  the  top,  but 
that  one  side  of  it  was  larger  than  the  other. 

2This  anecdote  of  the  duck,  though  disproved 
by  internal  and  external  evidence,  has  neverthe¬ 
less,  upon  supposition  of  its  truth,  been  made  the 
foundation  of  the  following  ingenious  and  fanciful 
reflections  of  Miss  Seward,  amongst  the  communi¬ 
cations  concerning  Dr.  Johnson  with  which  she  has 
been  pleased  to  favour  me:  “These  infant  numbers 
contain  the  seeds  of  those  propensities  which 
through  his  life  so  strongly  marked  his  character, 
of  that  poetick  talent  which  afterwards  bore  such 
rich  and  plentiful  fruits;  for,  excepting  his  ortho- 
graphick  works,  every  thing  which  Dr.  Johnson 
wrote  was  Poetry,  whose  essence  consists  not  in 
numbers,  or  in  jingle,  but  in  the  strength  and  glow 
of  a  fancy,  to  w  hich  all  the  stores  of  nature  and  of 
art  stand  in  prompt  administration;  and  in  an 
eloquence  which  conveys  their  blended  illustra¬ 
tions  in  a  language  ‘more  tuneable  than  needs  or 
rhyme  or  verse  to  add  more  harmony.’ 

“The  above  little  verses  also  shew  that  supersti¬ 
tious  bias  which  ‘grew  with  his  growth,  and 
strengthened  with  his  strength/  and,  of  late  years 
particularly,  injured  his  happiness,  by  presenting 
to  him  the  gloomy  side  of  religion,  rather  than 
that  bright  and  cheering  one  which  gilds  the  peri¬ 
od  of  closing  life  with  the  light  of  pious  hope.” 

This  is  so  beautifully  imagined,  that  I  would  not 
suppress  it.  But  like  many  other  theories,  it  is  de¬ 
duced  from  a  supposed  fact,  which  is,  indeed,  a 
fiction. 

zPrayers  and  Meditations,  p.  27* 

4Speaking  himself  of  the  imperfection  of  one  of 
his  eyes,  he  said  to  Dr.  Burney,  “the  dog  was  never 
good  for  much.”  [M.] 


1719]  LIFE  of 

And  the  ladies  with  whom  he  was  acquainted 
agree,  that  no  man  was  more  nicely  and  min¬ 
utely  critical  in  the  elegance  of  female  dress. 
When  I  found  that  he  saw  the  romantick  beau¬ 
ties  of  Islam,  in  Derbyshire,  much  better  than  I 
did,  I  told  him  that  he  resembled  an  able  per¬ 
former  upon  a  bad  instrument.  How  false  and 
contemptible  then  are  all  the  remarks  which 
have  been  made  to  the  prejudice  either  of  his 
candour  or  of  his  philosophy,  founded  upon  a 
supposition  that  he  was  almost  blind.  It  has 
been  said,  that  he  contracted  this  grievous  mal¬ 
ady  from  his  nurse.  His  mother  yielding  to  the 
superstitious  notion,  which,  it  is  wonderful  to 
think,  prevailed  so  long  in  this  country,  as  to 
the  virtue  of  the  regal  touch;  a  notion,  which 
our  kings  encouraged,  and  to  which  a  man  of 
such  inquiry  and  such  judgement  as  Carte  could 
give  credit,  carried  him  to  London,  where  he 
was  actually  touched  by  Queen  Anne.  Mrs. 
Johnson  indeed,  as  Mr.  Hector  informed  me, 
acted  by  the  advice  of  the  celebrated  Sir  John 
Floyer,  then  a  physician  in  Lichfield.  Johnson 
used  to  talk  of  this  very  frankly;  and  Mrs.  Piozzi 
has  preserved  his  very  picturesque  description 
of  the  scene,  as  it  remained  upon  his  fancy.  Be¬ 
ing  asked  if  he  could  remember  Queen  Anne, 
“He  had  (he  said)  a  confused,  but  somehow  a 
sort  of  solemn  recollection  of  a  lady  in  diamonds, 
and  a  long  black  hood.5’1  This  touch,  however, 
was  without  any  effect.  I  ventured  to  say  to 
him,  in  allusion  to  the  political  principles  in 
which  he  was  educated,  and  of  which  he  ever 
retained  some  odour,  that  “his  mother  had  not 
carried  him  far  enough;  she  should  have  taken 
him  to  Rome.” 

He  was  first  taught  to  read  English  by  Dame 
Oliver,  a  widow,  who  kept  a  school  for  young 
children  in  Lichfield.  He  told  me  she  could  read 
the  black  letter,  and  asked  him  to  borrow  for 
her,  from  his  father,  a  bible  in  that  character. 
When  he  was  going  to  Oxford,  she  came  to  take 
leave  of  him,  brought  him,  in  the  simplicity  of 
her  kindness,  a  present  of  gingerbread,  and 
said,  he  was  the  best  scholar  she  ever  had.  He 
delighted  in  mentioning  this  early  compliment: 
adding,  with  a  smile,  that  “this  was  as  high  a 
proof  of  his  merit  as  he  could  conceive.”  His 
next  instructor  in  English  was  a  master,  whom, 
when  he  spoke  of  him  to  me,  he  familiarly  called 
Tom  Brown,  who,  said  he,  “published  a  spell¬ 
ing-book,  and  dedicated  it  to  the  Universe; 
but,  I  fear,  no  copy  of  it  can  now  be  had.” 

He  began  to  learn  Latin  with  Mr.  Hawkins, 
usher,  or  under -master  of  Lichfield  school,  “a 

1  Anecdotes,  p.  10. 


JOHNSON  7 

man  (said  he)  very  skilful  in  his  little  way.” 
With  him  he  continued  two  years,  and  then 
rose  to  be  under  the  care  of  Mr.  Hunter,  the 
headmaster,  who,  according  to  his  account, 
“was  very  severe,  and  wrong-headedly  severe. 
He  used  (said  he)  to  beat  us  unmercifully;  and 
he  did  not  distinguish  between  ignorance  and 
negligence;  for  he  would  beat  a  boy  equally  for 
not  knowing  a  thing,  as  for  neglecting  to  know 
it.  He  would  ask  a  boy  a  question;  and  if  he  did 
not  answer  it,  he  would  beat  him,  without  con¬ 
sidering  whether  he  had  an  opportunity  of 
knowing  how  to  answer  it.  For  instance,  he 
would  call  up  a  boy  and  ask  him  Latin  for  a 
candlestick,  which  the  boy  could  not  expect  to 
be  asked.  Now,  Sir,  if  a  boy  could  answer  every 
question,  there  would  be  no  need  of  a  master  to 
teach  him.” 

It  is,  however,  but  justice  to  the  memory  of 
Mr.  Hunter  to  mention,  that  though  he  might 
err  in  being  too  severe,  the  school  of  Lichfield 
was  very  respectable  in  his  time.  The  late  Dr. 
Taylor,  Prebendary  of  Westminster,  who  was 
educated  under  him,  told  me,  that  “he  was  an 
excellent  master,  and  that  his  ushers  were  most 
of  them  men  of  eminence;  that  Holbrook,  one 
of  the  most  ingenious  men,  best  scholars,  and 
best  preachers  of  his  age,  was  usher  during  the 
greatest  part  of  the  time  that  Johnson  was  at 
school.  Then  came  Hague,  of  whom  as  much 
might  be  said,  with  the  addition  that  he  was  an 
elegant  poet.  Hague  was  succeeded  by  Green, 
afterwards  Bishop  of  Lincoln,  whose  character 
in  the  learned  world  is  well  known.  In  the  same 
form  with  Johnson  was  Congreve,  who  after¬ 
wards  became  chaplain  to  Archbishop  Boulter, 
and  by  that  connection  obtained  good  prefer¬ 
ment  in  Ireland.  He  was  a  younger  son  of  the 
ancient  family  of  Congreve,  in  Staffordshire,  of 
which  the  poet  was  a  branch.  His  brother  sold 
the  estate.  There  was  also  Lowe,  afterwards 
Canon  of  Windsor.” 

Indeed  Johnson  was  very  sensible  how  much 
he  owed  to  Mr.  Hunter.  Mr.  Langton  one  day 
asked  him  how  he  had  acquired  so  accurate  a 
knowledge  of  Latin,  in  which,  I  believe,  he  was 
exceeded  by  no  man  of  his  time;  he  said,  “My 
master  whipt  me  very  well.  Without  that,  Sir,  I 
should  have  done  nothing.”  He  told  Mr.  Lang¬ 
ton,  that  while  Hunter  was  flogging  his  boys  un¬ 
mercifully,  he  used  to  say,  “And  this  I  do  to 
save  you  from  the  gallows.”  Johnson,  upon  all 
occasions,  expressed  his  approbation  of  enforc¬ 
ing  instructions  by  means  of  the  rod.  “I  would 
rather  (said  he)  have  the  rod  to  be  the  general 
terrour  to  all,  to  make  them  learn,  than  tell  a 


BOSWELL 


8 

child,  if  you  do  thus,  or  thus,  you  will  be  more 
esteemed  than  your  brothers  or  sisters.  The  rod 
produces  an  effect  which  terminates  in  itself.  A 
child  is  afraid  of  being  whipped,  and  gets  his 
task,  and  there’s  an  end  on’t;  whereas,  by  excit¬ 
ing  emulation  and  comparisons  of  superiority, 
you  lay  the  foundation  of  lasting  mischief;  you 
make  brothers  and  sisters  hate  each  other.” 

When  Johnson  saw  some  young  ladies  in  Lin¬ 
colnshire  who  were  remarkably  well  behaved, 
owing  to  their  mother’s  strict  discipline  and  se¬ 
vere  correction,  he  exclaimed,  in  one  of  Shaks- 
peare’s  lines  a  little  varied, 

Rod,  I  will  honour  thee  for  this  thy  duty. 

That  superiority  over  his  fellows,  which  he 
maintained  with  so  much  dignity  in  his  march 
through  life,  was  not  assumed  from  vanity  and 
ostentation,  but  was  the  natural  and  constant 
effect  of  those  extraordinary  powers  of  mind,  of 
which  he  could  not  but  be  conscious  by  com¬ 
parison;  the  intellectual  difference,  which  in 
other  cases  of  comparison  of  characters,  is  often 
a  matter  of  undecided  contest,  being  as  clear  in 
his  case  as  the  superiority  of  stature  in  some  men 
above  others.  Johnson  did  not  strut  or  stand  on 
tiptoe:  He  only  did  not  stoop.  From  his  earliest 
years  his  superiority  was  perceived  and  ac¬ 
knowledged.  He  was  from  the  beginning  "Aya£ 
avbp&v,  a  king  of  men.  His  schoolfellow,  Mr. 
Hector,  has  obligingly  furnished  me  with  many 
particulars  of  his  boyish  days:  and  assured  me 
that  he  never  knew  him  corrected  at  school,  but 
for  talking  and  diverting  other  boys  from  their 
business.  He  seemed  to  learn  by  intuition;  for 
though  indolence  and  procrastination  were  in¬ 
herent  in  his  constitution,  whenever  he  made  an 
exertion  he  did  more  than  any  one  else.  In  short, 
he  is  a  memorable  instance  of  what  has  been 
often  observed,  that  the  boy  is  the  man  in  mini¬ 
ature:  and  that  the  distinguishing  characteris- 
ticks  of  each  individual  are  the  same,  through 
the  whole  course  of  life.  His  favourites  used  to 
receive  very  liberal  assistance  from  him;  and 
such  was  the  submission  and  deference  with 
which  he  was  treated,  such  the  desire  to  obtain 
his  regard,  that  three  of  the  boys,  of  whom  Mr. 
Hector  was  sometimes  one,  used  to  come  in  the 
morning  as  his  humble  attendants,  and  carry 
him  to  school.  One  in  the  middle  stooped,  while 
he  sat  upon  his  back,  and  one  on  each  side  sup¬ 
ported  him;  and  thus  he  was  borne  triumphant. 
Such  a  proof  of  the  early  predominance  of  intel¬ 
lectual  vigour  is  very  remarkable,  and  does  hon¬ 
our  to  human  nature.  Talking  to  me  once  him¬ 
self  of  his  being  much  distinguished  at  school, 


[  :725 

he  told  me,  “they  never  thought  to  raise  me  by 
comparing  me  to  any  one;  they  never  said, 
Johnson  is  as  good  a  scholar  as  such  a  one;  but 
such  a  one  is  as  good  a  scholar  as  Johnson;  and 
this  was  said  but  of  one,  but  of  Lowe;  and  I  do 
not  think  he  was  as  good  a  scholar.” 

He  discovered  a  great  ambition  to  excel, 
which  roused  him  to  counteract  his  indolence. 
He  was  uncommonly  inquisitive;  and  his  mem¬ 
ory  was  so  tenacious,  that  he  never  forgot  any 
thing  that  he  either  heard  or  read.  Mr.  Hector 
remembers  having  recited  to  him  eighteen 
verses,  which,  after  a  little  pause,  he  repeated 
verbatim ,  varying  only  one  epithet,  by  which  he 
improved  the  line. 

He  never  joined  with  the  other  boys  in  their 
ordinary  diversions:  his  only  amusement  was  in 
winter,  when  he  took  a  pleasure  in  being  drawn 
upon  the  ice  by  a  boy  barefooted,  who  pulled 
him  along  by  a  garter  fixed  round  him;  no  very 
easy  operation,  as  his  size  was  remarkably  large. 
His  defective  sight,  indeed,  prevented  him  from 
enjoying  the  common  sports;  and  he  once  pleas¬ 
antly  remarked  to  me,  “how  wonderfully  well 
he  had  contrived  to  be  idle  without  them.” 
Lord  Chesterfield,  however,  has  justly  observed 
in  one  of  his  letters,  when  earnestly  cautioning  a 
friend  against  the  pernicious  effects  of  idleness, 
that  active  sports  are  not  to  be  reckoned  idle¬ 
ness  in  young  people;  and  that  the  listless  torpor 
of  doing  nothing,  alone  deserves  that  name.  Of 
this  dismal  inertness  of  disposition,  Johnson  had 
all  his  life  too  great  a  share.  Mr.  Hector  relates, 
that  “he  could  not  oblige  him  more  than  by 
sauntering  away  the  hours  of  vacation  in  the 
fields,  during  which  he  was  more  engaged  in 
talking  to  himself  than  to  his  companion.” 

Dr.  Percy,  the  Bishop  of  Dromore,  who  was 
long  intimately  acquainted  with  him,  and  has 
preserved  a  few  anecdotes  concerning  him,  re¬ 
gretting  that  he  was  not  a  more  diligent  collec¬ 
tor,  informs  me,  that  “when  a  boy  he  was  immod¬ 
erately  fond  of  reading  romances  of  chivalry, 
and  he  retained  his  fondness  for  them  through 
life;  so  that  (adds  his  Lordship)  spending  part  of 
a  summer  at  my  parsonage-house  in  the  coun¬ 
try,  he  chose  for  his  regular  reading  the  old 
Spanish  romance  of  Felixmarte  of  Hircania ,  in  fo¬ 
lio,  which  he  read  quite  through.  Yet  I  have 
heard  him  attribute  to  these  extravagant  fictions 
that  unsettled  turn  of  mind  which  prevented  his 
ever  fixing  in  any  profession.” 

1725:  ^Etat.  16. — After  having  resided  for 
some  time  at  the  house  of  his  uncle,  Cornelius 
Ford,  Johnson  was,  at  the  age  of  fifteen,  re- 


1725]  LIFE  OF 

moved  to  the  school  of  Stourbridge,  in  Worces¬ 
tershire,  of  which  Mr.  Wentworth  was  then 
master.  This  step  was  taken  by  the  advice  of  his 
cousin,  the  Reverend  Mr.  Ford,  a  man  in  whom 
both  talents  and  good  dispositions  were  dis¬ 
graced  by  licentiousness,1  but  who  was  a  very 
able  judge  of  what  was  right.  At  this  school  he 
did  not  receive  so  much  benefit  as  was  expected. 
It  has  been  said,  that  he  acted  in  the  capacity  of 
an  assistant  to  Mr.  Wentworth,  in  teaching  the 
younger  boys.  “Mr.  Wentworth  (he  told  me) 
was  a  very  able  man,  but  an  idle  man,  and 
to  me  very  severe;  but  I  cannot  blame  him 
much.  I  was  then  a  big  boy;  he  saw  I  did  not 
reverence  him;  and  that  he  should  get  no 
honour  by  me.  I  had  brought  enough  with 
me,  to  carry  me  through;  and  all  I  should  get 
at  his  school  would  be  ascribed  to  my  own 
labour,  or  to  my  former  master.  Yet  he  taught 
me  a  great  deal.” 

He  thus  discriminated,  to  Dr.  Percy,  Bishop 
of  Dromore,  his  progress  at  his  two  grammar- 
schools.  “At  one,  I  learnt  much  in  the  school, 
but  little  from  the  master;  in  the  other,  I 
learnt  much  from  the  master,  but  little  in  the 
school.” 

The  Bishop  also  informs  me,  that  “Dr.  John¬ 
son’s  father,  before  he  was  received  at  Stour¬ 
bridge,  applied  to  have  him  admitted  as  a  schol¬ 
ar  and  assistant  to  the  Reverend  Samuel  Lea, 
M.A.,  head  master  of  Newport  school,  in  Shrop¬ 
shire”  (a  very  diligent,  good  teacher,  at  that 
time  in  high  reputation,  under  whom  Mr.  Hol¬ 
lis  is  said,  in  the  Memoirs  of  his  Life,  to  have 
been  also  educated2).  This  application  to  Mr. 
Lea  was  not  successful;  but  Johnson  had  after¬ 
wards  the  gratification  to  hear  that  the  old  gen¬ 
tleman,  who  lived  to  a  very  advanced  age,  men¬ 
tioned  it  as  one  of  the  most  memorable  events  of 
his  life,  that  “he  was  very  near  having  that  great 
man  for  his  scholar.” 

He  remained  at  Stourbridge  little  more  than 
a  year,  and  then  returned  home,  where  he  may 
be  said  to  have  loitered,  for  two  years,  in  a  state 
very  unworthy  his  uncommon  abilities.  He  had 
already  given  several  proofs  of  his  poetical  gen¬ 
ius,  both  in  his  school-exercises  and  in  other 
occasional  compositions.  Of  these  I  have  ob¬ 
tained  a  considerable  collection,  by  the  favour 
of  Mr.  Wentworth,  son  of  one  of  his  masters, 
and  of  Mr.  Hector,  his  school-fellow  and  friend ; 
from  which  I  select  the  following  specimens: 

Tie  is  said  to  be  the  original  of  the  parson  in 
Hogarth’s  Modern  Midnight  Conversation. 

2As  was  likewise  the  Bishop  of  Dromore  many 
years  afterwards. 


JOHNSON 

Translation  of  Virgil.  Pastoral  1 

MELIBCEUS 

Now,  Tityrus ,  you,  supine  and  careless  laid , 
Play  on  your  pipe  beneath  this  beechen  shade; 
While  wretched  we  about  the  world  must  roam , 
And  leave  our  pleasing  fields  and  native  home , 
Here  at  your  ease  you  sing  your  amorous  flame , 
And  the  wood  rings  with  Amarillis ’  name. 

TITYRUS 

Those  blessings,  friend,  a  deity  bestow’d , 

For  l  shall  never  think  him  less  than  God; 

Oft  on  his  altar  shall  my  firstlings  lie. 

Their  blood  the  consecrated  stones  shall  dye: 

He  gave  my  flocks  to  graze  the  flowery  meads , 
And  me  to  tune  at  ease  th ’  unequal  reeds. 

MELIBCEUS 

My  admiration  only  I  exprest, 

{No  spark  of  envy  harbours  in  my  breast) 

That ,  when  confusion  o’er  the  country  reigns. 

To  you  alone  this  happy  state  remains. 

Here  I,  though  faint  myself,  must  drive  my  goats. 
Far  from  their  antient  fields  and  humble  cots. 
This  scarce  I  lead,  who  left  on  yonder  rock 
Two  tender  kids,  the  hopes  of  all  the  flock. 

Had  we  not  been  perverse  and  careless  grown , 
This  dire  event  by  omens  was  foreshown; 

Our  trees  were  blasted  by  the  thunder  stroke ,  ) 
And  left-hand  crows,  from  an  old  hollow  oak,  j- 
Foretold  the  coming  evil  by  their  dismal  croak.) 

Translation  of  Horace.  Book  1.  Ode  22 

The  man ,  my  friend,  whose  conscious  heart 
With  virtue’s  sacred  ardour  glows, 

Nor  taints  with  death  the  envenom’d  dart. 

Nor  needs  the  guard  of  Moorish  bows: 

Though  Scythia’s  icy  cliffs  he  treads. 

Or  horrid  AfricFs  faithless  sands; 

Or  where  the  fam’d  Hydaspes  spreads 
His  liquid  wealth  o’er  barbarous  lands 

For  while  by  Chloe’s  image  charm’d. 

Too  far  in  Sabine  woods  I  stray’d; 

Me  singing,  careless  and  unarm’d, 

A  grizly  wolf  surprised,  and  fled. 

No  savage  more  portentous  stain’d 
Apulia’s  spacious  wilds  with  gore; 

No  fiercer  Juba’s  thirsty  land. 

Dire  nurse  of  raging  lions,  bore. 

Place  me  where  no  soft  summer  gale 
Among  the  quivering  branches  sighs; 

Where  clouds  condens’d  for  ever  veil 
With  horrid  gloom  the  frowning  skies: 

Place  me  beneath  the  burning  line, 

A  clime  deny’ d  to  human  race; 

Pll  sing  of  Chloe’s  charms  divine. 

Her  heav’nly  voice ,  and  beauteous  face. 


BOSWELL 


Translation  of  Horace.  Book  n.  Ode  9 

Clouds  do  not  always  veil  the  skies , 

Jsfor  showers  immerse  the  verdant  plain 
Nor  do  the  billows  always  rise , 

Or  storms  afflict  the  ruffled  main. 

Nor ,  Valgius,  on  th'  Armenian  shores 
Do  the  chain'd  waters  always  freeze; 

Not  always  furious  Boreas  roars , 

Or  bends  with  violent  force  the  trees. 

But  you  are  ever  drown'd  in  tears , 

For  Alystes  dead  you  ever  mourn; 

No  setting  Sol  can  ease  your  care , 

But  finds  you  sad  at  his  return. 

The  wise  experienc'd  Grecian  sage 
Mourn'd  not  Antilochus  so  long; 

Nor  did  King  Priam's  hoary  age 
So  much  lament  his  slaughter' d  son. 

Leave  off ,  at  length ,  these  woman's  sighs , 
Augustus'  numerous  trophies  sing ; 

Repeat  that  prince's  victories , 

To  whom  all  nations  tribute  bring. 

Niphates  rolls  an  humbler  wave , 

At  length  the  undaunted  Scythian  yields, 

Content  to  live  the  Roman's  slave , 

And  scarce  forsakes  his  native  fields. 

Translation  of  part  of  the  Dialogue  between 
Hector  and  Andromache;  from  the 
Sixth  Book  of  Homer’s  Iliad 

She  ceas'd:  then  godlike  Hector  answer'd  kind , 

(His  various  plumage  sporting  in  the  wind ) 

That  post ,  and  all  the  rest ,  shall  be  my  care; 

But  shall  I,  then ,  forsake  the  unfinished  war? 

How  would  the  Trojans  brand  great  Hector's  name! 
And  one  base  action  sully  all  my  fame , 

Acquired  by  wounds  and  battles  bravely  fought! 

Oh!  how  my  soul  abhors  so  mean  a  thought. 

Long  since  I  learn' d  to  slight  this  fleeting  breath , 

And  view  with  cheerful  eyes  approaching  death. 

The  inexorable  sisters  have  decreed 
That  Priam's  house ,  and  Priam's  self  shall  bleed: 
The  day  will  come ,  in  which  proud  Troy  shall  yield, 
And  spread  its  smoking  ruins  o'er  the  field. 

Yet  Hecuba's,  nor  Priam's  hoary  age , 

Whose  blood  shall  quench  some  Grecian's  thirsty  rage. 
Nor  my  brave  brothers,  that  have  bit  the  ground, 
Their  souls  dismiss'd  through  many  a  ghastly  wound, 
Can  in  my  bosom  half  that  grief  create , 

As  the  sad  thought  of  your  impending  fate: 

When  some  proud  Grecian  dame  shall  tasks  impose, 
Mimick  your  tears ,  and  ridicule  your  woes; 

Beneath  Hyperia's  waters  shall  you  sweat, 

And,  fainting,  scarce  support  the  liquid  weight: 

Then  shall  some  Argive  loud  insulting  cry. 

Behold  the  wife  of  Hector ,  guard  of  Troy ! 

Tears,  at  my  name,  shall  drown  those  beauteous  eyes. 
And  that  fair  bosom  heave  with  rising  sighs! 

Before  that  day,  by  some  brave  hero's  hand 
May  I  lie  slain,  and  spurn  the  bloody  sand. 


[*725 

To  a  Young  Lady  on  her  Birth-Day1 

This  tributary  verse  receive  my  fair, 

Warm  with  an  ardent  lover's  fondest  pray'r. 

May  this  returning  day  for  ever  find 

Thy  form  more  lovely,  more  adorn'd  thy  mind; 

All  pains,  all  cares,  may  favouring  heav'n  remove. 
All  but  the  sweet  solicitudes  of  love! 

May  powerful  nature  join  with  grateful  art. 

To  point  each  glance,  and  force  it  to  the  heart! 

0  then,  when  conquered  crouds  confess  thy  sway, 
When  ev'n  proud  wealth  and  prouder  wit  obey, 

My  fair,  be  mindful  of  the  mighty  trust, 

Alas!  ' tis  hard  for  beauty  to  be  just. 

Those  sovereign  charms  with  strictest  care  employ; 
Nor  give  the  generous  pain,  the  worthless  joy: 

With  his  own  form  acquaint  the  forward  fool. 

Shewn  in  the  faithful  glass  of  ridicule; 

Teach  mimick  censure  her  own  faults  to  find  A 
No  more  let  coquettes  to  themselves  be  blind,  j- 
So  shall  Belinda's  charms  improve  mankind. ) 


The  Young  Authour2 

When  first  the  peasant,  long  inclin'd  to  ream , 
Forsakes  his  rural  sports  and  peaceful  home, 

Pleas'd  with  the  scene  the  smiling  ocean  yields, 

He  scorns  the  verdant  meads  and  flow'ry  fields; 

Then  dances  jocund  o'er  the  watery  way , 

While  the  breeze  whispers,  and  the  streamers  play : 
Unbounded  prospects  in  his  bosom  roll. 

And  future  millions  lift  his  rising  soul; 

In  blissful  dreams  he  digs  the  golden  mine, 

And  raptur'd  sees  the  new-found  ruby  shine. 

Joys  insincere !  thick  clouds  invade  the  skies, 

Loud  roar  the  billows,  high  the  waves  arise; 

Sick'ning  with  fear,  he  longs  to  view  the  shore , 

And  vows  to  trust  the  faithless  deep  no  more. 

So  the  young  Authour,  panting  after  fame, 

And  the  long  honours  of  a  lasting  name, 

Entrusts  his  happiness  to  human  kind. 

More  false,  more  cruel,  than  the  seas  or  wind. 

“Toil  on,  dull  croud,  in  extacies  he  cries , 

For  wealth  or  title,  perishable  prize; 

While  I  those  transitory  blessings  scorn, 

Secure  of  praise  from  ages  yet  unborn." 

This  thought  once  form'd,  all  council  comes  too  late, 
He  flies  to  press,  and  hurries  on  his  fate; 

Swiftly  he  sees  the  imagin'd  laurels  spread, 

And  feels  the  unfading  wreath  surround  his  head. 
Warn'd  by  another's  fate,  vain  youth  be  wise, 

Those  dreams  were  Settle's  once,  and  Ogilby's: 

The  pamphlet  spreads,  incessant  hisses  rise. 

To  some  retreat  the  baffled  writer  flies ; 

Where  no  sour  criticks  snarl,  no  sneers  molest, 

Safe  from  the  tart  lampoon,  and  stinging  jest; 

There  begs  of  heaven  a  less  distinguish' d  lot. 

Glad  to  be  hid,  and  proud  to  be  forgot. 

:Mr.  Hector  informs  me,  that  this  was  made 
almost  impromptu,  in  his  presence. 

2This  he  inserted,  with  many  alterations,  in  The 
Gentleman's  Magazine,  1743  [p.  378]- 


1725]  LIFE  OF 

Epilogue,  intended  to  have  been  spoken  by 
a  Lady  who  was  to  personate  the 
Ghost  of  Hermione1 

Te  blooming  train ,  who  give  despair  or  joy , 

Bless  with  a  smile ,  or  with  a  frown  destroy; 

In  whose  fair  cheeks  destructive  Cupids  wait , 

And  with  unerring  shafts  distribute  fate; 

Whose  snowy  breasts ,  whose  animated  eyes, 

Each  youth  admires,  though  each  admirer  dies; 

Whilst  you  deride  their  pangs  in  barbarous  play,  1 
Unpitying  see  them  weep,  and  hear  them  pray,  f 
And  unrelenting  sport  ten  thousand  lives  away;  J 
For  you,  ye  fair,  I  quit  the  gloomy  plains; 

Where  sable  night  in  all  her  honour  reigns; 

No  fragrant  bowers,  no  delightful  glades, 

Receive  the  unhappy  ghosts  of  scornful  maids . 

For  kind,  for  tender  nymphs  the  myrtle  blooms, 

And  weaves  her  bending  boughs  in  pleasing  glooms: 
Perennial  roses  deck  each  purple  vale, 

And  scents  ambrosial  breathe  in  every  gale: 

Far  hence  are  banish'd  vapours,  spleen,  and  tears , 

Tea,  scandal,  ivory  teeth,  and  languid  airs: 

No  pug,  nor  favourite  Cupid  there  enjoys 
The  balmy  kiss,  for  which  poor  Thyrsis  dies; 

Form'd  to  delight,  they  use  no  foreign  arms. 

Nor  torturing  whalebones  pinch  them  into  charms; 

No  conscious  blushes  there  their  cheeks  inflame, 

For  those  who  feel  no  guilt  can  know  no  shame ; 
Unfaded  still  their  former  charms  they  shew, 

Around  them  pleasures  wait,  and  joys  for  ever  new . 
But  cruel  virgins  meet  severer  fates; 

Expell'd  and  exil'd  from  the  blissful  seats. 

To  dismal  realms,  and  regions  void  of  peace, 

Where  furies  ever  howl,  and  serpents  hiss. 

O'er  the  sad  plains  perpetual  tempests  sigh. 

And  pois'nous  vapours,  black' ning  all  the  sky, 

With  livid  hue  the  fairest  face  o'ercast. 

And  every  beauty  withers  at  the  blast: 

Where  e'er  they  fly  their  lover's  ghosts  pursue, 
Inflicting  all  those  ills  which  once  they  knew; 
Vexation,  Fury,  Jealousy,  Despair, 

Vex  ev'ry  eye,  and  every  bosom  tear; 

Their  foul  deformities  by  all  descry' d, 

No  maid  to  flatter ,  and  no  paint  to  hide . 

Then  melt,  ye  fair,  while  crouds  around  you  sigh, 

Nor  let  disdain  sit  lowring  in  your  eye; 

With  pity  soften  every  awful  grace. 

And  beauty  smile  auspicious  in  each  face; 

To  ease  their  pains  exert  your  milder  power , 

So  shall  you  guiltless  reign,  and  all  mankind  adore. 

The  two  years  which  he  spent  at  home,  after 
his  return  from  Stourbridge,  he  passed  in  what 
he  thought  idleness,  and  was  scolded  by  his  fa¬ 
ther  for  his  want  of  steady  application.  He  had 
no  settled  plan  of  life,  nor  looked  forward  at  all, 
but  merely  lived  from  day  to  day.  Yet  he  read  a 

1Some  young  ladies  at  Lichfield  having  pro¬ 
posed  to  act  The  Distressed  Mother,  Johnson  wrote 
this,  and  gave  it  to  Mr.  Hector  to  convey  it  pri¬ 
vately  to  them. 


JOHNSON  11 

great  deal  in  a  desultory  manner,  without  any 
scheme  of  study,  as  chance  threw  books  in  his 
way,  and  inclination  directed  him  through  them. 
He  used  to  mention  one  curious  instance  of  his 
casual  reading,  when  but  a  boy.  Having  imag¬ 
ined  that  his  brother  had  hid  some  apples  be¬ 
hind  a  large  folio  upon  an  upper  shelf  in  his  fa¬ 
ther’s  shop,  he  climbed  up  to  search  for  them. 
There  were  no  apples;  but  the  large  folio  proved 
to  be  Petrarch,  whom  he  had  seen  mentioned  in 
some  preface,  as  one  of  the  restorers  of  learning. 
His  curiosity  having  been  thus  excited,  he  sat 
down  with  avidity,  and  read  a  great  part  of  the 
book.  What  he  read  during  these  two  years  he 
told  me,  was  not  works  of  mere  amusement, 
“not  voyages  and  travels,  but  all  literature,  Sir, 
all  ancient  writers,  all  manly:  though  but  little 
Greek,  ony  some  of  Anacreon  and  Hesiod;  but 
in  this  irregular  manner  (added  he)  I  had  looked 
into  a  great  many  books,  which  were  not  com¬ 
monly  known  at  the  Universities,  where  they 
seldom  read  any  books  but  what  are  put  into 
their  hands  by  their  tutors;  so  that  when  I  came 
to  Oxford,  Dr.  Adams,  now  master  of  Pem¬ 
broke  College,  told  me  I  was  the  best  qualified 
for  the  University  that  he  had  ever  known  come 
there.” 

In  estimating  the  progress  of  his  mind  during 
these  two  years,  as  well  as  in  future  periods  of 
his  life,  we  must  not  regard  his  own  hasty  con¬ 
fession  of  idleness;  for  we  see,  when  he  explains 
himself,  that  he  was  acquiring  various  stores; 
and,  indeed  he  himself  concluded  the  account 
with  saying,  “I  would  not  have  you  think  I  was 
doing  nothing  then.”  He  might,  perhaps,  have 
studied  more  assiduously;  but  it  may  be  doubt¬ 
ed  whether  such  a  mind  as  his  was  not  more  en¬ 
riched  by  roaming  at  large  in  the  fields  of  liter¬ 
ature  than  if  it  had  been  confined  to  any  single 
spot.  The  analogy  between  body  and  mind  is 
very  general,  and  the  parallel  will  hold  as  to 
their  food,  as  well  as  any  other  particular.  The 
flesh  of  animals  who  feed  excursively,  is  allowed 
to  have  a  higher  flavour  than  that  of  those  who 
are  cooped  up.  May  there  not  be  the  same  dif¬ 
ference  between  men  who  read  as  their  taste 
prompts  and  men  who  are  confined  in  cells  and 
colleges  to  stated  tasks? 

That  a  man  in  Mr.  Michael  Johnson’s  cir¬ 
cumstances  should  think  of  sending  his  son  to 
the  expensive  University  of  Oxford,  at  his  own 
charge,  seems  very  improbable.  The  subject 
was  too  delicate  to  question  Johnson  upon.  But 
I  have  been  assured  by  Dr.  Taylor  that  the 
scheme  never  would  have  taken  place  had  not  a 
gentleman  of  Shropshire,  one  of  his  schoolfel- 


12  BOSWELL  [1728 


lows,  spontaneously  undertaken  to  support  him 
at  Oxford,  in  the  character  of  his  companion; 
though,  in  fact,  he  never  received  any  assistance 
whatever  from  that  gentleman. 

He,  however,  went  to  Oxford,  and  was  en¬ 
tered  a  Commoner  of  Pembroke  College  on  the 
31st  of  October,  1728,  being  then  in  his  nine¬ 
teenth  year. 

The  Reverend  Dr.  Adams,  who  afterwards 
presided  over  Pembroke  College  with  universal 
esteem,  told  me  he  was  present,  and  gave  me 
some  account  of  what  passed  on  the  night  of 
Johnson’s  arrival  at  Oxford.  On  that  evening, 
his  father,  who  had  anxiously  accompanied  him, 
found  means  to  have  him  introduced  to  Mr. 
Jorden,  who  was  to  be  his  tutor.  His  being  put 
under  any  tutor  reminds  us  of  what  Wood  says 
of  Robert  Burton,  authour  of  the  Anatomy  of  Mel¬ 
ancholy,  when  elected  student  of  Christ  Church: 
“for  form’s  sake,  though  he  wanted  not  a  tutor ,  he 
was  put  under  the  tuition  of  Dr.  John  Bancroft, 
afterwards  Bishop  of  Oxon.”1 

His  father  seemed  very  full  of  the  merits  of 
his  son,  and  told  the  company  he  was  a  good 
scholar,  and  a  poet,  and  wrote  Latin  verses.  His 
figure  and  manner  appeared  strange  to  them; 
but  he  behaved  modestly,  and  sat  silent,  till 
upon  something  which  occurred  in  the  course  of 
conversation,  he  suddenly  struck  in  and  quoted 
Macrobius;  and  thus  he  gave  the  first  impres¬ 
sion  of  that  more  extensive  reading  in  which  he 
had  indulged  himself. 

His  tutor,  Mr.  Jorden,  fellow  of  Pembroke, 
was  not,  it  seems,  a  man  of  such  abilities  as  we 
should  conceive  requisite  for  the  instructor  of 
Samuel  Johnson,  who  gave  me  the  following  ac¬ 
count  of  him.  “He  was  a  very  worthy  man,  but 
a  heavy  man,  and  I  did  not  profit  much  by  his 
instructions.  Indeed,  I  did  not  attend  him  much. 
The  first  day  after  I  came  to  college  I  waited 
upon  him,  and  then  staid  away  four.  On  the 
sixth,  Mr.  Jorden  asked  me  why  I  had  not  at¬ 
tended.  I  answered  I  had  been  sliding  in  Christ- 
Church  meadow.  And  this  I  said  with  as  much 
nonchalance  as  I  am  now2  talking  to  you.  I  had  no 
notion  that  I  was  wrong  or  irreverent  to  my  tu¬ 
tor.”  Boswell:  “That,  Sir,  was  great  fortitude 
of  mind.”  Johnson:  “No,  Sir;  stark  insensibil¬ 
ity.”3 

The  fifth  of  November  was  at  that  time  kept 

lAthen.  Oxon.,  edit.  1721,  i.  627. 

2Oxford,  20th  March,  1776. 

3It  ought  to  be  remembered  that  Dr.  Johnson 
was  apt,  in  his  literary  as  well  as  moral  exercises, 
to  overcharge  his  defects.  Dr.  Adams  informed 
me,  that  he  attended  his  tutor’s  lectures,  and  also 
the  lectures  in  the  College  Hall,  very  regularly. 


with  great  solemnity  at  Pembroke  College,  and 
exercises  upon  the  subject  of  the  day  were  re¬ 
quired.  Johnson  neglected  to  perform  his,  which 
is  much  to  be  regretted;  for  his  vivacity  of  imag¬ 
ination,  and  force  of  language,  would  probably 
have  produced  something  sublime  upon  the 
gunpowder  plot.  To  apologise  for  his  neglect, 
he  gave  in  a  short  copy  of  verses,  entitled  Som- 
nium,  containing  a  common  thought;  “that  the 
Muse  had  come  to  him  in  his  sleep,  and  whis¬ 
pered,  that  it  did  not  become  him  to  write  on 
such  subjects  as  politicks;  he  should  confine  him¬ 
self  to  humbler  themes”:  but  the  versification 
was  truly  Virgilian. 

He  had  a  love  and  respect  for  Jorden,  not  for 
his  literature,  but  for  his  worth.  “Whenever 
(said  he)  a  young  man  becomes  Jorden’s  pupil, 
he  becomes  his  son.” 

Having  given  such  a  specimen  of  his  poetical 
powers,  he  was  asked  by  Mr.  Jorden,  to  trans¬ 
late  Pope’s  “Messiah”  into  Latin  verse,  as  a 
Christmas  exercise.  He  performed  it  with  un¬ 
common  rapidity,  and  in  so  masterly  a  manner, 
that  he  obtained  great  applause  from  it,  which 
ever  after  kept  him  high  in  the  estimation  of  his 
College,  and,  indeed,  of  all  the  University. 

It  is  said,  that  Mr.  Pope  expressed  himself 
concerning  it  in  terms  of  strong  approbation. 
Dr.  Taylor  told  me,  that  it  was  first  printed  for 
old  Mr.  Johnson,  without  the  knowledge  of  his 
son,  who  was  very  angry  when  he  heard  of  it.  A 
Miscellany  of  Poems  collected  by  a  person  of 
the  name  of  Husbands,  was  published  at  Ox¬ 
ford  in  1731.  In  that  Miscellany  Johnson’s 
Translation  of  the  “Messiah”  appeared,  with 
this  modest  motto  from  Scaliger’s  Poeticks.  Ex 
alieno  ingenio  Poeta,  ex  suo  tantum  versijicator. 

I  am  not  ignorant  that  critical  objections  have 
been  made  to  this  and  other  specimens  of  John¬ 
son’s  Latin  Poetry.  I  acknowledge  myself  not 
competent  to  decide  on  a  question  of  such  ex¬ 
treme  nicety.  But  I  am  satisfied  with  the  just 
and  discriminative  eulogy  pronounced  upon  it 
by  my  friend  Mr.  Courtenay. 

And  with  like  ease  his  vivid  lines  assume 
The  garb  and  dignity  of  ancient  Rome. — 

Let  college  verse-men  trite  conceits  express , 

Trick'd  out  in  splendid  shreds  of  Virgil's  dress; 

From  playful  Ovid  cull  the  tinsel  phrase , 

And  vapid  notions  hitch  in  pilfer'd  lays: 

Then  with  mosaic k  art  the  piece  combine. 

And  boast  the  glitter  of  each  dulcet  line : 

Johnson  adventur'd  boldly  to  transfuse 
His  vigorous  sense  into  the  Latian  muse; 

Aspir'd  to  shine  by  unreflected  light. 

And  with  a  Roman's  ardour  think  and  write. 

He  felt  the  tuneful  Nine  his  breast  inspire , 


1729] 

And,  like  a  master,  wak'd  the  soothing  lyre: 

Horatian  strains  a  grateful  heart  proclaim. 

While  Sky's  wild  rocks  resound  his  Thralia's  name. 

Hesperia's  plant,  in  some  less  skilful  hands. 

To  bloom  a  while,  factitious  heat  demands: 

Though  glowing  Maro  a  faint  warmth  supplies , 

The  sickly  blossom  in  the  hot-house  dies: 

By  Johnson's  genial  culture,  art,  and  toil. 

Its  root  strikes  deep,  and  owns  the  fost' ring  soil; 

Imbibes  our  sun  through  all  its  swelling  veins , 

And  grows  a  native  of  Britannia' s  plains.1 

The  “morbid  melancholy,”  which  was  lurking 
in  his  constitution,  and  to  which  we  may  ascribe 
those  particularities,  and  that  aversion  to  regu¬ 
lar  life,  which,  at  a  very  early  period,  marked 
his  character,  gathered  such  strength  in  his 
twentieth  year,  as  to  afflict  him  in  a  dreadful 
manner.  While  he  was  at  Lichfield,  in  the  col¬ 
lege  vacation  of  the  year  1729,  he  felt  himself 
overwhelmed  with  an  horrible  hypochondria, 
with  perpetual  irritation,  fretfulness,  and  impa¬ 
tience;  and  with  a  dejection,  gloom,  and  des¬ 
pair,  which  made  existence  misery.  From  this 
dismal  malady  he  never  afterwards  was  perfect¬ 
ly  relieved;  and  all  his  labours,  and  all  his  en¬ 
joyments,  were  but  temporary  interruptions  of 
its  baleful  influence.  How  wonderful,  how  un¬ 
searchable  are  the  ways  of  God  !  Johnson,  who 
was  blest  with  all  the  powers  of  genius  and  un¬ 
derstanding  in  a  degree  far  above  the  ordinary 
state  of  human  nature,  was  at  the  same  time  vis¬ 
ited  with  a  disorder  so  afflictive,  that  they  who 
know  it  by  dire  experience,  will  not  envy  his  ex¬ 
alted  endowments.  That  it  was,  in  some  degree, 
occasioned  by  a  defect  in  his  nervous  system, 
that  inexplicable  part  of  our  frame,  appears 
highly  probable.  He  told  Mr.  Paradise  that  he 
was  sometimes  so  languid  and  inefficient,  that 
he  could  not  distinguish  the  hour  upon  the 
town -clock. 

Johnson,  upon  the  first  violent  attack  of  this 
disorder,  strove  to  overcome  it  by  forcible  exer¬ 
tions.  He  frequently  walked  to  Birmingham  and 
back  again,  and  tried  many  other  expedients, 
but  all  in  vain.  His  expression  concerning  it  to 
me  was  “I  did  not  then  know  how  to  manage 
it.”  His  distress  became  so  intolerable,  that  he 
applied  to  Dr.  Swinfen,  physician  in  Lichfield, 
his  god-father,  and  put  into  his  hands  a  state  of 
his  case,  written  in  Latin.  Dr.  Swinfen  was  so 
much  struck  with  the  extraordinary  acuteness, 
research,  and  eloquence  of  this  paper,  that  in 
his  zeal  for  his  godson  he  shewed  it  to  several 
people.  His  daughter,  Mrs.  Desmoulins,  who 

1 Poetical  Review  of  the  Literary  and  Moral  Character 
of  Dr.  Johnson,  by  John  Courtenay,  Esq.,  M.P. 


l3 

was  many  years  humanely  supported  in  Dr. 
Johnson’s  house  in  London,  told  me,  that  upon 
his  discovering  that  Dr.  Swinfen  had  communi¬ 
cated  his  case,  he  was  so  much  offended,  that  he 
was  never  afterwards  fully  reconciled  to  him. 
He  indeed  had  good  reason  to  be  offended;  for 
though  Dr.  Swinfen’s  motive  was  good,  he  in¬ 
considerately  betrayed  a  matter  deeply  interest¬ 
ing  and  of  great  delicacy,  which  had  been  en¬ 
trusted  to  him  in  confidence;  and  exposed  a  com¬ 
plaint  of  his  young  friend  and  patient,  which,  in 
the  superficial  opinion  of  the  generality  of  man¬ 
kind,  is  attended  with  contempt  and  disgrace. 

But  let  not  little  men  triumph  upon  knowing 
that  Johnson  was  an  Hypochondriack,  was 
subject  to  what  the  learned,  philosophical,  and 
pious  Dr.  Cheyne  has  so  well  treated  under  the 
tide  of  “The  English  Malady.”  Though  he  suf¬ 
fered  severely  from  it,  he  was  not  therefore  de¬ 
graded.  The  powers  of  his  great  mind  might  be 
troubled,  and  their  full  exercise  suspended  at 
times;  but  the  mind  itself  was  ever  entire.  As  a 
proof  of  this,  it  is  only  necessary  to  consider, 
that,  when  he  was  at  the  very  worst,  he  com¬ 
posed  that  state  of  his  own  case,  which  shewed 
an  uncommon  vigour,  not  only  of  fancy  and 
taste,  but  of  judgement.  I  am  aware  that  he  him¬ 
self  was  too  ready  to  call  such  a  complaint  by 
the  name  of  madness;  in  conformity  with  which 
notion,  he  has  traced  its  gradations,  with  exqui¬ 
site  nicety,  in  one  of  the  chapters  of  his  Rasselas. 
But  there  is  surely  a  clear  distinction  between  a 
disorder  which  affects  only  the  imagination  and 
spirits,  while  the  judgement  is  sound,  and  a  dis¬ 
order  by  which  the  judgement  itself  is  impaired. 
This  distinction  was  made  to  me  by  the  late 
Professor  Gaubius  of  Leyden,  physician  to  the 
Prince  of  Orange,  in  a  conversation  which  I 
had  with  him  several  years  ago,  and  he  expand¬ 
ed  it  thus:  “If  (said  he)  a  man  tells  me  that  he  is 
grievously  disturbed,  for  that  he  imagines  he  sees 
a  ruffian  coming  against  him  with  a  drawn 
sword,  though  at  the  same  time  he  is  conscious  it 
is  a  delusion,  I  pronounce  him  to  have  a  dis¬ 
ordered  imagination;  but  if  a  man  tells  me  that 
he  sees  this,  and  in  consternation  calls  to  me  to 
look  at  it,  I  pronounce  him  to  be  mad.” 

It  is  a  common  effect  of  low  spirits  or  melan¬ 
choly,  to  make  those  who  are  afflicted  with  it 
imagine  that  they  are  actually  suffering  those 
evils  which  happen  to  be  most  strongly  present¬ 
ed  to  their  minds.  Some  have  fancied  themselves 
to  be  deprived  of  the  use  of  their  limbs,  some  to 
labour  under  acute  diseases,  others  to  be  in  ex¬ 
treme  poverty;  when,  in  truth,  there  was  not  the 
least  reality  in  any  of  the  suppositions;  so  that 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


BOSWELL 


14 

when  the  vapours  were  dispelled,  they  were  con¬ 
vinced  of  the  delusion.  To  Johnson,  whose  su¬ 
preme  enjoyment  was  the  exercise  of  his  reason, 
the  disturbance  or  obscuration  of  that  faculty 
was  the  evil  most  to  be  dreaded.  Insanity,  there¬ 
fore,  was  the  object  of  his  most  dismal  apprehen¬ 
sion;  and  he  fancied  himself  seized  by  it,  or  ap¬ 
proaching  to  it,  at  the  very  time  when  he  was 
giving  proofs  of  a  more  than  ordinary  soundness 
and  vigour  of  judgement.  That  his  own  diseased 
imagination  should  have  so  far  deceived  him,  is 
strange;  but  it  is  stranger  still  that  some  of  his 
friends  should  have  given  credit  to  his  ground¬ 
less  opinion,  when  they  had  such  undoubted 
proofs  that  it  was  totally  fallacious;  though  it  is 
by  no  means  surprising  that  those  who  wish  to 
depreciate  him,  should,  since  his  death,  have 
laid  hold  of  this  circumstance,  and  insisted  upon 
it  with  very  unfair  aggravation. 

Amidst  the  oppression  and  distraction  of  a 
disease  which  very  few  have  felt  in  its  full  ex¬ 
tent,  but  many  have  experienced  in  a  slighter 
degree,  Johnson,  in  his  writings,  and  in  his  con¬ 
versation,  never  failed  to  display  all  the  varie¬ 
ties  of  intellectual  excellence.  In  his  march 
through  this  world  to  a  better,  his  mind  still 
appeared  grand  and  brilliant,  and  impressed 
all  around  him  with  the  truth  of  Virgil’s  noble 
sentiment — 

Igneus  est  oil  is  vigor  et  coelestis  origo. 

The  history  of  his  mind  as  to  religion  is  an 
important  article.  I  have  mentioned  the  early 
impressions  made  upon  his  tender  imagination 
by  his  mother,  who  continued  her  pious  care 
with  assiduity,  but,  in  his  opinion,  not  with 
judgement.  “Sunday  (said  he)  was  a  heavy  day 
to  me  when  I  was  a  boy.  My  mother  confined 
me  on  that  day,  and  made  me  read  The  Whole 
Duty  of  Man ,  from  a  great  part  of  which  I  could 
derive  no  instruction.  When,  for  instance,  I  had 
read  the  chapter  on  theft,  which  from  my  in¬ 
fancy  I  had  been  taught  was  wrong,  I  was  no 
more  convinced  that  theft  was  wrong  than  be¬ 
fore;  so  there  was  no  accession  of  knowledge.  A 
boy  should  be  introduced  to  such  books,  by  hav¬ 
ing  his  attention  directed  to  the  arrangement, 
to  the  style,  and  other  excellencies  of  composition ; 
that  the  mind  being  thus  engaged  by  an  amusing 
variety  of  objects,  may  not  grow  weary.” 

He  communicated  to  me  the  following  parti¬ 
culars  upon  the  subject  of  his  religious  progress. 
“I  fell  into  an  inattention  to  religion,  or  an  in¬ 
difference  about  it,  in  my  ninth  year.  The 
church  at  Lichfield,  in  which  we  had  a  seat, 
wanted  reparation,  so  I  was  to  go  and  find  a 


[1729 

seat  in  other  churches;  and  having  bad  eyes, 
and  being  awkward  about  this,  I  used  to  go  and 
read  in  the  fields  on  Sunday.  This  habit  con¬ 
tinued  till  my  fourteenth  year;  and  still  I  find  a 
great  reluctance  to  go  to  church.  I  then  became 
a  sort  of  lax  talker  against  religion,  for  I  did  not 
much  think  against  it;  and  this  lasted  till  I  went 
to  Oxford,  where  it  would  not  be  suffered.  When 
at  Oxford,  I  took  up  Law’s  Serious  Call  to  a  Holy 
Life ,  expecting  to  find  it  a  dull  book  (as  such 
books  generally  are),  and  perhaps  to  laugh  at  it. 
But  I  found  Law  quite  an  overmatch  for  me; 
and  this  was  the  first  occasion  of  my  thinking  in 
earnest  of  religion,  after  I  became  capable  of 
rational  inquiry.”1  From  this  time  forward  re¬ 
ligion  was  the  predominant  object  of  his 
thoughts;  though,  with  the  just  sentiments  of  a 
conscientious  Christian,  he  lamented  that  his 
practice  of  its  duties  fell  far  short  of  what  it 
ought  to  be. 

This  instance  of  a  mind  such  as  that  of  John- 

JMrs.  Piozzi  has  given  a  strange  fantastical  ac¬ 
count  of  the  original  of  Dr.  Johnson’s  belief  in  our 
most  holy  religion.  “At  the  age  of  ten  years  his 
mind  was  disturbed  by  scruples  of  infidelity,  which 
preyed  upon  his  spirits,  and  made  him  very  un¬ 
easy,  the  more  so,  as  he  revealed  his  uneasiness  to 
none,  being  naturally  (as  he  said)  of  a  sullen  tem¬ 
per,  and  reserved  disposition.  He  searched,  how¬ 
ever,  diligently,  but  fruitlessly,  for  evidences  of  the 
truth  of  revelation;  and,  at  length,  recollecting  a 
book  he  had  once  seen  [/  suppose  at  five  years  old J  in 
his  father’s  shop,  intitled  De  veritate  Religionis ,  etc., 
he  began  to  think  himself  highly  culpable  for  ne¬ 
glecting  such  a  means  of  information,  and  took 
himself  severely  to  task  for  this  sin,  adding  many 
acts  of  voluntary,  and,  to  others,  unknown  penance . 
The  first  opportunity  which  offered,  of  course,  he 
seized  the  book  with  avidity;  but,  on  examination, 
not  finding  himself  scholar  enough  to  peruse  its  contents , 
set  his  heart  at  rest;  and  not  thinking  to  enquire 
whether  there  were  any  English  books  written  on 
the  subject,  followed  his  usual  amusements  and 
considered  his  conscience  as  lightened  of  a  crime.  He  re¬ 
doubled  his  diligence  to  learn  the  language  that 
contained  the  information  he  most  wished  for;  but 
from  the  pain  which  guilt  [namely  having  omitted  to 
read  what  he  did  not  understand]  had  given  him,  he 
now  began  to  deduce  the  soul’s  immortality  [a  sen¬ 
sation  of  pain  in  this  world  being  an  unquestionable  proof 
of  existence  in  another ],  which  was  the  point  that  be¬ 
lief  first  stopped  at;  and  from  that  moment  resolving  to 
be  a  Christian ,  became  one  of  the  most  zealous  and 
pious  ones  our  nation  ever  produced.”  Anecdotes , 

P* 

This  is  one  of  the  numerous  misrepresentations 
of  this  lively  lady,  which  it  is  worth  while  to  cor¬ 
rect;  for  if  credit  should  be  given  to  such  a  childish, 
irrational,  and  ridiculous  statement  of  the  founda¬ 
tion  of  Dr.  Johnson’s  faith  in  Christianity,  how  lit¬ 
tle  credit  would  be  due  to  it.  Mrs.  Piozzi  seems  to 
wish,  that  the  world  should  think  Dr.  Johnson  also 
under  the  influence  of  that  easy  logick,  Stet  pro  ra- 
tione  voluntas. 


1729]  LIFE  OF 

son  being  first  disposed,  by  an  unexpected  in¬ 
cident,  to  think  with  anxiety  of  the  momentous 
concerns  of  eternity,  and  of  “what  he  should  do 
to  be  saved,”  may  for  ever  be  produced  in  op¬ 
position  to  the  superficial  and  sometimes  pro¬ 
fane  contempt  that  has  been  thrown  upon  those 
occasional  impressions  which  it  is  certain  many 
Christians  have  experienced;  though  it  must  be 
acknowledged  that  weak  minds,  from  an  erro¬ 
neous  supposition  that  no  man  is  in  a  state  of 
grace  who  has  not  felt  a  particular  conversion, 
have,  in  some  cases,  brought  a  degree  of  ridicule 
upon  them;  a  ridicule  of  which  it  is  inconsider¬ 
ate  or  unfair  to  make  a  general  application. 

How  seriously  Johnson  was  impressed  with  a 
sense  of  religion,  even  in  the  vigour  of  his  youth, 
appears  from  the  following  passage  in  his  min¬ 
utes  kept  by  way  of  diary:  “Sept.  7,  1736.  I 
have  this  day  entered  upon  my  twenty-eighth 
year.  Mayest  thou,  O  God,  enable  me,  for  Jesus 
Christ’s  sake,  to  spend  this  in  such  a  manner 
that  I  may  receive  comfort  from  it  at  the  hour  of 
death,  and  in  the  day  of  judgement!  Amen.” 

The  particular  course  of  his  reading  while  at 
Oxford,  and  during  the  time  of  vacation  which 
he  passed  at  home,  cannot  be  traced.  Enough 
has  been  said  of  his  irregular  mode  of  study.  He 
told  me  that  from  his  earliest  years  he  loved  to 
read  poetry,  but  hardly  ever  read  any  poem  to 
an  end;  that  he  read  Shakspeare  at  a  period  so 
early,  that  the  speech  of  the  ghost  in  Hamlet  ter¬ 
rified  him  when  he  was  alone;  that  Horace’s 
Odes  were  the  compositions  in  which  he  took 
most  delight,  and  it  was  long  before  he  liked 
his  Epistles  and  Satires .  He  told  me  what  he  read 
solidly  at  Oxford  was  Greek;  not  the  Grecian 
historians,  but  Homer  and  Euripides,  and  now 
and  then  a  little  Epigram;  that  the  study  of 
which  he  was  the  most  fond  was  Metaphysicks, 
but  he  had  not  read  much,  even  in  that  way.  I 
always  thought  that  he  did  himself  injustice  in 
his  account  of  what  he  had  read,  and  that  he 
must  have  been  speaking  with  reference  to  the 
vast  portion  of  study  which  is  possible,  and  to 
which  a  few  scholars  in  the  whole  history  of  lit¬ 
erature  have  attained;  for  when  I  once  asked 
him  whether  a  person,  whose  name  I  have  now 
forgotten,  studied  hard,  he  answered  “No,  Sir; 
I  do  not  believe  he  studied  hard.  I  never  knew 
a  man  who  studied  hard.  I  conclude,  indeed, 
from  the  effects,  that  some  men  have  studied 
hard,  as  Bendey  and  Clarke.”  Trying  him  by 
that  criterion  upon  which  he  formed  his  judge¬ 
ment  of  others,  we  may  be  absolutely  certain, 
both  from  his  writings  and  his  conversation, 
that  his  reading  was  very  extensive.  Dr.  Adam 


JOHNSON  15 

Smith,  than  whom  few  were  better  judges  on 
this  subject,  once  observed  to  me  that  “Johnson 
knew  more  books  than  any  man  alive.”  He  had 
a  peculiar  facility  in  seizing  at  once  what  was 
valuable  in  any  book,  without  submitting  to  the 
labour  of  perusing  it  from  beginning  to  end.  He 
had,  from  the  irritability  of  his  constitution,  at 
all  times,  an  impatience  and  hurry  when  he 
either  read  or  wrote.  A  certain  apprehension, 
arising  from  novelty,  made  him  write  his  first 
exercise  at  College  twice  over;  but  he  never  took 
that  trouble  with  any  other  composition;  and 
we  shall  see  that  his  most  excellent  works  were 
struck  off  at  a  heat,  with  rapid  exertion.1 

Yet  he  appears,  from  his  early  notes  or  mem¬ 
orandums  in  my  possession,  to  have  at  various 
times  attempted,  or  at  least  planned,  a  methodi¬ 
cal  course  of  study,  according  to  computation, 
of  which  he  was  all  his  life  fond,  as  it  fixed  his 
attention  steadily  upon  something  without,  and 
prevented  his  mind  from  preying  upon  itself. 
Thus  I  find  in  his  handwriting  the  number  of 
lines  in  each  of  two  of  Euripides’  Tragedies,  of 
the  Georgicks  of  Virgil,  of  the  first  six  books  of 
the  ALneid ,  of  Horace’s  Art  oj  Poetry ,  of  three  of 
the  books  of  Ovid’s  Metamorphoses ,  of  some  parts 
of  Theocritus,  and  of  the  tenth  Satire  of  Juve¬ 
nal;  and  a  table,  shewing  at  the  rate  of  various 
numbers  a  day  (I  suppose  verses  to  be  read), 
what  would  be,  in  each  case,  the  total  amount 
in  a  week,  month,  and  year. 

No  man  had  a  more  ardent  love  of  literature, 
or  a  higher  respect  for  it  than  Johnson.  His  apart¬ 
ment  in  Pembroke  College  was  that  upon  the 
second  floor,  over  the  gateway.  The  enthusiasts 
of  learning  will  ever  contemplate  it  with  venera¬ 
tion.  One  day,  while  he  was  sitting  in  it  quite 
alone,  Dr.  Panting,  then  master  of  the  College, 
whom  he  called  “a  fine  Jacobite  fellow,”  over¬ 
heard  him  uttering  this  soliloquy  in  his  strong, 
emphatick  voice:  “Well,  I  have  a  mind  to  see 
what  is  done  in  other  places  of  learning.  I’ll  go 
and  visit  the  Universities  abroad.  I’ll  go  to  France 
and  Italy.  I’ll  go  to  Padua. — And  I’ll  mind  my 
business.  For  an  Athenian  blockhead  is  the  worst 
of  all  blockheads.”2 

Dr.  Adams  told  me  that  Johnson,  while  he 
was  at  Pembroke  College,  “was  caressed  and 

1He  told  Dr.  Burney  that  he  never  wrote  any  of 
his  works  that  were  printed,  twice  over.  Dr.  Bur¬ 
ney’s  wonder  at  seeing  several  pages  of  his  Lives  of 
the  Poets ,  in  Manuscript,  with  scarce  a  blot  or  era¬ 
sure,  drew  this  observation  from  him.  [M]. 

2I  had  this  anecdote  from  Dr.  Adams,  and  Dr. 
Johnson  confirmed  it.  Bramston,  in  his  Man  of 
Taste ,  has  the  same  thought: 

Sure,  of  all  blockheads ,  scholars  are  the  worst . 


i6 


BOSWELL 


loved  by  all  about  him,  was  a  gay  and  frolick- 
some  fellow,  and  passed  there  the  happiest  part 
of  his  life.”  But  this  is  a  striking  proof  of  the  fal¬ 
lacy  of  appearances,  and  how  little  any  of  us 
know  of  the  real  internal  state  even  of  those 
whom  we  see  most  frequently;  for  the  truth  is, 
that  he  was  then  depressed  by  poverty,  and  ir¬ 
ritated  by  disease.  When  I  mentioned  to  him 
this  account  as  given  me  by  Dr.  Adams,  he 
said,  “Ah,  Sir,  I  was  mad  and  violent.  It  was 
bitterness  which  they  mistook  for  frolick.  I  was 
miserably  poor,  and  I  thought  to  fight  my  way 
by  my  literature  and  my  wit;  so  I  disregarded 
all  power  and  all  authority.” 

The  Bishop  of  Dromore  observes  in  a  letter  to 
me, 

“The  pleasure  he  took  in  vexing  the  tutors 
and  fellows  has  been  often  mentioned.  But  I 
have  heard  him  say,  what  ought  to  be  recorded 
to  the  honour  of  the  present  venerable  master  of 
that  College,  the  Reverend  William  Adams, 
D.D.,  who  was  then  very  young,  and  one  of  the 
junior  fellows;  that  the  mild  but  judicious  ex¬ 
postulations  of  this  worthy  man,  whose  virtue 
awed  him,  and  whose  learning  he  revered, 
made  him  really  ashamed  of  himself,  ‘though  I 
fear  (said  he)  I  was  too  proud  to  own  it.’ 

“I  have  heard  from  some  of  his  contempo¬ 
raries  that  he  was  generally  seen  lounging  at 
the  College  gate,  with  a  circle  of  young  students 
round  him,  whom  he  was  entertaining  with  wit, 
and  keeping  from  their  studies,  if  not  spiriting 
them  up  to  rebellion  against  the  College  disci¬ 
pline,  which  in  his  maturer  years  he  so  much 
extolled.” 

He  very  early  began  to  attempt  keeping  notes 
or  memorandums,  by  way  of  a  diary  of  his  life. 
I  find,  in  a  parcel  of  loose  leaves,  the  following 
spirited  resolution  to  contend  against  his  natu¬ 
ral  indolence: 

“Or/.  ij2g.  Desidice  valedixi;  syrenis  istius  canti- 
bus  surdam  posthac  aurem  obversurus . — I  bid  fare¬ 
well  to  Sloth,  being  resolved  henceforth  not  to 
listen  to  her  syren  strains.”  I  have  also  in  my 
possession  a  few  leaves  of  another  Libellus ,  or 
little  book,  entitled  Annales ,  in  which  some  of 
the  early  particulars  of  his  history  are  registered 
in  Latin. 

I  do  not  find  that  he  formed  any  close  inti¬ 
macies  with  his  fellow-collegians.  But  Dr. 
Adams  told  me  that  he  contracted  a  love  and 
regard  for  Pembroke  College,  which  he  re¬ 
tained  to  the  last.  A  short  time  before  his  death 
he  sent  to  that  College  a  present  of  all  his  works, 
to  be  deposited  in  their  library;  and  he  had 
thoughts  of  leaving  to  it  his  house  at  Lichfield; 


[1729 

but  his  friends  who  were  about  him  very  prop¬ 
erly  dissuaded  him  from  it,  and  he  bequeathed 
it  to  some  poor  relations.  He  took  a  pleasure  in 
boasting  of  the  many  eminent  men  who  had 
been  educated  at  Pembroke.  In  this  list  are 
found  the  names  of  Mr.  Hawkins  the  Poetry 
Professor,  Mr.  Shenstone,  Sir  William  Black- 
stone,  and  others;1  not  forgetting  the  cele¬ 
brated  popular  preacher,  Mr.  George  White- 
field,  of  whom,  though  Dr.  Johnson  did  not 
think  very  highly,  it  must  be  acknowledged  that 
his  eloquence  was  powerful,  his  views  pious  and 
charitable,  his  assiduity  almost  incredible;  and, 
that  since  his  death,  the  integrity  of  his  char¬ 
acter  has  been  fully  vindicated.  Being  himself  a 
poet,  Johnson  was  peculiarly  happy  in  men¬ 
tioning  how  many  of  the  sons  of  Pembroke  were 
poets;  adding,  with  a  smile  of  sportive  triumph, 
“Sir,  we  are  a  nest  of  singing  birds.” 

He  was  not,  however,  blind  to  what  he 
thought  the  defects  of  his  own  College;  and  I 
have,  from  the  information  of  Dr.  Taylor,  a 
very  strong  instance  of  that  rigid  honesty  which 
he  ever  inflexibly  preserved.  Taylor  had  ob¬ 
tained  his  father’s  consent  to  be  entered  of  Pem¬ 
broke,  that  he  might  be  with  his  schoolfellow 
Johnson,  with  whom,  though  some  years  older 
than  himself,  he  was  very  intimate.  This  would 
have  been  a  great  comfort  to  Johnson.  But  he 
fairly  told  Taylor  that  he  could  not,  in  con¬ 
science,  suffer  him  to  enter  where  he  knew  he 
could  not  have  an  able  tutor.  He  then  made  in¬ 
quiry  all  round  the  University,  and  having 
found  that  Mr.  Bateman,  of  Christ  Church,  was 
the  tutor  of  highest  reputation,  Taylor  was  en¬ 
tered  of  that  College.  Mr.  Bateman’s  lectures 
were  so  excellent,  that  Johnson  used  to  come  and 
get  them  at  second-hand  from  Taylor,  till  his 
poverty  being  so  extreme  that  his  shoes  were  worn 
out,  and  his  feet  appeared  through  them,  he  saw 
that  this  humiliating  circumstance  was  perceived 
by  the  Christ  Church  men,  and  he  came  no 
more.  He  was  too  proud  to  accept  of  money,  and 
somebody  having  set  a  pair  of  new  shoes  at  his 
door,  he  threw  them  away  with  indignation. 
How  must  we  feel  when  we  read  such  an  anec¬ 
dote  of  Samuel  Johnson! 

His  spirited  refusal  of  an  eleemosynary  sup¬ 
ply  of  shoes,  arose,  no  doubt,  from  a  proper 
pride.  But,  considering  his  ascetick  disposition 
at  times,  as  acknowledged  by  himself  in  his  Med¬ 
itations,  and  the  exaggeration  with  which  some 
have  treated  the  peculiarities  of  his  character,  I 
should  not  wonder  to  hear  it  ascribed  to  a  prin¬ 
ciple  of  superstitious  mortification;  as  we  are  told 

xSee  Nash’s  History  oj  Worcestershire ,  vol.  i,  p.  529. 


i  731  ]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  17 


by  Tursellinus,  in  his  Life  of  St.  Ignatius  Loyola , 
that  this  intrepid  founder  of  the  order  of  Jesuits, 
when  he  arrived  at  Goa,  after  having  made  a 
severe  pilgrimage  through  the  Eastern  deserts 
persisted  in  wearing  his  miserable  shattered 
shoes,  and  when  new  ones  were  offered  him  re¬ 
jected  them  as  an  unsuitable  indulgence. 

The  res  angusta  domi  prevented  him  from  hav¬ 
ing  the  advantage  of  a  complete  academical 
education.  The  friend  to  whom  he  had  trusted 
for  support  had  deceived  him.  His  debts  in  Col¬ 
lege,  though  not  great,  were  increasing;  and  his 
scanty  remittances  from  Lichfield,  which  had  all 
along  been  made  with  great  difficulty,  could  be 
supplied  no  longer,  his  father  having  fallen  into 
a  state  of  insolvency.  Compelled,  therefore,  by 
irresistible  necessity,  he  left  the  College  in  au¬ 
tumn,  1731,  without  a  degree,  having  been  a 
member  of  it  little  more  than  three  years. 

Dr.  Adams,  the  worthy  and  respectable  mas¬ 
ter  of  Pembroke  College,  has  generally  had  the 
reputation  of  being  Johnson’s  tutor.  The  fact, 
however,  is,  that  in  1731  Mr.  Jorden  quitted 
the  College,  and  his  pupils  were  transferred  to 
Dr.  Adams;  so  that  had  Johnson  returned,  Dr. 
Adams  would  have  been  his  tutor .  It  is  to  be  wish¬ 
ed,  that  this  connection  had  taken  place.  His 
equal  temper,  mild  disposition,  and  politeness 
of  manners,  might  have  insensibly  softened  the 
harshness  of  Johnson,  and  infused  into  him 
those  more  delicate  charities,  those  petites  mora¬ 
les ,  in  which,  it  must  be  confessed,  our  great 
moralist  was  more  deficient  than  his  best 
friends  could  fully  justify.  Dr.  Adams  paid 
Johnson  this  high  compliment.  He  said  to  me  at 
Oxford,  in  1776,  “I  was  his  nominal  tutor;  but 
he  was  above  my  mark.”  When  I  repeated  it  to 
Johnson,  his  eyes  flashed  with  grateful  satisfac¬ 
tion,  and  he  exclaimed,  “That  was  liberal  and 
noble.” 

And  now  (I  had  almost  said  poor )  Samuel 
Johnson  returned  to  his  native  city,  destitute, 
and  not  knowing  how  he  should  gain  even  a 
decent  livelihood.  His  father’s  misfortunes  in 
trade  rendered  him  unable  to  support  his  son; 
and  for  some  time  there  appeared  no  means  by 
which  he  could  maintain  himself.  In  the  De¬ 
cember  of  this  year  his  father  died. 

The  state  of  poverty  in  which  he  died,  ap¬ 
pears  from  a  note  in  one  of  Johnson’s  little 
diaries  of  the  following  year,  which  strongly  dis¬ 
plays  his  spirit  and  virtuous  dignity  of  mind. 

“1732,  Julii  15.  Undecim  aureos  deposui ,  quo  die 
quicquid  ante  matris  funus  ( quod  serum  sit  precor)  de 
paternis  bonis  sperari  licet ,  viginti  scilicet  libras ,  ac - 
cepi .  Usque  adeo  mihifortuna  fingenda  est.  Interea ,  ne 


pauper tate  vires  animi  languescant,  nec  in  flagitia 
egestas  abigat ,  cavendum. — I  layed  by  eleven  guin¬ 
eas  on  this  day,  when  I  received  twenty  pounds, 
being  all  that  I  have  reason  to  hope  for  out  of 
my  father’s  effects,  previous  to  the  death  of  my 
mother;  an  event  which  I  pray  God  may  be 
very  remote.  I  now  therefore  see  that  I  must 
make  my  own  fortune.  Meanwhile,  let  me  take 
care  that  the  powers  of  my  mind  may  not  be  de¬ 
bilitated  by  poverty,  and  that  indigence  do  not 
force  me  into  any  criminal  act.” 

Johnson  was  so  far  fortunate,  that  the  res¬ 
pectable  character  of  his  parents,  and  his  own 
merit,  had,  from  his  earliest  years,  secured  him 
a  kind  reception  in  the  best  families  at  Lich¬ 
field.  Among  these  I  can  mention  Mr.  Howard, 
Dr.  Swinfen,  Mr.  Simpson,  Mr.  Levett,  Cap¬ 
tain  Garrick,  father  of  the  great  ornament  of 
the  British  stage;  but  above  all,  Mr.  Gilbert 
Walmsley,1  Register  of  the  Prerogative  Court 
of  Lichfield,  whose  character,  long  after  his 
decease,  Dr.  Johnson  has,  in  his  Life  of  Ed¬ 
mund  Smith,  thus  drawn  in  the  glowing  col¬ 
ours  of  gratitude: 

“Of  Gilbert  Walmsley,  thus  presented  to  my 
mind,  let  me  indulge  myself  in  the  remem¬ 
brance.  I  knew  him  very  early;  he  was  one  of 
the  first  friends  that  literature  procured  me, 
and  I  hope  that,  at  least,  my  gratitude  made  me 
worthy  of  his  notice. 

“He  was  of  an  advanced  age,  and  I  was  only 
not  a  boy,  yet  he  never  received  my  notions 
with  contempt.  He  was  a  whig,  with  all  the  vir¬ 
ulence  and  malevolence  of  his  party;  yet  dif¬ 
ference  of  opinion  did  not  keep  us  apart.  I  hon¬ 
oured  him  and  he  endured  me. 

“He  had  mingled  with  the  gay  world  without 
exemption  from  its  vices  or  its  follies;  but  had 
never  neglected  the  cultivation  of  his  mind.  His 
belief  of  revelation  was  unshaken;  his  learning 
preserved  his  principles;  he  grew  first  regular, 
and  then  pious. 

“His  studies  had  been  so  various,  that  I  am 
not  able  to  name  a  man  of  equal  knowledge. 
His  acquaintance  with  books  was  great,  and 
what  he  did  not  immediately  know,  he  could, 
at  least,  tell  where  to  find.  Such  was  his  ampli- 

!Mr.  Warton  informs  me,  that  this  early  friend 
of  Johnson  was  entered  a  Commoner  of  Trinity 
College,  Oxford,  aged  seventeen,  in  1698;  and  is 
the  authour  of  many  Latin  verse  translations  in  The 
Gentleman's  Magazine,  vol.  xv,  102.  One  of  them  is  a 
translation  of 

My  time ,  O  ye  Muses ,  was  happily  spent ,  &c. 

He  died  Aug.  3,  1751,  and  a  monument  to  his 
memory  has  been  erected  in  the  Cathedral  of  Lich¬ 
field,  with  an  inscription  written  by  Mr.  Seward, 
one  of  the  Prebendaries. 


BOSWELL 


18 

tude  of  learning,  and  such  his  copiousness  of 
communication,  that  it  may  be  doubted  whether 
a  day  now  passes,  in  which  I  have  not  some  ad¬ 
vantage  from  his  friendship. 

“At  this  man’s  table  I  enjoyed  many  cheerful 
and  instructive  hours,  with  companions,  such  as 
are  not  often  found — with  one  who  has  length¬ 
ened,  and  one  who  has  gladdened  life;  with  Dr. 
James,  whose  skill  in  physick  will  be  long  re¬ 
membered;  and  with  David  Garrick,  whom  I 
hoped  to  have  gratified  with  this  character  of 
our  common  friend.  But  what  are  the  hopes  of 
man!  I  am  disappointed  by  that  stroke  of 
death,  which  has  eclipsed  the  gaiety  of  nations, 
and  impoverished  the  publick  stock  of  harmless 
pleasure.” 

In  these  families  he  passed  much  time  in  his 
early  years.  In  most  of  them,  he  was  in  the  com¬ 
pany  of  ladies,  particularly  at  Mr.  Walmsley’s, 
whose  wife  and  sisters-in-law,  of  the  name  of 
Aston,  and  daughters  of  a  Baronet,  were  re¬ 
markable  for  good  breeding;  so  that  the  notion 
which  has  been  industriously  circulated  and 
believed,  that  he  never  was  in  good  company 
till  late  in  life,  and,  consequently  had  been  con¬ 
firmed  in  coarse  and  ferocious  manners  by  long 
habits,  is  wholly  without  foundation.  Some  of 
the  ladies  have  assured  me,  they  recollected  him 
well  when  a  young  man,  as  distinguished  for  his 
complaisance. 

And  that  this  politeness  was  not  merely  oc¬ 
casional  and  temporary,  or  confined  to  the  cir¬ 
cles  of  Lichfield,  is  ascertained  by  the  testimony 
of  a  lady,  who,  in  a  paper  with  which  I  have 
been  favoured  by  a  daughter  of  his  intimate 
friend  and  physician,  Dr.  Lawrence,  thus  des¬ 
cribes  Dr.  Johnson  some  years  afterwards: 

“As  the  particulars  of  the  former  part  of  Dr. 
Johnson’s  life  do  not  seem  to  be  very  accurately 
known,  a  lady  hopes  that  the  following  infor¬ 
mation  may  not  be  unacceptable. 

“She  remembers  Dr.  Johnson  on  a  visit  to 
Dr.  Taylor,  at  Ashbourn,  some  time  between 
the  end  of  the  year  37,  and  the  middle  of  the 
year  40;  she  rather  thinks  it  to  have  been  after 
he  and  his  wife  were  removed  to  London.  Dur¬ 
ing  his  stay  at  Ashbourn,  he  made  frequent  vis¬ 
its  to  Mr.  Meynell,  at  Bradley,  where  his  com¬ 
pany  was  much  desired  by  thg  ladies  of  the 
family,  who  were,  perhaps,  in  point  of  elegance 
and  accomplishments,  inferiour  to  few  of  those 
with  whom  he  was  afterwards  acquainted.  Mr. 
Meynell’s  eldest  daughter  was  afterwards  mar¬ 
ried  to  Mr.  Fitzherbert,  father  to  Mr.  Alleyne 
Fitzherbert,  lately  minister  to  the  court  of  Rus¬ 
sia.  Of  her,  Dr.  Johnson  said,  in  Dr.  Lawrence’s 


[1732 

study,  that  she  had  the  best  understanding  he 
ever  met  with  in  any  human  being.  At  Mr. 
Meynell’s  he  also  commenced  that  friendship 
with  Mrs.  Hill  Boothby,  sister  to  the  present  Sir 
Brook  Boothby,  which  continued  till  her  death. 
The  young  woman  whom  he  used  to  call  Molly  As¬ 
ton J  was  sister  to  Sir  Thomas  Aston,  and  daugh¬ 
ter  to  a  Baronet;  she  was  also  sister  to  the  wife  of 
his  friend  Mr.  Gilbert  Walmsley2.  Besides  his 
intimacy  with  the  above-mentioned  persons, 
who  were  surely  people  of  rank  and  education, 
while  he  was  yet  at  Lichfield  he  used  to  be  fre¬ 
quently  at  the  house  of  Dr.  Swinfen,  a  gentleman 
of  a  very  ancient  family  in  Staffordshire,  from 
which,  after  the  death  of  his  elder  brother,  he 
inherited  a  good  estate.  He  was,  besides,  a  phy¬ 
sician  of  very  extensive  practice;  but  for  want 
of  due  attention  to  the  management  of  his  dom- 
estick  concerns,  left  a  very  large  family  in  indi¬ 
gence.  One  of  his  daughters,  Mrs.  Desmoulins, 
afterwards  found  an  asylum  in  the  house  of  her 
old  friend,  whose  doors  were  always  open  to  the 
unfortunate,  and  who  well  observed  the  pre¬ 
cept  of  the  Gospel,  for  he  ‘was  kind  to  the  un¬ 
thankful  and  to  the  evil.’  ” 

In  the  forlorn  state  of  his  circumstances,  he 
accepted  of  an  offer  to  be  employed  as  usher  in 
the  school  of  Market-Bos  worth,  in  Leicester¬ 
shire,  to  which  it  appears,  from  one  of  his  little 
fragments  of  a  diary,  that  he  went  on  foot,  on 
the  1 6th  of  July. — “ Julii  16.  Bosvortiam  pedes 
petiiT  But  it  is  not  true,  as  has  been  erroneously 
related,  that  he  was  assistant  to  the  famous  An¬ 
thony  Blackwall,  whose  merit  has  been  hon¬ 
oured  by  the  testimony  of  Bishop  Hurd,3  who 
was  his  scholar;  for  Mr.  Blackwall  died  on  the 
8th  of  April,  1730, 4  more  than  a  year  before 
Johnson  left  the  University. 

This  employment  was  very  irksome  to  him  in 
every  respect,  and  he  complained  grievously  of 
it  in  his  letters  to  his  friend  Mr.  Hector,  who 
was  now  settled  as  a  surgeon  at  Birmingham. 
The  letters  are  lost;  but  Mr.  Hector  recollects 

LThe  words  of  Sir  John  Hawkins,  p.  316. 

2Sir  Thomas  Aston,  Bart.,  who  died  in  Janu¬ 
ary,  1 724-5,  left  one  son,  named  Thomas  also,  and 
eight  daughters.  Of  the  daughters,  Catherine  mar¬ 
ried  Johnson’s  friend,  the  Hon.  Henry  Hervey; 
Margaret,  Gilbert  YValmsley.  Another  of  these 
ladies  married  the  Rev.  Mr.  Gastrell;  Mary,  or 
Molly  Aston,  as  she  was  usually  called,  became  the 
wife  of  Captain  Brodie  of  the  navy. 

3Bishop  Hurd  does  not  praise  Blackwall,  but 
the  Rev.  Mr.  Budworth,  headmaster  of  the  gram¬ 
mar  school  at  Brewood,  who  had  himself  been 
bred  under  Blackwall.  [M.] 

4See  The  Gentleman's  Magazine ,  Dec.,  1784,  p. 
957* 


1732]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  19 


his  writing  “that  the  poet  had  described  the  dull 
sameness  of  his  existence  in  these  words,  c  Vitam 
continet  una  dies’  (one  day  contains  the  whole 
of  my  life);  that  it  was  unvaried  as  the  note  of 
the  cuckow;  and  that  he  did  not  know  whether 
it  was  more  disagreeable  for  him  to  teach,  or 
the  boys  to  learn,  the  grammar  rules.”  His  gen¬ 
eral  aversion  to  this  painful  drudgery  was 
greatly  enhanced  by  a  disagreement  between 
him  and  Sir  Wolstan  Dixey,  the  patron  of  the 
school,  in  whose  house,  I  have  been  told,  he 
officiated  as  a  kind  of  domestick  chaplain,  so  far, 
at  least,  as  to  say  grace  at  table,  but  was  treated 
with  what  he  represented  as  intolerable  harsh¬ 
ness;  and,  after  suffering  for  a  few  months  such 
complicated  misery,1  he  relinquished  a  situation 
which  all  his  life  afterwards  he  recollected  with 
the  strongest  aversion,  and  even  a  degree  of  hor- 
rour.  But  it  is  probable  that  at  this  period,  what¬ 
ever  uneasiness  he  may  have  endured,  he  laid 
the  foundation  of  much  future  eminence  by  ap¬ 
plication  to  his  studies. 

Being  now  again  totally  unoccupied,  he  was 
invited  by  Mr.  Hector  to  pass  some  time  with 
him  at  Birmingham,  as  his  guest,  at  the  house 
of  Mr.  Warren,  with  whom  Mr.  Hector  lodged 
and  boarded.  Mr.  Warren  was  the  first  estab¬ 
lished  bookseller  in  Birmingham,  and  was  very 
attentive  to  Johnson,  who  he  soon  found  could 
be  of  much  service  to  him  in  his  trade,  by  his 
knowledge  of  literature;  and  he  even  obtained 
the  assistance  of  his  pen  in  furnishing  some 
numbers  of  a  periodical  Essay  printed  in  the 
newspaper,  of  which  Warren  was  proprietor. 
After  very  diligent  inquiry,  I  have  not  been 
able  to  recover  those  early  specimens  of  that 
particular  mode  of  writing  by  which  Johnson 
afterwards  so  greatly  distinguished  himself. 

He  continued  to  live  as  Mr.  Hector’s  guest 
for  about  six  months,  and  then  hired  lodgings 
in  another  part  of  the  town,  finding  himself  as 
well  situated  at  Birmingham  as  he  supposed  he 
could  be  any  where,  while  he  had  no  settled 
plan  of  life,  and  very  scanty  means  of  subsistence. 
He  made  some  valuable  acquaintances  there, 
amongst  whom  were  Mr.  Porter,  a  mercer,  whose 
widow  he  afterwards  married,  and  Mr.  Taylor, 
who  by  his  ingenuity  in  mechanical  inventions, 
and  his  success  in  trade,  acquired  an  immense 
fortune.  But  the  comfort  of  being  near  Mr.  Hec¬ 
tor,  his  old  schoolfellow  and  intimate  friend,  was 
Johnson’s  chief  inducement  to  continue  here. 

xIt  appears  from  a  letter  of  Johnson’s  to  a 
friend,  dated  Lichfield,  July  27,  1732,  that  he  had 
left  Sir  Wolstan  Dixie’s  house  recently,  before  that 
letter  was  written.  [M.] 


In  what  manner  he  employed  his  pen  at  this 
period,  or  whether  he  derived  from  it  any  pe¬ 
cuniary  advantage,  I  have  not  been  able  to  as¬ 
certain.  He  probably  got  a  little  money  from 
Mr.  Warren;  and  we  are  certain,  that  he  ex¬ 
ecuted  here  one  piece  of  literary  labour,  of 
which  Mr.  Hector  has  favoured  me  with  a  mi¬ 
nute  account.  Having  mentioned  that  he  had 
read  at  Pembroke  College  A  Voyage  to  Abyssinia , 
by  Lobo,  a  Portuguese  Jesuit,  and  that  he 
thought  an  abridgment  and  translation  of  it 
from  the  French  into  English  might  be  an  use¬ 
ful  and  profitable  publication,  Mr.  Warren  and 
Mr.  Hector  joined  in  urging  him  to  undertake 
it.  He  accordingly  agreed;  and  the  book  not 
being  to  be  found  in  Birmingham,  he  borrowed 
it  of  Pembroke  College.  A  part  of  the  work  be¬ 
ing  very  soon  done,  one  Osborn,  who  was  Mr. 
Warren’s  printer,  was  set  to  work  with  what  was 
ready,  and  Johnson  engaged  to  supply  the  press 
with  copy  as  it  should  be  wanted;  but  his  con¬ 
stitutional  indolence  soon  prevailed,  and  the 
work  was  at  a  stand.  Mr.  Hector,  who  knew 
that  a  motive  of  humanity  would  be  the  most 
prevailing  argument  with  his  friend,  went  to 
Johnson,  and  represented  to  him,  that  the 
printer  could  have  no  other  employment  till 
this  undertaking  was  finished,  and  that  the 
poor  man  and  his  family  were  suffering.  John¬ 
son  upon  this  exerted  the  powers  of  his  mind, 
though  his  body  was  relaxed.  He  lay  in  bed 
with  the  book,  which  was  a  quarto,  before  him, 
and  dictated  while  Hector  wrote.  Mr.  Hector 
carried  the  sheets  to  the  press,  and  corrected  al¬ 
most  all  the  proof  sheets,  very  few  of  which  were 
even  seen  by  Johnson.  In  this  manner,  with  the 
aid  of  Mr.  Hector’s  active  friendship,  the  book 
was  completed,  and  was  published  in  1735, 
with  London  upon  the  title-page,  though  it  was 
in  reality  printed  in  Birmingham,  a  device  too 
common  with  provincial  publishers.  For  this 
work  he  had  from  Mr.  Warren  only  the  sum  of 
five  guineas. 

This  being  the  first  prose  work  of  Johnson,  it 
is  a  curious  object  of  inquiry  how  much  may  be 
traced  in  it  of  that  style  which  marks  his  sub¬ 
sequent  writings  with  such  peculiar  excellence; 
with  so  happy  an  union  of  force,  vivacity,  and 
perspicuity.  I  have  perused  the  book  with  this 
view,  and  have  found  that  here,  as  I  believe  in 
every  other  translation,  there  is  in  the  work  it¬ 
self  no  vestige  of  the  translator’s  own  style;  for 
the  language  of  translation  being  adapted  to  the 
thoughts  of  another  person,  insensibly  follows 
their  cast,  and,  as  it  were,  runs  into  a  mould 
that  is  ready  prepared. 


20 


BOSWELL 


Thus,  for  instance,  taking  the  first  sentence 
that  occurs  at  the  opening  of  the  book,  p.  4. 

“1  lived  here  above  a  year,  and  completed 
my  studies  in  divinity;  in  which  time  some 
letters  were  received  from  the  fathers  of  Ethio¬ 
pia,  with  an  account  that  Sultan  Segned,  Em- 
perour  of  Abyssinia,  was  converted  to  the 
church  of  Rome;  that  many  of  his  subjects  had 
followed  his  example,  and  that  there  was  a 
great  want  of  missionaries  to  improve  these 
prosperous  beginnings.  Every  body  was  very 
desirous  of  seconding  the  zeal  of  our  fathers, 
and  of  sending  them  the  assistance  they  re¬ 
quested;  to  which  we  were  the  more  encour¬ 
aged,  because  the  Emperour’s  letter  informed 
our  Provincial,  that  we  might  easily  enter  his 
dominions  by  the  way  of  Dancala;  but,  unhap¬ 
pily,  the  secretary  wrote  Geila  for  Dancala, 
which  cost  two  of  our  fathers  their  lives.” 

Every  one  acquainted  with  Johnson’s  man¬ 
ner  will  be  sensible  that  there  is  nothing  of  it 
here;  but  that  this  sentence  might  have  been 
composed  by  any  other  man. 

But,  in  the  Preface,  the  Johnsonian  style  be¬ 
gins  to  appear;  and  though  use  had  not  yet 
taught  his  wing  a  permanent  and  equable 
flight,  there  are  parts  of  it  which  exhibit  his  best 
manner  in  full  vigour.  I  had  once  the  pleasure 
of  examining  it  with  Mr.  Edmund  Burke,  who 
confirmed  me  in  this  opinion,  by  his  superiour 
critical  sagacity,  and  was,  I  remember,  much 
delighted  with  the  following  specimen: 

“The  Portuguese  traveller,  contrary  to  the 
general  vein  of  his  countrymen,  has  amused  his 
reader  with  no  romantick  absurdity,  or  incredi¬ 
ble  fictions;  whatever  he  relates,  whether  true 
or  not,  is  at  least  probable;  and  he  who  tells 
nothing  exceeding  the  bounds  of  probability, 
has  a  right  to  demand  that  they  should  believe 
him  who  cannot  contradict  him. 

“He  appears,  by  his  modest  and  unaffected 
narration,  to  have  described  things  as  he  saw 
them,  to  have  copied  nature  from  the  life,  and 
to  have  consulted  his  senses,  not  his  imagina¬ 
tion.  He  meets  with  no  basilisks  that  destroy 
with  their  eyes,  his  crocodiles  devour  their  prey 
without  tears,  and  his  cataracts  fall  from  the 
rocks  without  deafening  the  neighbouring  in¬ 
habitants. 

“The  reader  will  here  find  no  regions  cursed 
with  irremediable  barrenness,  or  blessed  with 
spontaneous  fecundity;  no  perpetual  gloom,  or 
unceasing  sunshine;  nor  are  the  nations  here 
described  either  devoid  of  all  sense  of  humanity, 
or  consummate  in  all  private  or  social  virtues. 
Here  are  no  Hottentots  without  religious  polity 


[1734 

or  articulate  language;  no  Chinese  perfectly 
polite,  and  completely  skilled  in  all  sciences;  he 
will  discover,  what  will  always  be  discovered 
by  a  diligent  and  impartial  enquirer,  that  wher¬ 
ever  human  nature  is  to  be  found,  there  is  a 
mixture  of  vice  and  virtue,  a  contest  of  passion 
and  reason;  and  that  the  Creator  doth  not  ap¬ 
pear  partial  in  his  distributions,  but  has  bal¬ 
anced,  in  most  countries,  their  particular  in¬ 
conveniences  by  particular  favours.” 

Here  we  have  an  early  example  of  that  bril¬ 
liant  and  energetick  expression,  which,  upon 
innumerable  occasions  in  his  subsequent  life, 
justly  impressed  the  world  with  the  highest  ad¬ 
miration. 

Nor  can  any  one,  conversant  with  the  writ¬ 
ings  of  Johnson,  fail  to  discern  his  hand  in  this 
passage  of  the  Dedication  to  John  Warren,  Esq. 
of  Pembrokeshire,  though  it  is  ascribed  to  War¬ 
ren  the  bookseller: 

“A  generous  and  elevated  mind  is  distin¬ 
guished  by  nothing  more  certainly  than  an  emi¬ 
nent  degree  of  curiosity;1  nor  is  that  curiosity 
ever  more  agreeably  or  usefully  employed,  than 
in  examining  the  laws  and  customs  of  foreign 
nations.  I  hope,  therefore,  the  present  I  now 
presume  to  make,  will  not  be  thought  improper; 
which,  however,  it  is  not  my  business  as  a  dedi¬ 
cator  to  commend,  nor  as  a  bookseller  to  de¬ 
preciate.” 

It  is  reasonable  to  suppose,  that  his  having 
been  thus  accidentally  led  to  a  particular  study 
of  the  history  and  manners  of  Abyssinia,  was 
the  remote  occasion  of  his  writing,  many  years 
afterwards,  his  admirable  philosophical  tale, 
the  principal  scene  of  which  is  laid  in  that  coun¬ 
try. 

Johnson  returned  to  Lichfield  early  in  1734, 
and  in  August  that  year  he  made  an  attempt  to 
procure  some  little  subsistence  by  his  pen;  for 
he  published  proposals  for  printing  by  subscrip¬ 
tion  the  Latin  Poems  of  Politian:2  Angeli  Poll - 
tiani  Poemata  Latina ,  quibus ,  Notas  cum  historid 
Latinae  poeseos,  a  Petrarctue  avo  ad  Politiani  tem- 
pora  deducta ,  et  vita  Politiani  jusius  quam  antehac  en- 
arrata ,  addidit  Sam.  Johnson.3 

It  appears  that  his  brother  Nathanael  had 

*See  The  Rambler ,  No.  103. 

2May  we  not  trace  a  fanciful  similarity  between 
Politian  and  Johnson?  Huetius,  speaking  of  Paulus 
Pelissonius  Fontanerius,  says,  “.  .  .  in  quo  Natura ,  ut 
olim  in  Angelo  Politiano ,  deformitatem  oris  excellentis 
ingenii  puestantia  compensavitP  Comment,  de  reb .  ad 
eum  pertin.  Edit.  Amstel.,  1718,  p.  200. 

3The  book  was  to  contain  more  than  thirty 
sheets,  the  price  to  be  two  shillings  and  sixpence  at 
the  time  of  subscribing,  and  two  shillings  and  six¬ 
pence  at  the  delivery  of  a  perfect  book  in  quires. 


21 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


1734] 

taken  up  his  father’s  trade;  for  it  is  mentioned 
that  “subscriptions  are  taken  in  by  the  Editor, 
or  N.  Johnson,  bookseller,  of  Lichfield.5’  Not¬ 
withstanding  the  merit  of  Johnson,  and  the 
cheap  price  at  which  this  book  was  offered, 
there  were  not  subscribers  enough  to  insure  a 
sufficient  sale;  so  the  work  never  appeared,  and 
probably,  never  was  executed. 

We  find  him  again  this  year  at  Birmingham, 
and  there  is  preserved  the  following  letter  from 
him  to  Mr.  Edward  Cave,1  the  original  com¬ 
piler  and  editor  of  The  Gentleman’s  Magazine: 

To  Mr.  Cave 

Nov.  25,  1734 

Sir,  As  you  appear  no  less  sensible  than  your 
readers  of  the  defects  of  your  poetical  article,  you 
will  not  be  displeased,  if,  in  order  to  the  im¬ 
provement  of  it,  I  communicate  to  you  the  sen¬ 
timents  of  a  person,  who  will  undertake,  on  rea¬ 
sonable  terms,  sometimes  to  fill  a  column. 

His  opinion  is,  that  the  publick  would  not 
give  you  a  bad  reception,  if,  beside  the  current 
wit  of  the  month,  which  a  critical  examination 
would  generally  reduce  to  a  narrow  compass, 
you  admitted  not  only  poems,  inscriptions,  &c. 
never  printed  before,  which  he  will  sometimes 
supply  you  with;  but  likewise  short  literary  dis¬ 
sertations  in  Latin  or  English,  critical  remarks 
on  authours  ancient  or  modern,  forgotten  poems 
that  deserve  revival,  or  loose  pieces,  like  Floy- 
er’s,2  worth  preserving.  By  this  method,  your  lit¬ 
erary  article,  for  so  it  might  be  called,  will,  he 
thinks,  be  better  recommended  to  the  publick 
than  by  low  jests,  aukward  buffoonery,  or  the 
dull  scurrilities  of  either  party. 

If  such  a  correspondence  will  be  agreeable  to 
you,  be  pleased  to  inform  me  in  two  posts,  what 
the  conditions  are  on  which  you  shall  expect 
it.  Your  late  offer3  gives  me  no  reason  to  dis¬ 
trust  your  generosity.  If  you  engage  in  any  lit¬ 
erary  projects  besides  this  paper,  I  have  other 
designs  to  impart,  if  I  could  be  secure  from  hav¬ 
ing  others  reap  the  advantage  of  what  I  should 
hint. 

Your  letter  by  being  directed  to  S.  Smith ,  to  be 
left  at  the  Castle  in  Birmingham,  Warwickshire, 
will  reach 

Your  humble  servant. 

1Miss  Cave,  the  grand-niece  of  Mr.  Edward 
Cave,  has  obligingly  shewn  me  the  originals  of  this 
and  the  other  letters  of  Dr.  Johnson,  to  him,  which 
were  first  published  in  The  Gentleman's  Magazine , 
lv.  3,  with  notes  by  Mr.  John  Nichols,  the  worthy 
and  indefatigable  editor  of  that  valuable  miscel¬ 
lany,  signed  N. ;  some  of  which  I  shall  occasionally 
transcribe  in  the  course  of  this  work. 

2Sir  John  Floyer’s  Treatise  on  Cold  Baths.  The 
Gentleman' s  Magazine,  i734>  P-  1 97* 

3A  prize  of  fifty  pounds  for  the  best  poem  on 
“Life,  Death,  Judgement,  Heaven  and  Hell.”  See 
The  Gentleman' s  Magazine ,  iv,  p.  560.  [N.j 


Mr.  Cave  has  put  a  note  on  this  letter,  “An¬ 
swered  Dec.  2.”  But  whether  any  thing  was  done 
in  consequence  of  it  we  are  not  informed. 

Johnson  had,  from  his  early  youth,  been  sen¬ 
sible  to  the  influence  of  female  charms.  When 
at  Stourbridge  school,  he  was  much  enamoured 
of  Olivia  Lloyd,  a  young  quaker,  to  whom  he 
wrote  a  copy  of  verses,  which  I  have  not  been 
able  to  recover;  but  with  what  facility  and  ele¬ 
gance  he  could  warble  the  amorous  lay,  will 
appear  from  the  following  lines  which  he  wrote 
for  his  friend  Mr.  Edmund  Hector. 

Verses  to  a  Lady,  on  Receiving  from  Her 
a  Sprig  of  Myrtle 

What  hopes ,  what  terrours  does  thy  gift  create , 
Ambiguous  emblem  of  uncertain  fate: 

The  myrtle,  ensign  of  supreme  command , 

Consign'd  by  Venus  to  Melissa's  hand; 

Not  less  capricious  than  a  reigning  fair. 

Now  grants,  and  now  rejects  a  lover's  prayer. 

In  myrtle  shades  oft  sings  the  happy  swain. 

In  myrtle  shades  despairing  ghosts  complain ; 

The  myrtle  crowns  the  happy  lovers'  heads, 

The  unhappy  lovers'  grave  the  myrtle  spreads: 

0  then  the  meaning  of  thy  gift  impart , 

And  ease  the  throbbings  of  an  anxious  heart! 

Soon  must  this  bough,  as  you  shall  fix  his  doom, 
Adorn  Philander' s  head,  or  grace  his  tombA 

4Mrs.  Piozzi  gives  the  following  account  of  this 
little  composition  from  Dr.  Johnson’s  own  relation 
to  her,  on  her  inquiring  whether  it  was  rightly 
attributed  to  him:  “I  think  it  is  now  just  forty 
years  ago,  that  a  young  fellow  had  a  sprig  of  myr¬ 
tle  given  him  by  a  girl  he  courted,  and  asked  me  to 
write  him  some  verses  that  he  mignt  present  her  in 
return.  I  promised,  but  forgot;  and  when  he  called 
for  his  lines  at  the  time  agreed  on — Sit  still  a  mo¬ 
ment,  (says  I)  dear  Mund,  and  I’ll  fetch  them  thee 
— So  stepped  aside  for  five  minutes,  and  wrote  the 
nonsense  you  now  keep  such  a  stir  about.”  Anec., 
P-  34- 

In  my  first  edition  I  was  induced  to  doubt  the 
authenticity  of  this  account,  by  the  following  cir¬ 
cumstantial  statement  in  a  letter  to  me  from  Miss 
Seward,  of  Lichfield: — “/  know  those  verses  were 
addressed  to  Lucy  Porter,  when  he  was  enamoured 
of  her  in  his  boyish  days,  two  or  three  years  before 
he  had  seen  her  mother,  his  future  wife.  He  wrote 
them  at  my  grandfather’s,  and  gave  them  to  Lucy 
in  the  presence  of  my  mother,  to  whom  he  showed 
them  on  the  instant.  She  used  to  repeat  them  to 
me,  when  I  asked  her  for  the  Verses  Dr.  Johnson  gave 
her  on  a  Sprig  of  Myrtle,  which  he  had  stolen  or  begged 
from  her  bosom.  We  all  know  honest  Lucy  Porter  to 
have  been  incapable  of  the  mean  vanity  of  apply¬ 
ing  to  herself  a  compliment  not  intended  for  her.” 
Such  was  this  lady’s  statement,  which  I  make  no 
doubt  she  supposed  to  be  correct;  but  it  shews  how 
dangerous  it  is  to  trust  too  implicitly  to  traditional 
testimony  and  ingenious  inference;  for  Mr.  Hector 
has  lately  assured  me  that  Mrs.  Piozzi’s  account  is 
in  this  instance  accurate,  and  that  he  was  the  per¬ 
son  for  whom  Johnson  wrote  those  verses,  which 


22 


BOSWELL 


His  juvenile  attachments  to  the  fair  sex  were, 
however,  very  transient;  and  it  is  certain  that 
he  formed  no  criminal  connection  whatsoever. 
Mr.  Hector,  who  lived  with  him  in  his  younger 
days  in  the  utmost  intimacy  and  social  freedom, 
has  assured  me,  that  even  at  that  ardent  season 
his  conduct  was  strictly  virtuous  in  that  respect; 
and  that  though  he  loved  to  exhilarate  himself 
with  wine,  he  never  knew  him  intoxicated  but 
once. 

In  a  man  whom  religious  education  has  se¬ 
cured  from  licentious  indulgences,  the  passion  of 
love,  when  once  it  has  seized  him,  is  exceed¬ 
ingly  strong;  being  unimpaired  by  dissipation, 
and  totally  concentrated  in  one  object.  This 
was  experienced  by  Johnson,  when  he  became 
the  fervent  admirer  of  Mrs.  Porter,  after  her 
first  husband’s  death.  Miss  Porter  told  me,  that 
when  he  was  first  introduced  to  her  mother,  his 
appearance  was  very  forbidding:  he  was  then 
lean  and  lank,  so  that  his  immense  structure  of 

have  been  erroneously  ascribed  to  Mr.  Hammond. 

I  am  obliged  in  so  many  instances  to  notice 
Mrs.  Piozzi’s  incorrectness  of  relation,  that  I  glad¬ 
ly  seize  this  opportunity  of  acknowledging,  that 
however  often,  she  is  not  always  inaccurate. 

The  author  having  been  drawn  into  a  contro¬ 
versy  with  Miss  Anna  Seward,  in  consequence  of 
the  preceding  statement,  (which  may  be  found  in 
The  Gentleman's  Magazine ,  liii,  liv)  received  the 
following  letter  from  Mr.  Edmund  Hector,  on  the 
subject: 

“Dear  Sir,  I  am  sorry  to  see  you  are  engaged  in 
altercation  with  a  Lady,  who  seems  unwilling  to 
be  convinced  of  her  errors.  Surely  it  would  be 
more  ingenuous  to  acknowledge,  than  to  persevere. 

“Lately,  in  looking  over  some  papers  I  meant  to 
burn,  I  found  the  original  manuscript  of  the  Myr - 
tie ,  with  the  date  on  it,  1731,  which  I  have  in¬ 
closed. 

“The  true  history  (which  I  could  swear  to)  is  as 
follows:  Mr.  Morgan  Graves,  the  elder  brother  of 
a  worthy  Clergyman  near  Bath,  with  whom  I  was 
acquainted,  waited  upon  a  lady  in  this  neighbour¬ 
hood,  who  at  parting  presented  him  the  branch. 
He  shewed  it  me,  and  wished  much  to  return  the 
compliment  in  verse.  I  applied  to  Johnson,  who 
was  with  me,  and  in  about  half  an  hour  dictated 
the  verses  which  I  sent  to  my  friend. 

“I  most  solemnly  declare,  at  that  time  Johnson 
was  an  entire  stranger  to  the  Porter  family;  and  it 
was  almost  two  years  after  that  I  introduced  him 
to  the  acquaintance  of  Porter,  whom  I  bought  my 
cloaths  of. 

“If  you  intend  to  convince  this  obstinate  wo¬ 
man,  and  to  exhibit  to  the  publick  the  truth  of  your 
narrative,  you  are  at  liberty  to  make  what  use  you 
please  of  this  statement. 

“I  hope  you  will  pardon  me  for  taking  up  so 
much  of  your  time.  Wishing  you  multos  et  Jelices 
annos ,  I  shall  subscribe  myself, 

“Your  obliged  humble  servant, 

“E.  Hector” 

“Birmingham,  Jan.  9th,  1794” 


[ 1 735 

bones  was  hideously  striking  to  the  eye,  and  the 
scars  of  the  scrophula  were  deeply  visible.  He 
also  wore  his  hair,  which  was  straight  and  stiff, 
and  separated  behind:  and  he  often  had,  seem¬ 
ingly,  convulsive  starts  and  odd  gesticulations, 
which  tended  to  excite  at  once  surprize  and  ridi¬ 
cule.  Mrs.  Porter  was  so  much  engaged  by  his 
conversation  that  she  overlooked  all  these  ex¬ 
ternal  disadvantages,  and  said  to  her  daughter, 
“this  is  the  most  sensible  man  that  I  ever  saw 
in  my  life.” 

Though  Mrs.  Porter  was  double  the  age  of 
Johnson,* 1  and  her  person  and  manner,  as  des¬ 
cribed  to  me  by  the  late  Mr.  Garrick,  were  by 
no  means  pleasing  to  others,  she  must  have  had 
a  superiority  of  understanding  and  talents,  as 
she  certainly  inspired  him  with  a  more  than 
ordinary  passion;  and  she  having  signified  her 
willingness  to  accept  of  his  hand,  he  went  to 
Lichfield  to  ask  his  mother’s  consent  to  the 
marriage,  which  he  could  not  but  be  conscious 
was  a  very  imprudent  scheme,  both  on  account 
of  their  disparity  of  years,  and  her  want  of  for¬ 
tune.  But  Mrs.  Johnson  knew  too  well  the  ardour 
of  her  son’s  temper,  and  was  too  tender  a  parent 
to  oppose  his  inclinations. 

I  know  not  for  what  reason  the  marriage 
ceremony  was  not  performed  at  Birmingham; 
but  a  resolution  was  taken  that  it  should  be  at 
Derby,  for  which  place  the  bride  and  bride¬ 
groom  set  out  on  horseback,  I  suppose  in  very 
good  humour.  But  though  Mr.  Topham  Beau- 
clerk  used  archly  to  mention  Johnson’s  having 
told  him,  with  much  gravity,  “Sir,  it  was  a  love 
marriage  on  both  sides,”  I  have  had  from  my 
illustrious  friend  the  following  curious  account 
of  their  journey  to  church  upon  the  nuptial 
morn : 

9 th  July: — “Sir,  she  had  read  the  old  ro¬ 
mances,  and  had  got  into  her  head  the  fantasti¬ 
cal  notion  that  a  woman  of  spirit  should  use  her 
lover  like  a  dog.  So,  Sir,  at  first  she  told  me  that 
I  rode  too  fast,  and  she  could  not  keep  up  with 
me;  and,  when  I  rode  a  little  slower,  she  passed 
me,  and  complained  that  I  lagged  behind.  I  was 
not  to  be  made  the  slave  of  caprice;  and  I  re¬ 
solved  to  begin  as  I  meant  to  end.  I  therefore 
pushed  on  briskly,  till  I  was  fairly  out  of  her 
sight.  The  road  lay  between  two  hedges,  so  I 
was  sure  she  could  not  miss  it;  and  I  contrived 
that  she  should  soon  come  up  with  me.  When 
she  did,  I  observed  her  to  be  in  tears.” 

This,  it  must  be  allowed,  was  a  singular  be¬ 
ginning  of  connubial  felicity;  but  there  is  no 

!Mrs.  Johnson  was  born  on  Feb.  4,  1688-9. 
[M.] 


I 


1736]  LIFE  OF 

doubt  that  Johnson,  though  he  thus  shewed  a 
manly  firmness,  proved  a  most  affectionate  and 
indulgent  husband,  to  the  last  moment  of  Mrs. 
Johnson’s  life:  and  in  his  Prayers  and  Meditations , 
we  find  very  remarkable  evidence  that  his  re¬ 
gard  and  fondness  for  her  never  ceased,  even 
after  her  death. 

He  now  set  up  a  private  academy,  for  which 
purpose  he  hired  a  large  house,  well  situated  near 
his  native  city.  In  The  Gentleman's  Magazine  for 
1736,  there  is  the  following  advertisement: 

“At  Edial,  near  Lichfield,  in  Staffordshire, 
young  gendemen  are  boarded  and  taught  the 
Latin  and  Greek  languages,  by  Samuel  John¬ 
son.” 

But  the  only  pupils  that  were  put  under  his 
care  were  the  celebrated  David  Garrick  and  his 
brother  George,  and  a  Mr.  Offely,  a  young  gen- 
deman  of  good  fortune  who  died  early.  As  yet, 
his  name  had  nothing  of  that  celebrity  which 
afterwards  commanded  the  highest  attention  and 
respect  of  mankind.  Had  such  an  advertisement 
appeared  after  the  publication  of  his  London ,  or 
his  Rambler ,  or  his  Dictionary 5  how  would  it  have 
burst  upon  the  world !  with  what  eagerness  would 
the  great  and  the  wealthy  have  embraced  an  op¬ 
portunity  of  putting  their  sons  under  the  learned 
tuition  of  Samuel  Johnson.  The  truth,  however, 
is,  that  he  was  not  so  well  qualified  for  being  a 
teacher  of  elements,  and  a  conductor  in  learn¬ 
ing  by  regular  gradations,  as  men  of  inferiour 
powers  of  mind.  His  own  acquisitions  had  been 
made  by  fits  and  starts,  by  violent  irruptions  in¬ 
to  the  regions  of  knowledge;  and  it  could  not  be 
expected  that  his  impatience  would  be  subdued, 
and  his  impetuosity  restrained,  so  as  to  fit  him 
for  a  quiet  guide  to  novices.  The  art  of  commu¬ 
nicating  instruction,  of  whatever  kind,  is  much 
to  be  valued;  and  I  have  ever  thought  that  those 
who  devote  themselves  to  this  employment,  and 
do  their  duty  with  diligence  and  success,  are  en- 
tided  to  very  high  respect  from  the  community, 
as  Johnson  himself  often  maintained.  Yet  I  am 
of  opinion  that  the  greatest  abilities  are  not  only 
not  required  for  this  office,  but  render  a  man 
less  fit  for  it. 

While  we  acknowledge  the  justness  of  Thom¬ 
son’s  beautiful  remark, 

Delightfid  task!  to  rear  the  tender  thought , 

And  teach  the  young  idea  how  to  shoot ! 
we  must  consider  that  this  delight  is  perceptible 
only  by  “a  mind  at  ease,”  a  mind  at  once  calm 
and  clear;  but  that  a  mind  gloomy  and  impet¬ 
uous  like  that  of  Johnson,  cannot  be  fixed  for 
any  length  of  time  in  minute  attention,  and 
must  be  so  frequendy  irritated  by  unavoidable 


JOHNSON  23 

slowness  and  errour  in  the  advances  of  scholars, 
as  to  perform  the  duty,  with  litde  pleasure  to 
the  teacher,  and  no  great  advantage  to  the 
pupils.  Good  temper  is  a  most  essential  requi¬ 
site  in  a  Preceptor.  Horace  paints  the  character 
as  bland: 

.  .  .  Ut  pueris  olim  dant  crustula  blandi 
Doctores ,  elementa  velint  ut  discere  prima . 

Johnson  was  not  more  satisfied  with  his  situa¬ 
tion  as  the  master  of  an  academy,  than  with 
that  of  the  usher  of  a  school;  we  need  not  won¬ 
der,  therefore,  that  he  did  not  keep  his  academy 
above  a  year  and  a  half.  From  Mr.  Garrick’s 
account  he  did  not  appear  to  have  been  pro¬ 
foundly  reverenced  by  his  pupils.  His  oddities  of 
manner,  and  uncouth  gesticulations,  could  not 
but  be  the  subject  of  merriment  to  them;  and,  in 
particular,  the  young  rogues  used  to  listen  at 
the  door  of  his  bed-chamber,  and  peep  through 
the  key-hole,  that  they  might  turn  into  ridicule 
his  tumultuous  and  awkward  fondness  for  Mrs. 
Johnson,  whom  he  used  to  name  by  the  familiar 
appellation  of  Tetty  or  Tetsey,  which,  like  Betty 
or  Betsey ,  is  provincially  used  as  a  contraction 
for  Elisabeth ,  her  Christian  name,  but  which  to 
us  seems  ludicrous,  when  applied  to  a  woman  of 
her  age  and  appearance.  Mr.  Garrick  described 
her  to  me  as  very  fat,  with  a  bosom  of  more  than 
ordinary  protuberance,  with  swelled  cheeks  of  a 
florid  red,  produced  by  thick  painting,  and  in¬ 
creased  by  the  liberal  use  of  cordials;  flaring 
and  fantastick  in  her  dress,  and  affected  both  in 
her  speech  and  her  general  behaviour.  I  have 
seen  Garrick  exhibit  her,  by  his  exquisite  talent 
of  mimickry,  so  as  to  excite  the  heartiest  bursts 
of  laughter;  but  he,  probably,  as  is  the  case  in 
all  such  representations,  considerably  aggra¬ 
vated  the  picture. 

That  Johnson  well  knew  the  most  proper 
course  to  be  pursued  in  the  instruction  of  youth, 
is  authentically  ascertained  by  the  following 
paper  in  his  own  hand-writing,  given  about  this 
period  to  a  relation,  and  now  in  the  possession 
of  Mr.  John  Nichols: 

Scheme  for  the  Classes  of  a  Grammar  School 

When  the  introduction,  or  formation  of  nouns 
and  verbs,  is  perfecdy  mastered,  let  them  learn 

Corderius  by  Mr.  Clarke,  beginning  at  the 
same  time  to  translate  out  of  the  introduction, 
that  by  this  means  they  may  learn  the  syntax. 
Then  let  them  proceed  to 

Erasmus,  with  an  English  translation,  by  the 
same  authour. 

Class  II.  Learns  Eutropius  and  Cornelius  Ne- 
pos,  or  Justin,  with  the  translation. 

N.B.  The  first  class  gets  for  their  part  every 


24 

morning  the  rules  which  they  have  learned  be¬ 
fore,  and  in  the  afternoon  learns  the  Latin  rules 
of  the  nouns  and  verbs. 

They  are  examined  in  the  rules  which  they 
have  learned  every  Thursday  and  Saturday. 

The  second  class  does  the  same  whilst  they 
are  in  Eutropius;  afterwards  their  part  is  in  the 
irregular  nouns  and  verbs,  and  in  the  rules  for 
making  and  scanning  verses.  They  are  examined 
as  the  first. 

Class  III.  Ovid’s  Metamorphoses  in  the  morn¬ 
ing,  and  Caesar’s  Commentaries  in  the  afternoon. 

Practise  in  the  Latin  rules  till  they  are  perfect 
in  them;  afterwards  in  Mr.  Leeds’s  Greek  Gram¬ 
mar.  Examined  as  before. 

Afterwards  they  proceed  to  Virgil,  beginning 
at  the  same  time  to  write  themes  and  verses, 
and  to  learn  Greek;  from  thence  passing  on  to 
Horace,  &c.  as  shall  seem  most  proper. 

I  know  not  well  what  books  to  direct  you  to, 
because  you  have  not  informed  me  what  study 
you  will  apply  yourself  to.  I  believe  it  will  be 
most  for  your  advantage  to  apply  yourself  whol¬ 
ly  to  the  languages,  till  you  go  to  the  University. 
The  Greek  authours  I  think  it  best  for  you  to 
read  are  these:  Cebes;  ^Elian,  Lucian  by  Leeds, 
Xenophon  (Attick);  Homer  (Ionick);  Theocri¬ 
tus  (Dorick);  Euripides  (Attick  and  Dorick). 

Thus  you  will  be  tolerably  skilled  in  all  the 
dialects,  beginning  with  the  Attick,  to  which  the 
rest  must  be  referred. 

In  the  study  of  Latin,  it  is  proper  not  to  read 
the  latter  authours,  till  you  are  well  versed  in 
those  of  the  purest  ages;  as  Terence,  Tully,  Cae¬ 
sar,  Sallust,  Nepos,  Velleius  Paterculus,  Virgil, 
Horace,  Phaedrus. 

The  greatest  and  most  necessary  task  still  re¬ 
mains,  to  attain  a  habit  of  expression,  without 
which  knowledge  is  of  little  use.  This  is  neces¬ 
sary  in  Latin,  and  more  necessary  in  English; 
and  can  only  be  acquired  by  a  daily  imitation 
of  the  best  and  correctest  authours. 

Sam.  Johnson 

While  Johnson  kept  his  academy,  there  can 
be  no  doubt  that  he  was  insensibly  furnishing 
his  mind  with  various  knowledge;  but  I  have 
not  discovered  that  he  wrote  any  thing  except 
a  great  part  of  his  tragedy  of  Irene.  Mr.  Peter 
Garrick,  the  elder  brother  of  David,  told  me 
that  he  remembered  Johnson’s  borrowing  the 
Turkish  History  of  him,  in  order  to  form  his  play 
from  it.  When  he  had  finished  some  part  of  it, 
he  read  what  he  had  done  to  Mr.  Walmsley, 
who  objected  to  his  having  already  brought  his 
heroine  into  great  distress,  and  asked  him, 
“How  can  you  possibly  contrive  to  plunge  her 
into  deeper  calamity?”  Johnson,  in  sly  allusion  to 
the  supposed  oppressive  proceedings  of  the  court 
of  which  Mr.  Walmsley  was  register,  replied, 
“Sir,  I  can  put  her  into  the  Spiritual  Court!” 


[1737 

Mr.  Walmsley,  however,  was  well  pleased 
with  this  proof  of  Johnson’s  abilities  as  a  dra- 
matick  writer,  and  advised  him  to  finish  the 
tragedy,  and  produce  it  on  the  stage. 

Johnson  now  thought  of  trying  his  fortune  in 
London,  the  great  field  of  genius  and  exertion, 
where  talents  of  every  kind  have  the  fullest 
scope,  and  the  highest  encouragement.  It  is  a 
memorable  circumstance  that  his  pupil  David 
Garrick  went  thither  at  the  same  time,1  with  in¬ 
tention  to  complete  his  education,  and  follow 
the  profession  of  the  law,  from  which  he  was 
soon  diverted  by  his  decided  preference  for  the 
stage. 

This  joint  expedition  of  those  two  eminent 
men  to  the  metropolis,  was  many  years  after¬ 
wards  noticed  in  an  allegorical  poem  on  Shaks- 
peare’s  Mulberry  Tree,  by  Mr.  Lovibond,  the 
ingenious  authour  of  The  Tears  of  Old-Mayday. 

They  were  recommended  to  Mr.  Colson,2  an 
eminent  mathematician  and  master  of  an  acad¬ 
emy,  by  the  following  letter  from  Mr.  Walms¬ 
ley: 

To  the  Reverend  Mr.  Colson 

Lichfield,  March  2,  1737 

Dear  Sir,  I  had  the  favour  of  yours,  and  am 
extremely  obliged  to  you;  but  I  cannot  say  I 
had  a  greater  affection  for  you  upon  it  than  I 
had  before,  being  long  since  so  much  endeared 
to  you,  as  well  by  an  early  friendship,  as  by  your 
many  excellent  and  valuable  qualifications;  and, 
had  I  a  son  of  my  own,  it  would  be  my  ambi¬ 
tion,  instead  of  sending  him  to  the  University, 
to  dispose  of  him  as  this  young  gentleman  is. 

He,  and  another  neighbour  of  mine,  one  Mr. 
Samuel  Johnson,  set  out  this  morning  for  Lon¬ 
don  together.  Davy  Garrick  is  to  be  with  you 
early  the  next  week,  and  Mr.  Johnson  to  try  his 
fate  with  a  tragedy,  and  to  see  to  get  himself  em¬ 
ployed  in  some  translation,  either  from  the  Lat¬ 
in  or  the  French.  Johnson  is  a  very  good  scholar 

!Both  of  them  used  to  talk  pleasantly  of  this 
their  first  journey  to  London.  Garrick,  evidently 
meaning  to  embellish  a  little,  said  one  day  in  my 
hearing,  “we  rode  and  tied.”  And  the  Bishop  of 
Killaloe  informed  me,  that  at  another  time,  when 
Johnson  and  Garrick  were  dining  together  in  a 
pretty  large  company,  Johnson  humorously  ascer¬ 
taining  the  chronology  of  something,  expressed 
himself  thus:  “that  was  the  year  when  I  came  to 
London  with  two-pence  half-penny  in  my  pocket.” 
Garrick  overhearing  him,  exclaimed,  “Eh?  what 
do  you  say?  with  two-pence  half-penny  in  your 
pocket?” — Johnson,  “Why  yes;  when  I  came  with 
two-pence  half-penny  in  my  pocket,  and  thou, 
Davy,  with  three  half-pence  in  thine.” 

2Mr.  Colson  was  First  Master  of  the  Free 
School  at  Rochester.  In  1739  he  was  appointed 
Lucasian  Professor  of  Mathematics  at  Cambridge. 

[MJ 


BOSWELL 


1737] 

and  poet,  and  I  have  great  hopes  will  turn  out  a 
fine  tragedy-writer.  If  it  should  any  way  lie  in 
your  way,  doubt  not  but  you  would  be  ready  to 
recommend  and  assist  your  countryman. 

G.  Walmsley 

How  he  employed  himself  upon  his  first  com¬ 
ing  to  London  is  not  particularly  known.1  I 
never  heard  that  he  found  any  protection  or  en¬ 
couragement  by  the  means  of  Mr.  Colson,  to 
whose  academy  David  Garrick  went.  Mrs.  Lucy 
Porter  told  me,  that  Mr.  Walmsley  gave  him  a 
letter  of  introduction  to  Lintot  his  bookseller, 
and  that  Johnson  wrote  some  things  for  him; 
but  I  imagine  this  to  be  a  mistake,  for  I  have 
discovered  no  trace  of  it,  and  I  am  pretty  sure 
he  told  me  that  Mr.  Cave  was  the  first  pub¬ 
lisher  by  whom  his  pen  was  engaged  in  London. 

He  had  a  little  money  when  he  came  to  town, 
and  he  knew  how  he  could  live  in  the  cheapest 
manner.  His  first  lodgings  were  at  the  house  of 
Mr.  Norris,  a  staymaker,  in  Exeter-street,  ad¬ 
joining  Catharine-street,  in  the  Strand.  “I 
dined  (said  he)  very  well  for  eight-pence,  with 
very  good  company,  at  the  Pine  Apple  in  New- 
street,  just  by.  Several  of  them  had  travelled. 
They  expected  to  meet  every  day;  but  did  not 
know  one  another’s  names.  It  used  to  cost  the 
rest  a  shilling,  for  they  drank  wine;  but  I  had  a 
cut  of  meat  for  six-pence,  and  bread  for  a  penny, 
and  gave  the  waiter  a  penny;  so  that  I  was  quite 
well  served,  nay,  better  than  the  rest,  for  they 
gave  the  waiter  nothing.”  He  at  this  time,  I  be¬ 
lieve,  abstained  entirely  from  fermented  liquors: 
a  practice  to  which  he  rigidly  conformed  for 
many  years  together,  at  different  periods  of  his 
life. 

His  Ofellus  in  the  Art  of  Living  in  London ,  I 
have  heard  him  relate,  was  an  Irish  painter, 
whom  he  knew  at  Birmingham,  and  who  had 
practised  his  own  precepts  of  oeconomy  for  sev¬ 
eral  years  in  the  British  capital.  He  assured 
Johnson,  who,  I  suppose,  was  then  meditating 
to  try  his  fortune  in  London,  but  was  apprehen¬ 
sive  of  the  expence,  “that  thirty  pounds  a  year 
was  enough  to  enable  a  man  to  live  there  with¬ 
out  being  contemptible.”  He  allowed  ten 
pounds  for  clothes  and  linen.  He  said  a  man 
might  live  in  a  garret  at  eighteen-pence  a  week; 
few  people  would  inquire  where  he  lodged;  and 

xOne  curious  anecdote  was  communicated  by 
himself  to  Mr.  John  Nichols.  Mr.  Wilcox,  the 
bookseller,  on  being  informed  by  him  that  his  in¬ 
tention  was  to  get  his  livelihood  as  an  authour, 
eyed  his  robust  frame  attentively,  and  with  a  signi¬ 
ficant  look,  said,  “You  had  better  buy  a  porter’s 
knot.”  He  however  added,  “Wilcox  was  one  of  my 
best  friends.” 


25 

if  they  did,  it  was  easy  to  say,  “Sir,  I  am  to  be 
found  at  such  a  place.”  By  spending  three¬ 
pence  in  a  coffee-house,  he  might  be  for  some 
hours  every  day  in  very  good  company;  he 
might  dine  for  six-pence,  breakfast  on  bread 
and  milk  for  a  penny,  and  do  without  supper. 
On  clean-shirt-day  he  went  abroad,  and  paid 
visits.”  I  have  heard  him  more  than  once  talk  of 
this  frugal  friend,  whom  he  recollected  with  es¬ 
teem  and  kindness,  and  did  not  like  to  have  one 
smile  at  the  recital.  “This  man  (said  he,  gravely) 
was  a  very  sensible  man,  who  perfectly  under¬ 
stood  common  affairs:  a  man  of  a  great  deal  of 
knowledge  of  the  world,  fresh  from  life,  not 
strained  through  books.  He  borrowed  a  horse 
and  ten  pounds  at  Birmingham.  Finding  himself 
master  of  so  much  money,  he  set  off  for  West 
Chester,  in  order  to  get  to  Ireland.  He  returned 
the  horse,  and  probably  the  ten  pounds  too,  af¬ 
ter  he  got  home.” 

Considering  Johnson’s  narrow  circumstances 
in  the  early  part  of  his  life,  and  particularly  at 
the  interesting  aera  of  his  launching  into  the 
ocean  of  London,  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at, 
that  an  actual  instance,  proved  by  experience  of 
the  possibility  of  enjoying  the  intellectual  lux¬ 
ury  of  social  life,  upon  a  very  small  income, 
should  deeply  engage  his  attention,  and  be  ever 
recollected  by  him  as  a  circumstance  of  much 
importance.  He  amused  himself,  I  remember, 
by  computing  how  much  more  expence  was 
absolutely  necessary  to  live  upon  the  same  scale 
with  that  which  his  friend  described,  when  the 
value  of  money  was  diminished  by  the  progress  of 
commerce.  It  may  be  estimated  that  double  the 
money  might  now  with  difficulty  be  sufficient. 

Amidst  this  cold  obscurity,  there  was  one 
brilliant  circumstance  to  cheer  him;  he  was  well 
acquainted  with  Mr.  Henry  Hervey,2  one  of  the 
branches  of  the  noble  family  of  that  name,  who 
had  been  quartered  at  Lichfield  as  an  officer  of 
the  army,  and  had  at  this  time  a  house  in  Lon¬ 
don,  where  Johnson  was  frequently  entertained, 
and  had  an  opportunity  of  meeting  genteel 
company.  Not  very  long  before  his  death,  he 
mentioned  this,  among  other  particulars  of  his 
life,  which  he  was  kindly  communicating  to  me; 
and  he  described  this  early  friend,  “Harry  Her¬ 
vey,”  thus:  “He  was  a  vicious  man,  but  very 
kind  to  me.  If  you  call  a  dog  Hervey,  I  shall 
love  him.” 

2The  honourable  Henry  Hervey,  third  son  of 
the  first  Earl  of  Bristol,  quitted  the  army  and  took 
orders.  He  married  a  sister  of  Sir  Thomas  Aston, 
by  whom  he  got  the  Aston  Estate,  and  assumed 
the  name  and  arms  of  that  family.  Vide  Collins’s 
Peerage . 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


26 


BOSWELL 


He  told  me  he  had  now  written  only  three 
acts  of  his  Irene ,  and  that  he  retired  for  some 
time  to  lodgings  at  Greenwich,  where  he  pro¬ 
ceeded  in  it  somewhat  further,  and  used  to  com¬ 
pose,  walking  in  the  Park;  but  did  not  stay  long 
enough  at  that  place  to  finish  it. 

At  this  period  we  find  the  following  letter 
from  him  to  Mr.  Edward  Cave,  which,  as  a  link 
in  the  chain  of  his  literary  history,  it  is  proper  to 
insert: 

To  Mr.  Cave 

Greenwich,  next  door  to  the  Golden  Heart, 
Church-street,  July  12,  1737 

Sir,  Having  observed  in  your  papers  very  un¬ 
common  offers  of  encouragement  to  men  of  let¬ 
ters,  I  have  chosen,  being  a  stranger  in  London, 
to  communicate  to  you  the  following  design, 
which,  I  hope,  if  you  join  in  it,  will  be  of  advan¬ 
tage  to  both  of  us. 

The  History  of  the  Council  of  Trent  having 
been  lately  translated  into  French,  and  pub¬ 
lished  with  large  Notes  by  Dr.  Le  Courayer,  the 
reputation  of  that  book  is  so  much  revived  in 
England,  that,  it  is  presumed,  a  new  translation 
of  it  from  the  Italian,  together  with  Le  Couray- 
er’s  Notes  from  the  French,  could  not  fail  of  a 
favourable  reception. 

If  it  be  answered,  that  the  History  is  already 
in  English,  it  must  be  remembered,  that  there 
was  the  same  objection  against  Le  Courayer’s 
undertaking,  with  this  disadvantage,  that  the 
French  had  a  version  by  one  of  their  best  trans¬ 
lators,  whereas  you  cannot  read  three  pages  of 
the  English  History  without  discovering  that  the 
style  is  capable  of  great  improvements;  but 
whether  those  improvements  are  to  be  expected 
from  the  attempt,  you  must  judge  from  the  spe¬ 
cimen,  which,  if  you  approve  the  proposal,  I 
shall  submit  to  your  examination. 

Suppose  the  merit  of  the  versions  equal,  we 
may  hope  that  the  addition  of  the  Notes  will 
turn  the  balance  in  our  favour,  considering  the 
reputation  of  the  Annotator. 

Be  pleased  to  favour  me  with  a  speedy  an¬ 
swer,  if  you  are  not  willing  to  engage  in  this 
scheme;  and  appoint  me  a  day  to  wait  upon 
you,  if  you  are.  I  am,  Sir,  your  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

It  should  seem  from  this  letter,  though  sub¬ 
scribed  with  his  own  name,  that  he  had  not  yet 
been  introduced  to  Mr.  Cave.  We  shall  pre¬ 
sently  see  what  was  done  in  consequence  of  the 
proposal  which  it  contains. 

In  the  course  of  the  summer  he  returned  to 
Lichfield,  where  he  had  left  Mrs.  Johnson,  and 
there  he  at  last  finished  his  tragedy,  which  was 
not  executed  with  his  rapidity  of  composition 
upon  other  occasions,  but  was  slowly  and  pain¬ 
fully  elaborated.  A  few  days  before  his  death, 


[1737 

while  burning  a  great  mass  of  papers,  he  picked 
out  from  among  them  the  original  unformed 
sketch  of  this  tragedy,  in  his  own  hand-writing, 
and  gave  it  to  Mr.  Langton,  by  whose  favour  a 
copy  of  it  is  now  in  my  possession.  It  contains 
fragments  of  the  intended  plot,  and  speeches  for 
the  different  persons  of  the  drama,  partly  in  the 
raw  materials  of  prose,  partly  worked  up  into 
verse;  as  also  a  variety  of  hints  for  illustration, 
borrowed  from  the  Greek,  Roman,  and  modern 
writers.  The  hand-writing  is  very  difficult  to  be 
read,  even  by  those  who  were  best  acquainted 
with  Johnson’s  mode  of  penmanship,  which  at 
all  times  was  very  particular.  The  King  having 
graciously  accepted  of  this  manuscript  as  a 
literary  curiosity,  Mr.  Langton  made  a  fair 
and  distinct  copy  of  it,  which  he  ordered  to 
be  bound  up  with  the  original  and  the  print¬ 
ed  tragedy;  and  the  volume  is  deposited  in 
the  King’s  library.  His  Majesty  was  pleased  to 
permit  Mr.  Langton  to  take  a  copy  of  it  for 
himself. 

The  whole  of  it  is  rich  in  thought  and  imag¬ 
ery,  and  happy  expressions;  and  of  the  disjecta 
membra  scattered  throughout,  and  as  yet  unar¬ 
ranged,  a  good  dramatick  poet  might  avail  him¬ 
self  with  considerable  advantage.  I  shall  give 
my  readers  some  specimens  of  different  kinds, 
distinguishing  them  by  the  Italick  character. 

Nor  think  to  say,  here  will  I  stop, 

Here  will  I  jix  the  limits  of  transgression. 

Nor  farther  tempt  the  avenging  rage  of  heaven . 
When  guilt  like  this  once  harbours  in  the  breast , 
Those  holy  beings,  whose  unseen  direction 
Guides  through  the  maze  of  life  the  steps  of  man. 
Fly  the  detested  mansions  of  impiety, 

And  quit  their  charge  to  horrour  and  to  ruin. 

A  small  part  only  of  this  interesting  admoni¬ 
tion  is  preserved  in  the  play,  and  is  varied,  I 
think,  not  to  advantage: 

The  soul  once  tainted  with  so  foul  a  crime, 

No  more  shall  glow  with  friendship’s  hallow’d 
ardour, 

Those  holy  beings  whose  superior  care 

Guides  erring  mortals  to  the  paths  of  virtue, 

Affrighted  at  impiety  like  thine, 

Resign  their  charge  to  baseness  and  to  ruin. 

I  feel  the  soft  infection 

Flush  in  my  cheek ,  and  wander  in  my  veins. 

Teach  me  the  Grecian  arts  of  soft  persuasion. 

Sure  this  is  love ,  which  heretofore  I  conceived  the  dream 
of  idle  maids ,  and  wanton  poets . 

Though  no  comets  or  prodigies  foretold  the  ruin  of 
Greece,  signs  which  heaven  must  by  another  miracle  enable 
us  to  understand,  yet  might  it  be  foreshewn ,  by  tokens  no 
less  certain,  by  the  vices  which  always  bring  it  on. 


1737]  LIFE  OF 

This  last  passage  is  worked  up  in  the  tragedy 
itself,  as  follows: 

Leontius 

- That  power  that  kindly  spreads 

The  clouds,  a  signal  of  impending  showers. 

To  warn  the  wand’ring  linnet  to  the  shade. 
Beheld,  without  concern,  expiring  Greece, 

And  not  one  prodigy  foretold  our  fate. 

Demetrius 

A  thousand  horrid  prodigies  foretold  it; 

A  feeble  government,  eluded  laws, 

A  factious  populace,  luxurious  nobles, 

And  all  the  maladies  of  sinking  States, 

When  publick  villainy,  too  strong  for  justice, 
Shows  his  bold  front,  the  harbinger  of  ruin, 
Gan  brave  Leontius  call  for  airy  wonders, 
Which  cheats  interpret,  and  which  fools  regard? 
When  some  neglected  fabrick  nods  beneath 
The  weight  of  years,  and  totters  to  the  tempest, 
Must  heaven  despatch  the  messengers  of  light, 
Or  wake  the  dead,  to  warn  us  of  its  fall? 

Mahomet  (to  Irene).  I  have  tried  thee,  and  joy  to 
find  that  thou  deservest  to  be  loved  by  Mahomet , — with  a 
mind  great  as  his  own.  Sure ,  thou  art  an  errour  of  nature , 
and  an  exception  to  the  rest  of  thy  sex ,  and  art  immortal; 
for  sentiments  like  thine  were  never  to  sink  into  nothing.  I 
thought  all  the  thoughts  of  the  fair  had  been  to  select  the 
graces  of  the  day ,  dispose  the  colours  of  the  flaunting  ( flow¬ 
ing )  robe ,  tune  the  voice  and  roll  the  eye ,  place  the  gem , 
choose  the  dress ,  and  add  new  roses  to  the  fading  cheek ,  but 
— sparkling. 

Thus  in  the  tragedy: 

Illustrious  maid,  new  wonders  fix  me  thine; 
Thy  soul  completes  the  triumphs  of  thy  face: 

I  thought,  forgive  my  fair,  the  noblest  aim, 

The  strongest  effort  of  a  female  soul 
Was  but  to  choose  the  graces  of  the  day. 

To  tune  the  tongue,  to  teach  the  eyes  to  roll, 
Dispose  the  colours  of  the  flowing  robe, 

And  add  new  roses  to  the  faded  cheek. 

I  shall  select  one  other  passage,  on  account  of 
the  doctrine  which  it  illustrates.  Irene  ob¬ 
serves, 

<c  That  the  Supreme  Being  will  accept  of  virtue ,  what¬ 
ever  outward  circumstances  it  may  be  accompanied  with , 
and  may  be  delighted  with  varieties  of  worship” :  but  is 
answered ,  u  That  variety  cannot  affect  that  Being ,  who , 
infinitely  happy  in  his  own  perfections ,  wants  no  external 
gratifications;  nor  can  infinite  truth  be  delighted  withfals- 
hood;  that  though  he  may  guide  or  pity  those  he  leaves  in 
darkness ,  he  abandons  those  who  shut  their  eyes  against 
the  beams  of  day.” 

Johnson’s  residence  at  Lichfield,  on  his  return 
to  it  at  this  time,  was  only  for  three  months;  and 
as  he  had  as  yet  seen  but  a  small  part  of  the 


JOHNSON  27 

wonders  of  the  Metropolis,  he  had  little  to  tell 
his  townsmen.  He  related  to  me  the  following 
minute  anecdote  of  this  period:  “In  the  last  age, 
when  my  mother  lived  in  London,  there  were 
two  sets  of  people,  those  who  gave  the  wall,  and 
those  who  took  it;  the  peaceable  and  the  quar¬ 
relsome.  When  I  returned  to  Lichfield,  after 
having  been  in  London,  my  mother  asked  me, 
whether  I  was  one  of  those  who  gave  the  wall, 
or  those  who  took  it.  Now  it  is  fixed  that  every 
man  keeps  to  the  right;  or,  if  one  is  taking  the 
wall,  another  yields  it;  and  it  is  never  a  dis¬ 
pute.”1 

He  now  removed  to  London  with  Mrs.  John¬ 
son;  but  her  daughter,  who  had  lived  with  them 
at  Edial,  was  left  with  her  relations  in  the  coun¬ 
try.  His  lodgings  were  for  some  time  in  Wood- 
stock-street,  near  Hanover-square,  and  after¬ 
wards  in  Castle-street,  near  Cavendish-square. 
As  there  is  something  pleasingly  interesting,  to 
many,  in  tracing  so  great  a  man  through  all  his 
different  habitations,  I  shall,  before  this  work  is 
concluded,  present  my  readers  with  an  exact 
list  of  his  lodgings  and  houses,  in  order  of  time, 
which,  in  placid  condescension  to  my  respectful 
curiosity,  he  one  evening  dictated  to  me,  but 
without  specifying  how  long  he  lived  at  each.  In 
the  progress  of  his  life  I  shall  have  occasion  to 
mention  some  of  them  as  connected  with  parti¬ 
cular  incidents,  or  with  the  writing  of  particular 
parts  of  his  works.  To  some,  this  minute  atten¬ 
tion  may  appear  trifling;  but  when  we  consider 
the  punctilious  exactness  with  which  the  dif¬ 
ferent  houses  in  which  Milton  resided  have  been 
traced  by  the  writers  of  his  life,  a  similar  enthu¬ 
siasm  may  be  pardoned  in  the  biographer  of 
Johnson. 

His  tragedy  being  by  this  time,  as  he  thought, 
completely  finished  and  fit  for  the  stage,  he  was 
very  desirous  that  it  should  be  brought  forward. 
Mr.  Peter  Garrick  told  me,  that  Johnson  and  he 
went  together  to  the  Fountain  tavern,  and 
read  it  over,  and  that  he  afterwards  solicited 
Mr.  Fleetwood,  the  patentee  of  Drury-lane 
theatre,  to  have  it  acted  at  his  house;  but  Mr. 
Fleetwood  would  not  accept  it,  probably  be¬ 
cause  it  was  not  patronized  by  some  man  of 
high  rank;  and  it  was  not  acted  till  1749,  when 
his  friend  David  Garrick  was  manager  of  that 
theatre. 

The  Gentleman! s  Magazine ,  begun  and  carried 
on  by  Mr.  Edward  Gave,  under  the  name  of 
Sylvanus  Urban,  had  attracted  the  notice  and 
esteem  of  Johnson,  in  an  eminent  degree,  be- 

YJournal  of  a  Tour  to  the  Hebrides,  3rd  edit.,  p.  232 
[Sept.  20,  1773]. 


BOSWELL 


[  1738 


28 

fore  he  came  to  London  as  an  adventurer  in  lit¬ 
erature.  He  told  me,  that  when  he  first  saw  St. 
John’s  Gate,  the  place  where  that  deservedly 
popular  miscellany  was  originally  printed,  he 
“beheld  it  with  reverence.”  1  suppose,  indeed, 
that  every  young  authour  has  had  the  same 
kind  of  feeling  for  the  magazine  or  periodical 
publication  which  has  first  entertained  him, 
and  in  which  he  has  first  had  an  opportunity 
to  see  himself  in  print,  without  the  risk  of  expos¬ 
ing  his  name.  I  myself  recollect  such  impres¬ 
sions  from  The  Scots  Magazine ,  which  was  be¬ 
gun  at  Edinburgh  in  the  year  1739,  and  has 
been  ever  conducted  with  judgement,  accuracy, 
and  propriety.  I  yet  cannot  help  thinking  of 
it  with  an  affectionate  regard.  Johnson  has 
dignified  The  Gentleman's  Magazine ,  by  the  im¬ 
portance  with  which  he  invests  the  life  of 
Cave;  but  he  has  given  it  still  greater  lustre  by 
the  various  admirable  Essays  which  he  wrote 
for  it. 

Though  Johnson  was  often  solicited  by  his 
friends  to  make  a  complete  list  of  his  writings, 
and  talked  of  doing  it,  I  believe  with  a  serious 
intention  that  they  should  all  be  collected  on 
his  own  account,  he  put  it  off  from  year  to  year, 
and  at  last  died  without  having  done  it  per¬ 
fectly.  I  have  one  in  his  own  hand-writing, 
which  contains  a  certain  number;  I  indeed 
doubt  if  he  could  have  remembered  every  one 
of  them,  as  they  were  so  numerous,  so  various, 
and  scattered  in  such  a  multiplicity  of  uncon¬ 
nected  publications;  nay,  several  of  them  pub¬ 
lished  under  the  names  of  other  persons,  to 
whom  he  liberally  contributed  from  the  abun¬ 
dance  of  his  mind.  We  must,  therefore,  be  con¬ 
tent  to  discover  them,  partly  from  occasional 
information  given  by  him  to  his  friends,  and 
partly  from  internal  evidence.1 

His  first  performance  in  The  Gentleman's  Mag¬ 
azine ,  which  for  many  years  was  his  principal 
source  for  employment  and  support,  was  a  copy 
of  Latin  verses,  in  March  1 738,  addressed  to  the 
editor  in  so  happy  a  style  of  compliment,  that 
Cave  must  have  been  destitute  both  of  taste  and 
sensibility  had  he  not  felt  himself  highly  grati¬ 
fied. 

1While  in  the  course  of  my  narrative  I  enumer¬ 
ate  his  writings,  I  shall  take  care  that  my  readers 
shall  not  be  left  to  waver  in  doubt,  between  cer¬ 
tainty  and  conjecture,  with  regard  to  their  au¬ 
thenticity;  and,  for  that  purpose,  shall  mark  with 
an  asterisk  (*)  those  which  he  acknowledged  to  his 
friends,  and  with  a  dagger  (f)  those  which  are  as¬ 
certained  to  be  his  by  internal  evidence.  When  any 
other  pieces  are  ascribed  to  him,  I  shall  give  my 
reasons. 


Ad  Urbanum.  * 

Urbane,  nullis Jesse  laboribus. 

Urbane,  nullis  vide  calumniisy 
Cui  j route  sertum  in  eruditd 
Perpetuo  viret  et  virebit; 

Quid  moliatur  gens  imitantiumy 
Quid  et  minetur ,  solicitus parumy 
Vacare  solis  perge  Musis , 

Juxta  animo  studiisque  felix. 

Linguce procacis plumbea  spicula, 

FidenSy  superbo /range  silentio ; 

Victrix  per  obstantes  catervas 
Sedulitas  animosa  tendet. 

Intende  nervoSyfortisy  inanibus 
Risurus  olim  nisibus  cemuli; 

Intende  jam  nervos ,  habebis 
Partidpes  operce  Camcenas . 

Non  ulla  Musis  pagina  gratior, 

Quam  qua  sevens  ludicrajungere 
Novityjatigatamque  nugis 
Utilibus  recreare  mentem. 

Texente  Nymphis  serta  Lycoride , 

Rosa  ruborem  sic  viola  adjuvat 
Inmista,  sic  Iris  re  jut  get 
/Ether eis  variatajucis.2 

S.J. 

2A  translation  of  this  Ode,  by  an  unknown  cor¬ 
respondent,  appeared  in  the  Magazine  for  the  month 
of  May  following: 

Hail,  Urban  !  indefatigable  man , 

Unwearied  yet  by  all  thy  useful  toil ! 

Whom  numerous  slanderers  assault  in  vain; 

Whom  no  base  calumny  can  put  to  foil . 

But  still  the  laurel  on  thy  learned  brow 
Flourishes  fair,  and  shall  for  ever  grow. 

What  mean  the  servile  imitating  crew, 

What  their  vain  blust’ring,  and  their  empty  noise , 
Ne’er  seek:  but  still  thy  noble  ends  pursue , 
Unconquer’d  by  the  rabble’s  venal  voice. 

Still  to  the  Muse  thy  studious  mind  apply , 

Happy  in  temper  as  in  industry. 

The  senseless  sneerings  of  an  haughty  tongue , 
Unworthy  thy  attention  to  engage. 

Unheeded  pass:  and  tho ’  they  mean  thee  wrong , 

By  manly  silence  disappoint  their  rage. 

Assiduous  diligence  confounds  its  foes , 

Resistless,  tho’  malicious  crouds  oppose . 

Exert  thy  powers,  nor  slacken  in  the  course , 

Thy  spotless  fame  shall  quash  all  false  reports: 

Exert  thy  powers,  nor  fear  a  rival’s  force. 

But  thou  shalt  smile  at  all  his  vain  efforts ; 

Thy  labours  shall  be  crown’d  with  large  success; 
The  Muse’s  aid  thy  Magazine  shall  bless. 

No  page  more  grateful  to  th '  harmonious  nine 
Than  that  wherein  thy  labours  we  survey; 

Where  solemn  themes  in  fuller  splendour  shine, 

(. Delightful  mixture,)  blended  with  the  gay. 

Where  in  improving,  various  joys  we  find, 

A  welcome  respite  to  the  wearied  mind. 

Thus  when  the  nymphs  in  some  fair  verdant  mead , 
Of  various  flow’rs  a  beauteous  wreath  compose , 

The  lovely  violet’s  azure-painted  head 


173s  ] 

It  appears  that  he  was  now  enlisted  by  Mr. 
Gave  as  a  regular  coadjutor  in  his  magazine,  by 
which  he  probably  obtained  a  tolerable  liveli¬ 
hood.  At  what  time,  or  by  what  means,  he  had 
acquired  a  competent  knowledge  both  of  French 
and  Italian,  I  do  not  know;  but  he  was  so  well 
skilled  in  them,  as  to  be  sufficiently  qualified  for 
a  translator.  That  part  of  his  labour  which  con¬ 
sisted  in  emendation  and  improvement  of  the 
productions  of  other  contributors,  like  that  em¬ 
ployed  in  levelling  ground,  can  be  perceived 
only  by  those  who  had  an  opportunity  of  com¬ 
paring  the  original  with  the  altered  copy.  What 
we  certainly  know  to  have  been  done  by  him  in 
this  way,  was  the  Debates  in  both  houses  of  Par¬ 
liament,  under  the  name  of  “The  Senate  of 
Lilliput,”  sometimes  with  feigned  denominations 
of  the  several  speakers,  sometimes  with  denom¬ 
inations  formed  of  the  letters  of  their  real  names, 
in  the  manner  of  what  is  called  anagram,  so 
that  they  might  easily  be  decyphered.  Parlia¬ 
ment  then  kept  the  press  in  a  kind  of  mysterious 
awe,  which  made  it  necessary  to  have  recourse 
to  such  devices.  In  our  time  it  has  acquired  an 
unrestrained  freedom,  so  that  the  people  in  all 
parts  of  the  kingdom  have  a  fair,  open,  and 
exact  report  of  the  actual  proceedings  of  their 
representatives  and  legislators,  which  in  our 
constitution  is  highly  to  be  valued;  though,  un¬ 
questionably,  there  has  of  late  been  too  much 
reason  to  complain  of  the  petulance  with  which 
obscure  scribblers  have  presumed  to  treat  men 
of  the  most  respectable  character  and  situation. 

This  important  article  of  The  Gentlemans  Mag¬ 
azine  was,  for  several  years,  executed  by  Mr. 
William  Guthrie,  a  man  who  deserves  to  be 
respectably  recorded  in  the  literary  annals  of 
this  country.  He  was  descended  of  an  ancient 
family  in  Scotland;  but  having  a  small  patri¬ 
mony,  and  being  an  adherent  of  the  unfortu¬ 
nate  house  of  Stuart,  he  could  not  accept  of  any 
office  in  the  state;  he  therefore  came  to  London, 
and  employed  his  talents  and  learning  as  an 
“Authour  by  profession.55  His  writings  in  his¬ 
tory,  criticism,  and  politicks,  had  considerable 
merit.1  He  was  the  first  English  historian  who 
had  recourse  to  that  authentick  source  of  infor- 

Adds  lustre  to  the  crimson-blushing  rose. 

Thus  splendid  Iris ,  with  her  varied  dye , 

Shines  in  the  tether,  and  adorns  the  sky. 

Briton 

JHow  much  poetry  he  wrote,  I  know  not:  but  he 
informed  me,  that  he  was  the  authour  of  the  beau¬ 
tiful  little  piece,  “The  Eagle  and  Robin  Red¬ 
breast,’5  in  the  collection  of  poems  entitled  The 
Union ,  though  it  is  there  said  to  be  written  by  Arch- 
ibald  Scott,  before  the  year  1600. 


29 

mation,  the  Parliamentary  Journals;  and  such 
was  the  power  of  his  political  pen,  that,  at  an 
early  period,  Government  thought  it  worth 
their  while  to  keep  it  quiet  by  a  pension,  which 
he  enjoyed  till  his  death.  Johnson  esteemed  him 
enough  to  wish  that  his  life  should  be  written. 
The  debates  in  Parliament,  which  were  brought 
home  and  digested  by  Guthrie,  whose  memory, 
though  surpassed  by  others  who  have  since  fol¬ 
lowed  him  in  the  same  department,  was  yet 
very  quick  and  tenacious,  were  sent  by  Gave  to 
Johnson  for  his  revision;  and  after  some  time, 
when  Guthrie  had  attained  to  greater  variety  of 
employment,  and  the  speeches  were  more  and 
more  enriched  by  the  accession  of  Johnson’s 
genius,  it  was  resolved  that  he  should  do  the 
whole  himself,  from  the  scanty  notes  furnished 
by  persons  employed  to  attend  in  both  houses  of 
Parliament.  Sometimes,  however,  as  he  himself 
told  me,  he  had  nothing  more  communicated  to 
him  than  the  names  of  the  several  speakers,  and 
the  part  which  they  had  taken  in  the  debate. 

Thus  was  Johnson  employed  during  some  of 
the  best  years  of  his  life,  as  a  mere  literary  la¬ 
bourer  “for  gain,  not  glory,”  solely  to  obtain  an 
honest  support.  He  however  indulged  himself  in 
occasional  little  sallies,  which  the  French  so 
happily  express  by  the  term  jeux  d*  esprit,  and 
which  will  be  noticed  in  their  order,  in  the  prog¬ 
ress  of  this  work. 

But  what  first  displayed  his  transcendent 
powers,  and  “gave  the  world  assurance  of  the 
Man,”  was  his  London,  a  Poem,  in  Imitation  of  the 
Third  Satire  of  Juvenal:  which  came  out  in  May 
this  year,  and  burst  forth  with  a  splendour,  the 
rays  of  which  will  for  ever  encircle  his  name. 
Boileau  had  imitated  the  same  satire  with  great 
success,  applying  it  to  Paris;  but  an  attentive 
comparison  will  satisfy  every  reader,  that  he  is 
much  excelled  by  the  English  Juvenal.  Oldham 
had  also  imitated  it,  and  applied  it  to  London; 
all  which  performances  concur  to  prove,  that 
great  cities,  in  every  age,  and  in  every  country, 
will  furnish  similar  topicks  of  satire.  Whether 
Johnson  had  previously  read  Oldham’s  imita¬ 
tion,  I  do  not  know;  but  it  is  not  a  little  remark¬ 
able,  that  there  is  scarcely  any  coincidence 
found  between  the  two  performances,  though 
upon  the  very  same  subject.  The  only  instances 
are,  in  describing  London  as  the  sink  of  foreign 
worthlessness: 

- the  common  shore, 

Where  France  does  all  her  filth  and  ordure  pour. 

Oldham 

The  common  shore  of  Paris  and  of  Rome. 

Johnson 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


3° 

and, 

No  calling  or  profession  comes  amiss , 

A  needy  monsieur  can  be  what  he  please. 

Oldham 

All  sciences  a  fasting  monsieur  knows. 

Johnson 

The  particulars  which  Oldham  has  collected, 
both  as  exhibiting  the  horrours  of  London,  and 
of  the  times,  contrasted  with  better  days,  are 
different  from  those  of  Johnson,  and  in  general 
well  chosen,  and  well  exprest.1 

There  are,  in  Oldham’s  imitation,  many  pro- 
saick  verses  and  bad  rhymes,  and  his  poem  sets 
out  with  a  strange  inadvertent  blunder: 

Tho ’  much  concern'd  to  leave  my  dear  old friend , 

I  must,  however ,  his  design  commend 

Of  fixing  in  the  country - . 

It  is  plain  he  was  not  going  to  leave  his  friend ; 
his  friend  was  going  to  leave  him.  A  young  lady 
at  once  corrected  this  with  good  critical  sagac¬ 
ity,  to 

Tho *  much  concern'd  to  lose  my  dear  old friend. 

There  is  one  passage  in  the  original,  better 
transfused  by  Oldham  than  by  Johnson: 

Nil  habet  infelix  pauper tas  durius  in  se, 

Quam  quod  ridiculos  homines facit; 

which  is  an  exquisite  remark  on  the  galling 
meanness  and  contempt  annexed  to  poverty: 
Johnson’s  imitation  is: 

Of  all  the  griefs  that  harass  the  distrest , 

Sure  the  most  bitter  is  a  scornful  jest. 

Oldham’s,  though  less  elegant,  is  more  just: 

Nothing  in  poverty  so  ill  is  borne , 

As  its  exposing  men  to  grinning  scorn. 

Where,  or  in  what  manner  this  poem  was 
composed,  I  am  sorry  that  I  neglected  to  ascer¬ 
tain  with  precision,  from  Johnson’s  own  author¬ 
ity.  He  has  marked  upon  his  corrected  copy  of 
the  first  edition  of  it,  “Written  in  1738”;  and,  as 
it  was  published  in  the  month  of  May  in  that 
year,  it  is  evident  that  much  time  was  not  em¬ 
ployed  in  preparing  it  for  the  press.  The  history 

*1  own  it  pleased  me  to  find  amongst  them  one 
trait  of  the  manners  of  the  age  in  London,  in  the 
last  century,  to  shield  from  the  sneer  of  English 
ridicule,  which  was  some  time  ago  too  common  a 
practice  in  my  native  city  of  Edinburgh: 

If  what  I've  said  can't  from  the  town  affright , 

Consider  other  dangers  of  the  night; 

When  brickbats  are  from  upper  stories  thrown , 

And  emptied  chamberpots  come  pouring  down 

From  garret  windows. 


[  1738 

of  its  publication  I  am  enabled  to  give  in  a  very 
satisfactory  manner;  and  judging  from  myself, 
and  many  of  my  friends,  I  trust  that  it  will  not 
be  uninteresting  to  my  readers. 

We  may  be  certain,  though  it  is  not  expressly 
named  in  the  following  letters  to  Mr.  Cave,  in 
1738,  that  they  all  relate  to  it: 

To  Mr.  Cave 

Castle-street,  Wednesday  Morning 
[No  date ,  1 738] 

Sir,  When  I  took  the  liberty  of  writing  to  you 
a  few  days  ago,  I  did  not  expect  a  repetition  of 
the  same  pleasure  so  soon;  for  a  pleasure  I  shall 
always  think  it,  to  converse  in  any  manner  with 
an  ingenious  and  candid  man;  but  having  the 
inclosed  poem  in  my  hands  to  dispose  of  for  the 
benefit  of  the  authour  (of  whose  abilities  I  shall 
say  nothing,  since  I  send  you  his  performance,) 
I  believed  I  could  not  procure  more  advantage¬ 
ous  terms  from  any  person  than  from  you,  who 
have  so  much  distinguished  yourself  by  your 
generous  encouragement  of  poetry;  and  whose 
judgment  of  that  art  nothing  but  your  commen¬ 
dation  of  my  trifle2  can  give  me  any  occasion  to 
call  in  question.  I  do  not  doubt  but  you  will  look 
over  this  poem  with  another  eye,  and  reward  it 
in  a  different  manner,  from  a  mercenary  book¬ 
seller,  who  counts  the  lines  he  is  to  purchase, 
and  considers  nothing  but  the  bulk.  I  cannot 
help  taking  notice,  that,  besides  what  the  au¬ 
thour  may  hope  for  on  account  of  his  abilities, 
he  has  likewise  another  claim  to  your  regard,  as 
he  lies  at  present  under  very  disadvantageous 
circumstances  of  fortune.  I  beg,  therefore,  that 
you  will  favour  me  with  a  letter  to-morrow,  that 
I  may  know  what  you  can  afford  to  allow  him, 
that  he  may  either  part  with  it  to  you,  or  find 
out  (which  I  do  not  expect),  some  other  way 
more  to  his  satisfaction. 

I  have  only  to  add,  that  as  I  am  sensible  I 
have  transcribed  it  very  coarsely,  which,  after 
having  altered  it,  I  was  obliged  to  do,  I  will,  if 
you  please  to  transmit  the  sheets  from  the  press, 
correct  it  for  you;  and  take  the  trouble  of  alter¬ 
ing  any  stroke  of  satire  which  you  may  dislike. 

By  exerting  on  this  occasion  your  usual  gen¬ 
erosity,  you  will  not  only  encourage  learning, 
and  relieve  distress,  but  (though  it  be  in  com¬ 
parison  of  the  other  motives  of  very  small  ac¬ 
count)  oblige  in  a  very  sensible  manner,  Sir, 
your  very  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

To  Mr.  Cave 

Monday,  No.  6,  Castle-street 

Sir,  I  am  to  return  you  thanks  for  the  present 
you  were  so  kind  as  to  send  by  me,  and  to  in¬ 
treat  that  you  will  be  pleased  to  inform  me  by 
the  penny-post,  whether  you  resolve  to  print  the 

2His  Ode  Ad  Urbanum  probably.  [N.] 


BOSWELL 


173B]  LIFE  OF 

poem.  If  you  please  to  send  it  me  by  the  post, 
with  a  note  to  Dodsley,  I  will  go  and  read  the 
lines  to  him,  that  we  may  have  his  consent  to 
put  his  name  in  the  title-page.  As  to  the  printing, 
if  it  can  be  set  immediately  about,  I  will  be  so 
much  the  authour’s  friend,  as  not  to  content  my¬ 
self  with  mere  solicitations  in  his  favour.  I  pro¬ 
pose,  if  my  calculation  be  near  the  truth,  to  en¬ 
gage  for  the  reimbursement  of  all  that  you  shall 
lose  by  an  impression  of  500;  provided,  as  you 
very  generously  propose,  that  the  profit,  if  any, 
be  set  aside  for  the  authour’s  use,  excepting  the 
present  you  made,  which,  if  he  be  a  gainer,  it  is 
fit  he  should  repay.  I  beg  that  you  will  let  one  of 
your  servants  write  an  exact  account  of  the  ex¬ 
pense  of  such  an  impression,  and  send  it  with 
the  poem,  that  I  may  know  what  I  engage  for.  I 
am  very  sensible,  from  your  generosity  on  this 
occasion,  of  your  regard  to  learning,  even  in  its 
unhappiest  state;  and  cannot  but  think  such  a 
temper  deserving  of  the  gratitude  of  those  who 
suffer  so  often  from  a  contrary  disposition.  I  am, 
Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

To  Mr.  Cave 

[No  date \ 

Sir,  I  waited  on  you  to  take  the  copy  to  Dods¬ 
ley ’s:  as  I  remember  the  number  of  lines  which 
it  contains,  it  will  be  no  longer  than  Eugenio f 
with  the  quotations,  which  must  be  subjoined  at 
the  bottom  of  the  page;  part  of  the  beauty  of  the 
performance  (if  any  beauty  be  allowed  it)  con¬ 
sisting  in  adapting  Juvenal’s  sentiments  to  mod¬ 
ern  facts  and  persons.  It  will,  with  those  addi¬ 
tions,  very  conveniently  make  five  sheets.  And 
since  the  expense  will  be  no  more,  I  shall  con¬ 
tentedly  insure  it,  as  I  mentioned  in  my  last.  If 
it  be  not  therefore  gone  to  Dodsley’s,  I  beg  it 
may  be  sent  me  by  the  penny-post,  that  I  may 
have  it  in  the  evening.  I  have  composed  a  Greek 
epigram  to  Eliza,2  and  think  she  ought  to  be 
celebrated  in  as  many  different  languages  as 
Lewis  le  Grand.  Pray  send  me  word  when  you 
will  begin  upon  the  poem,  for  it  is  a  long  way  to 
walk.  I  would  leave  my  Epigram,  but  have  not 
daylight  to  transcribe  it.  I  am,  Sir,  your’s,  &c. 

Sam.  Johnson 

To  Mr.  Cave 

[jVb  date] 

Sir,  I  am  extremely  obliged  by  your  kind  let¬ 
ter,  and  will  not  fail  to  attend  you  to-morrow 
with  Irene ,  who  looks  upon  you  as  one  of  her 
best  friends. 

I  was  to-day  with  Mr.  Dodsley,  who  declares 
very  warmly  in  favour  of  the  paper  you  sent 
him,  which  he  desires  to  have  a  share  in,  it  be¬ 
ing,  as  he  says,  a  creditable  thing  to  be  concerned  in. 

*A  poem,  published  in  1737,  of  which  see  an  ac¬ 
count  under  April  30,  1773. 

2The  learned  Mrs.  Elizabeth  Carter. 


JOHNSON  31 

I  knew  not  what  answer  to  make  till  I  had  con¬ 
sulted  you,  nor  what  to  demand  on  the  author’s 
part,  but  am  very  willing  that,  if  you  please,  he 
should  have  a  part  in  it,  as  he  will  undoubtedly 
be  more  diligent  to  disperse  and  promote  it.  If 
you  can  send  me  word  to-morrow  what  I  shall 
say  to  him,  I  will  settle  matters,  and  bring  the 
poem  with  me  for  the  press,  which,  as  the  town 
empties,  we  cannot  be  too  quick  with.  I  am,  Sir, 
your’s,  &c. 

Sam.  Johnson 

To  us  who  have  long  known  the  manly  force, 
bold  spirit,  and  masterly  versification  of  this 
poem,  it  is  a  matter  of  curiosity  to  observe  the 
diffidence  with  which  its  authour  brought  it 
forward  into  publick  notice,  while  he  is  so  cau¬ 
tious  as  not  to  avow  it  to  be  his  own  production; 
and  with  what  humility  he  offers  to  allow  the 
printer  to  “alter  any  stroke  of  satire  which  he 
might  dislike.”  That  any  such  alteration  was 
made,  we  do  not  know.  If  we  did,  we  could  not 
but  feel  an  indignant  regret;  but  how  painful 
is  it  to  see  that  a  writer  of  such  vigorous  powers 
of  mind  was  actually  in  such  distress,  that 
the  small  profit  which  so  short  a  poem,  how¬ 
ever  excellent,  could  yield,  was  courted  as  a 
“relief.” 

It  has  been  generally  said,  I  know  not  with 
what  truth,  that  Johnson  offered  his  London  to 
several  booksellers,  none  of  whom  would  pur¬ 
chase  it.  To  this  circumstance  Mr.  Derrick  al¬ 
ludes  in  the  following  lines  of  his  Fortune ,  a  Rhap¬ 
sody: 

Will  no  kind  patron  Johnson  own? 

Shall  Johnson  friendless  range  the  town? 

And  every  publisher  refuse 

The  offspring  of  his  happy  Muse? 

But  we  have  seen  that  the  worthy,  modest, 
and  ingenious  Mr.  Robert  Dodsley  had  taste 
enough  to  perceive  its  uncommon  merit,  and 
thought  it  creditable  to  have  a  share  in  it.  The 
fact  is,  that,  at  a  future  conference,  he  bargained 
for  the  whole  property  of  it,  for  which  he  gave 
Johnson  ten  guineas;  who  told  me,  “I  might, 
perhaps,  have  accepted  of  less;  but  that  Paul 
Whitehead  had  a  little  before  got  ten  guineas 
for  a  poem  and  I  would  not  take  less  than  Paul 
Whitehead.” 

I  may  here  observe,  that  Johnson  appeared 
to  me  to  under-value  Paul  Whitehead  upon 
every  occasion  when  he  was  mentioned,  and,  in 
my  opinion,  did  not  do  him  justice;  but  when  it 
is  considered  that  Paul  Whitehead  was  a  mem¬ 
ber  of  a  riotous  and  profane  club,  we  may  ac¬ 
count  for  Johnson’s  having  a  prejudice  against 
him.  Paul  Whitehead  was,  indeed,  unfortunate 


32 

in  being  not  only  slighted  by  Johnson,  but  vio¬ 
lently  attacked  by  Churchill,  who  utters  the  fol¬ 
lowing  imprecation: 

May  I  {can  worse  disgrace  on  manhood fall?) 

Be  born  a  Whitehead ,  and  baptiz’d  a  Paul! 

yet  I  shall  never  be  persuaded  to  think  meanly 
of  the  authour  of  so  brilliant  and  pointed  a  sat¬ 
ire  as  Manners . 

Johnson’s  London  was  published  in  May,  1738; 
and  it  is  remarkable,  that  it  came  out  on  the 
same  morning  with  Pope’s  satire,  entitled  1738; 
so  that  England  had  at  once  its  Juvenal  and 
Horace  as  poetical  monitors.  The  Reverend  Dr. 
Douglas,  now  Bishop  of  Salisbury,  to  whom  I 
am  indebted  for  some  obliging  communica¬ 
tions,  was  then  a  student  at  Oxford,  and  re¬ 
members  well  the  effect  which  London  pro¬ 
duced.  Every  body  was  delighted  with  it;  and 
there  being  no  name  to  it,  the  first  buz  of  the 
literary  circles  was  “here  is  an  unknown  poet, 
greater  even  than  Pope.”  And  it  is  recorded 
in  The  Gentleman's  Magazine  of  that  year,1  that 
it  “got  to  the  second  edition  in  the  course  of  a 
week.” 

One  of  the  warmest  patrons  of  this  poem  on 
its  first  appearance  was  General  Oglethorpe, 
whose  “strong  benevolence  of  soul,”  was  un¬ 
abated  during  the  course  of  a  very  long  life; 
though  it  is  painful  to  think,  that  he  had  but  too 
much  reason  to  become  cold  and  callous,  and 
discontented  with  the  world,  from  the  neglect 
which  he  experienced  of  his  publick  and  private 
worth,  by  those  in  whose  power  it  was  to  gratify 
so  gallant  a  veteran  with  marks  of  distinction. 
This  extraordinary  person  was  as  remarkable 
for  his  learning  and  taste,  as  for  his  other  emi¬ 
nent  qualities;  and  no  man  was  more  prompt, 
active,  and  generous,  in  encouraging  merit.  I 
have  heard  Johnson  gratefully  acknowledge,  in 
his  presence,  the  kind  and  effectual  support 
which  he  gave  to  his  London ,  though  unac¬ 
quainted  with  its  authour. 

Pope,  who  then  filled  the  poetical  throne 
without  a  rival,  it  may  reasonably  be  presumed, 
must  have  been  particularly  struck  by  the  sud¬ 
den  appearance  of  such  a  poet;  and,  to  his 
credit,  let  it  be  remembered,  that  his  feelings 
and  conduct  on  the  occasion  were  candid  and 
liberal.  He  requested  Mr.  Richardson,  son  of 
the  painter,  to  endeavour  to  find  out  who  this 
new  authour  was.  Mr.  Richardson,  after  some 
inquiry,  having  informed  him  that  he  had  dis¬ 
covered  only  that  his  name  was  Johnson,  and 
that  he  was  some  obscure  man,  Pope  said,  “he 

JP.  269. 


1 1738 

will  soon  be  deterre .”2  We  shall  presently  see, 
from  a  note  written  by  Pope,  that  he  was  him¬ 
self  afterwards  more  successful  in  his  inquiries 
than  his  friend. 

That  in  this  justly-celebrated  poem  may  be 
found  a  few  rhymes  which  the  critical  precision 
of  English  prosody  at  this  day  would  disallow, 
cannot  be  denied;  but  with  this  small  imperfec¬ 
tion,  which  in  the  general  blaze  of  its  excellence 
is  not  perceived,  till  the  mind  has  subsided  into 
cool  attention,  it  is,  undoubtedly,  one  of  the 
noblest  productions  in  our  language,  both  for 
sentiment  and  expression.  The  nation  was  then 
in  that  ferment  against  the  court  and  the  minis¬ 
try,  which  some  years  after  ended  in  the  down¬ 
fall  of  Sir  Robert  Walpole;  and  as  it  has  been 
said,  that  Tories  are  Whigs  when  out  of  place, 
and  Whigs,  Tories  when  in  place;  so,  as  a  Whig 
administration  ruled  with  what  force  it  could, 
a  Tory  opposition  had  all  the  animation  and 
all  the  eloquence  of  resistance  to  power,  aided 
by  the  common  topicks  of  patriotism,  liberty, 
and  independence!  Accordingly,  we  find  in 
Johnson’s  London  the  most  spirited  invectives 
against  tyranny  and  oppression,  the  warmest 
predilection  for  his  own  country,  and  the  purest 
love  of  virtue;  interspersed  with  traits  of  his  own 
particular  character  and  situation,  not  omitting 
his  prejudices  as  a  “true-born  Englishman,”3 
not  only  against  foreign  countries,  but  against 
Ireland  and  Scotland.  On  some  of  these  topicks 
I  shall  quote  a  few  passages: 

The  cheated  nation's  happy  favorites  see; 

Mark  whom  the  great  caress ,  who  frown  on  me . 

Has  heaven  reserv'd  in  pity  to  the  poor. 

No  pathless  waste ,  or  undiscover'd  shore? 

No  secret  island  in  the  boundless  mairi? 

No  peaceful  desartyet  unclaim'd  by  Spain? 

Quick  let  us  rise ,  the  happy  seats  explore , 

And  bear  Oppression's  insolence  no  more. 

How ,  when  competitors  like  these  contend , 

Can  surly  Virtue  hope  to  fix  a  friend? 

This  mournful  truth  is  every  where  confess'd , 

Slow  rises  worth,  by  poverty  depress’d  ! 

We  may  easily  conceive  with  what  feeling  a 
great  mind  like  his,  cramped  and  galled  by  nar¬ 
row  circumstances,  uttered  this  last  line,  which 
he  marked  by  capitals.  The  whole  of  the  poem 

2Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  from  the  information  of 
the  younger  Richardson. 

3It  is,  however,  remarkable,  that  he  uses  the  epi¬ 
thet,  which  undoubtedly,  since  the  union  between 
England  and  Scotland,  ought  to  denominate  the 
natives  of  both  parts  of  our  island: 

Was  early  taught  a  Briton’s  rights  to  prize. 


BOSWELL 


173B]  LIFE  OF 

is  eminently  excellent,  and  there  are  in  it  such 
proofs  of  a  knowledge  of  the  world,  and  of  a 
mature  acquaintance  with  life,  as  cannot  be 
contemplated  without  wonder,  when  we  con¬ 
sider  that  he  was  then  only  in  his  twenty-ninth 
year,  and  had  yet  been  so  little  in  the  “busy 
haunts  of  men.” 

Yet,  while  we  admire  the  poetical  excellence 
of  this  poem,  candour  obliges  us  to  allow,  that 
the  flame  of  patriotism  and  zeal  for  popular 
resistance  with  which  it  is  fraught,  had  no  just 
cause.  There  was,  in  truth,  no  “oppression”; 
the  “nation”  was  not  “cheated.”  Sir  Robert 
Walpole  was  a  wise  and  a  benevolent  minister, 
who  thought  that  the  happiness  and  prosperity 
of  a  commercial  country  like  ours,  would  be 
best  promoted  by  peace,  which  he  accordingly 
maintained,  with  credit,  during  a  very  long 
period.  Johnson  himself  afterwards  honestly  ac¬ 
knowledged  the  merit  of  Walpole,  whom  he 
called  “a  fixed  star”;  while  he  characterised  his 
opponent,  Pitt,  as  “a  meteor.”  But  Johnson’s 
juvenile  poem  was  naturally  impregnated  with 
the  fire  of  opposition,  and  upon  every  account 
was  universally  admired. 

Though  thus  elevated  into  fame,  and  con¬ 
scious  of  uncommon  powers,  he  had  not  that 
bustling  confidence,  or,  I  may  rather  say,  that 
animated  ambition,  which  one  might  have  sup¬ 
posed  would  have  urged  him  to  endeavour  at 
rising  in  life.  But  such  was  his  inflexible  dignity 
of  character,  that  he  could  not  stoop  to  court 
the  great;  without  which,  hardly  any  man  has 
made  his  way  to  a  high  station.  He  could  not 
expect  to  produce  many  such  works  as  his  Lon - 
don ,  and  he  felt  the  hardships  of  writing  for 
bread;  he  was,  therefore,  willing  to  resume  the 
office  of  a  schoolmaster,  so  as  to  have  a  sure, 
though  moderate  income  for  his  life;  and  an 
offer  being  made  to  him  of  the  mastership  of  a 
school,* 1  provided  he  could  obtain  the  degree  of 

xIn  a  billet  written  by  Mr.  Pope  in  the  following 
year,  this  school  is  said  to  have  been  in  Shropshire; 
but  as  it  appears  from  a  letter  from  Earl  Gower, 
that  the  trustees  of  it  were  “some  worthy  gentle¬ 
men  in  Johnson’s  neighbourhood,”  I  in  my  first 
edition  suggested  that  Pope  must  have,  by  mistake, 
written  Shropshire,  instead  of  Staffordshire.  But  I 
have  since  been  obliged  to  Mr.  Spearing,  attorney- 
at-law,  for  the  following  information:  “William 
Adams,  formerly  citizen  and  haberdasher  of  Lon¬ 
don,  founded  a  school  at  Newport,  in  the  county 
of  Salop,  by  deed  dated  27th  November,  1656,  by 
which  he  granted  ‘the  yearly  sum  of  sixty  pounds  to 
such  able  and  learned  schoolmaster,  from  time  to 
time,  being  of  godly  life  and  conversation,  who 
should  have  been  educated  at  one  of  the  Universi¬ 
ties  of  Oxford  or  Cambridge,  and  had  taken  the 
degree  of  Master  oj  Arts ,  and  was  well  read  in  the 


JOHNSON  33 

Master  of  Arts,  Dr.  Adams  was  applied  to,  by  a 
common  friend,  to  know  whether  that  could  be 
granted  him  as  a  favour  from  the  University  of 
Oxford.  But  though  he  had  made  such  a  figure 
in  the  literary  world,  it  was  then  thought  too 
great  a  favour  to  be  asked. 

Pope,  without  any  knowledge  of  him  but 
from  his  London ,  recommended  him  to  Earl 
Gower,  who  endeavoured  to  procure  for  him  a 
degree  from  Dublin,  by  the  following  letter  to  a 
friend  of  Dean  Swift: 

Sir,  Mr.  Samuel  Johnson  (authour  of  London,  a 
satire,  and  some  other  poetical  pieces)  is  a  na¬ 
tive  of  this  country,  and  much  respected  by 
some  worthy  gentlemen  in  his  neighbourhood, 
who  are  trustees  of  a  charity  school  now  vacant; 
the  certain  salary  is  sixty  pounds  a  year,  of 

Greek  and  Latin  tongues,  as  should  be  nominated 
from  time  to  time  by  the  said  William  Adams,  dur¬ 
ing  his  life,  and  after  the  decease  of  the  said  Wil¬ 
liam  Adams,  by  the  Governours  (namely,  the  Mas¬ 
ter  and  Wardens  of  the  Haberdashers’  Company  of 
the  City  of  London)  and  their  successors.’  The  man- 
our  and  lands  out  of  which  the  revenues  for  the 
maintenance  of  the  school  were  to  issue  are  situate 
at  Knighton  and  Adbaston ,  in  the  county  of  Stafford .” 
From  the  foregoing  account  of  this  foundation,  par¬ 
ticularly  the  circumstances  of  the  salary  being  six¬ 
ty  pounds,  and  the  degree  of  Master  of  Arts  being 
a  requisite  qualification  in  the  teacher,  it  seemed 
probable  that  this  was  the  school  in  contempla¬ 
tion;  and  that  Lord  Gower  erroneously  supposed 
that  the  gentlemen  who  possessed  the  lands  out  of 
which  the  revenues  issued,  were  trustees  of  the 
charity. 

Such  was  probable  conjecture.  But  in  The  Gen¬ 
tleman's  Magazine  for  May,  1793,  there  is  a  letter 
from  Mr.  Henn,  one  of  the  masters  of  the  school  of 
Appleby,  in  Leicestershire,  in  which  he  writes  as 
follows: 

“I  compared  time  and  circumstance  together,  in 
order  to  discover  whether  the  school  in  question 
might  not  be  this  of  Appleby.  Some  of  the  trustees 
at  that  period  were  ‘worthy  gentlemen  of  the  neigh¬ 
bourhood  of  Litchfield.’  Appleby  itself  is  not  far 
from  the  neighbourhood  of  Litchfield.  The  salary, 
the  degree  requisite,  together  with  the  time  oj  elec - 
tion ,  all  agreeing  with  the  statutes  of  Appleby.  The 
election,  as  said  in  the  letter,  ‘could  not  be  delayed 
longer  than  the  1  ith  of  next  month,’  which  was  the 

1  ith  of  September,  just  three  months  after  the  an¬ 
nual  audit-day  of  Appleby  school,  which  is  always 
on  the  1  ith  of  June;  and  the  statutes  enjoin  ne  ullius 
prceceptorum  electio  diutius  tribus  mensibus  moraretur ,  etc, 

“These  I  thought  to  be  convincing  proofs  that 
my  conjecture  was  not  ill-founded,  and  that,  in  a 
future  edition  of  that  book,  the  circumstance  might 
be  recorded  as  fact. 

“But  what  banishes  every  shadow  of  doubt  is  the 
Minute-book  of  the  school,  which  declares  the  head- 
mastership  to  be  at  that  time  vacant.” 

I  cannot  omit  returning  thanks  to  this  learned 
gentleman  for  the  very  handsome  manner  in  which 
he  has  in  that  letter  been  so  good  as  to  speak  of  this 
work. 


34 

which  they  are  desirous  to  make  him  master; 
but,  unfortunately,  he  is  not  capable  of  re¬ 
ceiving  their  bounty,  which  would  make  him 
happy  for  life,  by  not  being  a  Master  of  Arts; 
which,  by  the  statutes  of  this  school,  the  master 
of  it  must  be. 

Now  these  gentlemen  do  me  the  honour  to 
think  that  I  have  interest  enough  in  you,  to  pre¬ 
vail  upon  you  to  write  to  Dean  Swift,  to  per¬ 
suade  the  University  of  Dublin  to  send  a  diplo¬ 
ma  to  me,  constituting  this  poor  man  Master  of 
Arts  in  their  University.  They  highly  extol  the 
man’s  learning  and  probity;  and  will  not  be 
persuaded,  that  the  University  will  make  any 
difficulty  of  conferring  such  a  favour  upon  a 
stranger,  if  he  is  recommended  by  the  Dean. 
They  say  he  is  not  afraid  of  the  strictest  exam¬ 
ination,  though  he  is  of  so  long  a  journey;  and 
will  venture  it,  if  the  Dean  thinks  it  neces¬ 
sary;  choosing  rather  to  die  upon  the  road, 
than  be  starved  to  death  in  translating  for  booksellers; 
which  has  been  his  only  subsistence  for  some 
time  past. 

I  fear  there  is  more  difficulty  in  this  affair, 
than  those  good-natured  gentlemen  apprehend; 
especially  as  their  election  cannot  be  delayed 
longer  than  the  nth  of  next  month.  If  you  see 
this  matter  in  the  same  light  that  it  appears  to 
me,  I  hope  you  will  burn  this,  and  pardon  me 
for  giving  you  so  much  trouble  about  an  im¬ 
practicable  thing;  but,  if  you  think  there  is  a 
probability  of  obtaining  the  favour  asked,  I  am 
sure  your  humanity,  and  propensity  to  relieve 
merit  in  distress,  will  incline  you  to  serve  the 
poor  man,  without  my  adding  any  more  to  the 
trouble  I  have  already  given  you,  than  assuring 
you  that  I  am,  with  great  truth,  Sir,  your  faith¬ 
ful  servant, 

Trentham,  Aug .  i,  1739  Gower 

It  was,  perhaps,  no  small  disappointment  to 
Johnson  that  this  respectable  application  had 
not  the  desired  effect;  yet  how  much  reason  has 
there  been,  both  for  himself  and  his  country,  to 
rejoice  that  it  did  not  succeed,  as  he  might 
probably  have  wasted  in  obscurity  those  hours 
in  which  he  afterwards  produced  his  incom¬ 
parable  works. 

About  this  time  he  made  one  other  effort  to 
emancipate  himself  from  the  drudgery  of  au- 
thourship.  He  applied  to  Dr.  Adams,  to  consult 
Dr.  Smal broke  of  the  Commons,  whether  a  per¬ 
son  might  be  permitted  to  practice  as  an  ad¬ 
vocate  there,  without  a  doctor’s  degree  in  Civil 
Law.  “I  am  (said  he)  a  total  stranger  to  these 
studies;  but  whatever  is  a  profession,  and  main¬ 
tains  numbers,  must  be  within  the  reach  of 
common  abilities,  and  some  degree  of  industry.” 
Dr.  Adams  was  much  pleased  with  Johnson’s 
design  to  employ  his  talents  in  that  manner, 


[  I73^ 

being  confident  he  would  have  attained  to  great 
eminence.  And,  indeed,  I  cannot  conceive  a 
man  better  qualified  to  make  a  distinguished 
figure  as  a  lawyer;  for,  he  would  have  brought 
to  his  profession  a  rich  store  of  various  knowl¬ 
edge,  an  uncommon  acuteness,  and  a  command 
of  language,  in  which  few  could  have  equalled, 
and  none  have  surpassed  him.  He  who  could 
display  eloquence  and  wit  in  defence  of  the 
decision  of  the  House  of  Commons  upon  Mr. 
Wilkes’s  election  for  Middlesex,  and  of  the  un¬ 
constitutional  taxation  of  our  fellow-subjects  in 
America,  must  have  been  a  powerful  advocate 
in  any  cause.  But  here,  also,  the  want  of  a 
degree  was  an  insurmountable  bar. 

He  was,  therefore,  under  the  necessity  of  per¬ 
severing  in  that  course,  into  which  he  had  been 
forced;  and  we  find,  that  his  proposal  from 
Greenwich  to  Mr.  Cave,  for  a  translation  of 
Father  Paul  Sarpi’s  History,  was  accepted.1 

Some  sheets  of  this  translation  were  printed 
off,  but  the  design  was  dropt;  for  it  happened, 
oddly  enough,  that  another  person  of  the  name 
of  Samuel  Johnson,  Librarian  of  St.  Martin’s  in 
the  Fields,  and  Curate  of  that  parish,  engaged 
in  the  same  undertaking,  and  was  patronised 
by  the  Clergy,  particularly  by  Dr.  Pearce,  af¬ 
terwards  Bishop  of  Rochester.  Several  light 
skirmishes  passed  between  the  rival  transla¬ 
tors,  in  the  newspapers  of  the  day;  and  the  con¬ 
sequence  was,  that  they  destroyed  each  other, 
for  neither  of  them  went  on  with  the  work.  It 
is  much  to  be  regretted,  that  the  able  perform¬ 
ance  of  that  celebrated  genius  Fra  Paolo 
lost  the  advantage  of  being  incorporated  into 

Tn  The  Weekly  Miscellany ,  October  21,  1738, 
there  appeared  the  following  advertisement:  “Just 
published,  Proposals  for  printing  the  History  of  the 
Council  of  Trent ,  translated  from  the  Italian  of  Fath¬ 
er  Paul  Sarpi;  with  the  Authour’s  Life,  and  Notes 
theological,  historical,  and  critical,  from  the  French 
edition  of  Dr.  Le  Courayer.  To  which  are  added, 
Observations  on  the  History,  and  Notes  and  Illus¬ 
trations  from  various  Authours,  both  printed  and 
manuscript.  By  S.  Johnson.  1.  The  work  will  con¬ 
sist  of  two  hundred  sheets,  and  be  two  volumes  in 
quarto,  printed  on  good  paper  and  letter.  2.  The 
price  will  be  i8j.  each  volume,  to  be  paid,  half-a- 
guinea  at  the  delivery  of  the  first  volume,  and  the 
rest  at  the  delivery  of  the  second  volume  in  sheets. 
3.  Two-pence  to  be  abated  for  every  sheet  less  than 
two  hundred.  It  may  be  had  on  a  large  paper,  in 
three  volumes,  at  the  price  of  three  guineas;  one  to 
be  paid  at  the  time  of  subscribing,  another  at  the 
delivery  of  the  first,  and  the  rest  at  the  delivery  of 
the  other  volumes.  The  work  is  now  in  the  press, 
and  will  be  diligently  prosecuted.  Subscriptions  are 
taken  in  by  Mr.  Dodsley  in  Pall-Mall,  Mr.  Riving- 
ton  in  St.  Paul’s  Church-yard,  by  E.  Cave  at  St. 
John’s  Gate,  and  the  Translator,  at  No.  6,  in  Cas¬ 
tle-street,  by  Cavendish-square.” 


BOSWELL 


1738] 

British  literature  by  the  masterly  hand  of  John¬ 
son. 

I  have  in  my  possession,  by  the  favour  of  Mr. 
John  Nichols,  a  paper  in  Johnson’s  hand¬ 
writing,  entitled  “Account  between  Mr.  Ed¬ 
ward  Cave  and  Sam.  Johnson,  in  relation  to  a 
version  of  Father  Paul,  &c.  begun  August  the 
2d,  1738”;  by  which  it  appears,  that  from  that 
day  to  the  2 1st  of  April,  1 739,  Johnson  received 
for  this  work  £49  7 s.  in  sums  of  one,  two,  three, 
and  sometimes  four  guineas  at  a  time,  most  fre¬ 
quently  two.  And  it  is  curious  to  observe  the 
minute  and  scrupulous  accuracy  with  which 
Johnson  has  pasted  upon  it  a  slip  of  paper, 
which  he  has  entitled  “Small  Account,”  and 
which  contains  one  article,  “Sept.  9th,  Mr. 
Cave  laid  down  2 s.  6 d”  There  is  subjoined  to 
this  account,  a  list  of  some  subscribers  to  the 
work,  partly  in  Johnson’s  hand-writing,  partly 
in  that  of  another  person;  and  there  follows  a 
leaf  or  two  on  which  are  written  a  number  of 
characters  which  have  the  appearance  of  a 
short  hand,  which,  perhaps,  Johnson  was  then 
trying  to  learn. 

To  Mr.  Cave 

Wednesday 

Sir,  I  did  not  care  to  detain  your  servant 
while  I  wrote  an  answer  to  your  letter,  in  which 
you  seem  to  insinuate  that  I  had  promised  more 
than  I  am  ready  to  perform.  If  I  have  raised 
your  expectations  by  any  thing  that  may  have 
escaped  my  memory,  I  am  sorry;  and  if  you 
remind  me  of  it,  shall  thank  you  for  the  fa¬ 
vour.  If  I  made  fewer  alterations  than  usual 
in  the  Debates,  it  was  only  because  there  ap¬ 
peared,  and  still  appears  to  be,  less  need  of  al¬ 
teration.  The  verses  to  Lady  Firebrace1  may  be 
had  when  you  please,  for  you  know  that  such  a 
subject  neither  deserves  much  thought,  nor  re¬ 
quires  it. 

The  Chinese  Stories2  may  be  had  folded  down 
when  you  please  to  send,  in  which  I  do  not  rec¬ 
ollect  that  you  desired  any  alterations  to  be 
made. 

An  answer  to  another  query  I  am  very  willing 
to  write,  and  had  consulted  with  you  about  it 
last  night  if  there  had  been  time;  for  I  think  it 
the  most  proper  way  of  inviting  such  a  corre¬ 
spondence  as  may  be  an  advantage  to  the  pa¬ 
per,  not  a  load  upon  it. 

As  to  the  Prize  Verses,  a  backwardness  to  de¬ 
termine  their  degrees  of  merit  is  not  peculiar  to 

1They  afterwards  appeared  in  The  Gentleman's 
Magazine ,  viii,  486,  with  this  title:  Verses  to  Lady 
Firebrace,  at  Bury  Assizes. 

2Du  Halde’s  Description  of  China  was  then  pub¬ 

lishing  by  Mr.  Cave  in  weekly  numbers,  whence 
Johnson  was  to  select  pieces  for  the  embellishment 

of  the  Magazine.  Nichols. 


35 

me.  You  may,  if  you  please,  still  have  what  I  can 
say;  but  I  shall  engage  with  little  spirit  in  an  af¬ 
fair,  which  I  shall  hardly  end  to  my  own  satisfac¬ 
tion,  and  certainly  not  to  the  satisfaction  of  the 
parties  concerned.3 

As  to  Father  Paul,  I  have  not  yet  been  just  to 
my  proposal,  but  have  met  with  impediments, 
which,  I  hope,  are  now  at  an  end;  and  if  you 
find  the  progress  hereafter  not  such  as  you  have 
a  right  to  expect,  you  can  easily  stimulate  a  neg¬ 
ligent  translator. 

If  any  or  all  of  these  have  contributed  to  your 
discontent,  I  will  endeavour  to  remove  it;  and 
desire  you  to  propose  the  question  to  which  you 
wish  for  an  answer.  I  am,  Sir,  your  humble 
servant,  Sam.  Johnson 

To  Mr.  Cave 

[No  date ] 

Sir,  I  am  pretty  much  of  your  opinion,  that 
the  Commentary  cannot  be  prosecuted  with 
any  appearance  of  success;  for  as  the  names  of 
the  authours  concerned  are  of  more  weight  in 
the  performance  than  its  own  intrinsick  merit, 
the  publick  will  be  soon  satisfied  with  it.  And  I 
think  the  Examen  should  be  pushed  forward 
with  the  utmost  expedition.  Thus,  “This  day, 
&c.,  An  Examen  of  Mr.  Pope’s  Essay,  &c.,  con¬ 
taining  a  succinct  Account  of  the  Philosophy  of 
Mr.  Leibnitz  on  the  System  of  the  Fatalists, 
with  a  Confutation  of  their  Opinions,  and  an 
Illustration  of  the  Doctrine  of  Free-will”;  [with 
what  else  you  think  proper.] 

It  will,  above  all,  be  necessary  to  take  no¬ 
tice,  that  it  is  a  thing  distinct  from  the  Com¬ 
mentary. 

I  was  so  far  from  imagining  they  stood  still,4 
that  I  conceived  them  to  have  a  good  deal  be¬ 
fore-hand,  and  therefore  was  less  anxious  in  pro¬ 
viding  them  more.  But  if  ever  they  stand  still  on 
my  account,  it  must  doubtless  be  charged  to  me; 
and  whatever  else  shall  be  reasonable,  I  shall 
not  oppose;  but  beg  a  suspense  of  judgment  till 
morning,  when  I  must  entreat  you  to  send  me  a 
dozen  proposals,  and  you  shall  then  have  copy 
to  spare.  I  am,  Sir,  your’s,  impransusy 

Sam.  Johnson 

Pray  muster  up  the  Proposals  if  you  can,  or 
let  the  boy  recall  them  from  the  booksellers. 

But  although  he  corresponded  with  Mr.  Cave 
concerning  a  translation  of  Crousaz’s  Examen  of 
Pope’s  Essay  on  Man ,  and  gave  advice  as  one 
anxious  for  its  success,  I  was  long  ago  convinced 
by  a  perusal  of  the  Preface,  that  this  translation 

3The  premium  of  forty  pounds  proposed  for  the 
best  poem  on  the  Divine  Attributes  is  here  alluded 
to.  Nichols. 

4The  Compositors  in  Mr.  Cave’s  printing-office, 
who  appear  by  this  letter  to  have  then  waited  for 
copy.  Nichols. 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


3& 

was  erroneously  ascribed  to  him;  and  I  have 
found  this  point  ascertained,  beyond  all  doubt, 
by  the  following  article  in  Dr.  Birch’s  Manu¬ 
scripts  in  the  British  Museum: 

Elis^e  Carters.  S.  P.  D.  Thomas  Birch. 

Versionem  tuam  Exarninis  Crousaziani  jam  perlegi . 
Summam  styli  et  elegantiam ,  et  in  re  difficillimd  prop- 
rietatem,  admiratus. 

Dabam  Novemb .  27°  17381 

Indeed  Mrs.  Carter  has  lately  acknowledged 
to  Mr.  Seward,  that  she  was  the  translator  of 
the  Examen. 

It  is  remarkable,  that  Johnson’s  last  quoted 
letter  to  Mr.  Cave  concludes  with  a  fair  confes¬ 
sion  that  he  had  not  a  dinner;  and  it  is  no  less 
remarkable,  that,  though  in  this  state  of  want 
himself,  his  benevolent  heart  was  not  insensible 
to  the  necessities  of  an  humble  labourer  in  liter¬ 
ature,  as  appears  from  the  very  next  letter: 

To  Mr.  Cave 

[No  date] 

Dear  Sir,  You  may  remember  I  have  former¬ 
ly  talked  with  you  about  a  Military  Dictionary. 
The  eldest  Mr.  Macbean,  who  was  with  Mr. 
Chambers,  has  very  good  materials  for  such  a 
work,  which  I  have  seen,  and  will  do  it  at  a  very 
low  rate.2  I  think  the  terms  of  War  and  Naviga¬ 
tion  might  be  comprised,  with  good  explana¬ 
tions,  in  one  8vo.  Pica,  which  he  is  willing  to  do 
for  twelve  shillings  a  sheet,  to  be  made  up  a 
guinea  at  the  second  impression.  If  you  think  on 
it,  I  will  wait  on  you  with  him.  I  am,  Sir,  your 
humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

Pray  lend  me  Topsel  on  Animals. 

I  must  not  omit  to  mention,  that  this  Mr. 
Macbean  was  a  native  of  Scotland. 

In  The  Gentleman's  Magazine  of  this  year, 
Johnson  gave  a  Life  of  Father  Paul;*  and  he 
wrote  the  Preface  to  the  Volume,  f  which, 
though  prefixed  to  it  when  bound,  is  always 
published  with  the  Appendix,  and  is  therefore 
the  last  composition  belonging  to  it.  The  ability 
and  nice  adaptation  with  which  he  could  draw 
up  a  prefatory  address,  was  one  of  his  peculiar 
excellencies. 

It  appears  too,  that  he  paid  a  friendly  atten¬ 
tion  to  Mrs.  Elizabeth  Carter;  for  in  a  letter 
from  Mr.  Cave  to  Dr.  Birch,  November  28,  this 
year,  I  find  “Mr.  Johnson  advises  Miss  C.  to 
undertake  a  translation  of  Boethius  de  Cons .  be¬ 
cause  there  is  prose  and  verse,  and  to  put  her 
name  to  it  when  published.”  This  advice  was 

JBirch,  MSS.  Brit .  Mus.  4323. 

2This  book  was  published. 


[  1739 

not  followed;  probably  from  an  apprehension 
that  the  work  was  not  sufficiently  popular  for  an 
extensive  sale.  How  well  Johnson  himself  could 
have  executed  a  translation  of  this  philosophical 
poet,  we  may  judge  from  the  following  speci¬ 
men  which  he  has  given  in  The  Rambler  (Motto 
to  No.  7): 

O  qui  perpetua  mundum  ratione  gubernas, 

Terrarum  ccelique  satorf - 

Disjice  terrence  nebulas  et  pondera  molis , 

Atque  tuo  splendor e  mica!  Tu  namque  serenum , 

Tu  requies  tranquilla  piis.  Te  cernere  jinis , 
Principium ,  vector ,  dux ,  semita ,  terminus ,  idem. 

0  thou  whose  power  o'er  moving  worlds  presides, 
Whose  voice  created ,  and  whose  wisdom  guides. 

On  darkling  man  in  pure  effulgence  shine , 

And  cheer  the  clouded  mind  with  light  divine. 

’  Tis  thine  alone  to  calm  the  pious  breast , 

With  silent  confidence  and  holy  rest; 

From  thee,  great  God!  we  spring ,  to  thee  we  tend , 

Path ,  motive,  guide,  original,  and  end! 

In  1739,  beside  the  assistance  which  he  gave 
to  the  Parliamentary  Debates,  his  writings  in 
The  Gentleman's  Magazine  were,  “The  Life  of 
Boerhaave,”  *  in  which  it  is  to  be  observed,  that 
he  discovers  that  love  of  chymistry  which  never 
forsook  him;  “An  Appeal  to  the  publick  in 
behalf  of  the  Editor”  ;f  “An  Address  to  the 
Reader”; f  “An  Epigram  both  in  Greek  and 
Latin  to  Eliza,”*  and  also  English  verses  to 
her;*  and,  “A  Greek  Epigram  to  Dr.  Birch.”* 
It  has  been  erroneously  supposed,  that  an  Essay 
published  in  that  Magazine  this  year,  entitled 
“The  Apotheosis  of  Milton,”  was  written  by 
Johnson;  and  on  that  supposition  it  has  been 
improperly  inserted  in  the  edition  of  his  works 
by  the  Booksellers,  after  his  decease.  Were  there 
no  positive  testimony  as  to  this  point,  the  style 
of  the  performance,  and  the  name  of  Shak- 
speare  not  being  mentioned  in  an  Essay  pro¬ 
fessedly  reviewing  the  principal  English  poets, 
would  ascertain  it  not  to  be  the  production  of 
Johnson.  But  there  is  here  no  occasion  to  resort 
to  internal  evidence;  for  my  Lord  Bishop  of  Sal¬ 
isbury  (Dr.  Douglas)  has  assured  me,  that  it 
was  written  by  Guthrie.  His  separate  publica¬ 
tions  were,  A  Complete  Vindication  of  the  Licensers 
of  the  Stage ,  from  the  malicious  and  scandalous 
Aspersions  of  Mr.  Brooke,  Authour  of  Gustavus 
Vasa ,  *  being  an  ironical  Attack  upon  them 
for  their  Suppression  of  that  Tragedy;  and, 
M armor  Norfolciense;  or  an  Essay  on  an  Ancient 
Prophetical  Inscription  in  Monkish  Rhyme ,  Lately 
Discovered  near  Lynne  in  Norfolk,  by  Probus 
Britannicus.  *  In  this  performance,  he,  in  a 
feigned  inscription,  supposed  to  have  been  found 


BOSWELL 


1 739]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  37 


in  Norfolk,  the  county  of  Sir  Robert  Walpole, 
then  the  obnoxious  prime  minister  of  this 
country,  inveighs  against  the  Brunswick  suc¬ 
cession,  and  the  measures  of  government  con¬ 
sequent  upon  it.1  To  this  supposed  prophecy 
he  added  a  Commentary,  making  each  expres¬ 
sion  apply  to  the  times,  with  warm  Anti-Hano¬ 
verian  zeal. 

This  anonymous  pamphlet,  I  believe,  did  not 
make  so  much  noise  as  was  expected,  and,  there¬ 
fore,  had  not  a  very  extensive  circulation.  Sir 
John  Hawkins  relates,  that,  “warrants  were  is¬ 
sued,  and  messengers  employed  to  apprehend 
the  authour;  who,  though  he  had  forborne  to 
subscribe  his  name  to  the  pamphlet,  the  vigi¬ 
lance  of  those  in  pursuit  of  him  had  discovered3’; 
and  we  are  informed,  that  he  lay  concealed  in 
Lambeth-marsh  till  the  scent  after  him  grew 
cold.  This,  however,  is  altogether  without  foun¬ 
dation;  for  Mr.  Steele,  one  of  the  Secretaries  of 
the  Treasury,  who  amidst  a  variety  of  impor¬ 
tant  business,  politely  obliged  me  with  his  at¬ 
tention  to  my  inquiry,  informed  me,  that  “he 
directed  every  possible  search  to  be  made  in  the 
records  of  the  Treasury  and  Secretary  of  State’s 
Office,  but  could  find  no  trace  whatever  of  any 
warrant  having  been  issued  to  apprehend  the 
authour  of  this  pamphlet.” 

M armor Norfolciense  became  exceedingly  scarce, 
so  that  I,  for  many  years,  endeavoured  in  vain 
to  procure  a  copy  of  it.  At  last  I  was  indebted  to 
the  malice  of  one  of  Johnson’s  numerous  petty 
adversaries,  who,  in  1775,  published  a  new  edi¬ 
tion  of  it,  “with  Notes  and  a  Dedication  to 
Samuel  Johnson,  LL.D.  by  Tribunus”;  in 
which  some  puny  scribbler  invidiously  attempted 
to  found  upon  it  a  charge  of  inconsistency 
against  its  authour,  because  he  had  accepted  of 
a  pension  from  his  present  Majesty,  and  had 
written  in  support  of  the  measures  of  govern¬ 
ment.  As  a  mortification  to  such  impotent  mal¬ 
ice,  of  which  there  are  so  many  instances  to¬ 
wards  men  of  eminence,  I  am  happy  to  relate, 
that  this  telum  imbelle  did  not  reach  its  exalted 
object,  till  about  a  year  after  it  thus  appeared, 
when  I  mentioned  it  to  him,  supposing  that  he 
knew  of  the  re-publication.  To  my  surprize,  he 
had  not  yet  heard  of  it.  He  requested  me  to  go 
directly  and  get  it  for  him,  which  I  did.  He 
looked  at  it  and  laughed,  and  seemed  to  be 
much  diverted  with  the  feeble  efforts  of  his  un¬ 
known  adversary,  who,  I  hope,  is  alive  to  read 
this  account.  “Now  (said  he)  here  is  somebody 

xThe  Inscription  and  the  Translation  of  it  are 
pr  eserved  in  The  London  Magazine  for  the  year  1  739, 
p.  244. 


who  thinks  he  has  vexed  me  sadly;  yet,  if  it  had 
not  been  for  you,  you  rogue,  I  should  probably 
never  have  seen  it.” 

As  Mr.  Pope’s  note  concerning  Johnson,  al¬ 
luded  to  in  a  former  page,  refers  both  to  his 
London ,  and  his  Marmor  Norfolciense ,  I  have  de¬ 
ferred  inserting  it  till  now.  I  am  indebted  for  it 
to  Dr.  Percy,  the  Bishop  of  Dromore,  who  per¬ 
mitted  me  to  copy  it  from  the  original  in  his 
possession.  It  was  presented  to  his  Lordship  by 
Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  to  whom  it  was  given  by 
the  son  of  Mr.  Richardson  the  painter,  the  per¬ 
son  to  whom  it  is  addressed.  I  have  transcribed 
it  with  minute  exactness,  that  the  peculiar  mode 
of  writing,  and  imperfect  spelling  of  that  cele¬ 
brated  poet,  may  be  exhibited  to  the  curious  in 
literature.  It  justifies  Swift’s  epithet  of  “paper¬ 
sparing  Pope,”  for  it  is  written  on  a  slip  no 
larger  than  a  common  message-card,  and  was 
sent  to  Mr.  Richardson,  along  with  the  Imita¬ 
tion  of  Juvenal. 

“This  is  imitated  by  one  Johnson  who  put  in 
for  a  Publick-school  in  Shropshire,2  but  was  dis¬ 
appointed.  He  has  an  infirmity  of  the  convul¬ 
sive  kind,  that  attacks  him  sometimes,  so  as  to 
make  him  a  sad  Spectacle.  Mr.  P.  from  the 
Merit  of  this  Work  which  was  all  the  knowledge 
he  had  of  him  endeavour’d  to  serve  him  without 
his  own  application;  &  wrote  to  my  Ld  gore, 
but  he  did  not  succeed.  Mr.  Johnson  published 
afterwds  another  Poem  in  Latin  with  Notes  the 
whole  very  Humerous  call’d  the  Norfolk  Proph¬ 
ecy.  P.” 

Johnson  had  been  told  of  this  note;  and  Sir 
Joshua  Reynolds  informed  him  of  the  com¬ 
pliment  which  it  contained,  but,  from  del¬ 
icacy,  avoided  shewing  him  the  paper  itself. 
When  Sir  Joshua  observed  to  Johnson  that  he 
seemed  very  desirous  to  see  Pope’s  note,  he  an¬ 
swered,  “Who  would  not  be  proud  to  have  such 
a  man  as  Pope  so  solicitous  in  inquiring  about 
him?” 

The  infirmity  to  which  Mr.  Pope  alludes,  ap¬ 
peared  to  me  also,  as  I  have  elsewhere3  ob¬ 
served,  to  be  of  the  convulsive  kind,  and  of  the 
nature  of  that  distemper  called  St.  Vitus’s 
dance;  and  in  this  opinion  I  am  confirmed  by 
the  description  which  Sydenham  gives  of  that 
disease.  “This  disorder  is  a  kind  of  convulsion. 
It  manifests  itself  by  halting  or  unsteadiness  of 
one  of  the  legs,  which  the  patient  draws  after 
him  like  an  ideot.  If  the  hand  of  the  same  side 
be  applied  to  the  breast,  or  any  other  part  of  the 
body,  he  cannot  keep  it  a  moment  in  the  same 

2See  note,  p.  33. 

zJournal  of  a  Tour  to  the  Hebrides ,  3rd  edit.,  p.  8. 


3& 

posture,  but  it  will  be  drawn  into  a  different  one 
by  a  convulsion,  notwithstanding  all  his  efforts 
to  the  contrary.”  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  how¬ 
ever,  was  of  a  different  opinion,  and  favoured 
me  with  the  following  paper. 

“Those  motions  or  tricks  of  Dr.  Johnson  are 
improperly  called  convulsions.  He  could  sit  mo¬ 
tionless,  when  he  was  told  so  to  do,  as  well  as 
any  other  man;  my  opinion  is  that  it  proceeded 
from  a  habit  which  he  had  indulged  himself  in, 
of  accompanying  his  thoughts  with  certain  un¬ 
toward  actions,  and  those  actions  always  ap¬ 
peared  to  me  as  if  they  were  meant  to  reprobate 
some  part  of  his  past  conduct.  Whenever  he  was 
not  engaged  in  conversation,  such  thoughts 
were  sure  to  rush  into  his  mind;  and,  for  this 
reason,  any  company,  any  employment  what¬ 
ever,  he  preferred  to  being  alone.  The  great 
business  of  his  life  (he  said)  was  to  escape  from 
himself;  this  disposition  he  considered  as  the 
disease  of  his  mind,  which  nothing  cured  but 
company. 

“One  instance  of  his  absence  and  particular¬ 
ity,  as  it  is  characteristick  of  the  man,  may  be 
worth  relating.  When  he  and  I  took  a  journey 
together  into  the  West,  we  visited  the  late  Mr. 
Banks,  of  Dorsetshire;  the  conversation  turning 
upon  pictures,  which  Johnson  could  not  well 
see,  he  retired  to  a  corner  of  the  room,  stretch¬ 
ing  out  his  right  leg  as  far  as  he  could  reach  be¬ 
fore  him,  then  bringing  up  his  left  leg,  and 
stretching  his  right  still  further  on.  The  old  gen¬ 
tleman  observing  him,  went  up  to  him,  and  in  a 
very  courteous  manner  assured  him,  that  though 
it  was  not  a  new  house,  the  flooring  was  perfect¬ 
ly  safe.  The  Doctor  started  from  his  reverie,  like 
a  person  waked  out  of  his  sleep,  but  spoke  not  a 
word.” 

While  we  are  on  this  subject,  my  readers  may 
not  be  displeased  with  another  anecdote,  com¬ 
municated  to  me  by  the  same  friend,  from  the 
relation  of  Mr.  Hogarth. 

Johnson  used  to  be  a  pretty  frequent  visitor 
at  the  house  of  Mr.  Richardson,  authour  of 
Clarissa ,  and  other  novels  of  extensive  reputa¬ 
tion.  Mr.  Hogarth  came  one  day  to  see  Richard¬ 
son,  soon  after  the  execution  of  Dr.  Cameron, 
for  having  taken  arms  for  the  house  of  Stuart  in 
1745-6;  and  being  a  warm  partisan  of  George 
the  Second,  he  observed  to  Richardson,  that 
certainly  there  must  have  been  some  very  un¬ 
favourable  circumstances  lately  discovered  in 
this  particular  case,  which  had  induced  the  King 
to  approve  of  an  execution  for  rebellion  so  long 
after  the  time  when  it  was  committed,  as  this 
had  the  appearance  of  putting  a  man  to  death 


[  1740 

in  cold  blood,1  and  was  very  unlike  his  Majesty’s 
usual  clemency.  While  he  was  talking,  he  per¬ 
ceived  a  person  standing  at  a  window  in  the 
room,  shaking  his  head,  and  rolling  himself 
about  in  a  strange  ridiculous  manner.  He  con¬ 
cluded  that  he  was  an  ideot,  whom  his  relations 
had  put  under  the  care  of  Mr.  Richardson,  as  a 
very  good  man.  To  his  great  surprize,  however, 
this  figure  stalked  forwards  to  where  he  and  Mr. 
Richardson  were  sitting,  and  all  at  once  took  up 
the  argument,  and  burst  out  into  an  invective 
against  George  the  Second,  as  one,  who,  upon 
all  occasions,  was  unrelenting  and  barbarous, 
mentioning  many  instances,  particularly,  that 
when  an  officer  of  high  rank  had  been  acquitted 
by  a  Court  Martial,  George  the  Second  had  with 
his  own  hand,  struck  his  name  off  the  list.  In 
short,  he  displayed  such  a  power  of  eloquence, 
that  Hogarth  looked  at  him  with  astonishment, 
and  actually  imagined  that  this  ideot  had  been 
at  the  moment  inspired.  Neither  Hogarth  nor 
Johnson  were  made  known  to  each  other  at  this 
interview. 

1740:  ^.tat.  31.] — In  1740  he  wrote  for  The 
Gentleman’s  Magazine  the  “Preface,”  f  “Life  of 
Sir  Francis  Drake,”  *  and  the  first  parts  of  those 
of  “Admiral  Blake,”  *  and  of  “Philip  Baretier,”  * 
both  which  he  finished  the  following  year.  He 
also  wrote  “An  Essay  on  Epitaphs,”  f  and  an 
“Epitaph  on  Philips,  a  Musician,”*  which  was 
afterwards  published  with  some  other  pieces  of 
his,  in  Mrs.  Williams’s  Miscellanies .  This  Epi¬ 
taph  is  so  exquisitely  beautiful,  that  I  remember 
even  Lord  Karnes,  strangely  prejudiced  as  he 
was  against  Dr.  Johnson,  was  compelled  to  al¬ 
low  it  very  high  praise.  It  has  been  ascribed  to 
Mr.  Garrick,  from  its  appearing  at  first  with  the 
signature  G;  but  I  have  heard  Mr.  Garrick  de¬ 
clare,  that  it  was  written  by  Dr.  Johnson,  and 
give  the  following  account  of  the  manner  in 

impartial  posterity  may,  perhaps,  be  as  little  in¬ 
clined  as  Dr.  Johnson  was  to  justify  the  uncommon 
rigour  exercised  in  the  case  of  Dr.  Archibald  Cam¬ 
eron.  He  was  an  amiable  and  truly  honest  man; 
and  his  offence  was  owing  to  a  generous,  though 
mistaken  principle  of  duty.  Being  obliged,  after 
1 746,  to  give  up  his  profession  as  a  physician,  and 
to  go  into  foreign  parts,  he  was  honoured  with  the 
rank  of  Colonel,  both  in  the  French  and  Spanish 
service.  He  was  a  son  of  the  ancient  and  respect¬ 
able  family  of  Cameron,  of  Lochiel;  and  his  broth¬ 
er,  who  was  the  Chief  of  that  brave  clan,  distin¬ 
guished  himself  by  moderation  and  humanity,  while 
the  Highland  army  marched  victorious  through 
Scotland.  It  is  remarkable  of  this  Chief,  that  though 
he  had  earnestly  remonstrated  against  the  attempt 
as  hopeless,  he  was  of  too  heroick  a  spirit  not  to 
venture  his  life  and  fortune  in  the  cause,  when  per¬ 
sonally  asked  by  him  whom  he  thought  his  prince. 


BOSWELL 


1740]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  39 


which  it  was  composed.  Johnson  and  he  were 
sitting  together;  when,  amongst  other  things, 
Garrick  repeated  an  Epitaph  upon  this  Philips 
by  a  Dr.  Wilkes,  in  these  words: 

Exalted  soul!  whose  harmony  could  please 
The  love-sick  virgin,  and  the  gouty  ease; 

Could  jarring  discord,  like  Amphion,  move 
To  beauteous  order  and  harmonious  love; 

Rest  here  in  peace,  till  angels  bid  thee  rise. 

And  meet  thy  blessed  Saviour  in  the  skies. 

Johnson  shook  his  head  at  these  common¬ 
place  funereal  lines,  and  said  to  Garrick,  “I 
think,  Davy,  I  can  make  a  better.”  Then,  stir¬ 
ring  about  his  tea  for  a  little  while,  in  a  state  of 
meditation,  he  almost  extempore  produced  the 
following  verses: 

Philips,  whose  touch  harmonious  could  remove 
The  pangs  of  guilty  power  or  hapless  love; 

Rest  here,  distress'd  by  poverty  no  more, 

Here find  that  calm  thou  gav'st  so  oft  before; 

Sleep,  undisturb'd,  within  this  peaceful  shrine. 

Till  angels  wake  thee  with  a  note  like  thine! 

At  the  same  time  that  Mr.  Garrick  favoured 
me  with  this  anecdote,  he  repeated  a  very  point¬ 
ed  Epigram  by  Johnson,  on  George  the  Sec¬ 
ond  and  Colley  Cibber,  which  has  never  yet  ap¬ 
peared,  and  of  which  I  know  not  the  exact  date: 
Dr.  Johnson  afterwards  gave  it  to  me  himself: 
Augustus  still  survives  in  Mar  o'  s  strain , 

And  Spenser's  verse  prolongs  Eliza's  reign; 

Great  George's  acts  let  tuneful  Cibber  sing; 

For  Nature  form'd  the  Poet for  the  King. 

In  1741  he  wrote  for  The  Gentleman' s  Magazine 
the  “Preface,”  *  “Conclusion  of  his  lives  of  Drake 
and  Baretier,”f  “A  free  translation  of  the  Jests  of 
Hierocles,  with  an  Introduction”  ;f  and,  I  think, 
the  following  pieces:  “Debate  on  the  Proposal 
of  Parliament  to  Cromwell,  to  assume  the  Title 
of  King,  abridged,  modified,  and  digested”;  f 
“Translation  of  Abbe  Guyon’s  Dissertation  on 
the  Amazons”; f  “Translation  of  Fontenelle’s 
Panegyrick  on  Dr.  Morin.”  f  Two  notes  upon 
this  appear  to  me  undoubtedly  his.  He  this  year, 
and  the  two  following,  wrote  the  Parliamentary 
Debates.  He  told  me  himself,  that  he  was  the  sole 
composer  of  them  for  those  three  years  only.  He 
was  not,  however,  precisely  exact  in  his  state¬ 
ment,  which  he  mentioned  from  hasty  recollec¬ 
tion;  for  it  is  sufficiently  evident,  that  his  com¬ 
position  of  them  began  November  1 9,  1 740,  and 
ended  February  23,  1742-3. 

It  appears  from  some  of  Cave’s  letters  to  Dr. 
Birch,  that  Cave  had  better  assistance  for  that 
branch  of  his  Magazine,  than  has  been  gener¬ 
ally  supposed;  and  that  he  was  indefatigable  in 
getting  it  made  as  perfect  as  he  could. 


Thus,  2 1st  July,  1 735.  “I  trouble  you  with  the 
inclosed,  because  you  said  you  could  easily  cor¬ 
rect  what  is  here  given  for  Lord  C - Id’s 

speech.  I  beg  you  will  do  so  as  soon  as  you  can 
for  me,  because  the  month  is  far  advanced.” 

And  15th  July,  1737.  “As  you  remember  the 
debates  so  far  as  to  perceive  the  speeches  al¬ 
ready  printed  are  not  exact,  I  beg  the  favour 
that  you  will  peruse  the  inclosed,  and,  in  the 
best  manner  your  memory  will  serve,  correct 
the  mistaken  passages,  or  add  any  thing  that  is 
omitted.  I  should  be  very  glad  to  have  some¬ 
thing  of  the  Duke  of  N - le’s  speech,  which 

would  be  particularly  of  service. 

“A  gentleman  has  Lord  Bathurst’s  speech  to 
add  something  to.” 

And  July  3,  1 744.  “You  will  see  what  stupid, 
low,  abominable  stuff  is  put1  upon  your  noble 
and  learned  friend’s2  character,  such  as  I  should 
quite  reject,  and  endeavour  to  do  something 
better  towards  doing  justice  to  the  character. 
But  as  I  cannot  expect  to  attain  my  desires  in 
that  respect,  it  would  be  a  great  satisfaction,  as 
well  as  an  honour  to  our  work  to  have  the  favour 
of  the  genuine  speech.  It  is  a  method  that  sev¬ 
eral  have  been  pleased  to  take,  as  I  could  show, 
but  I  think  myself  under  a  restraint.  I  shall  say 
so  far,  that  I  have  had  some  by  a  third  hand, 
which  I  understood  well  enough  to  come  from 
the  first;  others  by  penny  post,  and  others  by  the 
speakers  themselves,  who  have  been  pleased  to 
visit  St.John’s  Gate,  and  show  particular  marks 
of  their  being  pleased.”3 

There  is  no  reason,  I  believe,  to  doubt  the 
veracity  of  Gave.  It  is,  however,  remarkable, 
that  none  of  these  letters  are  in  the  years  during 
which  Johnson  alone  furnished  the  Debates, 
and  one  of  them  is  in  the  very  year  after  he 
ceased  from  that  labour.  Johnson  told  me  that 
as  soon  as  he  found  that  the  speeches  were 
thought  genuine,  he  determined  that  he  would 
write  no  more  of  them;  for  “he  would  not  be 
accessary  to  the  propagation  of  falsehood.”  And 
such  was  the  tenderness  of  his  conscience,  that 
a  short  time  before  his  death  he  expressed  his 
regret  for  his  having  been  the  authour  of  fic¬ 
tions,  which  had  passed  for  realities. 

He  nevertheless  agreed  with  me  in  thinking, 
that  the  debates  which  he  had  framed  were  to 
be  valued  as  orations  upon  questions  of  publick 
importance.  They  have  accordingly  been  col¬ 
lected  in  volumes,  properly  arranged,  and  rec- 

T  suppose  in  another  compilation  of  the  same 
kind. 

2Doubtless,  Lord  Hardwick. 

3Birch’s  MSS.  in  the  British  Museum ,  4302. 


BOSWELL 


40 

oramended  to  the  notice  of  parliamentary  speak¬ 
ers  by  a  preface,  written  by  no  inferior  hand.1  I 
must,  however,  observe,  that  although  there  is 
in  those  debates  a  wonderful  store  of  political 
information,  and  very  powerful  eloquence,  I 
cannot  agree  that  they  exhibit  the  manner  of 
each  particular  speaker,  as  Sir  John  Hawkins 
seems  to  think.  But,  indeed,  what  opinion  can 
we  have  of  his  judgement,  and  taste  in  publick 
speaking,  who  presumes  to  give,  as  the  charac- 
teristicks  of  two  celebrated  orators,  “the  deep- 
mouthed  rancour  of  Pulteney,  and  the  yelping 
pertinacity  of  Pitt.”  2 

This  year  I  find  that  his  tragedy  of  Irene  had 
been  for  some  time  ready  for  the  stage,  and  that 
his  necessities  made  him  desirous  of  getting  as 
much  as  he  could  for  it,  without  delay;  for  there 
is  the  following  letter  from  Mr.  Gave  to  Dr. 
Birch,  in  the  same  volume  of  manuscripts  in  the 
British  Museum,  from  which  I  copied  those 
above  quoted.  They  were  most  obligingly  point¬ 
ed  out  to  me  by  Sir  William  Musgrave,  one  of 
the  Curators  of  that  noble  repository. 

Sept.  9,  1741 

I  have  put  Mr.  Johnson’s  play  into  Mr.  Gray’s3 
hands,  in  order  to  sell  it  to  him,  if  he  is  inclined 
to  buy  it;  but  I  doubt  whether  he  will  or  not. 
He  would  dispose  of  the  copy,  and  whatever  ad¬ 
vantage  may  be  made  by  acting  it.  Would  your 
society,4  or  any  gentleman,  or  body  of  men  that 
you  know,  take  such  a  bargain?  He  and  I  are 
very  unfit  to  deal  with  theatrical  persons.  Fleet- 
wood  was  to  have  acted  it  last  season,  but  John¬ 
son’s  diffidence  or  5  prevented  it. 

I  have  already  mentioned  that  Irene  was  not 
brought  into  publick  notice  till  Garrick  was 
manager  of  Drury-lane  theatre. 

1742:  jet  at.  33.] — In  1742  he  wrote  for  The 
Gentleman's  Magazine  the  “Preface,”!  the  “Par¬ 
liamentary  Debates,”*  “Essay  on  the  Account 
of  the  Conduct  of  the  Duchess  of  Marlbor¬ 
ough,”*  then  the  popular  topick  of  conversa¬ 
tion.  This  “Essay”  is  a  short  but  masterly  per¬ 
formance.  We  find  him  in  No.  13  of  his  Rambler , 

II  am  assured  that  the  editor  is  Mr.  George  Chal¬ 
mers,  whose  commercial  works  are  well  known  and 
esteemed. 

2Hawkins’s  Life  of  Johnson ,  p.  1 00. 

3 A  bookseller  of  London. 

4Not  the  Royal  Society;  but  the  Society  for  the 
encouragement  of  learning,  of  which  Dr.  Birch  was 
a  leading  member.  Their  object  was  to  assist  auth¬ 
ors  in  printing  expensive  works.  It  existed  from 
about  1 735  to  1 746,  when  having  incurred  a  con¬ 
siderable  debt,  it  was  dissolved. 

5There  is  no  erasure  here,  but  a  mere  blank;  to 

fill  up  which  may  be  an  exercise  for  ingenious  con¬ 
jecture. 


[  1742 

censuring  a  profligate  sentiment  in  that  “Ac¬ 
count”;  and  again  insisting  upon  it  strenuously 
in  conversation.6  “An  Account  of  the  Life  of 
Peter  Burman,”  *  I  believe  chiefly  taken  from  a 
foreign  publication;  as,  indeed,  he  could  not 
himself  know  much  about  Burman;  Additions 
to  his  Life  of  Baretier;*  “The  Life  of  Syden¬ 
ham,”*  afterwards  prefixed  to  Dr.  Swan’s  edi¬ 
tion  of  his  works;  “Proposals  for  Printing  Biblio¬ 
theca  Harleiana,  or  a  Catalogue  of  the  Library 
of  the  Earl  of  Oxford.”*  His  account  of  that 
celebrated  collection  of  books,  in  which  he  dis¬ 
plays  the  importance  to  literature  of  what  the 
French  call  a  catalogue  raisonne ,  when  the  sub¬ 
jects  of  it  are  extensive  and  various,  and  it  is 
executed  with  ability,  cannot  fail  to  impress  all 
his  readers  with  admiration  of  his  philological 
attainments.  It  was  afterwards  prefixed  to  the 
first  volume  of  the  Catalogue,  in  which  the 
Latin  accounts  of  books  were  written  by  him. 
He  was  employed  in  this  business  by  Mr.  Thomas 
Osborne  the  bookseller,  who  purchased  the  li¬ 
brary  for  13,000/.,  a  sum  which  Mr.  Oldys  says, 
in  one  of  his  manuscripts,  was  not  more  than 
the  binding  of  the  books  had  cost;  yet,  as  Dr. 
Johnson  assured  me,  the  slowness  of  the  sale  was 
such,  that  there  was  not  much  gained  by  it.  It 
has  been  confidently  related,  with  many  em¬ 
bellishments,  that  Johnson  one  day  knocked 
Osborne  down  in  his  shop,  with  a  folio,  and  put 
his  foot  upon  his  neck.  The  simple  truth  I  had 
from  Johnson  himself.  “Sir,  he  was  impertinent 
to  me,  and  I  beat  him.  But  it  was  not  in  his 
shop:  it  was  in  my  own  chamber.” 

A  very  diligent  observer  may  trace  him  where 
we  should  not  easily  suppose  him  to  be  found. 
I  have  no  doubt  that  he  wrote  the  little  abridge¬ 
ment  entitled  “Foreign  History,”  in  the  Maga¬ 
zine  for  December.  To  prove  it,  I  shall  quote  the 
Introduction.  “As  this  is  that  season  of  the  year 
in  which  Nature  may  be  said  to  command  a  sus¬ 
pension  of  hostilities,  and  which  seems  intended, 
by  putting  a  short  stop  to  violence  and  slaugh¬ 
ter,  to  afford  time  for  malice  to  relent,  and  ani¬ 
mosity  to  subside;  we  can  scarce  expect  any 
other  accounts  than  of  plans,  negotiations  and 
treaties,  of  proposals  for  peace,  and  prepara¬ 
tions  for  war.”  As  also  this  passage:  “Let  those 
who  despise  the  capacity  of  the  Swiss,  tell  us 
by  what  wonderful  policy,  or  by  what  happy 
conciliation  of  interests,  it  is  brought  to  pass, 
that  in  a  body  made  up  of  different  communi¬ 
ties  and  different  religions,  there  should  be  no 
civil  commotions,  though  the  people  are  so  war- 

6  Journal  of  a  Tour  to  the  Hebrides ,  3rd  edit.,  p.  167. 
[Sept.  10,  1773] 


1742  ] 

like,  that  to  nominate  and  raise  an  army  is  the 
same.” 

I  am  obliged  to  Mr.  Astle  for  his  ready  per¬ 
mission  to  copy  the  two  following  letters,  of 
which  the  originals  are  in  his  possession.  Their 
contents  shew  that  they  were  written  about  this 
time,  and  that  Johnson  was  now  engaged  in 
preparing  an  historical  account  of  the  British 
Parliament. 

To  Mr.  Cave 

[jYo  date ] 

Sir,  I  believe  I  am  going  to  write  a  long  let¬ 
ter,  and  have  therefore  taken  a  whole  sheet  of 
paper.  The  first  thing  to  be  written  about  is  our 
historical  design. 

You  mentioned  the  proposal  of  printing  in 
numbers,  as  an  alteration  in  the  scheme,  but  I 
believe  you  mistook,  some  way  or  other,  my 
meaning;  I  had  no  other  view  than  that  you 
might  rather  print  too  many  of  five  sheets,  than 
of  five  and  thirty. 

With  regard  to  what  I  shall  say  on  the  man¬ 
ner  of  proceeding,  I  would  have  it  understood 
as  wholly  indifferent  to  me,  and  my  opinion 
only,  not  my  resolution.  Emptoris  sit  eligere. 

I  think  the  insertion  of  the  exact  dates  of  the 
most  important  events  in  the  margin,  or  of  so 
many  events  as  may  enable  the  reader  to  regu¬ 
late  the  order  of  facts  with  sufficient  exactness, 
the  proper  medium  between  a  journal,  which 
has  regard  only  to  time,  and  a  history  which 
ranges  facts  according  to  their  dependence  on 
each  other,  and  postpones  or  anticipates  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  convenience  of  narration.  I  think  the 
work  ought  to  partake  of  the  spirit  of  history, 
which  is  contrary  to  minute  exactness,  and  of 
the  regularity  of  a  journal,  which  is  inconsistent 
with  spirit.  For  this  reason,  I  neither  admit  num¬ 
bers  or  dates,  nor  reject  them. 

I  am  of  your  opinion  with  regard  to  placing 
most  of  the  resolutions  &c.,  in  the  margin,  and 
think  we  shall  give  the  most  complete  account 
of  Parliamentary  proceedings  that  can  be  con¬ 
trived.  The  naked  papers,  without  an  historical 
treatise  interwoven,  require  some  other  book  to 
make  them  understood.  I  will  date  the  succeed¬ 
ing  facts  with  some  exactness,  but  I  think  in  the 
margin.  You  told  me  on  Saturday  that  I  had  re¬ 
ceived  money  on  this  work,  and  found  set  down 
13/.  2s.  6 d.,  reckoning  the  half  guinea  of  last 
Saturday.  As  you  hinted  to  me  that  you  had 
many  calls  for  money,  I  would  not  press  you  too 
hard,  and  therefore  shall  desire  only,  as  I  send  it 
in,  two  guineas  for  a  sheet  of  copy;  the  rest  you 
may  pay  me  when  it  may  be  more  convenient; 
and  even  by  this  sheet-payment  I  shall,  for  some 
time,  be  very  expensive. 

The  Life  of  Savage  I  am  ready  to  go  upon;  and 
in  Great  Primer,  and  Pica  notes,  I  reckon  on 
sending  in  half  a  sheet  a  day;  but  the  money  for 
that  shall  likewise  lye  by  in  your  hands  till  it  is 


41 

done.  With  the  debates,  shall  not  I  have  busi¬ 
ness  enough?  if  I  had  but  good  pens. 

Towards  Mr.  Savage’s  Life  what  more  have 
you  got?  I  would  willingly  have  his  trial,  &c., 
and  know  whether  his  defence  be  at  Bristol,  and 
would  have  his  collection  of  poems,  on  account 
of  the  Preface. —  The  Plain  Dealer f — all  the  mag¬ 
azines  that  have  anything  of  his,  or  relating  to 
him. 

I  thought  my  letter  would  be  long,  but  it  is 
now  ended;  and  I  am,  Sir,  yours,  &c. 

Sam.  Johnson 

The  boy  found  me  writing  this  almost  in  the 
dark,  when  I  could  not  quite  easily  read  yours. 

I  have  read  the  Italian — nothing  in  it  is  well. 

I  had  no  notion  of  having  any  thing  for  the 
Inscription.  I  hope  you  don’t  think  I  kept  it  to 
extort  a  price.  I  could  think  of  nothing,  till  to¬ 
day.  If  you  could  spare  me  another  guinea  for 
the  history,  I  should  take  it  very  kindly,  to-night; 
but  if  you  do  not  I  shall  not  think  it  an  injury. — 
I  am  almost  well  again. 

To  Mr.  Cave 

Sir,  You  did  not  tell  me  your  determination 
about  the  “Soldier’s  Letter,”2  which  I  am  confi¬ 
dent  was  never  printed.  I  think  it  will  not  do  by 
itself,  or  in  any  other  place,  so  well  as  the  Mag . 
Extraordinary.  If  you  will  have  it  at  all,  I  believe 
you  do  not  think  I  set  it  high,  and  I  will  be  glad 
if  what  you  give,  you  will  give  quickly. 

You  need  not  be  in  care  about  something  to 
print,  for  I  have  got  the  State  Trials,  and  shall 
extract  Layer,  Atterbury,  and  Macclesfield  from 
them,  and  shall  bring  them  to  you  in  a  fort¬ 
night;  after  which  I  will  try  to  get  the  South  Sea 
Report. 

[No  date ,  nor  signature ] 

I  would  also  ascribe  to  him  an  “Essay  on  the 
Description  of  China,  from  the  French  of  Du 
Halde.”  f 

His  writings  in  The  Gentleman's  Magazine  in 
1743,  are,  the  “Preface,”!  the  “Parliamentary 
Debates,”!  “Considerations  on  the  Dispute  be¬ 
tween  Crousaz  and  War  burton,  on  Pope’s  Essay 
on  Man"\\  in  which,  while  he  defends  Crousaz, 
he  shews  an  admirable  metaphysical  acuteness 
and  temperance  in  controversy;  “ Ad  Lauram 
parituram  Epigramma” ;*3  and,  “A  Latin  Trans- 

1  The  Plain  Dealer  was  published  in  1 724,  and  con¬ 
tained  some  account  of  Savage. 

2I  have  not  discovered  what  this  was. 

zAngliacas  inter  pulcherrima  Laura  paellas, 

Mox  uteri  pondus  depositura  grave , 

Ads  it,  Laura ,  tibifacilis  Lucina  dolenti , 

Neve  tibi  noceat  prcenituisse  Deal. 

Mr.  Hector  was  present  when  this  Epigram  was 
made  impromptu.  The  first  line  was  proposed  by  Dr. 
James,  and  Johnson  was  called  upon  by  the  com¬ 
pany  to  finish  it,  which  he  instantly  did. 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


42 

lation  of  Pope’s  Verses  on  his  Grotto”;  *  and,  as 
he  could  employ  his  pen  with  equal  success 
upon  a  small  matter  as  a  great,  I  suppose  him 
to  be  the  authour  of  an  advertisement  for  Os¬ 
borne,  concerning  the  great  Harleian  Cata¬ 
logue. 

But  I  should  think  myself  much  wanting,  both 
to  my  illustrious  friend  and  my  readers,  did 
I  not  introduce  here,  with  more  than  ordi¬ 
nary  respect,  an  exquisitely  beautiful  Ode,  which 
has  not  been  inserted  in  any  of  the  collec¬ 
tions  of  Johnson’s  poetry,  written  by  him  at  a 
very  early  period,  as  Mr.  Hector  informs  me, 
and  inserted  in  The  Gentleman1  s  Magazine  of  this 
year. 

Friendship,  an  Ode* 

Friendship,  peculiar  boon  of  heav'n , 

The  noble  mind's  delight  and  pride , 

To  men  and  angels  only  giv'n. 

To  all  the  lower  world  deny'd. 

While  love ,  unknown  among  the  blest , 

Parent  oj  thousand  wild  desires , 

The  savage  and  the  human  breast 
Torments  alike  with  raging  fires; 

With  bright ,  but  oft  destructive ,  gleam , 

Alike  o'er  all  his  lightnings fly; 

Thy  lambent  glories  only  beam 
Around  the fav' rites  of  the  sky. 

Thy  gentle  flows  of  guiltless  joys 
On  fools  and  villains  ne'er  descend ; 

In  vain  for  thee  the  tyrant  sighs , 

And  hugs  a  flatterer  for  a  friend . 

Directress  of  the  brave  and  just , 

0  guide  us  through  life's  darksome  way! 

And  let  the  tortures  of  mistrust 
On  selfish  bosoms  only  prey. 

Nor  shall  thine  ardours  cease  to  glow , 

When  souls  to  blissful  climes  remove; 

What  rais'd  our  virtue  here  below , 

Shall  aid  our  happiness  above. 

Johnson  had  now  an  opportunity  of  oblig¬ 
ing  his  schoolfellow  Dr.  James,  of  whom  he 
once  observed,  “no  man  brings  more  mind 
to  his  profession.”  James  published  this  year 
his  Medicinal  Dictionary ,  in  three  volumes  folio. 
Johnson,  as  I  understood  from  him,  had  writ¬ 
ten,  or  assisted  in  writing,  the  proposals  for 
this  work;  and  being  very  fond  of  the  study 
of  the  physick,  in  which  James  was  his  master, 
he  furnished  some  of  the  articles.  He,  how¬ 
ever,  certainly  wrote  for  it  the  Dedication  to  Dr. 
Mead,  | which  is  conceived  with  great  address  to 


[  1743 

conciliate  the  patronage  of  that  very  eminent 
man.1 

It  has  been  circulated,  I  know  not  with  what 
authenticity,  that  Johnson  considered  Dr.  Birch 
as  a  dull  writer,  and  said  of  him,  “Tom  Birch  is 
as  brisk  as  a  bee  in  conversation;  but  no  sooner 
does  he  take  a  pen  in  his  hand,  than  it  becomes 
a  torpedo  to  him,  and  benumbs  all  his  faculties.” 
That  the  literature  of  this  country  is  much  in¬ 
debted  to  Birch’s  activity  and  diligence  must 
certainly  be  acknowledged.  We  have  seen  that 
Johnson  honoured  him  with  a  Greek  Epigram; 
and  his  correspondence  with  him,  during  many 
years,  proves  that  he  had  no  mean  opinion  of 
him. 

To  Dr.  Birch 

Thursday,  Sept.  29,  1 743 

Sir,  I  hope  you  will  excuse  me  for  troubling 
you  on  an  occasion  on  which  I  know  not  whom 
else  I  can  apply  to;  I  am  at  a  loss  for  the  Lives 
and  Characters  of  Earl  Stanhope,  the  two 
Craggs,  and  the  minister  Sunderland;  and  beg 
that  you  will  inform  [me]  where  I  may  find 
them,  and  send  any  pamphlets,  &c.  relating  to 
them  to  Mr.  Cave,  to  be  perused  for  a  few  days 
by,  Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

His  circumstances  were  at  this  time  much 
embarrassed;  yet  his  affection  for  his  mother 
was  so  warm,  and  so  liberal,  that  he  took  upon 
himself  a  debt  of  her’s,  which,  though  small  in 
itself,  was  then  considerable  to  him.  This  ap¬ 
pears  from  the  following  letter  which  he  wrote 
to  Mr.  Levett,  of  Lichfield,  the  original  of  which 
lies  now  before  me. 

To  Mr.  Levett;  in  Lichfield 

December  1,  1743 

Sir,  I  am  extremely  sorry  that  we  have  en¬ 
croached  so  much  upon  your  forbearance  with 
respect  to  the  interest,  which  a  great  perplexity 
of  affairs  hindered  me  from  thinking  of  with 
that  attention  that  I  ought,  and  which  I  am  not 
immediately  able  to  remit  to  you,  but  will  pay 

luTo  Dr.  Mead 

“SiR,i  That  the  Medicinal  Dictionary  is  dedicated 
to  you,  is  to  be  imputed  only  to  your  reputation  for 
superior  skill  in  those  sciences  which  I  have  endeav¬ 
oured  to  explain  and  facilitate:  and  you  are,  there¬ 
fore,  to  consider  this  address,  if  it  be  agreeable  to 
you,  as  one  of  the  rewards  of  merit;  and  if  other¬ 
wise,  as  one  of  the  inconveniences  of  eminence. 

“However  you  shall  receive  it,  my  design  cannot 
be  disappointed;  because  this  publick  appeal  to 
your  judgement  will  shew  that  I  do  not  found  my 
hopes  of  approbation  upon  the  ignorance  of  my 
readers,  and  that  I  fear  his  censure  least,  whose 
knowledge  is  most  extensive.  I  am,  Sir,  your  most 
obedient  humble  servant, 

“R.  James” 


BOSWELL 


1744] 

it  (I  think  twelve  pounds,)  in  two  months.  I 
look  upon  this,  and  on  the  future  interest  of  that 
mortgage,  as  my  own  debt;  and  beg  that  you 
will  be  pleased  to  give  me  directions  how  to  pay 
it,  and  not  mention  it  to  my  dear  mother.  If  it 
be  necessary  to  pay  this  in  less  time,  I  believe  I 
can  do  it;  but  I  take  two  months  for  certainty, 
and  beg  an  answer  whether  you  can  allow  me  so 
much  time.  I  think  myself  very  much  obliged  to 
your  forbearance,  and  shall  esteem  it  a  great 
happiness  to  be  able  to  serve  you.  I  have  great 
opportunities  of  dispersing  any  thing  that  you 
may  think  it  proper  to  make  publick.  I  will  give 
a  note  for  the  money,  payable  at  the  time  men¬ 
tioned,  to  any  one  here  that  you  shall  appoint.  I 
am,  Sir,  your  most  obedient,  and  most  humble 
servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

At  Mr.  Osborne’s,  bookseller,  in  Gray’s  Inn 

1 744:  jetat.  35.] — It  does  not  appear  that  he 
wrote  any  thing  in  1 744  for  The  Gentleman's  Mag¬ 
azine ,  but  the  Preface,  f  His  Life  of  Baretier  was 
now  re-published  in  a  pamphlet  by  itself.  But 
he  produced  one  work  this  year,  fully  sufficient 
to  maintain  the  high  reputation  which  he  had 
acquired.  This  was  The  Life  of  Richard  Savage ;* 
a  man,  of  whom  it  is  difficult  to  speak  impar¬ 
tially,  without  wondering  that  he  was  for  some 
time  the  intimate  companion  of  Johnson;  for 
his  character  was  marked  by  profligacy,  inso¬ 
lence,  and  ingratitude:1  yet,  as  he  undoubtedly 
had  a  warm  and  vigorous,  though  unregulated 
mind,  had  seen  life  in  all  its  varieties,  and  been 
much  in  the  company  of  the  statesmen  and  wits 
of  his  time,  he  could  communicate  to  Johnson 
an  abundant  supply  of  such  materials  as  his 
philosophical  curiosity  most  eagerly  desired; 
and  as  Savage’s  misfortunes  and  misconduct 
had  reduced  him  to  the  lowest  state  of  wretched¬ 
ness  as  a  writer  for  bread,  his  visits  to  St.  John’s 
Gate  naturally  brought  Johnson  and  him  to¬ 
gether.2 

1As  a  specimen  of  his  temper,  I  insert  the  follow¬ 
ing  letter  from  him  to  a  noble  Lord,  to  whom  he 
was  under  great  obligations,  but  who,  on  account 
of  his  bad  conduct,  was  obliged  to  discard  him. 
The  original  was  in  the  hands  of  the  late  Francis 
Cockayne  Cust,  Esq.,  one  of  His  Majesty’s  Counsel 
learned  in  the  law: 

“ Right  Honourable  Brute  and  Booby, 

“I  find  you  want  (as  Mr.  - is  pleased  to 

hint,)  to  swear  away  my  life,  that  is,  the  life  of  your 
creditor,  because  he  asks  you  for  a  debt. — The  pub- 
lick  shall  soon  be  acquainted  with  this,  to  judge 
whether  you  are  not  fitter  to  be  an  Irish  Evidence, 
than  to  be  an  Irish  Peer. — I  defy  and  despise  you. 
I  am,  your  determined  adversary,  R.  S.” 

2Sir  John  Hawkins  gives  the  world  to  under¬ 
stand,  that  Johnson,  “being  an  admirer  of  genteel 
manners,  was  captivated  by  the  address  and  de- 


43 

It  is  melancholy  to  reflect,  that  Johnson  and 
Savage  were  sometimes  in  such  extreme  indi¬ 
gence,3  that  they  could  not  pay  for  a  lodging;  so 
that  they  have  wandered  together  whole  nights 
in  the  streets.  Yet  in  these  almost  incredible 
scenes  of  distress,  we  may  suppose  that  Savage 
mentioned  many  of  the  anecdotes  with  which 
Johnson  afterwards  enriched  the  life  of  his  un¬ 
happy  companion,  and  those  of  other  Poets. 

He  told  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  that  one  night 
in  particular,  when  Savage  and  he  walked  round 
St.  James’s-square  for  want  of  a  lodging,  they 
were  not  at  all  depressed  by  their  situation;  but 
in  high  spirits  and  brimful  of  patriotism,  tra¬ 
versed  the  square  for  several  hours,  inveighed 
against  the  minister,  and  “resolved  they  would 
stand  by  their  country .” 

I  am  afraid,  however,  that  by  associating  with 
Savage,  who  was  habituated  to  the  dissipation 
and  licentiousness  of  the  town,  Johnson,  though 

meanour  of  Savage,  who,  as  to  his  exterior,  was,  to 
a  remarkable  degree,  accomplished.”  Hawkins’s 
Life ,  p.  52.  But  Sir  John’s  notions  of  gentility  must 
appear  somewhat  ludicrous,  from  his  stating  the 
following  circumstance  as  presumptive  evidence 
that  Savage  was  a  good  swordsman:  “That  he  un¬ 
derstood  the  exercise  of  a  gentleman’s  weapon,  may 
be  inferred  from  the  use  made  of  it  in  that  rash  en¬ 
counter  which  is  related  in  his  life.”  The  dexterity 
here  alluded  to  was,  that  Savage,  in  a  nocturnal  fit 
of  drunkenness,  stabbed  a  man  at  a  coffee-house, 
and  killed  him;  for  which  he  was  tried  at  the  Old- 
Bailey,  and  found  guilty  of  murder. 

Johnson,  indeed,  describes  him  as  having  “a 
grave  and  manly  deportment,  a  solemn  dignity  of 
mien;  but  which,  upon  a  nearer  acquaintance,  soft¬ 
ened  into  an  engaging  easiness  of  manners.”  How 
highly  Johnson  admired  him  for  that  knowledge 
which  he  himself  so  much  cultivated,  and  what 
kindness  he  entertained  for  him,  appears  from  the 
following  lines  in  The  Gentleman's  M agazine  for  April, 
!738,  which  I  am  assured  were  written  by  John¬ 
son: 

Ad  Rigardum  Savage 
Humani  studium  generis  qui  pectore  fervet 
O  colat  humanum  te  foveatque  genus. 

3The  following  striking  proof  of  Johnson’s  ex¬ 
treme  indigence,  when  he  published  the  Life  of  Sav¬ 
age,  was  communicated  to  the  author,  by  Mr.  Rich¬ 
ard  Stow,  of  Apsley,  in  Bedfordshire,  from  the  in¬ 
formation  of  Mr.  Walter  Harte,  author  of  the  Life 
of  Gustavus  Adolphus: 

Soon  after  Savage’s  Life  was  published,  Mr.  Harte 
dined  with  Edward  Gave,  and  occasionally  praised 
it.  Soon  after,  meeting  him.  Gave  said,  “You  made 
a  man  very  happy  t’other  day.” — “How  could  that 
be,”  says  Harte;  “nobody  was  there  but  ourselves.” 
Cave  answered,  by  reminding  him  that  a  plate  of 
victuals  was  sent  behind  a  screen,  which  was  to 
Johnson,  dressed  so  shabbily,  that  he  did  not  choose 
to  appear;  but  on  hearing  the  conversation,  was 
highly  delighted  with  the  encomiums  on  his  book. 

[MJ 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


44 

his  good  principles  remained  steady,  did  not  en¬ 
tirely  preserve  that  conduct,  for  which,  in  days 
of  greater  simplicity,  he  was  remarked  by  his 
friend  Mr.  Hector;  but  was  imperceptibly  led 
into  some  indulgencies  which  occasioned  much 
distress  to  his  virtuous  mind. 

That  Johnson  was  anxious  that  an  authen- 
tick  and  favourable  account  of  his  extraordinary 
friend  should  first  get  possession  of  the  publick 
attention,  is  evident  from  a  letter  which  he 
wrote  in  The  Gentleman’s  Magazine  for  August  of 
the  year  preceding  its  publication. 

Mr.  Urban,  As  your  collections  show  how 
often  you  have  owed  the  ornaments  of  your  po¬ 
etical  pages  to  the  correspondence  of  the  unfor¬ 
tunate  and  ingenious  Mr.  Savage,  I  doubt  not 
but  you  have  so  much  regard  to  his  memory  as 
to  encourage  any  design  that  may  have  a  tend¬ 
ency  to  the  preservation  of  it  from  insults  or  cal¬ 
umnies;  and  therefore,  with  some  degree  of 
assurance,  intreat  you  to  inform  the  publick, 
that  his  life  will  speedily  be  published  by  a  per¬ 
son  who  was  favoured  with  his  confidence,  and 
received  from  himself  an  account  of  most  of 
the  transactions  which  he  proposes  to  mention, 
to  the  time  of  his  retirement  to  Swansea  in 
Wales. 

From  that  period,  to  his  death  in  the  prison  of 
Bristol,  the  account  will  be  continued  from  ma¬ 
terials  still  less  liable  to  objection;  his  own  let¬ 
ters,  and  those  of  his  friends,  some  of  which  will 
be  inserted  in  the  work,  and  abstracts  of  others 
subjoined  in  the  margin. 

It  may  be  reasonably  imagined,  that  others 
may  have  the  same  design;  but  as  it  is  not  credi¬ 
ble  that  they  can  obtain  the  same  materials,  it 
must  be  expected  they  will  supply  from  inven¬ 
tion  the  want  of  intelligence;  and  that  under  the 
title  of  “The  Life  of  Savage,”  they  will  publish 
only  a  novel,  filled  with  romantick  adventures, 
and  imaginary  amours.  You  may  therefore,  per¬ 
haps,  gratify  the  lovers  of  truth  and  wit,  by  giv¬ 
ing  me  leave  to  inform  them  in  your  Magazine, 
that  my  account  will  be  published  in  8vo.  by 
Mr.  Roberts,  in  Warwick-lane. 

[No  signature \ 

In  February,  1744,  it  accordingly  came  forth 
from  the  shop  of  Roberts,  between  whom  and 
Johnson  I  have  not  traced  any  connection,  ex¬ 
cept  the  casual  one  of  this  publication.  In  John¬ 
son’s  Life  of  Savage,  although  it  must  be  allowed 
that  its  moral  is  the  reverse  of — Respicere  exem¬ 
plar  vitae  morumque  jubebo,  a  very  useful  lesson  is 
inculcated,  to  guard  men  of  warm  passions  from 
a  too  free  indulgence  of  them;  and  the  various 
incidents  are  related  in  so  clear  and  animated  a 
manner,  and  illuminated  throughout  with  so 
much  philosophy,  that  it  is  one  of  the  most  in- 


[  1744 

teresting  narratives  in  the  English  language.  Sir 
Joshua  Reynolds  told  me,  that  upon  his  return 
from  Italy  he  met  with  it  in  Devonshire,  know¬ 
ing  nothing  of  its  authour,  and  began  to  read  it 
while  he  was  standing  with  his  arm  leaning 
against  a  chimney-piece.  It  seized  his  attention 
so  strongly,  that,  not  being  able  to  lay  down  the 
book  till  he  had  finished  it,  when  he  attempted 
to  move,  he  found  his  arm  totally  benumbed. 
The  rapidity  with  which  this  work  was  com¬ 
posed,  is  a  wonderful  circumstance.  Johnson  has 
been  heard  to  say,  “I  wrote  forty-eight  of  the 
printed  octavo  pages  of  the  Life  of  Savage  at  a 
sitting;  but  then  I  sat  up  all  night.”1 

He  exhibits  the  genius  of  Savage  to  the  best 
advantage  in  the  specimens  of  his  poetry  which 
he  has  selected,  some  of  which  are  of  uncommon 
merit.  We,  indeed,  occasionally  find  such  vigour 
and  such  point,  as  might  make  us  suppose  that 
the  generous  aid  of  Johnson  had  been  imparted 
to  his  friend.  Mr.  Thomas  Warton  made  this 
remark  to  me;  and,  in  support  of  it,  quoted  from 
the  poem  entitled  The  Bastard ,  a  line,  in  which 
the  fancied  superiority  of  one  “stamped  in  Na¬ 
ture’s  mint  with  extasy,”  is  contrasted  with  a 
regular  lawful  descendant  of  some  great  and 
ancient  family: 

No  tenth  transmitter  of  a  foolish  face . 

But  the  fact  is,  that  this  poem  was  published 
some  years  before  Johnson  and  Savage  were 
acquainted. 

It  is  remarkable,  that  in  this  biographical 
disquisition  there  appears  a  very  strong  symp¬ 
tom  of  Johnson’s  prejudice  against  players;  a 
prejudice  which  may  be  attributed  to  the  fol¬ 
lowing  causes:  first,  the  imperfection  of  his  or¬ 
gans,  which  were  so  defective  that  he  was  not 
susceptible  of  the  fine  impressions  which  theat¬ 
rical  excellence  produces  upon  the  generality  of 
mankind;  secondly,  the  cold  rejection  of  his 
tragedy;  and,  lastly,  the  brilliant  success  of  Gar¬ 
rick,  who  had  been  his  pupil,  who  had  come  to 
London  at  the  same  time  with  him,  not  in  a 
much  more  prosperous  state  than  himself,  and 
whose  talents  he  undoubtedly  rated  low,  com¬ 
pared  with  his  own.  His  being  outstripped  by 
his  pupil  in  the  race  of  immediate  fame,  as  well 
as  of  fortune,  probably  made  him  feel  some  in¬ 
dignation,  as  thinking  that  whatever  might  be 
Garrick’s  merits  in  his  art,  the  reward  was  too 
great  when  compared  with  what  the  most  suc¬ 
cessful  efforts  of  literary  labour  could  attain.  At 
all  periods  of  his  life  Johnson  used  to  talk  con- 

\ Journal  of  a  Tour  to  the  Hebrides ,  3rd  edit.,  p.  35 
[p.  55.  Aug.  19,  1773]. 


BOSWELL 


1744] 

temptuously  of  players;  but  in  this  work  he 
speaks  of  them  with  peculiar  acrimony;  for 
which,  perhaps,  there  was  formerly  too  much 
reason  from  the  licentious  and  dissolute  man¬ 
ners  of  those  engaged  in  that  profession.  It  is  but 
justice  to  add,  that  in  our  own  time  such  a 
change  has  taken  place,  that  there  is  no  longer 
room  for  such  an  unfavourable  distinction. 

His  schoolfellow  and  friend,  Dr.  Taylor,  told 
me  a  pleasant  anecdote  of  Johnson’s  triumphing 
over  his  pupil  David  Garrick.  When  that  great 
actor  had  played  some  little  time  at  Goodman’s 
fields,  Johnson  and  Taylor  went  to  see  him  per¬ 
form,  and  afterwards  passed  the  evening  at  a 
tavern  with  him  and  old  Giffard.  Johnson,  who 
was  ever  depreciating  stage-players,  after  cen¬ 
suring  some  mistakes  in  emphasis  which  Gar¬ 
rick  had  committed  in  the  course  of  that  night’s 
acting,  said,  “The  players,  Sir,  have  got  a  kind 
of  rant,  with  which  they  run  on,  without  any 
regard  either  to  accent  or  emphasis.”  Both  Gar¬ 
rick  and  Giffard  were  offended  at  this  sarcasm, 
and  endeavoured  to  refute  it;  upon  which  John¬ 
son  rejoined,  “Well  now,  I’ll  give  you  some¬ 
thing  to  speak,  with  which  you  are  little  ac¬ 
quainted,  and  then  we  shall  see  how  just  my 
observation  is.  That  shall  be  the  criterion.  Let 
me  hear  you  repeat  the  ninth  Commandment, 
‘Thou  shalt  not  bear  false  witness  against  thy 
neighbour.’  ”  Both  tried  at  it,  said  Dr.  Taylor, 
and  both  mistook  the  emphasis,  which  should 
be  upon  not  and  false  witness.1  Johnson  put 
them  right,  and  enjoyed  his  victory  with  great 
glee. 

His  Life  of  Savage  was  no  sooner  published, 
than  the  following  liberal  praise  was  given  to  it, 
in  The  Champion ,  a  periodical  paper:  “This 
pamphlet  is,  without  flattery  to  its  authour,  as 
just  and  well  written  a  piece  as  of  its  kind  I  ever 
saw;  so  that  at  the  same  time  that  it  highly  de¬ 
serves,  it  certainly  stands  very  little  in  need  of 
this  recommendation.  As  to  the  history  of  the 
unfortunate  person,  whose  memoirs  compose 
this  work,  it  is  certainly  penned  with  equal  ac¬ 
curacy  and  spirit,  of  which  I  am  so  much  the 
better  judge,  as  I  know  many  of  the  facts  men¬ 
tioned  to  be  strictly  true,  and  very  fairly  re¬ 
lated.  Besides,  it  is  not  only  the  story  of  Mr. 
Savage,  but  innumerable  incidents  relating  to 
other  persons,  and  other  affairs,  which  renders 

T  suspect  Dr.  Taylor  was  inaccurate  in  this  state¬ 
ment.  The  emphasis  should  be  equall  r  upon  shalt 
and  not ,  as  both  concur  to  form  the  negative  in¬ 
junction;  and  false  witness ,  like  the  other  acts  pro¬ 
hibited  in  the  Decalogue,  should  not  be  marked  by 
any  peculiar  emphasis,  but  only  be  distinctly  enun¬ 
ciated. 


45 

this  a  very  amusing,  and,  withal,  a  very  instruc¬ 
tive  and  valuable  performance.  The  author’s 
observations  are  short,  significant,  and  just,  as 
his  narrative  is  remarkably  smooth,  and  well 
disposed.  His  reflections  open  to  all  the  recesses 
of  the  human  heart;  and,  in  a  word,  a  more  just 
or  pleasant,  a  more  engaging  or  a  more  improv¬ 
ing  treatise,  on  all  the  excellencies  and  defects 
of  human  nature,  is  scarce  to  be  found  in  our 
own,  or,  perhaps,  any  other  language.”2 

Johnson’s  partiality  for  Savage  made  him  en¬ 
tertain  no  doubt  of  his  story,  however  extraor¬ 
dinary  and  improbable.  It  never  occurred  to 
him  to  question  his  being  the  son  of  the  Count¬ 
ess  of  Macclesfield,  of  whose  unrelenting  bar¬ 
barity  he  so  loudly  complained,  and  the  partic¬ 
ulars  of  which  are  related  in  so  strong  and  af¬ 
fecting  a  manner  in  Johnson’s  life  of  him.  John¬ 
son  was  certainly  well  warranted  in  publishing 
his  narrative,  however  offensive  it  might  be  to 
the  lady  and  her  relations,  because  her  alledged 
unnatural  and  cruel  conduct  to  her  son,  and 
shameful  avowal  of  guilt,  were  stated  in  a  Life  of 
Savage  now  lying  before  me,  which  came  out  so 
early  as  1727,  and  no  attempt  had  been  made 
to  confute  it,  or  to  punish  the  authour  or  printer 
as  a  libeller:  but  for  the  honour  of  human  na¬ 
ture,  we  should  be  glad  to  find  the  shocking  tale 
not  true;  and,  from  a  respectable  gentleman3 
connected  with  the  lady’s  family,  I  have  re¬ 
ceived  such  information  and  remarks,  as  joined 
to  my  own  inquiries,  will,  I  think,  render  it  at 
least  somewhat  doubtful,  especially  when  we 
consider  that  it  must  have  originated  from  the 
person  himself  who  went  by  the  name  of  Richard 
Savage. 

If  the  maxim  falsum  in  uno,  falsum  in  omnibus , 
were  to  be  received  without  qualification,  the 
credit  of  Savage’s  narrative,  as  conveyed  to  us, 
would  be  annihilated;  for  it  contains  some  as¬ 
sertions  which,  beyond  a  question,  are  not  true. 

1.  In  order  to  induce  a  belief  that  Earl  Rivers, 
on  account  of  a  criminal  connection  with  whom, 
Lady  Macclesfield  is  said  to  have  been  divorced 
from  her  husband,  by  Act  of  Parliament,4  had  a 
peculiar  anxiety  about  the  child  which  she  bore 
to  him,  it  is  alledged,  that  his  Lordship  gave 

2This  character  of  the  Life  of  Savage  was  not  writ¬ 
ten  by  Fielding  as  has  been  supposed,  but  most 
probably  by  Ralph,  who,  as  appears  from  the  min¬ 
utes  of  the  partners  of  The  Champion ,  in  the  posses¬ 
sion  of  Mr.  Reed  of  Staple  Inn,  succeeded  Fielding 
in  his  share  of  the  paper,  before  the  date  of  that 
eulogium. 

3The  late  Francis  Cockayne  Gust,  Esq.,  one  of 
his  Majesty’s  Counsel. 

4 1697. 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


BOSWELL 


46 

him  his  own  name,  and  had  it  duly  recorded  in 
the  register  of  St.  Andrew’s,  Holborn.  I  have 
carefully  inspected  that  register,  but  no  such 
entry  is  to  be  found.1 

2.  It  is  stated,  that  “Lady  Macclesfield  hav¬ 
ing  lived  for  some  time  upon  very  uneasy  terms 
with  her  husband,  thought  a  publick  confession 
of  adultery  the  most  obvious  and  expeditious 
method  of  obtaining  her  liberty”;  and  Johnson, 
assuming  this  to  be  true,  stigmatises  her  with 
indignation,  as  “the  wretch  who  had,  without 
scruple,  proclaimed  herself  an  adulteress.”  But 
I  have  perused  the  Journals  of  both  houses  of 
Parliament  at  the  period  of  her  divorce,  and 
there  find  it  authentically  ascertained,  that  so 
far  from  voluntarily  submitting  to  the  ignomin¬ 
ious  charge  of  adultery,  she  made  a  strenuous 
defence  by  her  Counsel;  the  bill  having  been 
first  moved  15th  January,  1697,  in  the  House  of 
Lords,  and  proceeded  on,  (with  various  ap¬ 
plications  for  time  to  bring  up  witnesses  at  a 
distance,  &c.)  at  intervals,  till  the  3d  of  March, 
when  it  passed.  It  was  brought  to  the  Com¬ 
mons,  by  a  message  from  the  Lords,  the  5th  of 
March,  proceeded  on  the  7th,  10th,  nth,  14th, 
and  15th,  on  which  day,  after  a  full  examina¬ 
tion  of  witnesses  on  both  sides,  and  hearing  of 
Counsel,  it  was  reported  without  amendments, 
passed,  and  carried  to  the  Lords. 

That  Lady  Macclesfield  was  convicted  of  the 
crime  of  which  she  was  accused,  cannot  be 
denied;  but  the  question  now  is,  whether  the 
person  calling  himself  Richard  Savage  was  her 
son. 

It  has  been  said,  that  when  Earl  Rivers  was 
dying,  and  anxious  to  provide  for  all  his  natural 
children,  he  was  informed  by  Lady  Maccles¬ 
field  that  her  son  by  him  was  dead.  Whether, 
then,  shall  we  believe  that  this  was  a  malignant 
lie,  invented  by  a  mother  to  prevent  her  own 
child  from  receiving  the  bounty  of  his  father, 
which  was  accordingly  the  consequence,  if  the 
person  whose  life  Johnson  wrote,  was  her  son; 
or  shall  we  not  rather  believe  that  the  person 
who  then  assumed  the  name  of  Richard  Savage 
was  an  impostor,  being  in  reality  the  son  of  the 

!The  story  on  which  Mr.  Cust  so  much  relies, 
that  Savage  was  a  supposititious  child,  not  the  son 
of  Lord  Rivers  and  Lady  Macclesfield,  but  the  off¬ 
spring  of  a  shoemaker,  introduced  in  consequence 
of  her  real  son’s  death,  was,  without  doubt,  ground¬ 
ed  on  the  circumstance  of  Lady  Macclesfield  hav¬ 
ing,  in  1 696,  previously  to  the  birth  of  Savage,  had 
a  daughter  by  the  Earl  Rivers,  who  died  in  her  in¬ 
fancy;  a  fact  which  was  proved  in  the  course  of  the 
proceedings  on  Lord  Macclesfield’s  Bill  of  Divorce. 
Most  fictions  of  this  kind  have  some  admixture  of 
truth  in  them.  [M.] 


[  J744 

shoemaker,  under  whose  wife’s  care  Lady  Mac¬ 
clesfield’s  child  was  placed;  that  after  the  death 
of  the  real  Richard  Savage,  he  attempted  to 
personate  him;  and  that  the  fraud  being  known 
to  Lady  Macclesfield,  he  was  therefore  repulsed 
by  her  with  just  resentment? 

There  is  a  strong  circumstance  in  support  of 
the  last  supposition,  though  it  has  been  men¬ 
tioned  as  an  aggravation  of  Lady  Macclesfield’s 
unnatural  conduct,  and  that  is,  her  having  pre¬ 
vented  him  from  obtaining  the  benefit  of  a 
legacy  left  to  him  by  Mrs.  Lloyd  his  god-mother. 
For  if  there  was  such  a  legacy  left,  his  not  being 
able  to  obtain  payment  of  it,  must  be  imputed 
to  his  consciousness  that  he  was  not  the  real 
person.  The  just  inference  should  be,  that  by  the 
death  of  Lady  Macclesfield’s  child  before  its 
god-mother,  the  legacy  became  lapsed,  and 
therefore  that  Johnson’s  Richard  Savage  was  an 
impostor.  If  he  had  a  title  to  the  legacy  he 
could  not  have  found  any  difficulty  in  recovering 
it;  for  had  the  executors  resisted  his  claim,  the 
whole  costs,  as  well  as  the  legacy,  must  have 
been  paid  by  them,  if  he  had  been  the  child  to 
whom  it  was  given. 

The  talents  of  Savage,  and  the  mingled  fire, 
rudeness,  pride,  meanness,  and  ferocity  of  his 
character,2  concur  in  making  it  credible  that  he 
was  fit  to  plan  and  carry  on  an  ambitious  and 
daring  scheme  of  imposture,  similar  instances 
of  which  have  not  been  wanting  in  higher 
spheres,  in  the  history  of  different  countries,  and 
have  had  a  considerable  degree  of  success. 

Yet,  on  the  other  hand,  to  the  companion  of 
Johnson  (who  through  whatever  medium  he 
was  conveyed  into  this  world, — be  it  ever  so 
doubtful  “To  whom  related,  or  by  whom  be¬ 
got,”  was,  unquestionably,  a  man  of  no  com¬ 
mon  endowments,)  we  must  allow  the  weight  of 
general  repute  as  to  his  Status  or  parentage, 
though  illicit;  and  supposing  him  to  be  an  im¬ 
postor,  it  seems  strange  that  Lord  Tyrconnel, 
the  nephew  of  Lady  Macclesfield,  should  pat¬ 
ronise  him,  and  even  admit  him  as  a  guest  in  his 

2Johnson’s  companion  appears  to  have  persuad¬ 
ed  that  lofty-minded  man,  that  he  resembled  him 
in  having  a  noble  pride;  for  Johnson,  after  paint¬ 
ing  in  strong  colours  the  quarrel  between  Lord 
Tyrconnel  and  Savage,  asserts  that  “the  spirit  of 
Mr.  Savage,  indeed,  never  suffered  him  to  solicit  a 
reconciliation:  he  returned  reproach  for  reproach, 
and  insult  for  insult.”  But  the  respectable  gentle¬ 
man  to  whom  I  have  alluded,  has  in  his  possession 
a  letter  from  Savage,  after  Lord  Tyrconnel  had 
discarded  him,  addressed  to  the  Reverend  Mr.  Gil¬ 
bert,  his  Lordship’s  Chaplain,  in  which  he  requests 
him,  in  the  humblest  manner,  to  represent  his  case 
to  the  Viscount. 


1746]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  47 


family.1  Lastly,  it  must  ever  appear  very  sus¬ 
picious,  that  three  different  accounts  of  the  Life 
of  Richard  Savage,  one  published  in  The  Plain 
Dealer ,  in  1724,  another  in  1727,  and  another 
by  the  powerful  pen  of  Johnson,  in  1744,  and 
all  of  them  while  Lady  Macclesfield  was  alive, 
should,  notwithstanding  the  severe  attacks  upon 
her,  have  been  suffered  to  pass  without  any 
publick  and  effectual  contradiction. 

I  have  thus  endeavoured  to  sum  up  the  evi¬ 
dence  upon  the  case,  as  fairly  as  I  can;  and  the 
result  seems  to  be,  that  the  world  must  vibrate 
in  a  state  of  uncertainty  as  to  what  was  the 
truth. 

This  digression,  I  trust,  will  not  be  censured, 
as  it  relates  to  a  matter  exceedingly  curious, 
and  very  intimately  connected  with  Johnson, 
both  as  a  man  and  an  authour.2 

He  this  year  wrote  the  Preface  to  the  Harleian 

trusting  to  Savage’s  information,  Johnson  rep¬ 
resents  this  unhappy  man’s  being  received  as  a 
companion  by  Lord  Tyrconnel,  and  pensioned  by 
his  Lordship,  as  if  posteriour  to  Savage’s  convic¬ 
tion  and  pardon.  But  I  am  assured,  that  Savage 
had  received  the  voluntary  bounty  of  Lord  Tyr¬ 
connel,  and  had  been  dismissed  by  him,  long  be¬ 
fore  the  murder  was  committed,  and  that  his  Lord- 
ship  was  very  instrumental  in  procuring  Savage’s 
pardon,  by  his  intercession  with  the  Queen,  through 
Lady  Hertford.  If,  therefore,  he  had  been  desirous 
of  preventing  the  publication  by  Savage,  he  would 
have  left  him  to  his  fate.  Indeed  I  must  observe, 
that  although  Johnson  mentions  that  Lord  Tyr- 
connel’s  patronage  of  Savage  was  “upon  his  prom¬ 
ise  to  lay  aside  his  design  of  exposing  the  cruelty  of 
his  mother,”  the  great  biographer  has  forgotten 
that  he  himself  has  mentioned,  that  Savage’s  story 
had  been  told  several  years  before  in  The  Plain 
Dealer;  from  which  he  quotes  this  strong  saying  of 
the  generous  Sir  Richard  Steele,  that  “the  inhu¬ 
manity  of  his  mother  had  given  him  a  right  to  find 
every  good  man  his  father.”  At  the  same  time  it 
must  be  acknowledged,  that  Lady  Macclesfield  and 
her  relations  might  still  wish  that  her  story  should 
not  be  brought  into  more  conspicuous  notice  by 
the  satirical  pen  of  Savage. 

2Miss  Mason,  after  having  forfeited  the  title  of 
Lady  Macclesfield  by  divorce,  was  married  to  Col¬ 
onel  Brett,  and,  it  is  said,  was  well  known  in  all  the 
polite  circles.  Colley  Cibber,  I  am  informed,  had 
so  high  an  opinion  of  her  taste  and  judgement  as 
to  genteel  life,  and  manners,  that  he  submitted  ev¬ 
ery  scene  of  his  Careless  Husband  to  Mrs.  Brett’s  re- 
visal  and  correction.  Colonel  Brett  was  reported  to 
be  too  free  in  his  gallantry  with  his  Lady’s  maid. 
Mrs.  Brett  came  into  a  room  one  day  in  her  own 
house,  and  found  the  Colonel  and  her  maid  both 
fast  asleep  in  two  chairs.  She  tied  a  white  handker¬ 
chief  round  her  husband’s  neck,  which  was  a  suffi¬ 
cient  proof  that  she  had  discovered  his  intrigue; 
but  she  never  at  any  time  took  notice  of  it  to  him. 
This  incident,  as  I  am  told,  gave  occasion  to  the 
well-wrought  scene  of  Sir  Charles  and  Lady  Easy 
and  Edging. 


Miscellany .  *  The  selection  of  the  pamphlets  of 
which  it  was  composed  was  made  by  Mr.  Oldys, 
a  man  of  eager  curiosity  and  indefatigable  dili¬ 
gence,  who  first  exerted  that  spirit  of  inquiry 
into  the  literature  of  the  old  English  writers,  by 
which  the  works  of  our  great  dramatick  poet 
have  of  late  been  so  signally  illustrated. 

In  1745  he  published  a  pamphlet  entitled 
Miscellaneous  Observations  on  the  Tragedy  of  Mac¬ 
beth ,  with  remarks  on  Sir  T.  Hds  [Sir  Thomas  Han - 
mer’s]  Edition  of  Shakspeare.  *  To  which  he  affixed, 
proposals  for  a  new  edition  of  that  poet. 

As  we  do  not  trace  any  thing  else  published 
by  him  during  the  course  of  this  year,  we  may 
conjecture  that  he  was  occupied  entirely  with 
that  work.  But  the  little  encouragement  which 
was  given  by  the  publick  to  his  anonymous  pro¬ 
posals  for  the  execution  of  a  task  which  War- 
burton  was  known  to  have  undertaken,  prob¬ 
ably  damped  his  ardour.  His  pamphlet,  how¬ 
ever,  was  highly  esteemed,  and  was  fortunate 
enough  to  obtain  the  approbation  even  of  the 
supercilious  Warburton  himself,  who,  in  the 
Preface  to  his  Shakspeare  published  two  years 
afterwards,  thus  mentioned  it:  “As  to  all  those 
things  which  have  been  published  under  the 
titles  of  Essays ,  Remarks ,  Observations ,  &c.  on 
Shakspeare,  if  you  except  some  critical  notes  on 
Macbeth ,  given  as  a  specimen  of  a  projected  edi¬ 
tion,  and  written,  as  appears,  by  a  man  of  parts 
and  genius,  the  rest  are  absolutely  below  a  seri¬ 
ous  notice.” 

Of  this  flattering  distinction  shewn  to  him  by 
Warburton,  a  very  grateful  remembrance  was 
ever  entertained  by  Johnson,  who  said,  “He 
praised  me  at  a  time  when  praise  was  of  value 
to  me.” 

1746:  jetat.  37.] — In  1746  it  is  probable  that 
he  was  still  employed  upon  his  Shakspeare ,  which 
perhaps  he  laid  aside  for  a  time,  upon  account 
of  the  high  expectations  which  were  formed  of 
Warburton’s  edition  of  that  great  poet.  It  is 
somewhat  curious,  that  his  literary  career  ap¬ 
pears  to  have  been  almost  totally  suspended  in 
the  years  1745  and  1746,  those  years  which 
were  marked  by  a  civil  war  in  Great-Britain, 
when  a  rash  attempt  was  made  to  restore  the 
House  of  Stuart  to  the  throne.  That  he  had  a 
tenderness  for  that  unfortunate  House,  is  well 
known;  and  some  may  fancifully  imagine,  that 
a  sympathetick  anxiety  impeded  the  exertion  of 
his  intellectual  powers:  but  I  am  inclined  to 
think,  that  he  was,  during  this  time,  sketching 
the  outlines  of  his  great  philological  work. 

None  of  his  letters  during  those  years  are  ex¬ 
tant,  so  far  as  I  can  discover.  This  is  much  to  be 


48  BOSWELL  [1747 


regretted.  It  might  afford  some  entertainment 
to  see  how  he  then  expressed  himself  to  his  pri¬ 
vate  friends,  concerning  State  affairs.  Dr.  Adams 
informs  me,  that  “at  this  time  a  favourite  object 
which  he  had  in  contemplation  was  The  Life  of 
Alfred ;  in  which,  from  the  warmth  with  which 
he  spoke  about  it,  he  would,  I  believe,  had  he 
been  master  of  his  own  will,  have  engaged  him¬ 
self,  rather  than  on  any  other  subject.” 

1 747:  ^:tat.  38.] — In  1 747  it  is  supposed  that 
The  Gentleman’ s  Magazine  for  May  was  enriched 
by  him  with  five  short  poetical  pieces,  distin¬ 
guished  by  three  asterisks.  The  first  is  a  trans¬ 
lation,  or  rather  a  paraphrase,  of  a  Latin  Epi¬ 
taph  on  Sir  Thomas  Hanmer.  Whether  the 
Latin  was  his,  or  not,  I  have  never  heard, 
though  I  should  think  it  probably  was,  if  it  be 
certain  that  he  wrote  the  English;  as  to  which 
my  only  cause  of  doubt  is,  that  his  slighting 
character  of  Hanmer  as  an  editor,  in  his  Ob¬ 
servations  on  Macbeth ,  is  very  different  from  that 
in  the  “Epitaph. 55  It  may  be  said,  that  there  is 
the  same  contrariety  between  the  character  in 
the  Observations ,  and  that  in  his  own  Preface  to 
Shakspeare;  but  a  considerable  time  elapsed  be¬ 
tween  the  one  publication  and  the  other,  where¬ 
as  the  Observations  and  the  “Epitaph”  came 

close  together.  The  others  are  “To  Miss - , 

on  her  giving  the  Authour  a  gold  and  silk  net¬ 
work  Purse  of  her  own  weaving”;  “Stella  in 
Mourning”;  “The  Winter’s  Walk”;  “An  Ode”; 
and,  “To  Lyce,  an  elderly  Lady.”  I  am  not 
positive  that  all  these  were  his  productions;1  but 
as  “The  Winter’s  Walk”  has  never  been  con¬ 
troverted  to  be  his,  and  all  of  them  have  the 
same  mark,  it  is  reasonable  to  conclude  that 
they  are  all  written  by  the  same  hand.  Yet  to 
the  Ode,  in  which  we  find  a  passage  very  char- 
acteristick  of  him,  being  a  learned  description 
of  the  gout, 

Unhappy ,  whom  to  beds  of  pain 
Arthritick  tyranny  consigns; 

there  is  the  following  note:  “The  authour  being 
ill  of  the  gout”:  but  Johnson  was  not  attacked 
with  that  distemper  till  at  a  very  late  period  of 
his  life.  May  not  this,  however,  be  a  poetical 
fiction?  Why  may  not  a  poet  suppose  himself  to 
have  the  gout,  as  well  as  suppose  himself  to  be 

Tn  The  Universal  Visiter ,  to  which  Johnson  con¬ 
tributed,  the  mark  which  is  affixed  to  some  pieces 
unquestionably  his,  is  also  found  subjoined  to  oth¬ 
ers,  of  which  he  certainly  was  not  the  author.  The 
mark  therefore  will  not  ascertain  the  poems  in  ques¬ 
tion  to  have  been  written  by  him.  They  were  prob¬ 
ably  the  productions  of  Hawkesworth,  who,  it  is 
believed,  was  afflicted  with  the  gout.  [M.] 


in  love,  of  which  we  have  innumerable  in¬ 
stances,  and  which  has  been  admirably  ridiculed 
by  Johnson  in  his  Life  of  Cowley ?  1  have  also 
some  difficulty  to  believe  that  he  could  produce 
such  a  group  of  conceits  as  appear  in  the  verses  to 
Lyce,  in  which  he  claims  for  this  ancient  per¬ 
sonage  as  good  a  right  to  be  assimilated  to 
heaven ,  as  nymphs  whom  other  poets  have  flat¬ 
tered;  he  therefore  ironically  ascribes  to  her  the 
attributes  of  the  sky ,  in  such  stanzas  as  this: 

Her  teeth  the  night  with  darkness  dies , 

She’s  starr’d  with  pimples  o’er; 

Her  tongue  like  nimble  lightning  plies , 

And  can  with  thunder  roar. 

But  as  at  a  very  advanced  age  he  could  conde¬ 
scend  to  trifle  in  namby-pamby  rhymes,  to  please 
Mrs.  Thrale  and  her  daughter,  he  may  have,  in 
his  earlier  years,  composed  such  a  piece  as  this. 

It  is  remarkable,  that  in  this  first  edition  of 
“The  Winter’s  Walk.”  the  concluding  line  is 
much  more  Johnsonian  than  it  was  afterwards 
printed;  for  in  subsequent  editions,  after  praying 
Stella  to  “snatch  him  to  her  arms,”  he  says, 

And  shield  me  from  the  ills  of  life. 

Whereas  in  the  first  edition  it  is 

And  hide  me  from  the  sight  of  life. 

A  horrour  at  life  in  general  is  more  consonant 
with  Johnson’s  habitual  gloomy  cast  of  thought. 

I  have  heard  him  repeat  with  great  energy 
the  following  verses,  which  appeared  in  The 
Gentleman’s  Magazine  for  April  this  year;  but  I 
have  no  authority  to  say  they  were  his  own.  In¬ 
deed  one  of  the  best  criticks  of  our  age  suggests 
to  me,  that  “the  word  indifferently  being  used  in 
the  sense  of  without  concern ,”  and  being  also  very 
unpoetical,  renders  it  improbable  that  they 
should  have  been  his  composition. 

On  Lord  Lovat’s  Execution 
Pity’d  by  gentle  minds  Kilmarnock  died; 

The  brave,  Balmerino,  were  on  thy  side; 
Radcliffe,  unhappy  in  his  crimes  of  youth, 

Steady  in  what  he  still  mistook  for  truth , 

Beheld  his  death  so  decently  unmov’d , 

The  soft  lamented ,  and  the  brave  approv’d. 

But  Lovat’s fate  indifferently  we  view , 

True  to  no  King,  to  no  religion  true: 

No  fair  forgets  the  ruin  he  has  done; 

No  child  laments  the  tyrant  of  his  son; 

No  tory  pities ,  thinking  what  he  was; 

No  whig  compassions ,  for  he  left  the  cause; 

The  brave  regret  not,  for  he  was  not  brave; 

The  honest  mourn  not,  knowing  him  a  knave F 

2These  verses  are  somewhat  too  severe  on  the  ex¬ 
traordinary  person  who  is  the  chief  figure  in  them, 
for  he  was  undoubtedly  brave.  His  pleasantry  dur- 


1747]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  49 


This  year  his  old  pupil  and  friend,  David 
Garrick,  having  become  joint  patentee  and 
manager  of  Drury-lane  theatre,  Johnson  hon¬ 
oured  his  opening  of  it  with  a  Prologue,  *  which 
for  just  and  manly  dramatick  criticism,  on  the 
whole  range  of  the  English  stage,  as  well  as  for 
poetical  excellence,1  is  unrivalled.  Like  the  cele¬ 
brated  Epilogue  to  the  Distressed  Mother ,  it  was, 
during  the  season,  often  called  for  by  the  audi¬ 
ence.  The  most  striking  and  brilliant  passages 
of  it  have  been  so  often  repeated,  and  are  so 
well  recollected  by  all  the  lovers  of  the  drama 
and  of  poetry,  that  it  would  be  superfluous  to 
point  them  out.  In  The  Gentleman's  Magazine  for 
December  this  year,  he  inserted  an  “Ode  on 
Winter,55  which  is,  I  think,  an  admirable  speci¬ 
men  of  his  genius  for  lyrick  poetry. 

But  the  year  1747  is  distinguished  as  the 
epoch,  when  Johnson’s  arduous  and  important 
work,  his  Dictionary  of  the  English  Language ,  was 
announced  to  the  world,  by  the  publication  of 
its  Plan  or  Prospectus . 

Plow  long  this  immense  undertaking  had  been 
the  object  of  his  contemplation,  I  do  not  know. 
I  once  asked  him  by  what  means  he  had  at¬ 
tained  to  that  astonishing  knowledge  of  our 
language,  by  which  he  was  enabled  to  realise  a 
design  of  such  extent,  and  accumulated  diffi¬ 
culty.  He  told  me,  that  “it  was  not  the  effect  of 
particular  study;  but  that  it  had  grown  up  in 
his  mind  insensibly.55  I  have  been  informed  by 
Mr.  James  Dodsley,  that  several  years  before 
this  period,  when  Johnson  was  one  day  sitting 
in  his  brother  Robert’s  shop,  he  heard  his 
brother  suggest  to  him,  that  a  Dictionary  of  the 

ing  his  solemn  trial  (in  which,  by  the  way,  I  have 
heard  Mr.  David  Hume  observe,  that  we  have  one 
of  the  very  few  speeches  of  Mr.  Murray,  now  Earl 
of  Mansfield,  authentically  given)  was  very  remark¬ 
able.  When  asked  if  he  had  any  questions  to  put  to 
Sir  Everard  Fawkener,  who  was  one  of  the  strong¬ 
est  witnesses  against  him,  he  answered,  “I  only 
wish  him  joy  of  his  young  wife.”  And  after  sen¬ 
tence  of  death,  in  the  horrible  terms  in  cases  of 
treason,  was  pronounced  upon  him,  and  he  was 
retiring  from  the  bar,  he  said,  “Fare  you  well,  my 
Lords,  we  shall  not  all  meet  again  in  one  place.” 
He  behaved  with  perfect  composure  at  his  execu¬ 
tion,  and  called  out  “ Duke  et  decorum  est  pro  patrid 
moriP 

xMy  friend,  Mr.  Courtenay,  whose  eulogy  on 
Johnson’s  Latin  Poetry  has  been  inserted  in  this 
Work,  is  no  less  happy  in  praising  his  English 
Poetry. 

But  hark ,  he  sings !  the  strain  ev'n  Pope  admires ; 
Indignant  virtue  her  own  bard  inspires. 

Sublime  as  Juvenal  he  pours  his  lays , 

And  with  the  Roman  shares  congenial  praise ; — 

In  glowing  numbers  now  he  fires  the  age , 

And  Shakspeare's  sun  relumes  the  clouded  stage. 


English  Language  would  be  a  work  that  would 
be  well  received  by  the  publick;  that  Johnson 
seemed  at  first  to  catch  at  the  proposition,  but, 
after  a  pause,  said,  in  his  abrupt  decisive  man¬ 
ner,  “I  believe  I  shall  not  undertake  it.55  That 
he,  however,  had  bestowed  much  thought  upon 
the  subject,  before  he  published  his  Plan ,  is  evi¬ 
dent  from  the  enlarged,  clear,  and  accurate 
views  which  it  exhibits;  and  we  find  him  men¬ 
tioning  in  that  tract,  that  many  of  the  writers 
whose  testimonies  were  to  be  produced  as  au¬ 
thorities,  were  selected  by  Pope;  which  proves 
that  he  had  been  furnished,  probably  by  Mr. 
Robert  Dodsley,  with  whatever  hints  that  emi¬ 
nent  poet  had  contributed  towards  a  great 
literary  project,  that  had  been  the  subject  of 
important  consideration  in  a  former  reign. 

The  booksellers  who  contracted  with  John¬ 
son,  single  and  unaided,  for  the  execution  of  a 
work,  which  in  other  countries  has  not  been  ef¬ 
fected  but  by  the  co-operating  exertions  of 
many,  were  Mr.  Robert  Dodsley,  Mr.  Charles 
Hitch,  Mr.  Andrew  Millar,  the  two  Messieurs 
Longman,  and  the  two  Messieurs  Knapton.  The 
price  stipulated  was  fifteen  hundred  and  seven¬ 
ty-five  pounds. 

The  Plan  was  addressed  to  Philip  Dormer, 
Earl  of  Chesterfield,  then  one  of  his  Majesty’s 
Principal  Secretaries  of  State;  a  nobleman  who 
was  very  ambitious  of  literary  distinction,  and 
who,  upon  being  informed  of  the  design,  had 
expressed  himself  in  terms  very  favourable  to 
its  success.  There  is,  perhaps  in  every  thing  of 
any  consequence,  a  secret  history  which  it 
would  be  amusing  to  know,  could  we  have  it 
authentically  communicated.  Johnson  told  me,2 
“Sir,  the  way  in  which  the  Plan  of  my  Dictionary 
came  to  be  inscribed  to  Lord  Chesterfield,  was 
this:  I  had  neglected  to  write  it  by  the  time  ap¬ 
pointed.  Dodsley  suggested  a  desire  to  have  it 
addressed  to  Lord  Chesterfield.  I  laid  hold  of 
this  as  a  pretext  for  delay,  that  it  might  be  bet¬ 
ter  done,  and  let  Dodsley  have  his  desire.  I  said 
to  my  friend,  Dr.  Bathurst,  £Now  if  any  good 
comes  of  my  addressing  to  Lord  Chesterfield,  it 
will  be  ascribed  to  deep  policy,  when,  in  fact,  it 
was  only  a  casual  excuse  for  laziness.5  55 

It  is  worthy  of  observation,  that  the  Plan  has 
not  only  the  substantial  merit  of  comprehen¬ 
sion,  perspicuity,  and  precision,  but  that  the 
language  of  it  is  unexceptionably  excellent;  it 
being  altogether  free  from  that  inflation  of  style, 
and  those  uncommon  but  apt  and  energetick 
words,  which  in  some  of  his  writings  have  been 

September  22,  1777,  going  from  Ashbourne  in 
Derbyshire,  to  see  Islam. 


50  BOSWELL  [  1748 


censured,  with  more  petulance  than  justice;  and 
never  was  there  a  more  dignified  strain  of  com¬ 
pliment  than  that  in  which  he  courts  the  atten¬ 
tion  of  one  who,  he  had  been  persuaded  to  be¬ 
lieve,  would  be  a  respectable  patron. 

“With  regard  to  questions  of  purity  or  pro¬ 
priety,  (says  he)  I  was  once  in  doubt  whether  I 
should  not  attribute  to  myself  too  much  in  at¬ 
tempting  to  decide  them,  and  whether  my  prov¬ 
ince  was  to  extend  beyond  the  proposition  of 
the  question,  and  the  display  of  the  suffrages  on 
each  side;  but  I  have  been  since  determined  by 
your  Lordship’s  opinion,  to  interpose  my  own 
judgement,  and  shall  therefore  endeavour  to 
support  what  appears  to  me  most  consonant  to 
grammar  and  reason.  Ausonius  thought  that 
modesty  forbade  him  to  plead  inability  for  a 
task  to  which  Caesar  had  judged  him  equal: 

Cur  me  posse  negem  posse  quod  ille  putat? 

And  I  may  hope,  my  Lord,  that  since  you,  whose 
authority  in  our  language  is  so  generally  ac¬ 
knowledged,  have  commissioned  me  to  declare 
my  own  opinion,  I  shall  be  considered  as  exer¬ 
cising  a  kind  of  vicarious  jurisdiction;  and  that 
the  power  which  might  have  been  denied  to  my 
own  claim,  will  be  readily  allowed  me  as  the 
delegate  of  your  Lordship.” 

This  passage  proves,  that  Johnson’s  address¬ 
ing  his  Plan  to  Lord  Chesterfield  was  not  merely 
in  consequence  of  the  result  of  a  report  by 
means  of  Dodsley,  that  the  Earl  favoured  the 
design;  but  that  there  had  been  a  particular 
communication  with  his  Lordship  concerning 
it.  Dr.  Taylor  told  me,  that  Johnson  sent  his 
Plan  to  him  in  manuscript,  for  his  perusal;  and 
that  when  it  was  lying  upon  his  table,  Mr.  Wil¬ 
liam  Whitehead  happened  to  pay  him  a  visit, 
and  being  shewn  it,  was  highly  pleased  with 
such  parts  of  it  as  he  had  time  to  read,  and 
begged  to  take  it  home  with  him,  which  he  was 
allowed  to  do;  that  from  him  it  got  into  the 
hands  of  a  noble  Lord,  who  carried  it  to  Lord 
Chesterfield.  When  Taylor  observed  this  might 
be  an  advantage,  Johnson  replied,  “No,  Sir;  it 
would  have  come  out  with  more  bloom,  if  it  had 
not  been  seen  before  by  any  body.” 

The  opinion  conceived  of  it  by  another  noble 
authour,  appears  from  the  following  extract  of 
a  letter  from  the  Earl  of  Orrery  to  Dr.  Birch: 

Caledon,  Dec.  30,  1747 

I  have  just  now  seen  the  specimen  of  Mr. 
Johnson’s  Dictionary,  addressed  to  Lord  Ches¬ 
terfield.  I  am  much  pleased  with  the  plan,  and  I 
think  the  specimen  is  one  of  the  best  that  I  have 
ever  read.  Most  specimens  disgust,  rather  than 


prejudice  us  in  favour  of  the  work  to  follow;  but 
the  language  of  Mr.  Johnson’s  is  good,  and  the 
arguments  are  properly  and  modestly  expressed. 
However,  some  expressions  may  be  cavilled  at, 
but  they  are  trifles.  I’ll  mention  one.  The  barren 
Laurel.  The  laurel  is  not  barren,  in  any  sense 
whatever;  it  bears  fruits  and  flowers.  Sed  hoe  sunt 
nugee,  and  I  have  great  expectation  from  the 
performance.1 

That  he  was  fully  aware  of  the  arduous  nature 
of  the  undertaking,  he  acknowledges;  and  shews 
himself  perfectly  sensible  of  it  in  the  conclusion 
of  his  Plan ;  but  he  had  a  noble  consciousness  of 
his  own  abilities,  which  enabled  him  to  go  on 
with  undaunted  spirit. 

Dr.  Adams  found  him  one  day  busy  at  his 
Dictionary ,  when  the  following  dialogue  ensued. 
“Adams.  This  is  a  great  work,  Sir.  How  are  you 
to  get  all  the  etymologies?  Johnson.  Why,  Sir, 
here  is  a  shelf  with  Junius,  and  Skinner,  and 
others;  and  there  is  a  Welch  gentleman  who  has 
published  a  collection  of  Welch  proverbs,  who 
will  help  me  with  the  Welch.  Adams.  But,  Sir, 
how  can  you  do  this  in  three  years?  Johnson. 
Sir,  I  have  no  doubt  that  I  can  do  it  in  three 
years.  Adams.  But  the  French  Academy,  which 
consists  of  forty  members,  took  forty  years  to 
compile  their  Dictionary.  Johnson.  Sir,  thus  it 
is.  This  is  the  proportion.  Let  me  see;  forty 
times  forty  is  sixteen  hundred.  As  three  to  six¬ 
teen  hundred,  so  is  the  proportion  of  an  Eng¬ 
lishman  to  a  Frenchman.”  With  so  much  ease 
and  pleasantry  could  he  talk  of  that  prodigious 
labour  which  he  had  undertaken  to  execute. 

The  publick  has  had,  from  another  pen,2  a 
long  detail  of  what  had  been  done  in  this  coun¬ 
try  by  prior  Lexicographers;  and  no  doubt 
Johnson  was  wise  to  avail  himself  of  them,  so 
far  as  they  went:  but  the  learned,  yet  judicious 
research  of  etymology,  the  various,  yet  accurate 
display  of  definition,  and  the  rich  collection  of 
authorities,  were  reserved  for  the  superior  mind 
of  our  great  philologist.  For  the  mechanical 
part  he  employed,  as  he  told  me,  six  amanuen¬ 
ses;  and  let  it  be  remembered  by  the  natives  of 
North-Britain,  to  whom  he  is  supposed  to  have 
been  so  hostile,  that  five  of  them  were  of  that 
country.  There  were  two  Messieurs  Macbean; 
Mr.  Shiels,  who  we  shall  hereafter  see  partly 
wrote  the  Lives  of  the  Poets  to  which  the  name  of 
Cibber  is  affixed;3  Mr.  Stewart,  son  of  Mr. 
George  Stewart,  bookseller  at  Edinburgh;  and 
a  Mr.  Maitland.  The  sixth  of  these  humble  as- 

TSirch,  MSS.  Brit.  Mus.  4303. 

2See  Sir  John  Hawkins’s  Life  of  Johnson . 

3See  post ,  under  April  10,  1776. 


1749]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  51 


sistants  was  Mr.  Peyton,  who,  I  believe,  taught 
French,  and  published  some  elementary  tracts. 

To  all  these  painful  labourers,  Johnson  shewed 
a  never-ceasing  kindness,  so  far  as  they  stood  in 
need  of  it.  The  elder  Mr.  Macbean  had  after¬ 
wards  the  honour  of  being  Librarian  to  Archi¬ 
bald,  Duke  of  Argyle,  for  many  years,  but  was 
left  without  a  shilling.  Johnson  wrote  for  him  a 
Preface  to  A  System  of  Ancient  Geography ;  and,  by 
the  favour  of  Lord  Thurlow,  got  him  admitted 
a  poor  brother  of  the  Charterhouse.  For  Shiels, 
who  died  of  a  consumption,  he  had  much  ten¬ 
derness;  and  it  has  been  thought  that  some 
choice  sentences  in  the  Lives  of  the  Poets  were 
supplied  by  him.  Peyton,  when  reduced  to 
penury,  had  frequent  aid  from  the  bounty  of 
Johnson,  who  at  last  was  at  the  expense  of  bury¬ 
ing  both  him  and  his  wife. 

While  the  Dictionary  was  going  forward,  John¬ 
son  lived  part  of  the  time  in  Holborn,  part  in 
Gough-square,  Fleet  street;  and  he  had  an  up¬ 
per  room  fitted  up  like  a  counting-house  for  the 
purpose,  in  which  he  gave  to  the  copyists  their 
several  tasks.  The  words,  partly  taken  from 
other  dictionaries,  and  partly  supplied  by  him¬ 
self,  having  been  first  written  down  with  spaces 
left  between  them,  he  delivered  in  writing  their 
etymologies,  definitions,  and  various  significa¬ 
tions.  The  authorities  were  copied  from  the 
books  themselves,  in  which  he  had  marked  the 
passages  with  a  black-lead  pencil,  the  traces  of 
which  could  easily  be  effaced.  I  have  seen  sev¬ 
eral  of  them,  in  which  that  trouble  had  not  been 
taken;  so  that  they  were  just  as  when  used  by 
the  copyists.  It  is  remarkable,  that  he  was  so 
attentive  in  the  choice  of  the  passages  in  which 
words  were  authorised,  that  one  may  read  page 
after  page  of  his  Dictionary  with  improvement 
and  pleasure;  and  it  should  not  pass  unobserved, 
that  he  has  quoted  no  authour  whose  writings 
had  a  tendency  to  hurt  sound  religion  and 
morality. 

The  necessary  expense  of  preparing  a  work  of 
such  magnitude  for  the  press,  must  have  been  a 
considerable  deduction  from  the  price  stipu¬ 
lated  to  be  paid  for  the  copy-right.  I  understand 
that  nothing  was  allowed  by  the  booksellers  on 
that  account;  and  I  remember  his  telling  me, 
that  a  large  portion  of  it  having  by  mistake  been 
written  upon  both  sides  of  the  paper,  so  as  to  be 
inconvenient  for  the  compositor,  it  cost  him 
twenty  pounds  to  have  it  transcribed  upon  one 
side  only. 

He  is  now  to  be  considered  as  “tugging  at  his 
oar,”  as  engaged  in  a  steady  continued  course 
of  occupation,  sufficient  to  employ  all  his  time 


for  some  years;  and  which  was  the  best  preven¬ 
tive  of  that  constitutional  melancholy  which 
was  ever  lurking  about  him,  ready  to  trouble 
his  quiet.  But  his  enlarged  and  lively  mind 
could  not  be  satisfied  without  more  diversity  of 
employment,  and  the  pleasure  of  animated  re¬ 
laxation.  He  therefore  not  only  exerted  his 
talents  in  occasional  composition  very  different 
from  Lexicography,  but  formed  a  club  in  Ivy- 
lane,  Paternoster-row,  with  a  view  to  enjoy 
literary  discussion,  and  amuse  his  evening  hours. 
The  members  associated  with  him  in  this  little 
society  were  his  beloved  friend  Dr.  Richard 
Bathurst,  Mr.  Hawkesworth,  afterwards  well 
known  by  his  writings,  Mr.  John  Hawkins,  an 
attorney,1  and  a  few  others  of  different  profes¬ 
sions. 

In  The  Gentleman's  Magazine  for  May  of  this 
year  he  wrote  a  “Life  of  Roscommon,”  *  with 
Notes,  which  he  afterwards  much  improved, 
indented  the  notes  into  text,  and  inserted  it 
amongst  his  Lives  of  the  English  Poets . 

Mr.  Dodsley  this  year  brought  out  his  Pre¬ 
ceptor,  one  of  the  most  valuable  books  for  the 
improvement  of  young  minds  that  has  appeared 
in  any  language;  and  to  this  meritorious  work 
Johnson  furnished  the  “Preface,”  *  containing 
a  general  sketch  of  the  book,  with  a  short  and 
perspicuous  recommendation  of  each  article;  as 
also,  “The  Vision  of  Theodore  the  Hermit, 
found  in  his  Cell,”  *  a  most  beautiful  allegory  of 
human  life,  under  the  figure  of  ascending  the 
mountain  of  Existence.  The  Bishop  of  Dromore 
heard  Dr.  Johnson  say,  that  he  thought  this  was 
the  best  thing  he  ever  wrote. 

1749:  ^tat.  40.] — In  January,  1749,  he  pub¬ 
lished  The  Vanity  of  Human  Wishes,  being  the  Tenth 
Satire  of  Juvenal  imitated .  He,  I  believe,  composed 
it  the  preceding  year.2  Mrs.  Johnson,  for  the 
sake  of  country  air,  had  lodgings  at  Hampstead, 
to  which  he  resorted  occasionally,  and  there  the 
greatest  part,  if  not  the  whole,  of  this  Imitation 
was  written.  The  fervid  rapidity  with  which  it 

JHe  was  afterwards  for  several  years  Chairman 
of  the  Middlesex  Justices,  and  upon  occasion  of 
presenting  an  address  to  the  King,  accepted  the  us¬ 
ual  offer  of  Knighthood.  He  is  authour  of  A  History 
of  Musick ,  in  five  volumes  in  quarto.  By  assiduous 
attendance  on  Johnson  in  his  last  illness,  he  ob¬ 
tained  the  office  of  one  of  his  executors;  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  which,  the  booksellers  of  London  em¬ 
ployed  him  to  publish  an  edition  of  Dr.  Johnson’s 
works,  and  to  write  his  Life. 

2Sir  John  Hawkins,  with  solemn  inaccuracy,  rep¬ 
resents  this  poem  as  a  consequence  of  the  indiffer¬ 
ent  reception  of  his  tragedy.  But  the  fact  is,  that 
the  poem  was  published  on  the  9th  of  January,  and 
the  tragedy  was  not  acted  till  the  6th  of  the  Feb¬ 
ruary  following. 


BOSWELL 


52 

was  produced,  is  scarcely  credible.  I  have  heard 
him  say,  that  he  composed  seventy  lines  of  it  in 
one  day,  without  putting  one  of  them  upon 
paper  till  they  were  finished.  I  remember  when 
I  once  regretted  to  him  that  he  had  not  given  us 
more  of  Juvenal’s  Satires ,  he  said  he  probably 
should  give  more,  for  he  had  them  all  in  his 
head;  by  which  I  understood  that  he  had  the 
originals  and  correspondent  allusions  floating 
in  his  mind,  which  he  could,  when  he  pleased, 
embody  and  render  permanent  without  much 
labour.  Some  of  them,  however,  he  observed 
were  too  gross  for  imitation. 

The  profits  of  a  single  poem,  however  excel¬ 
lent,  appear  to  have  been  very  small  in  the  last 
reign,  compared  with  what  a  publication  of  the 
same  size  has  since  been  known  to  yield.  I  have 
mentioned,  upon  Johnson’s  own  authority,  that 
for  his  London  he  had  only  ten  guineas;  and  now, 
after  his  fame  was  established,  he  got  for  his 
Vanity  of  Human  Wishes  but  five  guineas  more,  as 
is  proved  by  an  authentick  document  in  my 
possession.1 

It  will  be  observed,  that  he  reserves  to  him¬ 
self  the  right  of  printing  one  edition  of  this 
satire,  which  was  his  practice  upon  occasion  of 
the  sale  of  all  his  writings;  it  being  his  fixed  in¬ 
tention  to  publish  at  some  period,  for  his  own 
profit,  a  complete  collection  of  his  works. 

His  Vanity  of  Human  Wishes  has  less  of  com¬ 
mon  life,  but  more  of  a  philosophick  dignity 
than  his  London.  More  readers,  therefore,  will  be 
delighted  with  the  pointed  spirit  of  London ,  than 
with  the  profound  reflection  of  The  Vanity  of 
Human  Wishes.  Garrick,  for  instance,  observed 
in  his  sprightly  manner,  with  more  vivacity 
than  regard  to  just  discrimination,  as  is  usual 
with  wits,  “When  Johnson  lived  much  with  the 
Herveys,  and  saw  a  good  deal  of  what  was  pass¬ 
ing  in  life,  he  wrote  his  London ,  which  is  lively 
and  easy.  When  he  became  more  retired,  he 
gave  us  his  Vanity  of  Human  Wishes ,  which  is  as 
hard  as  Greek.  Had  he  gone  on  to  imitate 
another  satire,  it  would  have  been  as  hard  as 
Hebrew.”2 

But  The  Vanity  of  Human  Wishes  is,  in  the 
opinion  of  the  best  judges,  as  high  an  effort  of 
ethick  poetry  as  any  language  can  shew.  The 

1£CNov.  25,  1748.  I  received  of  Mr.  Dodsley  fif¬ 
teen  guineas,  for  which  I  assign  to  him  the  right  of 
copy  of  an  imitation  of  the  Tenth  Satire  of  Juvenal, 
written  by  me;  reserving  to  myself  the  right  of 
printing  one  edition.  “Sam.  Johnson” 

“London,  29  June,  1786.  A  true  copy,  from  the 
original  in  Dr.  Johnson’s  handwriting. 

“Jas.  Dodsley” 

2From  Mr.  Langton. 


[  1749 

instances  of  variety  of  disappointment  are  cho¬ 
sen  so  judiciously  and  painted  so  strongly,  that, 
the  moment  they  are  read,  they  bring  convic¬ 
tion  to  every  thinking  mind.  That  of  the  scholar 
must  have  depressed  the  too  sanguine  expecta¬ 
tions  of  many  an  ambitious  student.3  That  of 
the  warrior,  Charles  of  Sweden,  is,  I  think,  as 
highly  finished  a  picture  as  can  possibly  be  con¬ 
ceived. 

Were  all  the  other  excellencies  of  this  poem 
annihilated,  it  must  ever  have  our  grateful  rev¬ 
erence  from  its  noble  conclusion;  in  which  we 
are  consoled  with  the  assurance  that  happiness 
may  be  attained,  if  we  “apply  our  hearts”  to 
piety: 

Where  then  shall  hope  and  fear  their  objects  find? 

Shall  dull  suspense  corrupt  the  stagnant  mind? 

Must  helpless  man ,  in  ignorance  sedate , 

Roll  darkling  down  the  torrent  of  his  fate? 

Shall  no  dislike  alarm ,  no  wishes  rise , 

No  cries  attempt  the  mercy  of  the  skies? 

Enthusiast ,  cease;  petitions  yet  remain , 

Which  Head n  may  hear ,  nor  deem  Religion  vain.  . 
Still  raise  for  good  the  supplicating  voice , 

Bu  leave  to  Heaven  the  measure  and  the  choice . 

Safe  in  His  hand ,  whose  eye  discerns  afar 
The  secret  ambush  of  a  specious pray'r; 

Implore  His  aid ,  in  His  decisions  rest , 

Secure  whatever  He  gives  He  gives  the  best , 

Yet  when  the  sense  of  sacred  presence  fires , 

And  strong  devotion  to  the  skies  aspires , 

Pour  forth  thy  fervours for  a  healthful  mind , 

Obedient  passions ,  and  a  will  resign'd; 

For  love ,  which  scarce  collective  man  can  fill , 

3In  this  poem  one  of  the  instances  mentioned  of 
unfortunate  learned  men  is  Lydiat: 

Hear  Lydiat' s  life ,  and  Galileo's  end. 

The  history  of  Lydiat  being  little  known,  the  fol¬ 
lowing  account  of  him  may  be  acceptable  to  many 
of  my  readers.  It  appeared  as  a  note  in  the  Supple¬ 
ment  to  The  Gentleman's  Magazine  for  1 748,  in  which 
some  passages  extracted  from  Johnson’s  poem  were 
inserted,  and  it  should  have  been  added  in  the  sub¬ 
sequent  editions.  A  very  learned  divine  and  mathe¬ 
matician,  fellow  of  New  College,  Oxon,  and  Rec¬ 
tor  of  Okerton,  near  Banbury.  He  wrote,  among 
many  others,  a  Latin  treatise,  De  Natura  cceli ,  etc., 
in  which  he  attacked  the  sentiments  of  Scaliger 
and  Aristotle,  not  bearing  to  hear  it  urged,  that 
some  things  are  true  in  philosophy  and  false  in  divinity. 
He  made  above  600  Sermons  on  the  harmony  of 
the  Evangelists.  Being  unsuccessful  in  publishing 
his  works,  he  lay  in  the  prison  of  Bocardo  at  Ox¬ 
ford,  and  in  the  King’s  Bench,  till  Bishop  Usher, 
Dr.  Laud,  Sir  William  Boswell,  and  Dr.  Pink,  re¬ 
leased  him  by  paying  his  debts.  He  petitioned  King 
Charles  I  to  be  sent  into  Ethiopia,  etc.,  to  procure 
MSS.  Having  spoken  in  favour  of  Monarchy  and 
bishops,  he  was  plundered  by  the  parliament  for¬ 
ces,  and  twice  carried  away  prisoner  from  his  rec¬ 
tory;  and  afterwards  had  not  a  shirt  to  shift  him  in 
three  months,  without  he  borrowed  it,  and  died 
very  poor  in  1646. 


1749] 

For  patience ,  sovereign  o'er  transmuted  ill; 

For faith ,  which  panting  for  a  happier  seat , 

Counts  death  kind  Nature's  signal  for  retreat . 

These  goods  for  man  the  laws  of  Heaven  ordain , 

These  goods  He  grants,  who  grants  the  power  to  gain; 

With  these  celestial  wisdom  calms  the  mind , 

And  makes  the  happiness  she  does  not find . 

f 

Garrick  being  now  vested  with  theatrical  pow¬ 
er  by  being  manager  of  Drury-lane  theatre,  he 
kindly  and  generously  made  use  of  it  to  bring 
out  Johnson’s  tragedy,  which  had  been  long 
kept  back  for  want  of  encouragement.  But  in 
this  benevolent  purpose  he  met  with  no  small 
difficulty  from  the  temper  of  Johnson,  which 
could  not  brook  that  a  drama  which  he  had 
formed  with  much  study,  and  had  been  obliged 
to  keep  more  than  the  nine  years  of  Horace, 
should  be  revised  and  altered  at  the  pleasure  of 
an  actor.  Yet  Garrick  knew  well,  that  without 
some  alterations  it  would  not  be  fit  for  the  stage. 
A  violent  dispute  having  ensued  between  them, 
Garrick  applied  to  the  Reverend  Dr.  Taylor  to 
interpose.  Johnson  was  at  first  very  obstinate. 
“Sir,  (said  he)  the  fellow  wants  me  to  make 
Mahomet  run  mad,  that  he  may  have  an  oppor¬ 
tunity  of  tossing  his  hands  and  kicking  his  heels.”1 
He  was,  however,  at  last,  with  difficulty,  pre¬ 
vailed  on  to  comply  with  Garrick’s  wishes,  so  as 
to  allow  of  some  changes;  but  still  there  were 
not  enough. 

Dr.  Adams  was  present  the  first  night  of  the 
representation  of  Irene,  and  gave  me  the  follow¬ 
ing  account:  “Before  the  curtain  drew  up,  there 
were  catcalls  whistling,  which  alarmed  John¬ 
son’s  friends.  The  Prologue,  which  was  written 
by  himself  in  a  manly  strain,  soothed  the  audi¬ 
ence,2  and  the  play  went  off  tolerably,  till  it 
came  to  the  conclusion,  when  Mrs.  Pritchard, 
the  heroine  of  the  piece,  was  to  be  strangled 

1Mahomet  was,  in  fact,  played  by  Mr.  Barry, 
and  Demetrius  by  Mr.  Garrick:  but  probably  at 
this  time  the  parts  were  not  yet  cast. 

2The  expression  used  by  Dr.  Adams  was 
“soothed.5’  I  should  rather  think  the  audience  was 
awed  by  the  extraordinary  spirit  and  dignity  of  the 
following  lines: 

Be  this  at  least  his  praise,  he  this  his  pride. 

To  force  applause  no  modern  arts  are  tried: 

Should  partial  catcalls  all  his  hopes  confound. 

He  bids  no  trumpet  quell  the  fatal  sound; 

Should  welcome  sleep  relieve  the  weary  wit. 

He  rolls  no  thunders  o'er  the  drowsy  pit; 

No  snares  to  captivate  the  judgment  spreads, 

Nor  bribes  your  eyes  to  prejudice  your  heads . 
Unmov'd,  though  witlings  sneer  and  rivals  rail , 
Studious  to  please,  yet  not  asham'd  to  fail , 

He  scorns  the  meek  address,  the  suppliant  strain , 
With  merit  needless ,  and  without  it  vain; 

In  Reason,  Nature,  Truth ,  he  dares  to  trust; 

Ye  fops  be  silent,  and  ye  wits  be  just / 


53 

upon  the  stage,  and  was  to  speak  two  lines  with 
the  bow-string  round  her  neck.  The  audience 
cried  out  c Murder !  Murder /’  She  several  times 
attempted  to  speak;  but  in  vain.  At  last  she  was 
obliged  to  go  off  the  stage  alive.”  This  passage 
was  afterwards  struck  out,  and  she  was  carried 
off  to  be  put  to  death  behind  the  scenes,  as  the 
play  now  has  it.  The  Epilogue,  as  Johnson  in¬ 
formed  me,  was  written  by  Sir  William  Yonge. 
I  know  not  how  his  play  came  to  be  thus  graced 
by  the  pen  of  a  person  then  so  eminent  in  the 
political  world. 

Notwithstanding  all  the  support  of  such  per¬ 
formers  as  Garrick,  Barry,  Mrs.  Cibber,  Mrs. 
Pritchard,  and  every  advantage  of  dress  and 
decoration,  the  tragedy  of  Irene  did  not  please 
thepublick.  Mr.  Garrick’s  zeal  carried  it  through 
for  nine  nights,  so  that  the  authour  had  his 
three  nights’  profits;  and  from  a  receipt  signed 
by  him,  now  in  the  hands  of  Mr.  James  Dodsley, 
it  appears  that  his  friend  Mr.  Robert  Dodsley 
gave  him  one  hundred  pounds  for  the  copy, 
with  his  usual  reservation  of  the  right  of  one 
edition. 

Irene,  considered  as  a  poem,  is  intitled  to  the 
praise  of  superiour  excellence.  Analysed  into 
parts,  it  will  furnish  a  rich  store  of  noble  senti¬ 
ments,  fine  imagery,  and  beautiful  language; 
but  it  is  deficient  in  pathos,  in  that  delicate 
power  of  touching  the  human  feelings,  which  is 
the  principal  end  of  the  drama.3  Indeed  Gar¬ 
rick  has  complained  to  me,  that  Johnson  not 
only  had  not  the  faculty  of  producing  the  im¬ 
pressions  of  tragedy,  but  that  he  had  not  the 
sensibility  to  perceive  them.  His  great  friend 
Mr.  Walmsley’s  prediction,  that  he  would  “turn 
out  a  fine  tragedy- writer,”  was,  therefore,  ill- 
founded.  Johnson  was  wise  enough  to  be  con¬ 
vinced  that  he  had  not  the  talents  necessary  to 
write  successfully  for  the  stage,  and  never  made 
another  attempt  in  that  species  of  composition. 

When  asked  how  he  felt  upon  the  ill  success 
of  his  tragedy,  he  replied,  “Like  the  Monu¬ 
ment”;  meaning  that  he  continued  firm  and 
unmoved  as  that  column.  And  let  it  be  remem¬ 
bered,  as  an  admonition  to  the  genus  irritabile  of 
drama  tick  writers,  that  this  great  man,  instead 
of  peevishly  complaining  of  the  bad  taste  of  the 
town,  submitted  to  its  decision  without  a  mur¬ 
mur.  He  had,  indeed,  upon  all  occasions,  a  great 
deference  for  the  general  opinion:  “A  man  (said 

3Aaron  Hill  (vol.  ii,  p.  355),  in  a  letter  to  Mr. 
Mallet,  gives  the  following  account  of  Irene  after 
having  seen  it:  “X  was  at  the  anomalous  Mr.  John¬ 
son’s  benefit,  and  found  the  play  his  proper  repre¬ 
sentative;  strong  sense  ungraced  by  sweetness  or 
decorum.” 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


BOSWELL 


54 

he)  who  writes  a  book,  thinks  himself  wiser  or 
wittier  than  the  rest  of  mankind;  he  supposes 
that  he  can  instruct  or  amuse  them,  and  the 
publick  to  whom  he  appeals,  must,  after  all,  be 
the  judges  of  his  pretensions.” 

On  occasion  of  his  play  being  brought  upon 
the  stage,  Johnson  had  a  fancy  that  as  a  dra¬ 
ma  tick  authour  his  dress  should  be  more  gay 
than  what  he  ordinarily  wore;  he  therefore  ap¬ 
peared  behind  the  scenes,  and  even  in  one  of 
the  side  boxes,  in  a  scarlet  waistcoat,  with  rich 
gold  lace,  and  a  gold-laced  hat.  He  humour¬ 
ously  observed  to  Mr.  Langton,  “that  when  in 
that  dress  he  could  not  treat  people  with  the 
same  ease  as  when  in  his  usual  plain  clothes.” 
Dress  indeed,  we  must  allow,  has  more  effect 
even  upon  strong  minds  than  one  should  sup¬ 
pose,  without  having  had  the  experience  of  it. 
His  necessary  attendance  while  his  play  was  in 
rehearsal,  and  during  its  performance,  brought 
him  acquainted  with  many  of  the  performers  of 
both  sexes,  which  produced  a  more  favourable 
opinion  of  their  profession  than  he  had  harshly 
expressed  in  his  Life  of  Savage.  With  some  of 
them  he  kept  up  an  acquaintance  as  long  as  he 
and  they  lived,  and  was  ever  ready  to  shew 
them  acts  of  kindness.  He  for  a  considerable 
time  used  to  frequent  the  Green  Room,  and 
seemed  to  take  delight  in  dissipating  his  gloom, 
by  mixing  in  the  sprightly  chit-chat  of  the  mot¬ 
ley  circle  then  to  be  found  there.  Mr.  David 
Hume  related  to  me  from  Mr.  Garrick,  that 
Johnson  at  last  denied  himself  this  amusement, 
from  considerations  of  rigid  virtue;  saying,  “I’ll 
come  no  more  behind  your  scenes,  David;  for 
the  silk  stockings  and  white  bosoms  of  your 
actresses  excite  my  amorous  propensities.” 

1750:  .etat.  41.] — In  1750  he  came  forth  in 
the  character  for  which  he  was  eminently  qual¬ 
ified,  a  majestick  teacher  of  moral  and  religious 
wisdom.  The  vehicle  which  he  chose  was  that  of 
a  periodical  paper,  which  he  knew  had  been, 
upon  former  occasions,  employed  with  great 
success.  The  Tatler ,  Spectator ,  and  Guardian ,  were 
the  last  of  the  kind  published  in  England,  which 
had  stood  the  test  of  a  long  trial;  and  such  an 
interval  had  now  elapsed  since  their  publica¬ 
tion,  as  made  him  justly  think  that,  to  many  of 
his  readers,  this  form  of  instruction  would,  in 
some  degree,  have  the  advantage  of  novelty.  A 
few  days  before  the  first  of  his  Essays  came  out, 
there  started  another  competitor  for  fame  in  the 
same  form,  under  the  title  of  The  Tatler  Revived , 
which  I  believe  was  “born  but  to  die.”  Johnson 
was,  I  think,  not  very  happy  in  the  choice  of  his 
title,  The  Rambler ,  which  certainly  is  not  suited 


[  175° 

to  a  series  of  grave  and  moral  discourses;  which 
the  Italians  have  literally,  but  ludicrously  trans¬ 
lated  by  II  Vagabondo;  and  which  has  been 
lately  assumed  as  the  denomination  of  a  vehicle 
of  licentious  tales,  The  Rambler's  Magazine.  He 
gave  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  the  following  account 
of  its  getting  this  name:  “What  must  be  done, 
Sir,  will  be  done.  When  I  was  to  begin  publish¬ 
ing  that  paper,  I  was  at  a  loss  how  to  name  it.  I 
sat  down  at  night  upon  my  bedside,  and  re¬ 
solved  that  I  would  not  go  to  sleep  till  I  had 
fixed  its  title.  The  Rambler  seemed  the  best  that 
occurred,  and  I  took  it.”1 

With  what  devout  and  conscientious  senti¬ 
ments  this  paper  was  undertaken,  is  evidenced 
by  the  following  prayer,  which  he  composed 
and  offered  up  on  the  occasion:  “Almighty 
God,  the  giver  of  all  good  things,  without  whose 
help  all  labour  is  ineffectual,  and  without  whose 
grace  all  wisdom  is  folly;  grant,  I  beseech  Thee, 
that  in  this  undertaking  thy  Holy  Spirit  may 
not  be  with-held  from  me,  but  that  I  may  pro¬ 
mote  thy  glory,  and  the  salvation  of  myself  and 
others:  grant  this,  O  Lord,  for  the  sake  of  thy 
son  Jesus  Christ.  Amen.”2 

The  first  paper  of  The  Rambler  was  published 
on  Tuesday  the  20th  of  March,  1750;  and  its 
authour  was  enabled  to  continue  it,  without  in¬ 
terruption,  every  Tuesday  and  Friday,  till  Sat¬ 
urday  the  17th  of  March,  1752, 3  on  which  day 
it  closed.  This  is  a  strong  confirmation  of  the 
truth  of  a  remark  of  his,  which  I  have  had  occa¬ 
sion  to  quote  elsewhere,4  that  “a  man  may 
write  at  any  time,  if  he  will  set  himself  doggedly 
to  it”;  for,  notwithstanding  his  constitutional 
indolence,  his  depression  of  spirits,  and  his  la¬ 
bour  in  carrying  on  his  Dictionary ,  he  answered 
the  stated  calls  of  the  press  twice  a  week  from 
the  stores  of  his  mind,  during  all  that  time; 

T  have  heard  Dr.  Warton  mention,  that  he  was 
at  Mr.  Robert  Dodsley’s  with  the  late  Mr.  Moore, 
and  several  of  his  friends,  considering  what  should 
be  the  name  of  the  periodical  paper  which  Moore 
had  undertaken.  Garrick  proposed  The  Sallad , 
which,  by  a  curious  coincidence,  was  afterwards 
applied  to  himself  by  Goldsmith: 

Our  Garrick's  a  sallad,  for  in  him  we  see 
Oil,  vinegar,  sugar,  and  saltness  agree! 

At  last,  the  company  having  separated,  without 
any  thing  of  which  they  approved  having  been  of¬ 
fered,  Dodsley  himself  thought  of  The  World. 

2 Prayers  and  Meditations,  p.  9. 

3In  the  original  folio  edition  of  The  Rambler  the 
concluding  paper  is  dated  Saturday,  March  17* 
But  Saturday  was  in  fact  March  14.  This  circum¬ 
stance  is  worth  notice,  for  Mrs.  Johnson  died  on 
the  17th.  [M.] 

A Journal  of  a  Tour  to  the  Hebrides,  3rd  edit.,  p.  28. 
[Aug.  16,  1773] 


175°  1  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  55 


having  received  no  assistance,  except  four  billets 
in  No.  io,  by  Miss  Mulso,  now  Mrs.  Chapone; 
No.  30,  by  Mrs.  Catharine  Talbot;  No.  97,  by 
Mr.  Samuel  Richardson,  whom  he  describes  in 
an  introductory  note  as  “An  author  who  has 
enlarged  the  knowledge  of  human  nature,  and 
taught  the  passions  to  move  at  the  command  of 
virtue55;  and  Nos.  44  and  100  by  Mrs.  Elizabeth 
Carter. 

Posterity  will  be  astonished  when  they  are 
told,  upon  the  authority  of  Johnson  himself, 
that  many  of  these  discourses,  which  we  should 
suppose  had  been  laboured  with  all  the  slow  at¬ 
tention  of  literary  leisure,  were  written  in  haste 
as  the  moment  pressed,  without  even  being  read 
over  by  him  before  they  were  printed.  It  can  be 
accounted  for  only  in  this  way;  that  by  reading 
and  meditation,  and  a  very  close  inspection  of 
life,  he  had  accumulated  a  great  fund  of  mis¬ 
cellaneous  knowledge,  which,  by  a  peculiar 
promptitude  of  mind,  was  ever  ready  at  his  call, 
and  which  he  had  constantly  accustomed  him¬ 
self  to  clothe  in  the  most  apt  and  energetick  ex¬ 
pression.  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  once  asked  him 
by  what  means  he  had  attained  his  extraordi¬ 
nary  accuracy  and  flow  of  language.  He  told 
him,  that  he  had  early  laid  it  down  as  a  fixed 
rule  to  do  his  best  on  every  occasion,  and  in 
every  company;  to  impart  whatever  he  knew  in 
the  most  forcible  language  he  could  put  it  in; 
and  that  by  constant  practice,  and  never  suffer¬ 
ing  any  careless  expressions  to  escape  him,  or 
attempting  to  deliver  his  thoughts  without  ar¬ 
ranging  them  in  the  clearest  manner,  it  became 
habitual  to  him. 

Yet  he  was  not  altogether  unprepared  as  a 
periodical  writer;  for  I  have  in  my  possession  a 
small  duodecimo  volume,  in  which  he  has  writ¬ 
ten,  in  the  form  of  Mr.  Locke’s  Common-Place 
Book ,  a  variety  of  hints  for  essays  on  different 
subjects.  He  has  marked  upon  the  first  blank 
leaf  of  it,  “To  the  128th  page,  collections  for 
The  Rambler” ;  and  in  another  place,  “In  fifty- 
two  there  were  seventeen  provided;  in  97 — 21; 
in  190 — 25.”  At  a  subsequent  period  (probably 
after  the  work  was  finished)  he  added,  “  In  all, 
taken  of  provided  materials,  30.” 

Sir  John  Hawkins,  who  is  unlucky  upon  all 
occasions,  tells  us,  that  “this  method  of  accumu¬ 
lating  intelligence  had  been  practised  by  Mr. 
Addison,  and  is  humourously  described  in  one  of 
the  Spectators ,  wherein  he  feigns  to  have  dropped 
his  paper  of  notanda ,  consisting  of  a  diverting 
medley  of  broken  sentences  and  loose  hints, 
which  he  tells  us  he  had  collected,  and  meant  to 
make  use  of.  Much  of  the  same  kind  is  Johnson’s 


Adversaria.”1  But  the  truth  is,  that  there  is  no  re¬ 
semblance  at  all  between  them.  Addison’s  note 
was  a  fiction,  in  which  unconnected  fragments 
of  his  lucubrations  were  purposely  jumbled  to¬ 
gether,  in  as  odd  a  manner  as  he  could,  in  order 
to  produce  a  laughable  effect.  Whereas  John¬ 
son’s  abbreviations  are  all  distinct,  and  applica¬ 
ble  to  each  subject  of  which  the  head  is  men¬ 
tioned. 

For  instance,  there  is  the  following  specimen; 

“Youth's  Entry ,  &c. 

“Baxter’s  account  of  things  in  which  he  had 
changed  his  mind  as  he  grew  up.  Voluminous. 
— No  wonder. — If  every  man  was  to  tell,  or 
mark,  on  how  many  subjects  he  has  changed,  it 
would  make  vols.  but  the  changes  not  always 
observed  by  man’s  self. — From  pleasure  to  bus. 
[business]  to  quiet;  from  thoughtfulness  to  reflect, 
to  piety;  from  dissipation  to  domestic,  by  im- 
percept.  gradat.  but  the  change  is  certain.  Dial 
non  progredi,  progress,  esse  conspicimus.  Look  back, 
consider  what  was  thought  at  some  dist.  period. 

“ Hope  predom.  in  youth.  Mind  not  willingly  in¬ 
dulges  unpleasing  thoughts.  The  world  lies  all  enam¬ 
eled  before  him,  as  a  distant  prospect  sun-gilt;2 
inequalities  only  found  by  coming  to  it.  Love  is  to 
be  all  joy — children  excellent — Fame  to  be  con¬ 
stant — caresses  of  the  great — applauses  of  the 
learned — smiles  of  Beauty. 

“ Fear  of  disgrace — bashfulness — Finds  things  of 
less  importance.  Miscarriages  forgot  like  excel¬ 
lencies; — if  remembered,  of  no  import.  Danger 
of  sinking  into  negligence  of  reputation.  Lest  the 
fear  of  disgrace  destroy  activity. 

“ Confidence  in  himself.  Long  tract  of  life  before 
him. — No  thought  of  sickness. — Embarrassment 
of  affairs. — Distraction  of  family.  Publick  calam¬ 
ities. — No  sense  of  the  prevalence  of  bad  habits. 
— Negligent  of  time —  ready  to  undertake — care¬ 
less  to  pursue — all  changed  by  time. 

“ Confident  of  others — unsuspecting  as  unexpe¬ 
rienced — imagining  himself  secure  against  neg¬ 
lect,  never  imagines  they  will  venture  to  treat 
him  ill.  Ready  to  trust;  expecting  to  be  trusted. 
Convinced  by  time  of  the  selfishness,  the  mean¬ 
ness,  the  cowardice,  the  treachery  of  men. 

“Youth  ambitious,  as  thinking  honours  easy 
to  be  had. 

“Different  kinds  of  praise  pursued  at  different 
periods.  Of  the  gay  in  youth,  dang,  hurt,  &c. 
despised. 

Dawkins’s  Life  of  Johnson,  p.  268  [p.  265]. 

2This  most  beautiful  image  of  the  enchanting 
delusion  of  youthful  prospect  has  not  been  used  in 
any  of  Johnson’s  essays. 


BOSWELL 


56 

“Of  the  fancy  in  manhood.  Ambit. — stocks — 
bargains. — Of  the  wise  and  sober  in  old  age — 
seriousness — formality — maxims,  but  general — 
only  of  the  rich,  otherwise  age  is  happy— but  at 
last  every  thing  referred  to  riches — no  having 
fame,  honour,  influence,  without  subjection  to 
caprice. 

“Horace. 

“Hard  it  would  be  if  men  entered  life  with 
the  same  views  with  which  they  leave  it,  or  left 
as  they  enter  it. — No  hope — no  undertaking — no 
regard  to  benevolence — no  fear  of  disgrace,  &c. 

“Youth  to  be  taught  the  piety  of  age — age  to 
retain  the  honour  of  youth.” 

This,  it  will  be  observed,  is  the  sketch  of 
Number  196  of  The  Rambler .  I  shall  gratify  my 
readers  with  another  specimen: 

“ Confederacies  difficult;  why. 

“Seldom  in  war  a  match  for  single  persons — 
nor  in  peace;  therefore  kings  make  themselves 
absolute.  Confederacies  in  learning — every  great 
work  the  work  of  one.  Bruy.  Scholar’s  friendship 
like  ladies.  Scribebamus,  &c.  Mart.1  the  apple 
of  discord — the  laurel  of  discord — the  poverty 
of  criticism.  Swift’s  opinion  of  the  power  of  six 
geniuses  united.  That  union  scarce  possible.  His 
remarks  just;  man  a  social,  not  steady  nature. 
Drawn  to  man  by  words,  repelled  by  passions. 
Orb  drawn  by  attraction  rep.  [j repelled ]  by  cen¬ 
trifugal. 

“Common  danger  unites  by  crushing  other 
passions — but  they  return.  Equality  hinders 
compliance.  Superiority  produces  insolence  and 
envy.  Too  much  regard  in  each  to  private  inter¬ 
est — too  little. 

“The  mischiefs  of  private  and  exclusive  socie¬ 
ties — the  fitness  of  social  attraction  diffused 
through  the  whole.  The  mischiefs  of  too  partial 
love  of  our  country.  Contraction  of  moral  duties 
— ot  <j>i\oL  ov  epikos. 

“Every  man  moves  upon  his  own  center,  and 
therefore  repels  others  from  too  near  a  contact, 
though  he  may  comply  with  some  general  laws. 

“Of  confederacy  with  superiours,  every  one 
knows  the  inconvenience.  With  equals,  no  au¬ 
thority; — every  man  his  own  opinion — his  own 
interest. 

“Man  and  wife  hardly  united; — scarce  ever 
without  children.  Computation,  if  two  to  one 
against  two,  how  many  against  five?  If  confed¬ 
eracies  were  easy — useless; — many  oppresses 
many. — If  possible  only  to  some,  dangerous. 
Principum  amicitias .” 

^ook  xii,  96  [95].  In  Tuccam  amulum  omnium  suo - 
rum  studiorum.  [M.J 


[  175° 

Here  we  see  the  embryo  of  Number  45  of  The 
Adventurer;  and  it  is  a  confirmation  of  what  I 
shall  presently  have  occasion  to  mention,  that 
the  papers  in  that  collection  marked  T.  were 
written  by  Johnson. 

This  scanty  preparation  of  materials  will  not, 
however,  much  diminish  our  wonder  at  the  ex¬ 
traordinary  fertility  of  his  mind;  for  the  propor¬ 
tion  which  they  bear  to  the  number  of  essays 
which  he  wrote,  is  very  small;  and  it  is  remark¬ 
able,  that  those  for  which  he  had  made  no  prep¬ 
aration,  are  as  rich  and  as  highly  finished  as 
those  for  which  the  hints  were  lying  by  him.  It 
is  also  to  be  observed,  that  the  papers  formed 
from  his  hints  are  worked  up  with  such  strength 
and  elegance,  that  we  almost  lose  sight  of  the 
hints,  which  become  like  “drops  in  the  bucket.” 
Indeed,  in  several  instances,  he  has  made  a  very 
slender  use  of  them,  so  that  many  of  them  re¬ 
main  still  unapplied.2 

As  The  Rambler  was  entirely  the  work  of  one 
man,  there  was,  of  course,  such  a  uniformity  in 
its  texture,  as  very  much  to  exclude  the  charm 
of  variety;  and  the  grave  and  often  solemn  cast 
of  thinking,  which  distinguished  it  from  other 
periodical  papers,  made  it,  for  some  time,  not 
generally  liked.  So  slowly  did  this  excellent  work , 
of  which  twelve  editions  have  now  issued  from 
the  press,  gain  upon  the  world  at  large,  that 
even  in  the  closing  number  the  authour  says,  “I 
have  never  been  much  a  favourite  of  the  pub- 
lick.” 

Yet,  very  soon  after  its  commencement,  there 
were  who  felt  and  acknowledged  its  uncommon 
excellence.  Verses  in  its  praise  appeared  in  the 
newspapers;  and  the  editor  of  The  Gentleman’s 
Magazine  mentions,  in  October,  his  having  re¬ 
ceived  several  letters  to  the  same  purpose  from 
the  learned.  The  Student ,  or  Oxford  and  Cambridge 

2Sir  John  Hawkins  has  selected  from  this  little 
collection  of  materials,  what  he  calls  the  “Rudi¬ 
ments  of  two  of  the  papers  of  The  Rambler .”  But  he 
has  not  been  able  to  read  the  manuscript  distinct¬ 
ly.  Thus  he  writes,  p.  266,  “Sailor’s  fate  any  man¬ 
sion”;  whereas  the  original  is  “Sailor’s  life  my 
aversion.”  He  has  also  transcribed  the  unappro¬ 
priated  hints  on  Writers  for  bread ,  in  which  he  de¬ 
cyphers  these  notable  passages,  one  in  Latin,  “/a- 
tui  non  fames  f  instead  of  ‘fami  non  fames”;  Johnson 
having  in  his  mind  what  Thuanus  says  of  the  learn¬ 
ed  German  antiquary  and  linguist,  Xylander,  who, 
he  tells  us,  lived  in  such  poverty,  that  he  was  sup¬ 
posed  fami non famce scribere;  and  another  in  French, 
“ Degente  de  fate  [fatu]  et  affame  d’ argent ,”  instead  of 
“ Degoute  de  fame ,  (an  old  word  for  renommee)  et  affa- 
me  d’ argent.”  The  manuscript  being  written  in  an 
exceedingly  small  hand,  is  indeed  very  hard  to 
read;  but  it  would  have  been  better  to  have  left 
blanks  than  to  write  nonsense. 


1750  ]  LIFE  OF 

Miscellany ,  in  which  Mr.  Bonnell  Thornton  and 
Mr.  Colman  were  the  principal  writers,  de¬ 
scribes  it  as  “a  work  that  exceeds  anything  of 
the  kind  ever  published  in  this  kingdom,  some 
of  the  Spectators  excepted — if  indeed  they  may  be 
excepted.”  And  afterwards,  “May  the  publick 
favours  crown  his  merits,  and  may  not  the  Eng¬ 
lish,  under  the  auspicious  reign  of  George  the 
Second,  neglect  a  man,  who,  had  he  lived  in  the 
first  century,  would  have  been  one  of  the  great¬ 
est  favourites  of  Augustus.”  This  flattery  of  the 
monarch  had  no  effect.  It  is  too  well  known, 
that  the  second  George  never  was  an  Augustus 
to  learning  or  genius. 

Johnson  told  me,  with  an  amiable  fondness, 
a  little  pleasing  circumstance  relative  to  this 
work.  Mrs.  Johnson,  in  whose  judgement  and 
taste  he  had  great  confidence,  said  to  him,  after 
a  few  numbers  of  The  Rambler  had  come  out,  “I 
thought  very  well  of  you  before;  but  I  did  not 
imagine  you  could  have  written  any  thing  equal 
to  this.”  Distant  praise,  from  whatever  quarter, 
is  not  so  delightful  as  that  of  a  wife  whom  a  man 
loves  and  esteems.  Her  approbation  may  be  said 
to  “come  home  to  his  bosom”;  and  being  so  near, 
its  effect  is  most  sensible  and  permanent. 

Mr.  James  Elphinston,  who  has  since  pub¬ 
lished  various  works,  and  who  was  ever  esteemed 
by  Johnson  as  a  worthy  man,  happened  to  be  in 
Scotland  while  The  Rambler  was  coming  out  in 
single  papers  at  London.  With  a  laudable  zeal 
at  once  for  the  improvement  of  his  countrymen, 
and  the  reputation  of  his  friend,  he  suggested 
and  took  the  charge  of  an  edition  of  those  Essays 
at  Edinburgh,  which  followed  progressively  the 
London  publication.1 

The  following  letter  written  at  this  time, 
though  not  dated,  will  show  how  much  pleased 
Johnson  was  with  this  publication,  and  what 
kindness  and  regard  he  had  for  Mr.  Elphinston. 

To  Mr.  James  Elphinston 

[No  date ] 

Dear  Sir,  I  cannot  but  confess  the  failures  of 
my  correspondence,  but  hope  the  same  regard 
which  you  express  for  me  on  every  other  occa¬ 
sion,  will  incline  you  to  forgive  me.  I  am  often, 
very  often,  ill;  and,  when  I  am  well,  am  obliged 

JIt  was  executed  in  the  printing-office  of  Sands, 
Murray,  and  Cochran,  with  uncommon  elegance, 
upon  writing-paper,  of  a  duodecimo  size,  and  with 
the  greatest  correctness;  and  Mr.  Elphinston  en¬ 
riched  it  with  translations  of  the  mottos.  When 
completed,  it  made  eight  handsome  volumes.  It  is, 
unquestionably,  the  most  accurate  and  beautiful 
edition  of  this  work;  and  there  being  but  a  small 
impression,  it  is  now  become  scarce,  and  sells  at  a 
very  high  price. 


JOHNSON  57 

to  work:  and,  indeed,  have  never  much  used 
myself  to  punctuality.  You  are,  however,  not  to 
make  unkind  inferences,  when  I  forbear  to 
reply  to  your  kindness;  for  be  assured,  I  never 
receive  a  letter  from  you  without  great  pleasure, 
and  a  very  warm  sense  of  your  generosity  and 
friendship,  which  I  heartily  blame  myself  for 
not  cultivating  with  more  care.  In  this,  as  in 
many  other  cases,  I  go  wrong,  in  opposition  to 
conviction;  for  I  think  scarce  any  temporal  good 
equally  to  be  desired  with  the  regard  and  fa¬ 
miliarity  of  worthy  men.  I  hope  we  shall  be 
some  time  nearer  to  each  other,  and  have  a 
more  ready  way  of  pouring  out  our  hearts. 

I  am  glad  that  you  still  find  encouragement 
to  proceed  in  your  publication,  and  shall  beg 
the  favour  of  six  more  volumes  to  add  to  my  for¬ 
mer  six,  when  you  can,  with  any  convenience, 
send  them  me.  Please  to  present  a  set,  in  my 
name,  to  Mr.  Ruddiman,2  of  whom,  I  hear,  that 
his  learning  is  not  his  highest  excellence.  I  have 
transcribed  the  mottos,  and  returned  them,  I 
hope  not  too  late,  of  which  I  think  many  very 
happily  performed.  Mr.  Gave  has  put  the  last  in 
the  magazine,  in  which  I  think  he  did  well.  I 
beg  of  you  to  write  soon,  and  to  write  often,  and 
to  write  long  letters,  which  I  hope  in  time  to  re¬ 
pay  you;  but  you  must  be  a  patient  creditor.  I 
have,  however,  this  of  gratitude,  that  I  think  of 
you  with  regard,  when  I  do  not,  perhaps,  give 
the  proofs  which  I  ought,  of  being,  Sir,  your 
most  obliged  and  most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

This  year  he  wrote  to  the  same  gentleman 
another  letter,  upon  a  mournful  occasion. 

To  Mr.  James  Elphinston 

September  25,  1750 

Dear  Sir,  You  have,  as  I  find  by  every  kind 
of  evidence,  lost  an  excellent  mother;  and  I 
hope  you  will  not  think  me  incapable  of  partak¬ 
ing  of  your  grief.  I  have  a  mother,  now  eighty- 
two  years  of  age,  whom,  therefore,  I  must  soon 
lose,  unless  it  please  God  that  she  rather  should 
mourn  for  me.  I  read  the  letters  in  which  you 
relate  your  mother’s  death  to  Mrs.  Strahan,  and 
think  I  do  myself  honour,  when  I  tell  you  that  I 
read  them  with  tears;  but  tears  are  neither  to 
you  nor  to  me  of  any  further  use,  when  once  the 
tribute  of  nature  has  been  paid.  The  business  of 
life  summons  us  away  from  useless  grief,  and 
calls  us  to  the  exercise  of  those  virtues  of  which 
we  are  lamenting  our  deprivation.  The  greatest 
benefit  which  one  friend  can  confer  upon  anoth¬ 
er,  is  to  guard,  and  excite,  and  elevate  his  vir- 

2Mr.  Thomas  Ruddiman,  the  learned  grammar¬ 
ian  of  Scotland,  well  known  for  his  various  excel¬ 
lent  works,  and  for  his  accurate  editions  of  several 
authours.  He  was  also  a  man  of  a  most  worthy  pri¬ 
vate  character.  His  zeal  for  the  Royal  House  of 
Stuart  did  not  render  him  less  estimable  in  Dr. 
Johnson’s  eye. 


58 

tues.  This  your  mother  will  still  perform,  if  you 
diligently  preserve  the  memory  of  her  life,  and 
of  her  death:  a  life,  so  far  as  I  can  learn,  useful, 
wise,  and  innocent;  and  a  death  resigned,  peace¬ 
ful,  and  holy.  I  cannot  forbear  to  mention,  that 
neither  reason  nor  revelation  denies  you  to  hope, 
that  you  may  increase  her  happiness  by  obeying 
her  precepts;  and  that  she  may,  in  her  present 
state,  look  with  pleasure  upon  every  act  of  vir¬ 
tue  to  which  her  instructions  or  example  have 
contributed.  Whether  this  be  more  than  a  pleas¬ 
ing  dream,  or  a  just  opinion  of  separate  spirits, 
is,  indeed,  of  no  great  importance  to  us,  when 
we  consider  ourselves  as  acting  under  the  eye  of 
God:  yet,  surely,  there  is  something  pleasing  in 
the  belief,  that  our  separation  from  those  whom 
we  love  is  merely  corporeal;  and  it  may  be  a 
great  incitement  to  virtuous  friendship,  if  it  can 
be  made  probable,  that  that  union  that  has  re¬ 
ceived  the  divine  approbation  shall  continue  to 
eternity. 

There  is  one  expedient  by  which  you  may,  in 
some  degree,  continue  her  presence.  If  you  write 
down  minutely  what  you  remember  of  her  from 
your  earliest  years,  you  will  read  it  with  great 
pleasure,  and  receive  from  it  many  hints  of 
soothing  recollection,  when  time  shall  remove 
her  yet  farther  from  you,  and  your  grief  shall  be 
matured  to  veneration.  To  this,  however  pain¬ 
ful  for  the  present,  I  cannot  but  advise  you,  as 
to  a  source  of  comfort  and  satisfaction  in  the 
time  to  come;  for  all  comfort  and  all  satisfaction 
is  sincerely  wished  you  by,  dear  Sir,  your  most 
obliged,  most  obedient,  and  most  humble  serv¬ 
ant,  Sam.  Johnson 

The  Rambler  has  increased  in  fame  as  in  age. 
Soon  after  its  first  folio  edition  was  concluded, 
it  was  published  in  six  duodecimo  volumes;  and 
its  author  lived  to  see  ten  numerous  editions  of 
it  in  London,  beside  those  of  Ireland  and  Scot¬ 
land. 

I  profess  myself  to  have  ever  entertained  a 
profound  veneration  for  the  astonishing  force 
and  vivacity  of  mind  which  The  Rambler  exhib¬ 
its.  That  Johnson  had  penetration  enough  to 
see,  and  seeing  would  not  disguise  the  general 
misery  of  man  in  this  state  of  being,  may  have 
given  rise  to  the  superficial  notion  of  his  being 
too  stern  a  philosopher.  But  men  of  reflection 
will  be  sensible  that  he  has  given  a  true  repre¬ 
sentation  of  human  existence,  and  that  he  has, 
at  the  same  time,  with  a  generous  benevolence 
displayed  every  consolation  which  our  state  af¬ 
fords  us;  not  only  those  arising  from  the  hopes 
of  futurity,  but  such  as  may  be  attained  in  the 
immediate  progress  through  life.  He  has  not  de¬ 
pressed  the  soul  to  despondency  and  indiffer¬ 
ence.  He  has  every  where  inculcated  study,  la¬ 
bour,  and  exertion.  Nay,  he  has  shewn,  in  a 


[  175° 

very  odious  light,  a  man  whose  practice  is  to  go 
about  darkening  the  views  of  others,  by  perpe¬ 
tual  complaints  of  evil,  and  awakening  those 
considerations  of  danger  and  distress,  which  are, 
for  the  most  part,  lulled  into  a  quiet  oblivion. 
This  he  has  done  very  strongly  in  his  character 
of  Suspirius,1  from  which  Goldsmith  took  that 
of  Croaker,  in  his  comedy  of  The  Good-Natured 
Man ,  as  Johnson  told  me  he  acknowledged  to 
him,  and  which  is,  indeed,  very  obvious. 

To  point  out  the  numerous  subjects  which 
The  Rambler  treats,  with  a  dignity  and  perspicu¬ 
ity  which  are  there  united  in  a  manner  which 
we  shall  in  vain  look  for  any  where  else,  would 
take  up  too  large  a  portion  of  my  book,  and 
would,  I  trust,  be  superfluous,  considering  how 
universally  those  volumes  are  now  disseminated. 
Even  the  most  condensed  and  brilliant  sentences 
which  they  contain,  and  which  have  very  prop¬ 
erly  been  selected  under  the  name  of  Beauties ,2 
are  of  considerable  bulk.  But  I  may  shortly  ob¬ 
serve,  that  The  Rambler  furnishes  such  an  assem¬ 
blage  of  discourses  on  practical  religion  and 
moral  duty,  of  critical  investigations,  and  alle¬ 
gorical  and  oriental  tales,  that  no  mind  can  be 
thought  very  deficient  that  has,  by  constant 
study  and  meditation,  assimilated  to  itself  all 
that  may  be  found  there.  No.  7,  written  in  Pas¬ 
sion-week  on  abstraction  and  self-examination, 
and  No.  no,  on  penitence  and  the  placability 
of  the  Divine  Nature,  cannot  be  too  often  read. 
No.  54,  on  the  effect  which  the  death  of  a  friend 
should  have  upon  us,  though  rather  too  dispirit¬ 
ing,  may  be  occasionally  very  medicinal  to  the 
mind.  Every  one  must  suppose  the  writer  to 
have  been  deeply  impressed  by  a  real  scene;  but 
he  told  me  that  was  not  the  case;  which  shows 
how  well  his  fancy  could  conduct  him  to  the 
“house  of  mourning.”  Some  of  these  more  sol¬ 
emn  papers,  I  doubt  not,  particularly  attracted 
the  notice  of  Dr.  Young,  the  authour  of  The 
Night  Thoughts ,  of  whom  my  estimation  is  such, 
as  to  reckon  his  applause  an  honour  even  to 
Johnson.  I  have  seen  some  volumes  of  Dr.  Young’s 
copy  of  The  Rambler ,  in  which  he  has  marked 
the  passages  which  he  thought  particularly  ex¬ 
cellent,  by  folding  down  a  corner  of  the  page; 
and  such  as  he  rated  in  a  super-eminent  degree, 

xNo.  55  [59]. 

2Dr.  Johnson  was  gratified  by  seeing  this  selec¬ 
tion,  and  wrote  to  Mr.  Kearsley,  bookseller  in 
Fleet-Street,  the  following  note: 

“Mr.  Johnson  sends  compliments  to  Mr.  Kears¬ 
ley,  and  begs  the  favour  of  seeing  him  as  soon  as  he 
can.  Mr.  Kearsley  is  desired  to  bring  with  him  the 
last  edition  of  what  he  has  honoured  with  the  name 
of  Beauties.  May  20,  1782” 


BOSWELL 


1750]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  59 


are  marked  by  double  folds.  I  am  sorry  that 
some  of  the  volumes  are  lost.  Johnson  was  pleased 
when  told  of  the  minute  attention  with  which 
Young  had  signified  his  approbation  of  his  Es¬ 
says. 

I  will  venture  to  say,  that  in  no  writings  what¬ 
ever  can  be  found  more  bark  and  steel  for  the  mind , 
if  I  may  use  the  expression ;  more  that  can  brace 
and  invigorate  every  manly  and  noble  senti¬ 
ment.  No.  32  on  patience,  even  under  extreme 
misery,  is  wonderfully  lofty,  and  as  much  above 
the  rant  of  stoicism,  as  the  Sun  of  Revelation  is 
brighter  than  the  twilight  of  Pagan  philosophy. 
I  never  read  the  following  sentence  withoutieel- 
ing  my  frame  thrill:  “I  think  there  is  some  rea¬ 
son  for  questioning  whether  the  body  and  mind 
are  not  so  proportioned,  that  the  one  can  bear 
all  which  can  be  inflicted  on  the  other;  whether 
virtue  cannot  stand  its  ground  as  long  as  life, 
and  whether  a  soul  well  principled,  will  not  be 
sooner  separated  than  subdued.5’ 

Though  instruction  be  the  predominant  pur¬ 
pose  of  The  Rambler ,  yet  it  is  enlivened  with  a 
considerable  portion  of  amusement.  Nothing 
can  be  more  erroneous  than  the  notion  which 
some  persons  have  entertained,  that  Johnson 
was  then  a  retired  authour,  ignorant  of  the 
world;  and,  of  consequence,  that  he  wrote  only 
from  his  imagination  when  he  described  charac¬ 
ters  and  manners.  He  said  to  me,  that  before  he 
wrote  that  work,  he  had  been  “running  about 
the  world,”  as  he  expressed  it,  more  than  almost 
any  body;  and  I  have  heard  him  relate,  with 
much  satisfaction,  that  several  of  the  characters 
in  The  Rambler  were  drawn  so  naturally,  that 
when  it  first  circulated  in  numbers,  a  club  in 
one  of  the  towns  in  Essex  imagined  themselves 
to  be  severally  exhibited  in  it,  and  were  much 
incensed  against  a  person  who,  they  suspected, 
had  thus  made  them  objects  of  publick  notice; 
nor  were  they  quieted  till  authentick  assurance 
was  given  them,  that  The  Rambler  was  written  by 
a  person  who  had  never  heard  of  any  one  of 
them.  Some  of  the  characters  are  believed  to 
have  been  actually  drawn  from  the  life,  particu¬ 
larly  that  of  Prospero  from  Garrick,  who  never 
entirely  forgave  its  pointed  satire.  For  instances 
of  fertility  of  fancy,  and  accurate  description  of 
real  life,  I  appeal  to  No.  19,  a  man  who  wanders 
from  one  profession  to  another,  with  most  plau¬ 
sible  reasons  for  every  change.  No.  34,  female 
fastidiousness  and  timorous  refinement.  No.  82, 
a  Virtuoso  who  has  collected  curiosities.  No.  881, 
petty  modes  of  entertaining  a  company,  and 
conciliating  kindness.  No.  182,  fortune-hunting. 

1[No.  98.] 


No.  1 94-1 95,  a  tutor’s  account  of  the  follies  of 
his  pupil.  No.  197-198,  legacy-hunting.  He  has 
given  a  specimen  of  his  nice  observation  of  the 
mere  external  appearances  of  life,  in  the  follow¬ 
ing  passage  in  No.  1 79,  against  affectation,  that 
frequent  and  most  disgusting  quality:  “He  that 
stands  to  contemplate  the  crouds  that  fill  the 
streets  of  a  populous  city,  will  see  many  passen¬ 
gers  whose  air  and  motion  it  will  be  difficult  to 
behold  without  contempt  and  laughter;  but  if 
he  examine  what  are  the  appearances  that  thus 
powerfully  excite  his  risibility,  he  will  find  among 
them  neither  poverty  nor  disease,  nor  any  invol¬ 
untary  or  painful  defect.  The  disposition  to  de¬ 
rision  and  insult,  is  awakened  by  the  softness  of 
foppery,  the  swell  of  insolence,  the  liveliness  of 
levity,  or  the  solemnity  of  grandeur;  by  the 
sprightly  trip,  the  stately  stalk,  the  formal  strut, 
and  the  lofty  mien;  by  gestures  intended  to 
catch  the  eye,  and  by  looks  elaborately  formed 
as  evidences  of  importance.” 

Every  page  of  The  Rambler  shews  a  mind  teem¬ 
ing  with  classical  allusion  and  poetical  imagery: 
illustrations  from  other  writers  are,  upon  all 
occasions,  so  ready,  and  mingle  so  easily  in  his 
periods,  that  the  whole  appears  of  one  uniform 
vivid  texture. 

The  style  of  this  work  has  been  censured  by 
some  shallow  criticks  as  involved  and  turgid, 
and  abounding  with  antiquated  and  hard  words. 
So  ill-founded  is  the  first  part  of  this  objection, 
that  I  will  challenge  all  who  may  honour  this 
book  with  a  perusal,  to  point  out  any  English 
writer  whose  language  conveys  his  meaning  with 
equal  force  and  perspicuity.  It  must,  indeed,  be 
allowed,  that  the  structure  of  his  sentences  is  ex¬ 
panded,  and  often  has  somewhat  of  the  inver¬ 
sion  of  Latin;  and  that  he  delighted  to  express 
familiar  thoughts  in  philosophical  language;  be¬ 
ing  in  this  the  reverse  of  Socrates,  who,  it  was 
said,  reduced  philosophy  to  the  simplicity  of 
common  life.  But  let  us  attend  to  what  he  him¬ 
self  says  in  his  concluding  paper:  “When  com¬ 
mon  words  were  less  pleasing  to  the  ear,  or  less 
distinct  in  their  signification,  I  have  familiar¬ 
ised  the  terms  of  philosophy,  by  applying  them 
to  popular  ideas.2”  And,  as  to  the  second  part  of 
this  objection,  upon  a  late  careful  revision  of  the 
work,  I  can  with  confidence  say,  that  it  is  amaz¬ 
ing  how  few  of  those  words,  for  which  it  has 
been  unjustly  characterised,  are  actually  to  be 
found  in  it;  I  am  sure,  not  the  proportion  of  one 

2Yet  his  style  did  not  escape  the  harmless  shafts 
of  pleasant  humour;  for  the  ingenious  Bonnell 
Thornton  published  a  mock  Rambler  in  the  Drury - 
lane  Journal. 


BOSWELL 


[  1750 


60 

to  each  paper.  This  idle  charge  has  been  echoed 
from  one  babbler  to  another,  who  have  con¬ 
founded  Johnson’s  Essays  with  Johnson’s  Dic¬ 
tionary ;  and  because  he  thought  it  right  in  a  Lex¬ 
icon  of  our  language  to  collect  many  words  which 
had  fallen  into  disuse,  but  were  supported  by 
great  authorities,  it  has  been  imagined  that  all 
of  these  have  been  interwoven  into  his  own  com¬ 
positions.  That  some  of  them  have  been  adopted 
by  him  unnecessarily,  may,  perhaps,  be  allowed; 
but,  in  general  they  are  evidently  an  advantage, 
for  without  them  his  stately  ideas  would  be  con¬ 
fined  and  cramped.  “He  that  thinks  with  more 
extent  than  another,  will  wan+  words  of  larger 
meaning.”1  He  once  told  me,  trial  he  had  formed 
his  style  upon  that  of  Sir  William  Temple,  and 
upon  Chambers’s  Proposal  for  his  Dictionary.  He 
certainly  was  mistaken ;  or  if  he  imagined  at  first 
that  he  was  imitating  Temple,  he  was  very  un¬ 
successful;  for  nothing  can  be  more  unlike  than 
the  simplicity  of  Temple,  and  the  richness  of 
Johnson.  Their  styles  differ  as  plain  cloth  and 
brocade.  Temple,  indeed,  seems  equally  errone¬ 
ous  in  supposing  that  he  himself  had  formed  his 
style  upon  Sandys’s  View  of  the  State  of  Religion  in 
the  Western  parts  of  the  World. 

The  style  of  Johnson  was,  undoubtedly,  much 
formed  upon  that  of  the  great  writers  in  the  last 
century,  Hooker,  Bacon,  Sanderson,  Hakewell, 
and  others;  those  “Giants,”  as  they  were  well 
characterised  by  a  great  Personage,  whose 
authority,  were  I  to  name  him,  would  stamp  a 
reverence  on  the  opinion. 

We  may,  with  the  utmost  propriety,  apply  to 
his  learned  style  that  passage  of  Horace,  a  part 
of  which  he  has  taken  as  the  motto  to  his  Dic¬ 
tionary: 

Cum  tabulis  animum  censoris  sumet  honesti ; 

Audebit  qucecumque parum  splendoris  habebunt 
Et  sine  pondere  erunt,  et  honor e  indigna  ferentur , 
Verba  movere  loco,  quamvis  invita  recedant , 

Et  versentur  adhuc  intra  penetralia  Vestce. 

Obscurata  diupopulo  bonus  eruet,  atque 
Proferet  in  lucem  speciosa  vocabula  rerum , 

Quce priscis  memorata  Catonibus  atque  Cethegis, 
Nunc  situs  informis premit  et  deserta  vetustas: 
Adsciscet  nova ,  quce  genitor  produxerit  usus: 
Vehemens,  et  liquidus,puroque  simillimus  amni , 
Fundet  opes  Latiumque  beabit  divite  lingua .2 

To  so  great  a  master  of  thinking,  to  one  of 
such  vast  and  various  knowledge  as  Johnson, 
might  have  been  allowed  a  liberal  indulgence  of 
that  licence  which  Horace  claims  in  another 
place: 

lIdler ,  No.  70. 

2Horace,  Epist .,  ii.  2  [1.  1 1  o]. 


- Si forte  necesse  est 

Indiciis  monstrare  recentibus  abdita  rerum , 

Fingere  cinctutis  non  exaudita  Cethegis 
Continget,  dabiturque  ticentia  sumpta  pudenter; 

Et  nova fictaque  nuper  habebunt  verba fidem  si 
Graeco  fonte  cadant ,  parce  detorta.  Quid  autem 
Ccecilio  Plautoque  dabit  Romanus ,  ademptum 
Virgil  io  Varioque?  Ego  cur,  acquit  ere  pauca 
Si  possum,  invideor;  cum  lingua  Catonis  et  Enni 
Sermonern  p atrium  ditaverit ,  et  nova  rerum 
Nomina  protulerit?  Licuit  semper que  licebit 
Signatum  preesente  no  td  produce  re  nomen.3 

Yet  Johnson  assured  me,  that  he  had  not 
taken  upon  him  to  add  more  than  four  or  five 
words  to  the  English  language,  of  his  own  for¬ 
mation;  and  he  was  very  much  offended  at  the 
general  licence,  by  no  means  “modestly  taken” 
in  his  time,  not  only  to  coin  new  words,  but  to 
use  many  words  in  senses  quite  different  from 
their  established  meaning,  and  those  frequently 
very  fantastical. 

Sir  Thomas  Brown,  whose  life  Johnson  wrote, 
was  remarkably  fond  of  Anglo-Latian  diction; 
and  to  his  example  we  are  to  ascribe  Johnson’s 
sometimes  indulging  himself  in  this  kind  of 
phraseology.4  Johnson’s  comprehension  of  mind 
was  the  mould  for  his  language.  Had  his  con¬ 
ceptions  been  narrower,  his  expression  would 
have  been  easier.  His  sentences  have  a  dignified 
march;  and,  it  is  certain,  that  his  example  has 
given  a  general  elevation  to  the  language  of  his 
country,  for  many  of  our  best  writers  have  ap¬ 
proached  very  near  to  him;  and,  from  the  influ¬ 
ence  which  he  has  had  upon  our  composition, 
scarcely  any  thing  is  written  now  that  is  not  bet¬ 
ter  expressed  than  was  usual  before  he  appeared 
to  lead  the  national  taste. 

This  circumstance,  the  truth  of  which  must 
strike  every  critical  reader,  has  been  so  happily 
enforced  by  Mr.  Courtenay,  in  his  Moral  and 
Literary  Character  of  Dr.  Johnson ,  that  I  cannot 
prevail  on  myself  to  withhold  it,  notwithstand¬ 
ing  his,  perhaps,  too  great  partiality  for  one  of 
his  friends: 

By  nature' s  gif  ts  ordain'd  mankind  to  rule , 

He,  like  a  Titian,  form'd  his  brilliant  school; 

And  taught  congenial  spirits  to  excel. 

While  from  his  lips  impressive  wisdom  fell. 

Our  boasted  Goldsmith  felt  the  sovereign  sway; 

3Horace,  De  Arte  Poetica  [1.  48]. 

4The  observation  of  his  having  imitated  Sir 
Thomas  Brown  has  been  made  by  many  people; 
and  lately  it  has  been  insisted  on,  and  illustrated 
by  a  variety  of  quotations  from  Brown,  in  one  of 
the  popular  Essays  written  by  the  Reverend  Mr. 
Knox,  master  of  Tunbridge  school,  whom  I  have 
set  down  in  my  list  of  those  who  have  sometimes 
not  unsuccessfully  imitated  Dr.  Johnson’s  style. 


1750]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  61 


From  him  deriv'd  the  sweet, yet  nervous  lay. 

To  Fame's  proud  cliff  he  bade  our  Raphael  rise; 

Hence  Reynolds’  pen  with  Reynolds’  pencil  vies. 
With  Johnson's flame  melodious  Burney  glows. 
While  the  grand  strain  in  smoother  cadence  flows. 

And  you,  Malone,  to  critick  learning  dear. 

Correct  and  elegant ,  refin'd  though  clear. 

By  studying  him,  acquir'd  that  classick  taste, 

Which  high  in  Shakspeare'sjane  thy  statue  plac'd. 
Near  Johnson  Steevens  stands,  on  scenick  ground. 
Acute,  laborious,  fertile,  and  profound. 

Ingenious  Hawkesworth  to  this  school  we  owe. 

And  scarce  the  pupil  from  the  tutor  know. 

Here  early  parts  accomplish' d  Jones  sublimes , 

And  science  blends  with  Asia's  lofty  rhymes: 
Harmonious  Jones  !  who  in  his  splendid  strains 
Sings  Camdeo's  sports,  on  Agra's  flowery  plains: 

In  Hindu  fictions  while  we  fondly  trace 
Love  and  the  Muses,  deck'd  with  Attick  grace. 

Amid  these  names  can  Boswell  be  forgot, 

Scarce  by  North  Britons  now  esteem'd  a  Scot?1 
Who  to  the  sage  devoted from  his  youth, 

Imbib' d from  him  the  sacred  love  of  truth; 

The  keen  research ,  the  exercise  of  mind. 

And  that  best  art,  the  art  to  know  mankind. — 

Nor  was  his  energy  confin'd  alone 
To  friends  around  his  philosophick  throne ; 

Its  influence  wide  improv’d  our  letter’d  isle. 
And  lucid  vigour  marked  the  general  style: 

As  Nile's  proud  waves,  swoln  from  their  oozy  bed. 

First  o'er  the  neighbouring  meads  majestick  spread; 
Till  gathering  force,  they  more  and  more  expand. 

And  with  new  virtue fertilise  the  land. 

Johnson’s  language,  however,  must  be  al¬ 
lowed  to  be  too  masculine  for  the  delicate  gen¬ 
tleness  of  female  writing.  His  ladies,  therefore, 
seem  strangely  formal,  even  to  ridicule;  and  are 
well  denominated  by  the  names  which  he  has 
given  them,  as  Misella,  Zozima,  Properantia, 
Rhodoclia. 

It  has  of  late  been  the  fashion  to  compare  the 
style  of  Addison  and  Johnson,  and  to  depreciate, 
I  think  very  unjustly,  the  style  of  Addison  as 
nerveless  and  feeble,  because  it  has  not  the 
strength  and  energy  of  that  of  Johnson.  Their 
prose  may  be  balanced  like  the  poetry  of  Dry- 

HThe  following  observation  in  Mr.  Boswell’s  Jour¬ 
nal  of  a  Tour  to  the  Hebrides  may  sufficiently  account 
for  that  Gentleman’s  being  “now  scarcely  esteem’d 
a  Scot”  by  many  of  his  countrymen:  “If  he  [Dr. 
Johnson]  was  particularly  prejudiced  against  the 
Scots,  it  was  because  they  were  more  in  his  way; 
because  he  thought  their  success  in  England  rather 
exceeded  the  due  proportion  of  their  real  merit; 
and  because  he  could  not  but  see  in  them  that  na¬ 
tionality  which,  I  believe,  no  liberal-minded  Scotch¬ 
man  will  deny.”  Mr.  Boswell,  indeed,  is  so  free 
from  national  prejudices,  that  he  might  with  equal 
propriety  have  been  described  as — 

“Scarce  by  South  Britons  now  esteem’d  a  Scot.” 

Courtenay 


den  and  Pope.  Both  are  excellent,  though  in  dif¬ 
ferent  ways.  Addison  writes  with  the  ease  of  a 
gentleman.  His  readers  fancy  that  a  wise  and 
accomplished  companion  is  talking  to  them;  so 
that  he  insinuates  his  sentiments  and  taste  into 
their  minds  by  an  imperceptible  influence.  John¬ 
son  writes  like  a  teacher.  He  dictates  to  his  read¬ 
ers  as  if  from  an  academical  chair.  They  attend 
with  awe  and  admiration;  and  his  precepts  are 
impressed  upon  them  by  his  commanding  elo¬ 
quence.  Addison’s  style,  like  a  light  wine,  pleases 
everybody  from  the  first.  Johnson’s,  like  a  liquor 
of  more  body,  seems  too  strong  at  first,  but,  by 
degrees,  is  highly  relished;  and  such  is  the  mel¬ 
ody  of  his  periods,  so  much  do  they  captivate 
the  ear,  and  seize  upon  the  attention,  that  there 
is  scarcely  any  writer,  however  inconsiderable, 
who  does  not  aim,  in  some  degree,  at  the  same 
species  of  excellence.  But  let  us  not  ungratefully 
undervalue  that  beautiful  style,  which  has  pleas¬ 
ingly  conveyed  to  us  much  instruction  and  en¬ 
tertainment.  Though  comparatively  weak,  op¬ 
posed  to  Johnson’s  Herculean  vigour,  let  us  not 
call  it  positively  feeble.  Let  us  remember  the 
character  of  his  style,  as  given  by  Johnson  him¬ 
self:  “What  he  attempted,  he  performed;  he  is 
never  feeble,  and  he  did  not  wish  to  be  energetick; 
he  is  never  rapid,  and  he  never  stagnates.  His 
sentences  have  neither  studied  amplitude,  nor 
affected  brevity:  his  periods,  though  not  dili¬ 
gently  rounded,  are  voluble  and  easy.  Whoever 
wishes  to  attain  an  English  style,  familiar  but 
not  coarse,  and  elegant  but  not  ostentatious, 
must  give  his  days  and  nights  to  the  volumes  of 
Addison.”2 

Though  The  Rambler  was  not  concluded  till 
the  year  1752,  I  shall,  under  this  year,  say  all 
that  I  have  to  observe  upon  it.  Some  of  the  trans¬ 
lations  of  the  mottos  by  himself  are  admirably 
done.  He  acknowledges  to  have  received  “ele¬ 
gant  translations”  of  many  of  them  from  Mr. 
James  Elphinston;  and  some  are  very  happily 
translated  by  a  Mr.  F.  Lewis,  of  whom  I  never 
heard  more,  except  that  Johnson  thus  described 
him  to  Mr.  Malone:  “Sir,  he  lived  in  London, 
and  hung  loose  upon  society.”  The  concluding 
paper  of  his  Rambler  is  at  once  dignified  and 
pathetick.  I  cannot,  however,  but  wish  that  he 
had  not  ended  it  with  an  unnecessary  Greek 
verse,  translated  also  into  an  English  couplet.  It 
is  too  much  like  the  conceit  of  those  dramatick 
poets,  who  used  to  conclude  each  act  with  a 
rhyme;  and  the  expression  in  the  first  line  of  his 

2I  shall  probably,  in  another  work,  maintain  the 
merit  of  Addison’s  poetry,  which  has  been  very  un¬ 
justly  depreciated. 


62  BOSWELL  [1751 


couplet,  “ Celestial  powers ,”  though  proper  in  Pa¬ 
gan  poetry,  is  ill  suited  to  Christianity,  with  “a 
conformity”  to  which  he  consoles  himself.  How 
much  better  would  it  have  been,  to  have  ended 
with  the  prose  sentence  “I  shall  never  envy  the 
honours  which  wit  and  learning  obtain  in  any 
other  cause,  if  I  can  be  numbered  among  the 
writers  who  have  given  ardour  to  virtue,  and 
confidence  to  truth.” 

His  friend.  Dr.  Birch,  being  now  engaged  in 
preparing  an  edition  of  Ralegh’s  smaller  pieces, 
Dr.  Johnson  wrote  the  following  letter  to  that 
gentleman: 

To  Dr.  Birch 

Gough-square,  May  12,  1750 

Sir,  Knowing  that  you  are  now  preparing  to 
favour  the  publick  with  a  new  edition  of  Ral¬ 
egh’s  miscellaneous  pieces,  I  have  taken  the 
liberty  to  send  you  a  Manuscript,  which  fell  by 
chance  within  my  notice.  I  perceive  no  proofs  of 
forgery  in  my  examination  of  it;  and  the  owner 
tells  me,  that  as  he  has  heard,  the  handwriting  is 
Sir  Walter’s.  If  you  should  find  reason  to  con¬ 
clude  it  genuine,  it  will  be  a  kindness  to  the 
owner,  a  blind  person,1  to  recommend  it  to 
the  booksellers.  I  am,  Sir,  your  most  humble  serv¬ 
ant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

His  just  abhorrence  of  Milton’s  political  no¬ 
tions  was  ever  strong.  But  this  did  not  prevent 
his  warm  admiration  of  Milton’s  great  poetical 
merit,  to  which  he  has  done  illustrious  justice, 
beyond  all  who  have  written  upon  the  subject. 
And  this  year  he  not  only  wrote  a  Prologue, 
which  was  spoken  by  Mr.  Garrick  before  the 
acting  of  Comus  at  Drury-lane  theatre,  for  the 
benefit  of  Milton’s  grand-daughter,  but  took  a 
very  zealous  interest  in  the  success  of  the  charity. 
On  the  day  preceding  the  performance,  he  pub¬ 
lished  the  following  letter  in  The  General  Adver¬ 
tiser ,  addressed  to  the  printer  of  that  paper: 

Sir,  That  a  certain  degree  of  reputation  is  ac¬ 
quired  merely  by  approving  the  works  of  genius, 
and  testifying  a  regard  to  the  memory  of  au- 
thours,  is  a  truth  too  evident  to  be  denied;  and 
therefore  to  ensure  a  participation  of  fame  with 
a  celebrated  poet,  many  who  would,  perhaps, 
have  contributed  to  starve  him  when  alive,  have 
heaped  expensive  pageants  upon  his  grave. 

It  must,  indeed,  be  confessed,  that  this  meth¬ 
od  of  becoming  known  to  posterity  with  honour, 
is  peculiar  to  the  great,  or  at  least  to  the  wealthy; 
but  an  opportunity  now  offers  for  almost  every 
individual  to  secure  the  praise  of  paying  a  just 
regard  to  the  illustrious  dead,  united  with  the 
pleasure  of  doing  good  to  the  living.  To  assist 

JMrs.  Williams  is  probably  the  person  meant. 


industrious  indigence,  struggling  with  distress 
and  debilitated  by  age,  is  a  display  of  virtue, 
and  an  acquisition  of  happiness  and  honour. 

Whoever,  then,  would  be  thought  capable  of 
pleasure  in  reading  the  works  of  our  incompara¬ 
ble  Milton,  and  not  so  destitute  of  gratitude  as 
to  refuse  to  lay  out  a  trifle  in  rational  and  ele¬ 
gant  entertainment,  for  the  benefit  of  his  living 
remains,  for  the  exercise  of  their  own  virtue,  the 
increase  of  their  reputation,  and  the  pleasing 
consciousness  of  doing  good,  should  appear  at 
Drury-lane  theatre  to-morrow,  April  5,  when 
Comus  will  be  performed  for  the  benefit  of  Mrs. 
Elizabeth  Foster,  grand-daughter  to  the  author, 
and  the  only  surviving  branch  of  his  family. 

N.B.  There  will  be  a  new  prologue  on  the  oc¬ 
casion,  written  by  the  authour  of  Irene ,  and 
spoken  by  Mr.  Garrick;  and,  by  particular  de¬ 
sire,  there  will  be  added  to  the  Masque  a  dra¬ 
ma  tick  satire,  called  Lethe ,  in  which  Mr.  Gar¬ 
rick  will  perform. 

1751:  ^:tat.  42] — In  1751  we  are  to  consider 
him  as  carrying  on  both  his  Dictionary  and  Ram¬ 
bler.  But  he  also  wrote  The  Life  of  Cheynel ,  *  in 
the  miscellany  called  The  Student ;  and  the  Rev¬ 
erend  Dr.  Douglas  having,  with  uncommon 
acuteness,  clearly  detected  a  gross  forgery  and 
imposition  upon  the  publick  by  William  Lauder, 
a  Scotch  schoolmaster,  who  had,  with  equal  im¬ 
pudence  and  ingenuity,  represented  Milton  as  a 
plagiary  from  certain  modern  Latin  poets,  John¬ 
son,  who  had  been  so  far  imposed  upon  as  to 
furnish  a  Preface  and  Postscript  to  his  work, 
now  dictated  a  letter  for  Lauder,  addressed  to 
Dr.  Douglas,  acknowledging  his  fraud  in  terms 
of  suitable  contrition.2 

This  extraordinary  attempt  of  Lauder  was  no 
sudden  effort.  He  had  brooded  over  it  for  many 
years:  and  to  this  hour  it  is  uncertain  what  his 

2Lest  there  should  be  any  person,  at  any  future 
period,  absurd  enough  to  suspect  that  Johnson  was 
a  partaker  in  Lauder’s  fraud,  or  had  any  knowl¬ 
edge  of  it,  when  he  assisted  him  with  his  masterly 
pen,  it  is  proper  here  to  quote  the  words  of  Dr. 
Douglas,  now  Bishop  of  Salisbury,  at  the  time  when 
he  detected  the  imposition.  “It  is  to  be  hoped,  nay 
it  is  expected ,  that  the  elegant  and  nervous  writer, 
whose  judicious  sentiments  and  inimitable  style 
point  out  the  authour  of  Lauder’s  Preface  and  Post¬ 
script,  will  no  longer  allow  one  to  plume  himself  with 
his  feathers ,  who  appeareth  so  little  to  deserve  [his] 
assistance:  an  assistance  which  I  am  persuaded 
would  never  have  been  communicated,  had  there 
been  the  least  suspicion  of  those  facts  which  I  have 
been  the  instrument  of  conveying  to  the  world  in 
these  sheets.”  Milton  on  Plagiary ,  2nd  edit.,  p.  78. 
And  his  Lordship  has  been  pleased  now  to  autho¬ 
rise  me  to  say,  in  the  strongest  manner,  that  there 
is  no  ground  whatever  for  any  unfavourable  re¬ 
flection  against  Dr.  Johnson,  who  expressed  the 
strongest  indignation  against  Lauder. 


1752]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  63 


principal  motive  was,  unless  it  were  a  vain  no¬ 
tion  of  his  superiority,  in  being  able,  by  what¬ 
ever  means,  to  deceive  mankind.  To  effect  this, 
he  produced  certain  passages  from  Grotius, 
Masenius,  and  others,  which  had  a  faint  resem¬ 
blance  to  some  parts  of  the  Paradise  Lost.  In  these 
he  interpolated  some  fragments  of  Hog’s  Latin 
translation  of  that  poem,  alledging  that  the  mass 
thus  fabricated  was  the  archetype  from  which 
Milton  copied.  These  fabrications  he  published 
from  time  to  time  in  The  Gentleman’s  Magazine ; 
and,  exulting  in  his  fancied  success,  he  in  1750 
ventured  to  collect  them  into  a  pamphlet,  en¬ 
titled  An  Essay  on  Milton’s  Use  and  Imitation  of  the 
Moderns  in  his  Paradise  Lost.  To  this  pamphlet 
Johnson  wrote  a  Preface,  in  full  persuasion  of 
Lauder’s  honesty,  and  a  Postscript  recommend¬ 
ing,  in  the  most  persuasive  terms,  a  subscription 
for  the  relief  of  a  grand-daughter  of  Milton,  of 
whom  he  thus  speaks: 

“It  is  yet  in  the  power  of  a  great  people  to 
reward  the  poet  whose  name  they  boast,  and 
from  their  alliance  to  whose  genius,  they  claim 
some  kind  of  superiority  to  every  other  nation  of 
the  earth;  that  poet,  whose  works  may  possibly 
be  read  when  every  other  monument  of  British 
greatness  shall  be  obliterated;  to  reward  him, 
not  with  pictures  or  with  medals,  which,  if  he 
sees,  he  sees  with  contempt,  but  with  tokens  of 
gratitude,  which  he,  perhaps  may  even  now 
consider  as  not  unworthy  of  an  immortal  spirit.” 

Surely  this  is  inconsistent  with  “enmity  to¬ 
wards  Milton,”  which  Sir  John  Hawkins  im¬ 
putes  to  Johnson  upon  this  occasion,  adding, 

“I  could  all  along  observe  that  Johnson  seemed 
to  approve  not  only  of  the  design,  but  of  the 
argument;  and  seemed  to  exult  in  a  persuasion, 
that  the  reputation  of  Milton  was  likely  to  suffer 
by  this  discovery.  That  he  was  not  privy  to  the 
imposture,  I  am  well  persuaded;  but  that  he 
wished  well  to  the  argument,  may  be  inferred 
from  the  Preface,  which  indubitably  was  written 
by  Johnson.” 

Is  it  possible  for  any  man  of  clear  judgement 
to  suppose  that  Johnson,  who  so  nobly  praised 
the  poetical  excellence  of  Milton  in  a  Postcript 
to  this  very  “discovery,”  as  he  then  supposed  it, 
could,  at  the  same  time,  exult  in  a  persuasion 
that  the  great  poet’s  reputation  was  likely  to 
suffer  by  it?  This  is  an  inconsistency  of  which 
Johnson  was  incapable;  nor  can  any  thing  more 
be  fairly  inferred  from  the  Preface,  than  that 
Johnson,  who  was  alike  distinguished  for  ardent 
curiosity  and  love  of  truth,  was  pleased  with  an 
investigation  by  which  both  were  gratified.  That 
he  was  actuated  by  these  motives,  and  certainly 


by  no  unworthy  desire  to  depreciate  our  great 
epick  poet,  is  evident  from  his  own  words;  for, 
after  mentioning  the  general  zeal  of  men  of  gen¬ 
ius  and  literature  “to  advance  the  honour,  and 
distinguish  the  beauties  of  Paradise  Lost’’  he 
says: 

“Among  the  inquiries  to  which  this  ardour  of 
criticism  has  naturally  given  occasion,  none  is 
more  obscure  in  itself,  or  more  worthy  of  ration¬ 
al  curiosity,  than  a  retrospect  of  the  progress  of 
this  mighty  genius  in  the  construction  of  his 
work;  a  view  of  the  fabrick  gradually  rising,  per¬ 
haps,  from  small  beginnings,  till  its  foundation 
rests  in  the  centre,  and  its  turrets  sparkle  in  the 
skies;  to  trace  back  the  structure  through  all  its 
varieties,  to  the  simplicity  of  its  first  plan;  to 
find  what  was  first  projected,  whence  the  scheme 
was  taken,  how  it  was  improved,  by  what  assist¬ 
ance  it  was  executed,  and  from  what  stores  the 
materials  were  collected;  whether  its  founder 
dug  them  from  the  quarries  of  Nature,  or  de¬ 
molished  other  buildings  to  embellish  his  own.” 

Is  this  the  language  of  one  who  wished  to 
blast  the  laurels  of  Milton? 

Though  Johnson’s  circumstances  were  at  this 
time  far  from  being  easy,  his  humane  and  char¬ 
itable  disposition  was  constantly  exerting  itself. 
Mrs.  Anna  Williams,  daughter  of  a  very  ingen¬ 
ious  Welsh  physician,  and  a  woman  of  more  than 
ordinary  talents  and  literature,  having  come  to 
London  in  hopes  of  being  cured  of  a  cataract  in 
both  her  eyes,  which  afterwards  ended  in  total 
blindness,  was  kindly  received  as  a  constant  vis¬ 
itor  at  his  house  while  Mrs.  Johnson  lived;  and 
after  her  death,  having  come  under  his  roof 
in  order  to  have  an  operation  upon  her  eyes 
performed  with  more  comfort  to  her  than  in 
lodgings,  she  had  an  apartment  from  him  dur¬ 
ing  the  rest  of  her  life,  at  all  times  when  he  had 
a  house. 

1752:  ^:tat.  43.] — In  1752  he  was  almost  en¬ 
tirely  occupied  with  his  Dictionary.  The  last  pa¬ 
per  of  his  Rambler  was  published  March  2,  this 
year;  after  which,  there  was  a  cessation  for  some 
time  of  any  exertion  of  his  talents  as  an  essayist. 
But,  in  the  same  year,  Dr.  Hawkesworth,  who 
was  his  warm  admirer,  and  a  studious  imitator 
of  his  style,  and  then  lived  in  great  intimacy  with 
him,  began  a  periodical  paper,  entitled  The  Ad¬ 
venturer ,  in  connection  with  other  gentlemen, 
one  of  whom  was  Johnson’s  much-loved  friend, 
Dr.  Bathurst;  and,  without  doubt,  they  received 
many  valuable  hints  from  his  conversation,  most 
of  his  friends  having  been  so  assisted  in  the 
course  of  their  works. 


BOSWELL 


64 

That  there  should  be  a  suspension  of  his  liter¬ 
ary  labours  during  a  part  of  the  year  1 752,  will 
not  seem  strange,  when  it  is  considered  that  soon 
after  closing  his  Rambler ,  he  suffered  a  Joss  which, 
there  can  be  no  doubt,  affected  him  with  the 
deepest  distress.  For  on  the  1 7th  of  March,  O.S., 
his  wife  died.  Why  Sir  John  Hawkins  should 
unwarrantably  take  upon  him  even  to  suppose 
that  Johnson’s  fondness  for  her  was  dissembled 
(meaning  simulated  or  assumed,)  and  to  assert, 
that  if  it  was  not  the  case,  “it  was  a  lesson  he 
had  learned  by  rote,”  I  cannot  conceive;  unless 
it  proceeded  from  a  want  of  similar  feelings  in 
his  own  breast.  To  argue  from  her  being  much 
older  than  Johnson,  or  any  other  circumstances, 
that  he  could  not  really  love  her,  is  absurd;  for 
love  is  not  a  subject  of  reasoning,  but  of  feeling, 
and  therefore  there  are  no  common  principles 
upon  which  one  can  persuade  another  concern¬ 
ing  it.  Every  man  feels  for  himself,  and  knows 
how  he  is  affected  by  particular  qualities  in  the 
person  he  admires,  the  impressions  of  which  are 
too  minute  and  delicate  to  be  substantiated  in 
language. 

Thefollowing  very  solemn  and  affecting  prayer 
was  found  after  Dr.  Johnson’s  decease,  by  his 
servant,  Mr.  Francis  Barber,  who  delivered  it  to 
my  worthy  friend  the  Reverend  Mr.  Strahan, 
Vicar  of  Islington,  who  at  my  earnest  request 
has  obligingly  favoured  me  with  a  copy  of  it, 
which  he  and  I  compared  with  the  original.  I 
present  it  to  the  world  as  an  undoubted  proof  of 
a  circumstance  in  the  character  of  my  illustrious 
friend,  which  though  some  whose  hard  minds  I 
never  shall  envy,  may  attack  as  superstitious, 
will  I  am  sure  endear  him  more  to  numbers  of 
good  men.  I  have  an  additional,  and  that  a  per¬ 
sonal  motive  for  presenting  it,  because  it  sanc¬ 
tions  what  I  myself  have  always  maintained  and 
am  fond  to  indulge. 

“April  26,  1752,  being  after  12  at  Night 
of  the  25th. 

“O  Lord!  Governour  of  heaven  and  earth,  in 
whose  hands  are  embodied  and  departed  Spir¬ 
its,  if  thou  hast  ordained  the  Souls  of  the  Dead 
to  minister  to  the  Living,  and  appointed  my  de¬ 
parted  Wife  to  have  care  of  me,  grant  that  I  may 
enjoy  the  good  effects  of  her  attention  and  min¬ 
istration,  whether  exercised  by  appearance,  im¬ 
pulses,  dreams  or  in  any  other  manner  agreeable 
to  thy  Government.  Forgive  my  presumption, 
enlighten  my  ignorance,  and  however  meaner 
agents  are  employed,  grant  me  the  blessed  in¬ 
fluences  of  thy  holy  Spirit,  through  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord.  Amen.” 


[  1752 

What  actually  followed  upon  this  most  inter¬ 
esting  piece  of  devotion  by  Johnson,  we  are  not 
informed;  but  I,  whom  it  has  pleased  God  to 
afflict  in  a  similar  manner  to  that  which  occa¬ 
sioned  it,  have  certain  experience  of  benignant 
communication  by  dreams. 

That  his  love  for  his  wife  was  of  the  most  ar¬ 
dent  kind,  and,  during  the  long  period  of  fifty 
years,  was  unimpaired  by  the  lapse  of  time,  is 
evident  from  various  passages  in  the  series  of  his 
Prayers  and  Meditations ,  published  by  the  Rever¬ 
end  Mr.  Strahan,  as  well  as  from  other  memor¬ 
ials,  two  of  which  I  select,  as  strongly  marking 
the  tenderness  and  sensibility  of  his  mind. 

“March  28,  1753.  I  kept  this  day  as  the  anni¬ 
versary  of  my  Tetty’s  death,  with  prayer  and 
tears  in  the  morning.  In  the  evening  I  prayed 
for  her  conditionally,  if  it  were  lawful.” 

“April  23,  1 753.  I  know  not  whether  I  do  not 
too  much  indulge  the  vain  longings  of  affection; 
but  I  hope  they  intenerate  my  heart,  and  that 
when  I  die  like  my  Tetty,  this  affection  will  be 
acknowledged  in  a  happy  interview,  and  that  in 
the  mean  time  I  am  incited  by  it  to  piety.  I  will, 
however,  not  deviate  too  much  from  common 
and  received  methods  of  devotion.” 

Her  wedding-ring,  when  she  became  his  wife, 
was,  after  her  death,  preserved  by  him,  as  long 
as  he  lived,  with  an  affectionate  care,  in  a  little 
round  wooden  box,  in  the  inside  of  which  he 
pasted  a  slip  of  paper,  thus  inscribed  by  him  in 
fair  characters,  as  follows: 

Eheu! 

Eliz .  Johnson 
Nupta  Jul.  g°  1736 , 

Mortua,  eheu! 

Mart.  1 70  1732 

After  his  death,  Mr.  Francis  Barber,  his  faith¬ 
ful  servant  and  residuary  legatee,  offered  this 
memorial  of  tenderness  to  Mrs.  Lucy  Porter, 
Mrs.  Johnson’s  daughter;  but  she  having  de¬ 
clined  to  accept  of  it,  he  had  it  enamelled  as  a 
mourning  ring  for  his  old  master,  and  presented 
it  to  his  wife,  Mrs.  Barber,  who  now  has  it. 

The  state  of  mind  in  which  a  man  must  be 
upon  the  death  of  a  woman  whom  he  sincerely 
loves,  had  been  in  his  contemplation  many  years 
before.  In  his  Irene,  we  find  the  following  fervent 
and  tender  speech  of  Demetrius,  addressed  to 
his  Aspasia: 

From  those  bright  regions  of  eternal  day , 

Where  now  thou  shin'st  amongst  thy  fellow  saints , 
Array'd  in  purer  light ,  look  down  on  me! 

In  pleasing  visions  and  delusive  dreams , 

O!  sooth  my  soul ,  and  teach  me  how  to  lose  thee . 


1752]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  65 


I  have,  indeed,  been  told  by  Mrs.  Desmoulins, 
who,  before  her  marriage,  lived  for  some  time 
with  Mrs.  Johnson  at  Hampstead,  that  she  in¬ 
dulged  herself  in  country  air  and  nice  living,  at 
an  unsuitable  expense,  while  her  husband  was 
drudging  in  the  smoke  of  London,  and  that  she 
by  no  means  treated  him  with  that  complacency 
which  is  the  most  engaging  quality  in  a  wife. 
But  all  this  is  perfectly  compatible  with  his  fond¬ 
ness  for  her,  especially  when  it  is  remembered 
that  he  had  a  high  opinion  of  her  understanding, 
and  that  the  impressions  which  her  beauty,  real 
or  imaginary,  had  originally  made  upon  his  fan¬ 
cy,  being  continued  by  habit,  had  not  been  ef¬ 
faced,  though  she  herself  was  doubtless  much 
altered  for  the  worse.  The  dreadful  shock  of  sep¬ 
aration  took  place  in  the  night;  and  he  immedi¬ 
ately  dispatched  a  letter  to  his  friend,  the  Rev¬ 
erend  Dr.  Taylor,  which,  as  Taylor  told  me, 
expressed  grief  in  the  strongest  manner  he  had 
ever  read;  so  that  it  is  much  to  be  regretted  it 
has  not  been  preserved.1  The  letter  was  brought 
to  Dr.  Taylor,  at  his  house  in  the  Cloisters,  West¬ 
minster,  about  three  in  the  morning;  and  as  it 
signified  an  earnest  desire  to  see  him,  he  got  up, 
and  went  to  Johnson  as  soon  as  he  was  dressed, 
and  found  him  in  tears  and  in  extreme  agita¬ 
tion.  After  being  a  little  while  together,  Johnson 
requested  him  to  join  with  him  in  prayer.  He 
then  prayed  extempore,  as  did  Dr.  Taylor;  and 
thus,  by  means  of  that  piety  which  was  ever  his 
primary  object,  his  troubled  mind  was,  in  some 
degree,  soothed  and  composed. 

The  next  day  he  wrote  as  follows: 

To  the  Reverend  Dr.  Taylor 

Dear  Sir,  Let  me  have  your  company  and 
instruction.  Do  not  live  away  from  me.  My  dis¬ 
tress  is  great. 

Pray  desire  Mrs.  Taylor  to  inform  me  what 
mourning  I  should  buy  for  my  mother  and  Miss 
Porter,  and  bring  a  note  in  writing  with  you. 

Remember  me  in  your  prayers,  for  vain  is  the 
help  of  man.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  &c. 

March  18,1752  Sam.  Johnson 

That  his  sufferings  upon  the  death  of  his  wife 
were  severe,  beyond  what  are  commonly  en¬ 
dured,  I  have  no  doubt,  from  the  information  of 
many  who  were  then  about  him,  to  none  of 
whom  I  give  more  credit  than  to  Mr.  Francis 

Tn  The  Gentleman* s  Magazine  for  February,  1794 
(p.  100),  was  printed  a  letter  pretending  to  be  that 
written  by  Johnson  on  the  death  of  his  wife.  But 
it  is  merely  a  transcript  of  the  41st  number  of  The 
Idler .  A  fictitious  date  (March  17,  1751,  O.  S.)  was 
added  by  some  person  previous  to  this  paper  being 
sent  to  the  publisher  of  that  miscellany,  to  give  a 
colour  to  this  deception.  [M.] 


Barber,  his  faithful  negro  servant,2  who  came  in¬ 
to  his  family  about  a  fortnight  after  the  dismal 
event.  These  sufferings  were  aggravated  by  the 
melancholy  inherent  in  his  constitution;  and  al¬ 
though  he  probably  was  not  oftener  in  the  wrong 
than  she  was,  in  the  little  disagreements  which 
sometimes  troubled  his  married  state,  during 
which,  he  owned  to  me,  that  the  gloomy  irrita¬ 
bility  of  his  existence  was  more  painful  to  him 
than  ever,  he  might  very  naturally,  after  her 
death,  be  tenderly  disposed  to  charge  himself 
with  slight  omissions  and  offences,  the  sense  of 
which  would  give  him  much  uneasiness.  Accord¬ 
ingly  we  find,  about  a  year  after  her  decease, 
that  he  thus  addressed  the  Supreme  Being:  £C0 
Lord,  who  givest  the  grace  of  repentance,  and 
hearest  the  prayers  of  the  penitent,  grant  that 
by  true  contrition  I  may  obtain  forgiveness  of 
all  the  sins  committed,  and  of  all  duties  neg¬ 
lected  in  my  union  with  the  wife  whom  thou 
hast  taken  from  me;  for  the  neglect  of  joint  de¬ 
votion,  patient  exhortation,  and  mild  instruc¬ 
tion.”3  The  kindness  of  his  heart,  notwithstand¬ 
ing  the  impetuosity  of  his  temper,  is  well  known 
to  his  friends;  and  I  cannot  trace  the  smallest 
foundation  for  the  following  dark  and  unchari¬ 
table  assertion  by  Sir  John  Hawkins:  “The  ap¬ 
parition  of  his  departed  wife  was  altogether  of 
the  terrifick  kind,  and  hardly  afforded  him  a 
hope  that  she  was  in  a  state  of  happiness.”4  That 
he,  in  conformity  with  the  opinion  of  many  of 
the  most  able,  learned,  and  pious  Christians  in 
all  ages,  supposed  that  there  was  a  middle  state 
after  death,  previous  to  the  time  at  which  de¬ 
parted  souls  are  finally  received  to  eternal  felic¬ 
ity,  appears,  I  think,  unquestionably  from  his 
devotions:  “And,  O  Lord,  so  far  as  it  may  be 
lawful  in  me,  I  commend  to  thy  fatherly  good¬ 
ness  the  soul  of  my  departed  wife ;  beseeching  thee 

2Francis  Barber  was  born  in  Jamaica,  and  was 
brought  to  England  in  1 750  by  Colonel  Bathurst, 
father  of  Johnson’s  very  intimate  friend,  Dr.  Bath¬ 
urst.  He  was  sent,  for  some  time,  to  the  Reverend 
Mr.  Jackson’s  school,  at  Barton,  in  Yorkshire.  The 
Colonel  by  his  will  left  him  his  freedom,  and  Dr. 
Bathurst  was  willing  that  he  should  enter  into 
Johnson’s  service,  in  which  he  continued  from  1 752 
till  Johnson’s  death,  with  the  exception  of  two  in¬ 
tervals;  in  one  of  which,  upon  some  difference  with 
his  master,  he  went  and  served  an  apothecary  in 
Cheapside,  but  still  visited  Dr.  Johnson  occasion¬ 
ally;  in  another,  he  took  a  fancy  to  go  to  sea.  Part 
of  the  time,  indeed,  he  was,  by  the  kindness  of  his 
master,  at  a  school  in  Northamptonshire,  that  he 
might  have  the  advantage  of  some  learning.  So 
early  and  so  lasting  a  connection  was  there  between 
Dr.  Johnson  and  this  humble  friend. 

3 Prayers  and  Meditations ,  p.  1 9. 

4Hawkins’s  Life  of  Johnson,  p.  316. 


BOSWELL 


66 

to  grant  her  whatever  is  best  in  her  present  state , 
and  finally  to  receive  her  to  eternal  happiness  But 
this  state  has  not  been  looked  upon  with  hor- 
rour,  but  only  as  less  gracious. 

He  deposited  the  remains  of  Mrs.  Johnson  in 
the  church  of  Bromley,  in  Kent,  to  which  he 
was  probably  led  by  the  residence  of  his  friend 
Hawkesworth  at  that  place.  The  funeral  sermon 
which  he  composed  for  her,  which  was  never 
preached,  but  having  been  given  to  Dr.  Taylor, 
has  been  published  since  his  death,  is  a  perform¬ 
ance  of  uncommon  excellence,  and  full  of  ra¬ 
tional  and  pious  comfort  to  such  as  are  depressed 
by  that  severe  affliction  which  Johnson  felt  when 
he  wrote  it.  When  it  is  considered  that  it  was 
written  in  such  an  agitation  of  mind,  and  in  the 
short  interval  between  her  death  and  burial,  it 
cannot  be  read  without  wonder. 

From  Mr.  Francis  Barber  I  have  had  the  fol¬ 
lowing  authentick  and  artless  account  of  the 
situation  in  which  he  found  him  recently  after 
his  wife’s  death: 

“He  was  in  great  affliction.  Mrs.  Williams 
was  then  living  in  his  house,  which  was  in  Gough- 
square.  He  was  busy  with  the  Dictionary.  Mr. 
Shiels,  and  some  others  of  the  gentlemen  who 
had  formerly  written  for  him,  used  to  come  about 
him.  He  had  then  little  for  himself,  but  frequently 
sent  money  to  Mr.  Shiels  when  in  distress.  The 
friends  who  visited  him  at  that  time,  were  chiefly 
Dr.  Bathurst,2  and  Mr.  Diamond,  an  apothecary 
in  Cork-street,  Burlington-gardens,  with  whom 
he  and  Mrs.  Williams  generally  dined  every 
Sunday.  There  was  a  talk  of  his  going  to  Iceland 
with  him,  which  would  probably  have  happened 
had  he  lived.  There  were  also  Mr.  Cave,  Dr. 
Hawkesworth,  Mr.  Ryland,  merchant  on  Tower 
Hill,  Mrs.  Masters,  the  poetess,  who  lived  with 
Mr.  Cave,  Mrs.  Carter,  and  sometimes  Mrs. 
Macaulay,  also  Mrs.  Gardiner,  wife  of  a  tallow- 
chandler  on  Snow-hill,  not  in  the  learned  way, 
but  a  worthy  good  woman;  Mr.  (now  Sir  Joshua) 
Reynolds;  Mr.  Millar,  Mr.  Dodsley,  Mr.  Bou¬ 
quet,  Mr.  Payne  of  Paternoster-row,  booksel¬ 
lers;  Mr.  Strahan,  the  printer;  the  Earl  of  Orrery, 
Lord  Southwell,  Mr.  Garrick.” 

1  Prayers  and  Meditations ,  p.  20. 

2Dr.  Bathurst,  though  a  Physician  of  no  incon¬ 
siderable  merit,  had  not  the  good  fortune  to  get 
much  practice  in  London.  He  was,  therefore,  will¬ 
ing  to  accept  of  employment  abroad,  and,  to  the 
regret  of  all  who  knew  him,  fell  a  sacrifice  to  the 
destructive  climate,  in  the  expedition  against  the 
Havannah.  Mr.  Langton  recollects  the  following 
passage  in  a  letter  from  Dr.  Johnson  to  Mr.  Beau- 
clerk:  “The  Havannah  is  taken; — a  conquest  too 
dearly  obtained;  for,  Bathurst  died  before  it.  iVix 
Priamus  tanti  totaque  Troja  fiuit .’  ” 


[  1752 

Many  are,  no  doubt,  omitted  in  this  catalogue 
of  his  friends,  and,  in  particular,  his  humble 
friend  Mr.  Robert  Levct,  an  obscure  practiser 
in  physick  amongst  the  lower  people,  his  fees 
being  sometimes  very  small  sums,  sometimes 
whatever  provisions  his  patients  could  afford 
him;  but  of  such  extensive  practice  in  that  way, 
that  Mrs.  Williams  has  told  me,  his  walk  was 
from  Hounsditch  to  Marybone.  It  appears  from 
Johnson’s  diary  that  their  acquaintance  com¬ 
menced  about  the  year  1746;  and  such  was 
Johnson’s  predilection  for  him,  and  fanciful  es¬ 
timation  of  his  moderate  abilities,  that  I  have 
heard  him  say  he  should  not  be  satisfied,  though 
attended  by  all  the  College  of  Physicians,  unless 
he  had  Mr.  Levet  with  him.  Ever  since  I  was 
acquainted  with  Dr.  Johnson,  and  many  years 
before,  as  I  have  been  assured  by  those  who 
knew  him  earlier,  Mr.  Levet  had  an  apartment 
in  his  house,  or  his  chambers,  and  waited  upon 
him  every  morning,  through  the  whole  course 
of  his  late  and  tedious  breakfast.  He  was  of  a 
strange  grotesque  appearance,  stiff  and  formal 
in  his  manner,  and  seldom  said  a  word  while 
any  company  was  present. 

The  circle  of  his  friends,  indeed,  at  this  time 
was  extensive  and  various,  far  beyond  what  has 
been  generally  imagined.  To  trace  his  acquaint¬ 
ance  with  each  particular  person,  if  it  could  be 
done,  would  be  a  task,  of  which  the  labour  would 
not  be  repaid  by  the  advantage.  But  exceptions 
are  to  be  made;  one  of  which  must  be  a  friend 
so  eminent  as  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  who  was 
truly  his  dulce  decus ,  and  with  whom  he  main¬ 
tained  an  uninterrupted  intimacy  to  the  last 
hour  of  his  life.  When  Johnson  lived  in  Castle- 
street,  Cavendish-square,  he  used  frequently  to 
visit  two  ladies,  who  lived  opposite  to  him,  Miss 
Cotterells,  daughters  of  Admiral  Cotterell.  Rey¬ 
nolds  used  also  to  visit  there,  and  thus  they  met. 
Mr.  Reynolds,  as  I  have  observed  above,  had, 
from  the  first  reading  of  his  Life  of  Savage ,  con¬ 
ceived  a  very  high  admiration  of  Johnson’s 
powers  of  writing.  His  conversation  no  less  de¬ 
lighted  him;  and  he  cultivated  his  acquaintance 
with  the  laudable  zeal  of  one  who  was  ambi¬ 
tious  of  general  improvement.  Sir  Joshua,  in¬ 
deed,  was  lucky  enough  at  their  very  first  meet¬ 
ing  to  make  a  remark,  which  was  so  much  above 
the  common-place  style  of  conversation,  that 
Johnson  at  once  perceived  that  Reynolds  had 
the  habit  of  thinking  for  himself.  The  ladies  were 
regretting  the  death  of  a  friend,  to  whom  they 
owed  great  obligations;  upon  which  Reynolds 
observed,  “You  have,  however,  the  comfort  of 
being  relieved  from  a  burthen  of  gratitude.” 


1752]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  67 


They  were  shocked  a  little  at  this  alleviating 
suggestion,  as  too  selfish;  but  Johnson  defended 
it  in  his  clear  and  forcible  manner,  and  was 
much  pleased  with  the  mind ,  the  fair  view  of  hu¬ 
man  nature,  which  it  exhibited,  like  some  of  the 
reflections  of  Rochefaucault.  The  consequence 
was,  that  he  went  home  with  Reynolds,  and 
supped  with  him. 

Sir  Joshua  told  me  a  pleasant  characteristical 
anecdote  of  Johnson  about  the  time  of  their  first 
acquaintance.  When  they  were  one  evening  to¬ 
gether  at  the  Miss  Cotterells’,  the  then  Duchess 
of  Argyle  and  another  lady  of  high  rank  came 
in.  Johnson  thinking  that  the  Miss  Cotterells 
were  too  much  engrossed  by  them,  and  that  he 
and  his  friend  were  neglected,  as  low  company  of 
whom  they  were  somewhat  ashamed,  grew  an¬ 
gry;  and  resolving  to  shock  their  supposed  pride, 
by  making  their  great  visitors  imagine  that  his 
friend  and  he  were  low  indeed,  he  addressed 
himself  in  a  loud  tone  to  Mr.  Reynolds,  saying, 
“How  much  do  you  think  you  and  I  could  get  in 
a  week,  if  we  were  to  work  as  hard  as  we  could?” 
— as  if  they  had  "been  common  mechanicks. 

His  acquaintance  with  Bennet  Langton,  Esq. 
of  Langton,  in  Lincolnshire,  another  much  val¬ 
ued  friend,  commenced  soon  after  the  conclu¬ 
sion  of  his  Rambler ;  which  that  gentleman,  then 
a  youth,  had  read  with  so  much  admiration, 
that  he  came  to  London  chiefly  with  the  view 
of  endeavouring  to  be  introduced  to  its  authour. 
By  a  fortunate  chance  he  happened  to  take  lodg¬ 
ings  in  a  house  where  Mr.  Levet  frequently  vis¬ 
ited;  and  having  mentioned  his  wish  to  his  land¬ 
lady,  she  introduced  him  to  Mr.  Levet,  who 
readily  obtained  Johnson’s  permission  to  bring 
Mr.  Langton  to  him;  as,  indeed,  Johnson,  dur¬ 
ing  the  whole  course  of  his  life,  had  no  shyness, 
real  or  affected,  but  was  easy  of  access  to  all  who 
were  properly  recommended,  and  even  wished 
to  see  numbers  at  his  levee ,  as  his  morning  circle 
of  company  might,  with  strict  propriety,  be 
called.  Mr.  Langton  was  exceedingly  surprised 
when  the  sage  first  appeared.  He  had  not  re¬ 
ceived  the  smallest  intimation  of  his  figure,  dress, 
or  manner.  From  perusing  his  writings,  he  fan¬ 
cied  he  should  see  a  decent,  well-drest,  in  short, 
a  remarkably  decorous  philosopher.  Instead  of 
which,  down  from  his  bed-chamber,  about  noon, 
came,  as  newly  risen,  a  huge  uncouth  figure, 
with  a  little  dark  wig  which  scarcely  covered 
his  head,  and  his  clothes  hanging  loose  about 
him.  But  his  conversation  was  so  rich,  so  ani¬ 
mated,  and  so  forcible,  and  his  religious  and 
political  notions  so  congenial  with  those  in  which 
Langton  had  been  educated,  that  he  conceived 


for  him  that  veneration  and  attachment  which 
he  ever  preserved.  Johnson  was  not  the  less 
ready  to  love  Mr.  Langton,  for  his  being  of  a 
very  ancient  family;  for  I  have  heard  him  say, 
with  pleasure,  “Langton,  Sir,  has  a  grant  of  free 
warren  from  Henry  the  Second;  and  Cardinal 
Stephen  Langton,  in  King  John’s  reign,  was  of 
this  family.” 

Mr.  Langton  afterwards  went  to  pursue  his 
studies  at  Trinity  College,  Oxford,  where  he 
formed  an  acquaintance  with  his  fellow  student, 
Mr.  Topham  Beauclerk;  who,  though  their 
opinions  and  modes  of  life  were  so  different,  that 
it  seemed  utterly  improbable  that  they  should 
at  all  agree,  had  so  ardent  a  love  of  literature, 
so  acute  an  understanding,  such  elegance  of 
manners,  and  so  well  discerned  the  excellent 
qualities  of  Mr.  Langton,  a  gentleman  eminent 
not  only  for  worth  and  learning,  but  for  an  inex¬ 
haustible  fund  of  entertaining  conversation,  that 
they  became  intimate  friends. 

Johnson,  soon  after  this  acquaintance  began, 
passed  a  considerable  time  at  Oxford.  He  at  first 
thought  it  strange  that  Langton  should  associ¬ 
ate  so  much  with  one  who  had  the  character  of 
being  loose,  both  in  his  principles  and  practice; 
but,  by  degrees,  he  himself  was  fascinated.  Mr. 
Beauclerk’s  being  of  the  St.  Alban’s  family,  and 
having,  in  some  particulars,  a  resemblance  to 
Charles  the  Second,  contributed,  in  Johnson’s 
imagination,  to  throw  a  lustre  upon  his  other 
qualities;  and,  in  a  short  time,  the  moral,  pious 
Johnson,  and  the  gay,  dissipated  Beauclerk,  were 
companions.  “What  a  coalition!  (said  Garrick, 
when  he  heard  of  this)  I  shall  have  my  old 
friend  to  bail  out  of  the  Round-house.”  But  I 
can  bear  testimony  that  it  was  a  very  agreeable 
association,  Beauclerk  was  too  polite,  and  val¬ 
ued  learning  and  wit  too  much,  to  offend  John¬ 
son  by  sallies  of  infidelity  or  licentiousness;  and 
Johnson  delighted  in  the  good  qualities  of  Beau¬ 
clerk,  and  hoped  to  correct  the  evil.  Innumera¬ 
ble  were  the  scenes  in  which  Johnson  was  amused 
by  these  young  men.  Beauclerk  could  take  more 
liberty  with  him,  than  any  body  with  whom  I 
ever  saw  him;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  Beau¬ 
clerk  was  not  spared  by  his  respectable  compan¬ 
ion,  wThen  reproof  was  proper.  Beauclerk  had 
such  a  propensity  to  satire,  that  at  one  time 
Johnson  said  to  him,  “You  never  open  your 
mouth  but  with  intention  to  give  pain;  and  you 
have  often  given  me  pain,  not  from  the  power 
of  what  you  said,  but  from  seeing  your  inten¬ 
tion.”  At  another  time  applying  to  him,  with  a 
slight  alteration,  a  line  of  Pope,  he  said, 

44  Thy  love  of  jolly ,  and  thy  scorn  of  fools — 


BOSWELL 


68 

Every  thing  thou  dost  shews  the  one,  and  every 
thing  thou  say’st  the  other.”  At  another  time  he 
said  to  him,  “Thy  body  is  all  vice,  and  thy  mind 
all  virtue.”  Beauclerk  not  seeming  to  relish  the 
compliment,  Johnson  said,  “Nay,  Sir,  Alexan¬ 
der  the  Great,  marching  in  triumph  into  Baby¬ 
lon,  could  not  have  desired  to  have  had  more 
said  to  him.” 

Johnson  was  some  time  with  Beauclerk  at  his 
house  at  Windsor,  where  he  was  entertained 
with  experiments  in  natural  philosophy.  One 
Sunday,  when  the  weather  was  very  fine,  Beau¬ 
clerk  enticed  him,  insensibly,  to  saunter  about 
all  the  morning.  They  went  into  a  church-yard, 
in  the  time  of  divine  service,  and  Johnson  laid 
himself  down  at  his  ease  upon  one  of  the  tomb¬ 
stones.  “Now,  Sir,  (said  Beauclerk)  you  are  like 
Hogarth’s  Idle  Apprentice.”  When  Johnson  got 
his  pension,  Beauclerk  said  to  him,  in  the  hu¬ 
morous  phrase  of  Falstaff,  “I  hope  you’ll  now 
purge  and  live  cleanly  like  a  gentleman.” 

One  night  when  Beauclerk  and  Langton  had 
supped  at  a  tavern  in  London,  and  sat  till  about 
three  in  the  morning,  it  came  into  their  heads 
to  go  and  knock  up  Johnson,  and  see  if  they 
could  prevail  on  him  to  join  them  in  a  ramble. 
They  rapped  violently  at  the  door  of  his  cham¬ 
bers  in  the  Temple,  till  at  last  he  appeared  in 
his  shirt,  with  his  little  black  wig  on  the  top  of 
his  head,  instead  of  a  nightcap,  and  a  poker  in 
his  hand,  imagining,  probably,  that  some  ruf¬ 
fians  were  coming  to  attack  him.  When  he  dis¬ 
covered  who  they  were,  and  was  told  their 
errand,  he  smiled,  and  with  great  good  humour 
agreed  to  their  proposal:  “What,  is  it  you,  you 
dogs!  I’ll  have  a  frisk  with  you.”  He  was  soon 
drest,  and  they  sallied  forth  together  into  Co¬ 
vent-Garden,  where  the  greengrocers  and  fruit¬ 
erers  were  beginning  to  arrange  their  hampers, 
just  come  in  from  the  country.  Johnson  made 
some  attempts  to  help  them;  but  the  honest  gar¬ 
deners  stared  so  at  his  figure  and  manner,  and 
odd  interference,  that  he  soon  saw  his  services 
were  not  relished.  They  then  repaired  to  one  of 
the  neighbouring  taverns,  and  made  a  bowl  of 
that  liquor  called  Bishop ,  which  Johnson  had 
always  liked;  while  in  joyous  contempt  of  sleep, 
from  which  he  had  been  roused,  he  repeated 
the  festive  lines, 

Short ,  0  short  then  be  thy  reign , 

And  give  us  to  the  world  again! 1 

1Mr.  Langton  has  recollected,  or  Dr.  Johnson  re- 

Eeated,  the  passage  wrong.  The  lines  are  in  Lord 
ansdowne’s  Drinking  Song  to  Sleep ,  and  run  thus: 
Short ,  very  short  be  then  thy  reign , 

For  Pm  in  haste  to  laugh  and  drink  again. 


[  1753 

They  did  not  stay  long,  but  walked  down  to 
the  Thames,  took  a  boat,  and  rowed  to  Billings¬ 
gate.  Beauclerk  and  Johnson  were  so  well  pleased 
with  their  amusement,  that  they  resolved  toper- 
severe  in  dissipation  for  the  rest  of  the  day:  but 
Langton  deserted  them,  being  engaged  to  break¬ 
fast  with  some  young  Ladies.  Johnson  scolded 
him  for  “leaving  his  social  friends,  to  go  and  sit 
with  a  set  of  wretched  un-idea'd  girls.”  Garrick 
being  told  of  this  ramble,  said  to  him  smartly, 
“I  heard  of  your  frolick  t’other  night.  You’ll  be 
in  the  Chronicle.”  Upon  which  Johnson  after¬ 
wards  observed,  “He  durst  not  do  such  a  thing. 
His  wife  would  not  let  him !” 

1753:  ^tat.  44.] — He  entered  upon  this  year 
1 753  wLh  his  usual  piety,  as  appears  from  the 
following  prayer,  which  I  transcribed  from  that 
part  of  his  diary  which  he  burnt  a  few  days  be¬ 
fore  his  death: 

“Jan.  1,  1753,  N.S.  which  I  shall  use  for  the 
future. 

“Almighty  God,  who  hast  continued  my  life 
to  this  day,  grant  that,  by  the  assistance  of  thy 
Holy  Spirit,  I  may  improve  the  time  which  thou 
shalt  grant  me,  to  my  eternal  salvation.  Make 
me  to  remember,  to  thy  glory,  thy  judgements 
and  thy  mercies.  Make  me  so  to  consider  the 
loss  of  my  wife,  whom  thou  hast  taken  from  me, 
that  it  may  dispose  me,  by  thy  grace,  to  lead  the 
residue  of  my  life  in  thy  fear.  Grant  this,  O 
Lord,  for  Jesus  Christ’s  sake.  Amen.” 

He  now  relieved  the  drudgery  of  his  Diction¬ 
ary ,  and  the  melancholy  of  his  grief,  by  taking 
an  active  part  in  the  composition  of  The  Adven¬ 
turer  ,  in  which  he  began  to  write  April  10,  mark¬ 
ing  his  essays  with  the  signature  T,  by  which 
most  of  his  papers  in  that  collection  are  distin¬ 
guished:  those,  however,  which  have  that  signa¬ 
ture  and  also  that  of  Mysargyrus,  were  not  written 
by  him,  but,  as  I  suppose,  by  Dr.  Bathurst.  In¬ 
deed  Johnson’s  energy  of  thought  and  richness 
of  language,  are  still  more  decisive  marks  than 
any  signature.  As  a  proof  of  this,  my  readers,  I 
imagine,  will  not  doubt  that  Number  39,  on 
sleep,  is  his;  for  it  not  only  has  the  general  tex¬ 
ture  and  colour  of  his  style,  but  the  authours 
with  whom  he  was  peculiarly  conversant  are 
readily  introduced  in  it  in  cursory  allusion.  The 
translation  of  a  passage  in  Statius  quoted  in  that 
paper,  and  marked  C.  B.  has  been  erroneously 
ascribed  to  Dr.  Bathurst,  whose  Christian  name 
was  Richard.  How  much  this  amiable  man  ac¬ 
tually  contributed  to  The  Adventurer ,  cannot  be 
known.  Let  me  add,  that  Hawkesworth’s  imita¬ 
tions  of  Johnson  are  sometimes  so  happy,  that  it 


1753]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  69 


is  extremely  difficult  to  distinguish  them,  with 
certainty,  from  the  compositions  of  his  great 
archetype.  Hawkesworth  was  his  closest  imita¬ 
tor,  a  circumstance  of  which  that  writer  would 
once  have  been  proud  to  be  told;  though,  when 
he  had  become  elated  by  having  risen  into  some 
degree  of  consequence,  he,  in  a  conversation 
with  me,  had  the  provoking  effrontery  to  say  he 
was  not  sensible  of  it. 

Johnson  was  truly  zealous  for  the  success  of 
The  Adventurer ;  and  very  soon  after  his  engaging 
in  it,  he  wrote  the  following  letter: 

To  the  Reverend  Dr.  Joseph  Warton 

Dear  Sir,  I  ought  to  have  written  to  you  be¬ 
fore  now,  but  I  ought  to  do  many  things  which 
I  do  not;  nor  can  I,  indeed,  claim  any  merit 
from  this  letter;  for  being  desired  by  the  au- 
thours  and  proprietor  of  The  Adventurer  to  look 
out  for  another  hand,  my  thoughts  necessarily 
fixed  upon  you,  whose  fund  of  literature  will  en¬ 
able  you  to  assist  them,  with  very  little  interrup¬ 
tion  of  your  studies. 

They  desire  you  to  engage  to  furnish  one  pa¬ 
per  a  month,  at  two  guineas  a  paper,  which  you 
may  very  readily  perform.  We  have  considered 
that  a  paper  should  consist  of  pieces  of  imagina¬ 
tion,  pictures  of  life,  and  disquisitions  of  litera¬ 
ture.  The  part  which  depends  on  the  imagina¬ 
tion  is  very  well  supplied,  as  you  will  find  when 
you  read  the  paper;  for  descriptions  of  life,  there 
is  now  a  treaty  almost  made  with  an  authour 
and  an  authouress;  and  the  province  of  criticism 
and  literature  they  are  very  desirous  to  assign  to 
the  commentator  on  Virgil. 

I  hope  this  proposal  will  not  be  rejected,  and 
that  the  next  post  will  bring  us  your  compliance. 
I  speak  as  one  of  the  fraternity,  though  I  have 
no  part  in  the  paper,  beyond  now  and  then  a 
motto;  but  two  of  the  writers  are  my  particu¬ 
lar  friends,  and  I  hope  the  pleasure  of  seeing  a 
third  united  to  them,  will  not  be  denied  to, 
dear  Sir,  your  most  obedient,  and  most  humble 
servant, 

March  8,  1753  Sam.  Johnson 

The  consequence  of  this  letter  was,  Dr.  War- 
ton’s  enriching  the  collection  with  several  ad¬ 
mirable  essays. 

Johnson’s  saying  “I  have  no  part  in  the  paper 
beyond  now  and  then  a  motto,”  may  seem  in¬ 
consistent  with  his  being  the  authour  of  the  pa¬ 
pers  marked  T.  But  he  had,  at  this  time,  written 
only  one  number;  and  besides,  even  at  any  after 
period,  he  might  have  used  the  same  expression, 
considering  it  as  a  point  of  honour  not  to  own 
them;  for  Mrs.  Williams  told  me  that,  “as  he 
had  given  those  Essays  to  Dr.  Bathurst,  who  sold 
them  at  two  guineas  each,  he  never  would  own 
them;  nay,  he  used  to  say  he  did  not  write  them: 


but  the  fact  was,  that  he  dictated  them,  while 
Bathurst  wrote.”  I  read  to  him  Mrs.  Williams’s 
account;  he  smiled,  and  said  nothing. 

I  am  not  quite  satisfied  with  the  casuistry  by 
which  the  productions  of  one  person  are  thus 
passed  upon  the  world  for  the  productions  of 
another.  I  allow  that  not  only  knowledge,  but 
powers  and  qualities  of  mind  may  be  communi¬ 
cated;  but  the  actual  effect  of  individual  exer¬ 
tion  never  can  be  transferred,  with  truth,  to  any 
other  than  its  own  original  cause.  One  person’s 
child  may  be  made  the  child  of  another  person 
by  adoption,  as  among  the  Romans,  or  by  the 
ancient  Jewish  mode  of  a  wife  having  children 
born  to  her  upon  her  knees,  by  her  handmaid. 
But  these  were  children  in  a  different  sense 
from  that  of  nature.  It  was  clearly  understood 
that  they  were  not  of  the  blood  of  their  nominal 
parents.  So  in  literary  children,  an  authour  may 
give  the  profits  and  fame  of  his  composition  to 
another  man,  but  cannot  make  that  other  the 
real  authour.  A  Highland  gentleman,  a  younger 
branch  of  a  family,  once  consulted  me  if  he 
could  not  validly  purchase  the  Chieftainship  of 
his  family,  from  the  Chief  who  was  willing  to 
sell  it.  I  told  him  it  was  impossible  for  him  to 
acquire,  by  purchase,  a  right  to  be  a  different 
person  from  what  he  really  was;  for  that  the 
right  of  Chieftainship  attached  to  the  blood  of 
primogeniture,  and,  therefore,  was  incapable  of 
being  transferred.  I  added,  that  though  Esau 
sold  his  birth-right,  or  the  advantages  belonging 
to  it,  he  still  remained  the  first-born  of  his  par¬ 
ents  ;  and  that  whatever  agreement  a  Chief  might 
make  with  any  of  the  clan,  the  Herald’s  Office 
could  not  admit  of  the  metamorphosis,  or  with 
any  decency  attest  that  the  younger  was  the 
elder;  but  I  did  not  convince  the  worthy  gentle¬ 
man. 

Johnson’s  papers  in  The  Adventurer  are  very 
similar  to  those  of  The  Rambler ;  but  being  rather 
more  varied  in  their  subjects,  and  being  mixed 
with  essays  by  other  writers,  upon  topicks  more 
generally  attractive  than  even  the  most  elegant 
ethical  discourses,  the  sale  of  the  work,  at  first, 
was  more  extensive.  Without  meaning,  how¬ 
ever,  to  depreciate  The  Adventurer ,  I  must  ob¬ 
serve  that  as  the  value  of  The  Rambler  came,  in 
the  progress  of  time,  to  be  better  known,  it  grew 
upon  the  publick  estimation,  and  that  its  sale 
has  far  exceeded  that  of  any  other  periodical 
papers  since  the  reign  of  Queen  Anne. 

In  one  of  the  books  of  his  diary  I  find  the  fol¬ 
lowing  entry: 

“Apr.  3,  1753.  I  began  the  second  vol.  of  my 
Dictionary,  room  being  left  in  the  first  for  Pre- 


BOSWELL 


70 

face,  Grammar,  and  History,  none  of  them  yet 
begun. 

“O  God,  who  hast  hitherto  supported  me, 
enable  me  to  proceed  in  this  labour,  and  in  the 
whole  task  of  my  present  state;  that  when  I  shall 
render  up,  at  the  last  day,  an  account  of  the  tal¬ 
ent  committed  to  me,  I  may  receive  pardon,  for 
the  sake  of  Jesus  Christ.  Amen.” 

He  this  year  favoured  Mrs.  Lennox  with  a 
Dedication*  to  the  Earl  of  Orrery,  of  her  Shak - 
speare  Illustrated. 

1754:  zetat.  45.] — In  1754  I  can  trace  noth¬ 
ing  published  by  him,  except  his  numbers  of 
The  Adventurer,  and cc  The  Life  of  Edward  Cave,”  * 
in  The  Gentleman's  Magazine  for  February.  In 
biography  there  can  be  no  question  that  he  ex¬ 
celled,  beyond  all  who  have  attempted  that 
species  of  composition;  upon  which,  indeed,  he 
set  the  highest  value.  To  the  minute  selection  of 
characteristical  circumstances,  for  which  the  an¬ 
cients  were  remarkable,  he  added  a  philosophical 
research,  and  the  most  perspicuous  and  ener- 
getick  language.  Cave  was  certainly  a  man  of 
estimable  qualities,  and  was  eminently  diligent 
and  successful  in  his  own  business,  which,  doubt¬ 
less,  entitled  him  to  respect.  But  he  was  pecu¬ 
liarly  fortunate  in  being  recorded  by  Johnson, 
who,  of  the  narrow  life  of  a  printer  and  pub¬ 
lisher,  without  any  digressions  or  adventitious 
circumstances,  has  made  an  interesting  and 
agreeable  narrative. 

The  Dictionary ,  we  may  believe,  afforded 
Johnson  full  occupation  this  year.  As  it  ap¬ 
proached  to  its  conclusion,  he  probably  worked 
with  redoubled  vigour,  as  seamen  increase  their 
exertion  and  alacrity  when  they  have  a  near 
prospect  of  their  haven. 

Lord  Chesterfield,  to  whom  Johnson  had  paid 
the  high  compliment  of  addressing  to  his  Lord- 
shipthe  Plan  of  his  Dictionary,  had  behaved  to 
him  in  such  a  manner  as  to  excite  his  contempt 
and  indignation.  The  world  has  been  for  many 
years  amused  with  a  story  confidently  told,  and 
as  confidently  repeated  with  additional  circum¬ 
stances,  that  a  sudden  disgust  was  taken  by  John¬ 
son  upon  occasion  of  his  having  been  one  day 
kept  long  in  waiting  in  his  Lordship’s  ante¬ 
chamber,  for  which  the  reason  assigned  was, 
that  he  had  company  with  him;  and  that  at  last, 
when  the  door  opened,  out  walked  Colley  Cib¬ 
ber;  and  that  Johnson  was  so  violently  provoked 
when  he  found  for  whom  he  had  been  so  long 
excluded,  that  he  went  away  in  a  passion,  and 
never  would  return.  I  remember  having  men¬ 
tioned  this  story  to  George  Lord  Lyttelton,  who 


[ 1 754 

told  me,  he  was  very  intimate  with  Lord  Ches¬ 
terfield;  and  holding  it  as  a  well-known  trujth, 
defended  Lord  Chesterfield,  by  saying,  that 
“Cibber,  who  had  been  introduced  familiarly 
by  the  back-stairs,  had  probably  not  been  there 
above  ten  minutes.”  It  may  seem  strange  even 
to  entertain  a  doubt  concerning  a  story  so  long 
and  so  widely  current,  and  thus  implicitly  adopt¬ 
ed,  if  not  sanctioned,  by  the  authority  which  I 
have  mentioned;  but  Johnson  himself  assured 
me,  that  there  was  not  the  least  foundation  for 
it.  He  told  me,  that  there  never  was  any  partic¬ 
ular  incident  which  produced  a  quarrel  between 
Lord  Chesterfield  and  him;  but  that  his  Lord¬ 
ship’s  continued  neglect  was  the  reason  why  he 
resolved  to  have  no  connection  with  him.  When 
the  Dictionary  was  upon  the  eve  of  publication, 
Lord  Chesterfield,  who,  it  is  said,  had  flattered 
himself  with  expectations  that  Johnson  would 
dedicate  the  work  to  him,  attempted,  in  a  court¬ 
ly  manner,  to  sooth,  and  insinuate  himself  with 
the  Sage,  conscious,  as  it  should  seem,  of  the 
cold  indifference  with  which  he  had  treated  its 
learned  authour;  and  further  attempted  to  con¬ 
ciliate  him,  by  writing  two  papers  in  The  World , 
in  recommendation  of  the  work;  and  it  must  be 
confessed,  that  they  contain  some  studied  com¬ 
pliments,  so  finely  turned,  that  if  there  had  been 
no  previous  offence,  it  is  probable  that  Johnson 
would  have  been  highly  delighted.  Praise,  in 
general,  was  pleasing  to  him;  but  by  praise  from 
a  man  of  rank  and  elegant  accomplishments,  he 
was  peculiarly  gratified. 

His  Lordship  says, 

“I  think  the  publick  in  general,  and  the  re- 
publick  of  letters  in  particular,  are  greatly  ob¬ 
liged  to  Mr.  Johnson,  for  having  undertaken, 
and  executed,  so  great  and  desirable  a  work. 
Perfection  is  not  to  be  expected  from  man;  but 
if  we  are  to  judge  by  the  various  works  of  John¬ 
son  already  published,  we  have  good  reason  to 
believe,  that  he  will  bring  this  as  near  to  perfec¬ 
tion  as  any  man  could  do.  The  Plan  of  it,  which 
he  published  some  years  ago,  seems  to  me  to  be 
a  proof  of  it.  Nothing  can  be  more  rationally 
imagined,  or  more  accurately  and  elegantly  ex¬ 
pressed.  I  therefore  recommend  the  previous 
perusal  of  it  to  all  those  who  intend  to  buy  the 
Dictionary ,  and  who,  I  suppose,  are  all  those  who 
can  afford  it.  .  .  . 

“It  must  be  owned,  that  our  language  is,  at 
present,  in  a  state  of  anarchy,  and  hitherto,  per¬ 
haps,  it  may  not  have  been  the  worse  for  it. 
During  our  free  and  open  trade,  many  words 
and  expressions  have  been  imported,  adopted, 
and  naturalized  from  other  languages,  which 


1754]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  71 


have  greatly  enriched  our  own.  Let  it  still  pre¬ 
serve  what  real  strength  and  beauty  it  may  have 
borrowed  from  others;  but  let  it  not,  like  the 
Tarpeian  maid,  be  overwhelmed  and  crushed 
by  unnecessary  ornaments.  The  time  for  dis¬ 
crimination  seems  to  be  now  come.  Toleration, 
adoption,  and  naturalization  have  run  their 
lengths.  Good  order  and  authority  are  now  nec¬ 
essary.  But  where  shall  we  find  them,  and,  at 
the  same  time,  the  obedience  due  to  them?  We 
must  have  recourse  to  the  old  Roman  expedient 
in  times  of  confusion,  and  chuse  a  dictator.  Upon 
this  principle,  I  give  my  vote  for  Mr.  Johnson 
to  fill  that  great  and  arduous  post.  And  I  hereby 
declare,  that  I  make  a  total  surrender  of  all  my 
rights  and  privileges  in  the  English  language,  as 
a  free-born  British  subject,  to  the  said  Mr.  John¬ 
son,  during  the  term  of  his  dictatorship.  Nay 
more,  I  will  not  only  obey  him,  like  an  old  Ro¬ 
man,  as  my  dictator,  but,  like  a  modern  Roman, 
I  will  implicitly  believe  in  him  as  my  Pope,  and 
hold  him  to  be  infallible  while  in  the  chair,  but 
no  longer.  More  than  this  he  cannot  well  re¬ 
quire;  for,  I  presume,  that  obedience  can  never 
be  expected,  when  there  is  neither  terrour  to  en¬ 
force,  nor  interest  to  invite  it.  .  .  . 

“But  a  Grammar,  a  Dictionary,  and  a  His¬ 
tory  of  our  Language  through  its  several  stages, 
were  still  wanting  at  home,  and  importunately 
called  for  from  abroad.  Mr.  Johnson’s  labours 
will  now,  I  dare  say,  very  fully  supply  that  want, 
and  greatly  contribute  to  the  farther  spreading 
of  our  language  in  other  countries.  Learners 
were  discouraged,  by  finding  no  standard  to  re¬ 
sort  to;  and,  consequently,  thought  it  incapable 
of  any.  They  will  now  be  undeceived  and  en¬ 
couraged.” 

This  courtly  device  failed  of  its  effect.  John¬ 
son,  who  thought  that  “all  was  false  and  hol¬ 
low,”  despised  the  honeyed  words,  and  was 
even  indignant  that  Lord  Chesterfield  should, 
for  a  moment,  imagine  that  he  could  be  the 
dupe  of  such  an  artifice.  His  expression  to  me 
concerning  Lord  Chesterfield,  upon  this  occa¬ 
sion,  was,  “Sir,  after  making  great  professions, 
he  had,  for  many  years,  taken  no  notice  of  me; 
but  when  my  Dictionary  was  coming  out,  he  fell 
a  scribbling  in  The  World  about  it.  Upon  which, 
I  wrote  him  a  letter  expressed  in  civil  terms,  but 
such  as  might  shew  him  that  I  did  not  mind 
what  he  said  or  wrote,  and  that  I  had  done  with 
him.” 

This  is  that  celebrated  letter  of  which  so  much 
has  been  said,  and  about  which  curiosity  has 
been  so  long  excited,  without  being  gratified.  I 
for  many  years  solicited  Johnson  to  favour  me 


with  a  copy  of  it,  that  so  excellent  a  composi¬ 
tion  might  not  be  lost  to  posterity.  He  delayed 
from  time  to  time  to  give  it  me;1  till  at  last  in 
1781,  when  we  were  on  a  visit  at  Mr.  Dilly’s, 
at  Southill  in  Bedfordshire,  he  was  pleased  to 
dictate  it  to  me  from  memory.  He  afterwards 
found  among  his  papers  a  copy  of  it,  which 
he  had  dictated  to  Mr.  Baretti,  with  its  title 
and  corrections,  in  his  own  handwriting.  This 
he  gave  to  Mr.  Langton;  adding  that  if  it 
were  to  come  into  print,  he  wished  it  to  be 
from  that  copy.  By  Mr.  Langton’s  kindness,  I 
am  enabled  to  enrich  my  work  with  a  perfect 
transcript  of  what  the  world  has  so  eagerly  de¬ 
sired  to  see. 

To  the  Right  Honourable  the  Earl 
of  Chesterfield 

February  7,  1755 

My  Lord,  I  have  been  lately  informed,  by 
the  proprietor  of  The  World ,  that  two  papers,  in 
which  my  Dictionary  is  recommended  to  the 
publick,  were  written  by  your  Lordship.  To  be 
so  distinguished,  is  an  honour,  which,  being 
very  little  accustomed  to  favours  from  the  great, 
I  know  not  well  how  to  receive,  or  in  what  terms 
to  acknowledge. 

When,  upon  some  slight  encouragement,  I 
first  visited  your  Lordship,  I  was  overpowered, 
like  the  rest  of  mankind,  by  the  enchantment  of 
your  address;  and  could  not  forbear  to  wish  that 
I  might  boast  myself  Le  vainqueur  du  vainqueur  de 
la  terre; — that  I  might  obtain  that  regard  for 
which  I  saw  the  world  contending;  but  I  found 
my  attendance  so  little  encouraged,  that  neither 
pride  nor  modesty  would  suffer  me  to  continue 
it.  When  I  had  once  addressed  your  Lordship 
in  publick,  I  had  exhausted  all  the  art  of  pleas¬ 
ing  which  a  retired  and  uncourtly  scholar  can 
possess.  I  had  done  all  that  I  could;  and  no  man 
is  well  pleased  to  have  his  all  neglected,  be  it 
ever  so  little. 

Seven  years,  my  Lord,  have  now  past,  since  I 
waited  in  your  outward  rooms,  or  was  repulsed 
from  your  door;  during  which  time  I  have  been 
pushing  on  my  work  through  difficulties,  of 
which  it  is  useless  to  complain,  and  have  brought 
it,  at  last,  to  the  verge  of  publication,  without 

fDr.  Johnson  appeared  to  have  had  a  remark¬ 
able  delicacy  with  respect  to  the  circulation  of  this 
letter;  for  Dr.  Douglas,  Bishop  of  Salisbury,  in¬ 
forms  me  that,  having  many  years  ago  pressed  him 
to  be  allowed  to  read  it  to  the  second  Lord  Hard- 
wicke,  who  was  very  desirous  to  hear  it  (promising 
at  the  same  time,  that  no  copy  of  it  should  be  tak¬ 
en),  Johnson  seemed  much  pleased  that  it  had  at¬ 
tracted  the  attention  of  a  nobleman  of  such  a  re¬ 
spectable  character;  but  after  pausing  some  time, 
declined  to  comply  with  the  request,  saying,  with  a 
smile,  “No,  Sir;  I  have  hurt  the  dog  too  much  al¬ 
ready”;  or  words  to  that  purpose. 


72 

one  act  of  assistance,1  one  word  of  encourage¬ 
ment,  or  one  smile  of  favour.  Such  treatment  I 
did  not  expect,  for  I  never  had  a  Patron  before. 

The  shepherd  in  Virgil  grew  at  last  acquainted 
with  Love,  and  found  him  a  native  of  the  rocks. 

Is  not  a  Patron,  my  Lord,  one  who  looks  with 
unconcern  on  a  man  struggling  for  life  in  the 
water,  and,  when  he  has  reached  ground,  en¬ 
cumbers  him  with  help?  The  notice  which  you 
have  been  pleased  to  take  of  my  labours,  had  it 
been  early,  had  been  kind;  but  it  has  been  de¬ 
layed  till  I  am  indifferent,  and  cannot  enjoy  it; 
till  I  am  solitary,  and  cannot  impart  it;2  till  I  am 
known,  and  do  not  want  it.  I  hope  it  is  no  very 
cynical  asperity  not  to  confess  obligations  where 
no  benefit  has  been  received,  or  to  be  unwilling 
that  the  Publick  should  consider  me  as  owing 
that  to  a  Patron,  which  Providence  has  enabled 
me  to  do  for  myself. 

Having  carried  on  my  work  thus  far  with  so 
little  obligation  to  any  favourer  of  learning,  I 
shall  not  be  disappointed  though  I  should  con¬ 
clude  it,  if  less  be  possible,  with  less;  for  I  have 
been  long  wakened  from  that  dream  of  hope,  in 
which  I  once  boasted  myself  with  so  much  exul¬ 
tation,  my  Lord,  your  Lordship’s  most  humble, 
most  obedient  servant,  Sam.  Johnson3 

“While  this  was  the  talk  of  the  town  (says  Dr. 
Adams,  in  a  letter  to  me),  I  happened  to  visit 
Dr.  Warburton,  who  finding  that  I  was  ac¬ 
quainted  with  Johnson,  desired  me  earnestly  to 
carry  his  compliments  to  him,  and  to  tell  him, 
that  he  honoured  him  for  his  manly  behaviour 
in  rejecting  these  condescensions  of  Lord  Ches¬ 
terfield,  and  for  resenting  the  treatment  he  had 
received  from  him,  with  a  proper  spirit.  John- 

HThe  following  note  is  subjoined  by  Mr.  Lang- 
ton:  “Dr.  Johnson,  when  he  gave  me  this  copy  of 
his  letter,  desired  that  I  would  annex  to  it  his  in¬ 
formation  to  me,  that  whereas  it  is  said  in  the  let¬ 
ter  that  ‘no  assistance  has  been  received,’  he  did 
once  receive  from  Lord  Chesterfield  the  sum  of  ten 
pounds;  but  as  that  was  so  inconsiderable  a  sum, 
he  thought  the  mention  of  it  could  not  properly 
find  place  in  a  letter  of  the  kind  that  this  was.” 

2In  this  passage  Dr.  Johnson  evidently  alludes  to 
the  loss  of  his  wife.  We  find  the  same  tender  recol¬ 
lection  recurring  to  his  mind  upon  innumerable  oc¬ 
casions:  and,  perhaps  no  man  ever  more  forcibly 
felt  the  truth  of  the  sentiment  so  elegantly  expressed 
by  my  friend  Mr.  Malone,  in  his  Prologue  to  Mr. 
Jephson’s  tragedy  of  Julia: 

Vain — wealth,  and  fame,  and  fortune's  fostering  care , 
If  no  fond  breast  the  splendid  blessings  share ; 

And,  each  day' s  bustling  pageantry  once  past , 

There,  only  there,  our  bliss  is  found  at  last. 

3Upon  comparing  this  copy  with  that  which  Dr. 
Johnson  dictated  to  me  from  recollection,  the  vari¬ 
ations  are  found  to  be  so  slight,  that  this  must  be 
added  to  the  many  other  proofs  which  he  gave  of 
the  wonderful  extent  and  accuracy  of  his  memory. 
To  gratify  the  curious  in  composition,  I  have  de¬ 
posited  both  the  copies  in  the  British  Museum. 


[  1754 

son  was  visibly  pleased  with  this  compliment, 
for  he  had  always  a  high  opinion  of  Warburton. 4 
Indeed,  the  force  of  mind  which  appeared  in 
this  letter,  was  congenial  with  that  which  War¬ 
burton  himself  amply  possessed.” 

There  is  a  curious  minute  circumstance  which 
struck  me,  in  comparing  the  various  editions  of 
Johnson’s  imitations  of  Juvenal.  In  the  tenth 
Satire,  one  of  the  couplets  upon  the  vanity  of 
wishes  even  for  literary  distinction  stood  thus: 

Yet  think  what  ills  the  scholar's  life  assail. 

Pride,  envy,  want,  the  garret,  and  the  jail. 

But  after  experiencing  the  uneasiness  which 
Lord  Chesterfield’s  fallacious  patronage  made 
him  feel,  he  dismissed  the  word  garret  from  the 
sad  group,  and  in  all  the  subsequent  editions 
the  line  stands 

Pride,  envy,  want,  the  Patron,  and  the  jail. 

That  Lord  Chesterfield  must  have  been  mor¬ 
tified  by  the  lofty  contempt,  and  polite,  yet 
keen  satire  with  which  Johnson  exhibited  him 
to  himself  in  this  letter,  it  is  impossible  to  doubt. 
He,  however,  with  that  glossy  duplicity  which 
was  his  constant  study,  affected  to  be  quite  un¬ 
concerned.  Dr.  Adams  mentioned  to  Mr.  Rob¬ 
ert  Dodsley  that  he  was  sorry  Johnson  had  writ¬ 
ten  his  letter  to  Lord  Chesterfield.  Dodsley, 
with  the  true  feelings  of  trade,  said  “he  was  very 
sorry  too;  for  that  he  had  a  property  in  the  Dic¬ 
tionary,  to  which  his  Lordship’s  patronage  might 
have  been  of  consequence.”  He  then  told  Dr. 
Adams,  that  Lord  Chesterfield  had  shewn  him 
the  letter.  “I  should  have  imagined  (replied  Dr. 
Adams)  that  Lord  Chesterfield  would  have  con¬ 
cealed  it.”  “Poh!  (said  Dodsley)  do  you  think  a 
letter  from  Johnson  could  hurt  Lord  Chester¬ 
field?  Not  at  all,  Sir.  It  lay  upon  his  table,  where 
any  body  might  see  it.  He  read  it  to  me;  said, 
cthis  man  has  great  powers,’  pointed  out  the 
severest  passages,  and  observed  how  well  they 
were  expressed.”  This  air  of  indifference,  which 
imposed  upon  the  worthy  Dodsley,  was  certain- 

4Soon  after  Edwards’s  Canons  of  Criticism  came 
out,  Johnson  was  dining  at  Tonson  the  Bookseller’s, 
with  Hayman  the  Painter  and  some  more  com¬ 
pany.  Hayman  related  to  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  that 
the  conversation  having  turned  upon  Edwards’s 
book,  the  gentlemen  praised  it  much,  and  Johnson 
allowed  its  merit.  But  when  they  went  farther,  and 
appeared  to  put  that  authour  upon  a  level  with 
Warburton,  “Nay,  (said  Johnson,)  he  has  given 
him  some  smart  hits  to  be  sure;  but  there  is  no  pro¬ 
portion  between  the  two  men;  they  must  not  be 
named  together.  A  fly,  Sir,  may  sting  a  stately 
horse  and  make  him  wince;  but  one  is  but  an  in¬ 
sect,  and  the  other  is  a  horse  still.” 


BOSWELL 


1754  J  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  73 


ly  nothing  but  a  specimen  of  that  dissimulation 
which  Lord  Chesterfield  inculcated  as  one  of 
the  most  essential  lessons  for  the  conduct  of  life. 
His  Lordship  endeavoured  to  justify  himself  to 
Dodsley  from  the  charges  brought  against  him 
by  Johnson;  but  we  may  judge  of  the  flimsiness 
of  his  defence,  from  his  having  excused  his  neg¬ 
lect  of  Johnson,  by  saying  that  “he  had  heard 
he  had  changed  his  lodgings,  and  did  not  know 
where  he  lived”;  as  if  there  could  have  been 
the  smallest  difficulty  to  inform  himself  of  that 
circumstance,  by  inquiring  in  the  literary 
circle  with  which  his  Lordship  was  well  ac¬ 
quainted,  and  was,  indeed,  himself  one  of  its 
ornaments. 

Dr.  Adams  expostulated  with  Johnson,  and 
suggested,  that  his  not  being  admitted  when  he 
called  on  him,  was,  probably,  not  to  be  imputed 
to  Lord  Chesterfield;  for  his  Lordship  had  de¬ 
clared  to  Dodsley,  that  “he  would  have  turned 
off  the  best  servant  he  ever  had,  if  he  had  known 
that  he  denied  him  to  a  man  who  would  have 
been  always  more  than  welcome”;  and,  in  con¬ 
firmation  of  this,  he  insisted  on  Lord  Chester¬ 
field’s  general  affability  and  easiness  of  access, 
especially  to  literary  men.  “Sir  (said  Johnson), 
that  is  not  Lord  Chesterfield;  he  is  the  proudest 
man  this  day  existing.”  “No  (said  Dr.  Adams), 
there  is  one  person,  at  least,  as  proud;  I  think, 
by  your  own  account,  you  are  the  prouder  man 
of  the  two.”  “But  mine  (replied  Johnson,  in¬ 
stantly)  was  defensive  pride.”  This,  as  Dr.  Adams 
well  observed,  was  one  of  those  happy  turns  for 
which  he  was  so  remarkably  ready. 

Johnson  having  now  explicitly  avowed  his 
opinion  of  Lord  Chesterfield,  did  not  refrain 
from  expressing  himself  concerning  that  noble¬ 
man  with  pointed  freedom:  “This  man  (said 
he)  I  thought  had  been  a  Lord  among  wits;  but, 
I  find,  he  is  only  a  wit  among  Lords !”  And  when 
his  Letters  to  his  natural  son  were  published,  he 
observed,  that  “they  teach  the  morals  of  a 
whore,  and  the  manners  of  a  dancing  master.” 

The  character  of  “a  respectable  Hottentot,” 
in  Lord  Chesterfield’s  letters,  has  been  generally 
understood  to  be  meant  for  Johnson,  and  I  have 
no  doubt  that  it  was.  But  I  remember  when  the 
Literary  Property  of  those  letters  was  contested  in 
the  Court  of  Session  in  Scotland,  and  Mr.  Hen¬ 
ry  Dundas,1  one  of  the  counsel  for  the  proprie¬ 
tors,  read  this  character  as  an  exhibition  of 
Johnson,  Sir  David  Dalrymple,  Lord  Hailes, 
one  of  the  Judges,  maintained,  with  some 
warmth,  that  it  was  not  intended  as  a  portrait 

JNow  one  of  his  Majesty’s  principal  Secretaries 
of  State. 


of  Johnson,  but  of  a  late  noble  Lord,  distin¬ 
guished  for  abstruse  science.  I  have  heard  John¬ 
son  himself  talk  of  the  character,  and  say  that  it 
was  meant  for  George  Lord  Lyttelton,  in  which 
I  could  by  no  means  agree;  for  his  Lordship  had 
nothing  of  that  violence  which  is  a  conspicuous 
feature  in  the  composition.  Finding  that  my  il¬ 
lustrious  friend  could  bear  to  have  it  supposed 
that  it  might  be  meant  for  him,  I  said,  laugh¬ 
ingly,  that  there  was  one  trait  which  unques¬ 
tionably  did  not  belong  to  him;  “he  throws  his 
meat  any  where  but  down  his  throat.”  “Sir, 
(said  he,)  Lord  Chesterfield  never  saw  me  eat 
in  his  life.” 

On  the  6th  of  March  came  out  Lord  Boling- 
broke’s  works,  published  by  Mr.  David  Mallet. 
The  wild  and  pernicious  ravings,  under  the 
name  of  Philosophy ,  which  were  thus  ushered 
into  the  world,  gave  great  offence  to  all  well- 
principled  men.  Johnson,  hearing  of  their  ten¬ 
dency,  which  nobody  disputed,  was  roused  with 
a  just  indignation,  and  pronounced  this  mem¬ 
orable  sentence  upon  the  noble  authour  and  his 
editor.  “Sir,  he  was  a  scoundrel,  and  a  coward: 
a  scoundrel,  for  charging  a  blunderbuss  against 
religion  and  morality;  a  coward,  because  he 
had  not  resolution  to  fire  it  off  himself,  but  left 
half  a  crown  to  a  beggarly  Scotchman,  to  draw 
the  trigger  after  his  death !”  Garrick,  who  I  can 
attest  from  my  own  knowledge,  had  his  mind 
seasoned  with  pious  reverence,  and  sincerely 
disapproved  of  the  infidel  writings  of  several, 
whom,  in  the  course  of  his  almost  universal  gay 
intercourse  with  men  of  eminence,  he  treated 
with  external  civility,  distinguished  himself  up¬ 
on  this  occasion.  Mr.  Pelham  having  died  on 
the  very  day  on  which  Lord  Bolingbroke’s  works 
came  out,  he  wrote  an  elegant  Ode  on  his  death, 
beginning: 

Let  others  hail  the  rising  sun, 

I  bow  to  that  whose  course  is  run; 

in  which  is  the  following  stanza: 

The  same  sad  morn ,  to  Church  and  State 
{So  for  our  sins 5 twas  fix'd  by  fate,) 

A  double  stroke  was  given; 

Black  as  the  whirlwinds  of  the  North, 

St.  John's  fell  genius  issued forth, 

And  Pelham  fled  to  heaven . 

Johnson  this  year  found  an  interval  of  leisure 
to  make  an  excursion  to  Oxford,  for  the  purpose 
of  consulting  the  libraries  there.  Of  this,  and  of 
many  interesting  circumstances  concerning  him, 
during  a  part  of  his  life  when  he  conversed  but 
little  with  the  world,  I  am  enabled  to  give  a 
particular  account,  by  the  liberal  communica- 


74 

tions  of  the  Reverend  Mr.  Thomas  Warton,  who 
obligingly  furnished  me  with  several  of  our  com¬ 
mon  friend’s  letters,  which  he  illustrated  with 
notes.  These  I  shall  insert  in  their  proper  places. 

To  the  Reverend  Mr.  Thomas  Warton 

Sir,  It  is  but  an  ill  return  for  the  book  with 
which  you  were  pleased  to  favour  me,  to  have 
delayed  my  thanks  for  it  till  now.  I  am  too  apt 
to  be  negligent;  but  I  can  never  deliberately 
shew  my  disrespect  to  a  man  of  your  character: 
and  I  now  pay  you  a  very  honest  acknowledge¬ 
ment,  for  the  advancement  of  the  literature  of 
our  native  country.  You  have  shewn  to  all,  who 
shall  hereafter  attempt  the  study  of  our  ancient 
authours,  the  way  to  success;  by  directing  them 
to  the  perusal  of  the  books  which  those  authours 
had  read.  Of  this  method,  Hughes  and  men 
much  greater  than  Hughes,  seem  never  to  have 
thought.  The  reason  why  the  authours,  which 
are  yet  read,  of  the  sixteenth  century,  are  so 
little  understood,  is,  that  they  are  read  alone; 
and  no  help  is  borrowed  from  those  who  lived 
with  them,  or  before  them.  Some  part  of  this  ig¬ 
norance  I  hope  to  remove  by  my  book,  which 
now  draws  towards  its  end;  but  which  I  cannot 
finish  to  my  mind,  without  visiting  the  libraries 
at  Oxford,  which  I,  therefore,  hope  to  see  in  a 
fortnight.  I  know  not  how  long  I  shall  stay,  or 
where  I  shall  lodge:  but  shall  be  sure  to  look  for 
you  at  my  arrival,  and  we  shall  easily  settle  the 
rest.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  most  obedient,  &c. 

[London]  July  1 6,  1754  Sam.  Johnson 

Of  his  conversation  while  at  Oxford  at  this 
time,  Mr.  Warton  preserved  and  communicated 
to  me  the  following  memorial,  which,  though 
not  written  with  all  the  care  and  attention 
which  that  learned  and  elegant  writer  bestowed 
on  those  compositions  which  he  intended  for  the 
publick  eye,  is  so  happily  expressed  in  an  easy 
style,  that  I  should  injure  it  by  any  alteration: 

“When  Johnson  came  to  Oxford  in  1754,  the 
long  vacation  was  beginning,  and  most  people 
were  leaving  the  place.  This  was  the  first  time 
of  his  being  there,  after  quitting  the  University. 
The  next  morning  after  his  arrival,  he  wished  to 
see  his  old  College,  Pembroke.  I  went  with  him. 
He  was  highly  pleased  to  find  all  the  College- 
servants  which  he  had  left  there  still  remaining, 
particularly  a  very  old  butler;  and  expressed 
great  satisfaction  at  being  recognised  by  them, 
and  conversed  with  them  familiarly.  He  waited 
on  the  master,  Dr.  Radcliffe,  who  received  him 
very  coldly.  Johnson  at  least  expected,  that  the 
master  would  order  a  copy  of  his  Dictionary, 
now  near  publication:  but  the  master  did  not 
choose  to  talk  on  the  subject,  never  asked  John¬ 
son  to  dine,  nor  even  to  visit  him,  while  he 
stayed  at  Oxford.  After  we  had  left  the  lodgings, 


[  *754 

Johnson  said  to  me,  4  There  lives  a  man,  who 
lives  by  the  revenues  of  literature,  and  will  not 
move  a  finger  to  support  it.  If  I  come  to  live  at 
Oxford,  I  shall  take  up  my  abode  at  Trinity.’ 
We  then  called  on  the  Reverend  Mr.  Meeke, 
one  of  the  fellows,  and  of  Johnson’s  standing. 
Here  was  a  most  cordial  greeting  on  both  sides. 
On  leaving  him,  Johnson  said,  T  used  to  think 
Meeke  had  excellent  parts,  when  we  were  boys 
together  at  the  College:  but,  alas! 

Lost  in  a  convent's  solitary  gloom! 

I  remember,  at  the  classical  lecture  in  the  Hall, 
I  could  not  bear  Meeke’s  superiority,  and  I 
tried  to  sit  as  far  from  him  as  I  could,  that  I 
might  not  hear  him  construe.’ 

“As  we  were  leaving  the  College,  he  said, 
‘Here  I  translated  Pope’s  Messiah.  Which  do  you 
think  is  the  best  line  in  it? — My  own  favourite  is, 

Vail  is  aromaticas  fundit  Saronica  nubes .’ 

I  told  him,  I  thought  it  a  very  sonorous  hexam¬ 
eter.  I  did  not  tell  him,  it  was  not  in  the  Vir- 
gilian  style.  He  much  regretted  that  his  first 
tutor  was  dead;  for  whom  he  seemed  to  retain 
the  greatest  regard.  He  said,  T  once  had  been  a 
whole  morning  sliding  in  Christ-Church  Mea¬ 
dow,  and  missed  his  lecture  in  logick.  After  din¬ 
ner,  he  sent  for  me  to  his  room.  I  expected  a 
sharp  rebuke  for  my  idleness,  and  went  with  a 
beating  heart.  When  we  were  seated,  he  told 
me  he  had  sent  for  me  to  drink  a  glass  of  wine 
with  him,  and  to  tell  me,  he  was  not  angry  with 
me  for  missing  his  lecture.  This  was,  in  fact,  a 
most  severe  reprimand.  Some  more  of  the  boys 
were  then  sent  for,  and  we  spent  a  very  pleasant 
afternoon.’  Besides  Mr.  Meeke,  there  was  only 
one  other  Fellow  of  Pembroke  now  resident: 
from  both  of  whom  Johnson  received  the  great¬ 
est  civilities  during  this  visit,  and  they  pressed 
him  very  much  to  have  a  room  in  the  College. 

“In  the  course  of  this  visit  (1754)  Johnson 
and  I  walked,  three  or  four  times,  to  Ellsfield,  a 
village  beautifully  situated  about  three  miles 
from  Oxford,  to  see  Mr.  Wise,  Radclivian  li¬ 
brarian,  with  whom  Johnson  was  much  pleased. 
At  this  place,  Mr.  Wise  had  fitted  up  a  house 
and  gardens,  in  a  singular  manner,  but  with 
great  taste.  Here  was  an  excellent  library;  par¬ 
ticularly,  a  valuable  collection  of  books  in  North¬ 
ern  literature,  with  which  Johnson  was  often 
very  busy.  One  day  Mr.  Wise  read  to  us  a  dis¬ 
sertation  which  he  was  preparing  for  the  press, 
intitled,  A  History  and  Chronology  of  the  Fabulous 
Ages.  Some  old  divinities  of  Thrace,  related  to 
the  Titans,  and  called  the  Cabiri,  made  a  very 


BOSWELL 


1754]  LIFE  OF 

important  part  of  the  theory  of  this  piece;  and 
in  conversation  afterwards,  Mr.  Wise  talked 
much  of  his  Cabiri.  As  we  returned  to  Oxford 
in  the  evening,  I  out-walked  Johnson,  and  he 
cried  out  £ Sufflamina ,’  a  Latin  word  which  came 
from  his  mouth  with  peculiar  grace,  and  was  as 
much  as  to  say,  Put  on  your  drag  chain.  Before  we 
got  home,  I  again  walked  too  fast  for  him;  and 
he  now  cried  out,  sWhv,  you  walk  as  if  you  were 
pursued  by  all  the  Cabiri  in  a  body.’  In  an 
evening,  we  frequently  took  long  walks  from 
Oxford  into  the  country,  returning  to  supper. 
Once,  in  our  way  home,  we  viewed  the  ruins  of 
the  abbies  of  Oseney  and  Rewley,  near  Oxford. 
After  at  least  half  an  hour’s  silence,  Johnson 
said,  ‘I  viewed  them  with  indignation!5  We  had 
then  a  long  conversation  on  Gothick  buildings; 
and  in  talking  of  the  form  of  old  halls,  he  said, 
‘In  these  halls,  the  fire  place  was  anciently  al¬ 
ways  in  the  middle  of  the  room,  till  the  Whigs 
removed  it  on  one  side.5 — About  this  time  there 
had  been  an  execution  of  two  or  three  criminals 
at  Oxford  on  a  Monday.  Soon  afterwards,  one 
day  at  dinner,  I  was  saying  that  Mr.  Swinton 
the  chaplain  of  the  gaol,  and  also  a  frequent 
preacher  before  the  University,  a  learned  man, 
but  often  thoughtless  and  absent,  preached  the 
condemnation-sermon  on  repentance,  before 
the  convicts,  on  the  preceding  day,  Sunday; 
and  that  in  the  close  he  told  his  audience,  that 
he  should  give  them  the  remainder  of  what  he 
had  to  say  on  the  subject,  the  next  Lord’s  Day. 
Upon  which,  one  of  our  company,  a  Doctor  of 
Divinity,  and  a  plain  matter-of-fact  man,  by  way 
of  offering  an  apology  for  Mr.  Swinton,  gravely 
remarked,  that  he  had  probably  preached  the 
same  sermon  before  the  University:  ‘Yes,  Sir, 
(says  Johnson)  but  the  University  were  not  to 
be  hanged  the  next  morning.’ 

“I  forgot  to  observe  before,  that  when  he  left 
Mr.  Meeke,  (as  I  have  told  above)  he  added, 
‘About  the  same  time  of  life,  Meeke  was  left  be¬ 
hind  at  Oxford  to  feed  on  a  Fellowship,  and  I 
went  to  London  to  get  my  living:  now,  Sir,  see 
the  difference  of  our  literary  characters !’  ” 

The  following  letter  was  written  by  Dr.  John¬ 
son  to  Mr.  Chambers,  of  Lincoln  College,  after¬ 
wards  Sir  Robert  Chambers,  one  of  the  judges 
in  India:1 

To  Mr.  Chambers  of  Lincoln  College 

Dear  Sir,  The  commission  which  I  delayed 
to  trouble  you  with  at  your  departure,  I  am 
now  obliged  to  send  you;  and  beg  that  you  will 
be  so  kind  as  to  carry  it  to  Mr.  Warton,  of  Trin- 

^ommunicated  by  the  Reverend  Mr.  Thomas 
Warton,  who  had  the  original. 


JOHNSON  75 

ity,  to  whom  I  should  have  written  immediate¬ 
ly,  but  that  I  know  not  if  he  be  yet  come  back  to 
Oxford. 

In  the  Catalogue  of  MSS.  of  Gr.  Brit,  see  vol. 
I.  pag.  18.  mss.  Bodl.  Martyrium  xv.  marty- 
rium  sub  Juliano ,  auctore  Theophylacto. 

It  is  desired  that  Mr.  Warton  will  inquire, 
and  send  word,  what  will  be  the  cost  of  trans¬ 
scribing  this  manuscript. 

Vol.  II.  pag.  32.  Num.  1022.  58.  Coll.  Nov. 
— Commentaria  in  Acta  Apostol. — Comment,  in  Sep - 
tem  Epistolas  Catholicas. 

He  is  desired  to  tell  what  is  the  age  of  each  of 
these  manuscripts:  and  what  it  will  cost  to  have 
a  transcript  of  the  two  first  pages  of  each. 

If  Mr.  Warton  be  not  in  Oxford,  you  may  try 
if  you  can  get  it  done  by  any  body  else;  or  stay 
till  he  comes,  according  to  your  own  conveni¬ 
ence.  It  is  for  an  Italian  liter ato. 

The  answer  is  to  be  directed  to  his  Excellency 
Mr.  Zon,  Venetian  Resident,  Soho-Square. 

I  hope,  dear  Sir,  that  you  do  not  regret  the 
change  of  London  for  Oxford.  Mr.  Baretti  is 
well,  and  Miss  Williams;2  and  we  shall  all  be 
glad  to  hear  from  you,  whenever  you  shall  be  so 
kind  as  to  write  to,  Sir,  your  most  humble 
servant, 

Nov.  21,1754  Sam.  Johnson 

The  degree  of  Master  of  Arts,  which,  it  has 
been  observed,  could  not  be  obtained  for  him  at 
an  early  period  of  his  life,  was  now  considered 
as  an  honour  of  considerable  importance,  in 
order  to  grace  the  title-page  of  his  Dictionary ; 
and  his  character  in  the  literary  world  being  by 
this  time  deservedly  high,  his  friends  thought 
that,  if  proper  exertions  were  made,  the  Univer¬ 
sity  of  Oxford  would  pay  him  the  compliment. 

2“I  presume  she  was  a  relation  of  Mr.  Zachariah 
Williams,  who  died  in  his  eighty-third  year,  July 
12,  1755.  When  Dr.  Johnson  was  with  me  at  Ox¬ 
ford,  in  1 755,  he  gave  to  the  Bodleian  Library  a 
thin  quarto  of  twenty-one  pages,  a  work  in  Italian, 
with  an  English  translation  on  the  opposite  page. 
The  English  title-page  is  this:  4 An  Account  of  an 
Attempt  to  ascertain  the  Longitude  at  Sea,  by  an 
exact  Variation  of  the  Magnetical  Needle,  &c.  By 
Zachariah  Williams.  London,  printed  for  Dodsley, 
1 755*5  The  English  translation,  from  the  strongest 
internal  marks,  is  unquestionably  the  work  of  John¬ 
son.  In  a  blank  leaf,  Johnson  has  written  the  age, 
and  time  of  death,  of  the  authour  Z.  Williams,  as 
I  have  said  above.  On  another  blank  leaf,  is  pasted 
a  paragraph  from  a  newspaper,  of  the  death  and 
character  of  Williams,  which  is  plainly  written  by 
Johnson.  He  was  very  anxious  about  placing  this 
book  in  the  Bodleian:  and,  for  fear  of  any  omission 
or  mistake,  he  entered,  in  the  great  Catalogue,  the 
title-page  of  it  with  his  own  hand.55  Warton.  In 
this  statement  there  is  a  slight  mistake.  The  Eng¬ 
lish  account,  which  was  written  by  Johnson,  was 
the  original;  the  Italian  was  a  translation ,  done  by 
Baretti.  See  post ,  end  of  1 755.  [M.] 


76  BOSWELL  [1755 


To  the  Reverend  Mr.  Thomas  Warton 

Dear  Sir,  I  am  extremely  obliged  to  you  and 
to  Mr.  Wise,  for  the  uncommon  care  which  you 
have  taken  of  my  interest:1  if  you  can  accom¬ 
plish  your  kind  design,  I  shall  certainly  take  me 
a  little  habitation  among  you. 

The  books  which  I  promised  to  Mr.  Wise,2  I 
have  not  been  able  to  procure:  but  I  shall  send 
him  a  Finnick  Dictionary ,  the  only  copy,  perhaps, 
in  England,  which  was  presented  me  by  a  learned 
Swede:  but  I  keep  it  back,  that  it  may  make  a 
set  of  my  own  books  of  the  new  edition,  with 
which  I  shall  accompany  it,  more  welcome.  You 
will  assure  him  of  my  gratitude. 

Poor  dear  Collins!3 — Would  a  letter  give  him 
any  pleasure?  I  have  a  mind  to  write. 

I  am  glad  of  your  hindrance  in  your  Spense¬ 
rian  design,4  yet  I  would  not  have  it  delayed. 
Three  hours  a  day  stolen  from  sleep  and  amuse¬ 
ment  will  produce  it.  Let  a  Servitour5  transcribe 
the  quotations,  and  interleave  them  with  refer¬ 
ences,  to  save  time.  This  will  shorten  the  work, 
and  lessen  the  fatigue. 

Can  1  do  any  thing  to  promoting  the  diplo¬ 
ma?  I  would  not  be  wanting  to  co-operate  with 
your  kindness;  of  which,  whatever  be  the  effect, 
I  shall  be,  dear  Sir,  your  most  obliged,  &c. 

[London]  Nov .  28,  1754  Sam.  Johnson 

To  the  Same 

Dear  Sir,  I  am  extremely  sensible  of  the  fa¬ 
vour  done  me,  both  by  Mr.  Wise  and  yourself. 
The  book6  cannot,  I  think,  be  printed  in  less 
than  six  weeks,  nor  probably  so  soon;  and  I  will 
keep  back  the  title-page,  for  such  an  insertion  as 
you  seem  to  promise  me.  Be  pleased  to  let  me 
know  what  money  I  shall  send  you,  for  bearing 
the  expence  of  the  affair;  and  I  will  take  care 
that  you  may  have  it  ready  at  your  hand. 

I  had  lately  the  favour  of  a  letter  from  your 
brother,  with  some  account  of  poor  Collins,  for 
whom  I  am  much  concerned.  I  have  a  notion, 
that  by  very  great  temperance,  or  more  proper¬ 
ly  abstinence,  he  may  yet  recover. 

There  is  an  old  English  and  Latin  book  of 
poems  by  Barclay,  called  “The  Ship  of  Fools”; 

ffn  procuring  him  the  degree  of  Master  of  Arts 
by  diploma  at  Oxford.  Warton. 

2Lately  fellow  of  Trinity  College,  and  at  this 
time  Radclivian  librarian,  at  Oxford.  He  was  a 
man  of  very  considerable  learning,  and  eminently 
skilled  in  Roman  and  Anglo-Saxon  antiquities.  He 
died  in  1767.  Warton. 

3ColIins  (the  poet)  was  at  this  time  at  Oxford,  on 
a  visit  to  Mr.  Warton;  but  labouring  under  the 
most  deplorable  languor  of  body,  and  dejection  of 
mind.  Warton. 

4Of  publishing  a  volume  of  observations  on  the 
best  of  Spenser’s  works.  It  was  hindred  by  my  tak¬ 
ing  pupils  in  this  College.  Warton. 

6Young  students  of  the  lowest  rank  at  Oxford  are 
so  called.  Warton. 

6His  Dictionary.  Warton. 


at  the  end  of  which  are  a  number  of  Eglogues;  so 
he  writes  it,  from  Egloga ,  which  are  probably 
the  first  in  our  language.  If  you  cannot  find  the 
book  I  will  get  Mr.  Dodsley  to  send  it  you. 

I  shall  be  extremely  glad  to  hear  from  you 
again,  to  know,  if  the  affair  proceeds.7  I  have 
mentioned  it  to  none  of  my  friends  for  fear  of 
being  laughed  at  for  my  disappointment. 

You  know  poor  Mr.  Dodsley  has  lost  his  wife; 
I  believe  he  is  much  affected.  1  hope  he  will  not 
suffer  so  much  as  I  yet  suffer  for  the  loss  of  mine. 

0 tpoi.  tL  5’  oIhol  ;  QvriTa  yap  TveivbvOaptv. 

I  have  ever  since  seemed  to  myself  broken  off 
from  mankind;  a  kind  of  solitary  wanderer  in 
the  wild  of  life,  without  any  direction,  or  fixed 
point  of  view:  a  gloomy  gazer  on  a  world  to 
which  I  have  little  relation.  Yet  I  would  en¬ 
deavour,  by  the  help  of  you  and  your  brother, 
to  supply  the  want  of  closer  union,  by  friend¬ 
ship:  and  hope  to  have  long  the  pleasure  of  be¬ 
ing,  dear  Sir,  most  affectionately  your’s, 

[London]  Dec .  21,  1754  Sam.  Johnson 

1755:  ,etat.  46.] — In  1755  we  behold  him  to 
great  advantage;  his  degree  of  Master  of  Arts 
conferred  upon  him,  his  Dictionary  published, 
his  correspondence  animated,  his  benevolence 
exercised. 

To  the  Reverend  Mr.  Thomas  Warton 

Dear  Sir,  I  wrote  to  you  some  weeks  ago,  but 
believe  did  not  direct  accurately,  and  therefore 
know  not  whether  you  had  my  letter.  I  would, 
likewise,  write  to  your  brother,  but  know  not 
where  to  find  him.  I  now  begin  to  see  land,  after 
having  wandered,  according  to  Mr.  Warbur- 
ton’s  phrase,  in  this  vast  sea  of  words.  What  re¬ 
ception  I  shall  meet  with  on  the  shore,  I  know 
not;  whether  the  sound  of  bells,  and  acclama¬ 
tions  of  the  people,  which  Ariosto  talks  of  in  his 
last  Canto,  or  a  general  murmur  of  dislike,  I 
know  not:  whether  I  shall  find  upon  the  coast  a 
Calypso  that  will  court,  or  a  Polypheme  that 
will  resist.  But  if  Polypheme  comes,  have  at  his 
eye.  I  hope,  however,  the  criticks  will  let  me  be 
at  peace;  for  though  1  do  not  much  fear  their 
skill  and  strength,  I  am  a  little  afraid  of  myself, 
and  would  not  willingly  feel  so  much  ill-will  in 
my  bosom  as  literary  quarrels  are  apt  to  excite. 

Mr.  Baretti  is  about  a  work  for  which  he  is  in 
great  want  of  Crescimbeni ,  which  you  may  have 
again  when  you  please. 

There  is  nothing  considerable  done  or  doing 
among  us  here.  We  are  not,  perhaps,  as  inno¬ 
cent  as  villagers,  but  most  of  us  seem  to  be  as 
idle.  I  hope,  however,  you  are  busy;  and  should 
be  glad  to  know  what  you  are  doing.  I  am, 
dearest  Sir,  your  humble  servant, 

[London]  Feb.  4,  1755  Sam.  Johnson 

7Of  the  degree  at  Oxford.  Warton. 


1755]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  77 


To  the  Same 

Dear  Sir,  I  received  your  letter  this  day, 
with  great  sense  of  the  favour  that  has  been 
done  me;1  for  which  I  return  my  most  sincere 
thanks:  and  entreat  you  to  pay  to  Mr.  Wise  such 
returns  as  I  ought  to  make  for  so  much  kind¬ 
ness  so  little  deserved. 

I  sent  Mr.  Wise  the  Lexicon ,  and  afterwards 
wrote  to  him;  but  know  not  whether  he  had 
either  the  book  or  letter.  Be  so  good  as  to  con¬ 
trive  to  enquire. 

But  why  does  my  dear  Mr.  Warton  tell  me 
nothing  of  himself?  Where  hangs  the  new  vol¬ 
ume?2  Gan  I  help?  Let  not  the  past  labour  be 
lost,  for  want  of  a  little  more:  but  snatch  what 
time  you  can  from  the  Hall,  and  the  pupils,  and 
the  coffee-house,  and  the  parks,  and  complete 
your  design.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  &c. 

[London]  Feb.  4,  1755  Sam.  Johnson 

To  the  Same 

Dear  Sir,  I  had  a  letter  last  week  from  Mr. 
Wise,  but  have  yet  heard  nothing  from  you,  nor 
know  in  what  state  my  affair  stands;3  of  which  I 
beg  you  to  inform  me,  if  you  can,  to-morrow, 
by  the  return  of  the  post. 

Mr.  Wise  sends  me  word,  that  he  has  not  had 
the  Finnick  Lexicon  yet,  which  I  sent  some  time 
ago;  and  if  he  has  it  not,  you  must  enquire  after 
it.  However,  do  not  let  your  letter  stay  for  that. 

Your  brother,  who  is  a  better  correspondent 
than  you,  and  not  much  better,  sends  me  word, 
that  your  pupils  keep  you  in  College:  but  do 
they  keep  you  from  writing  too?  Let  them,  at 
least,  give  you  time  to  write  to,  dear  Sir,  your 
most  affectionate,  &c. 

[London]  13,  1755  Sam.  Johnson 

To  the  Same 

Dear  Sir,  Dr.  King4  was  with  me  a  few  min¬ 
utes  before  your  letter;  this,  however,  is  the  first 
instance  in  which  your  kind  intentions  to  me 
have  ever  been  frustrated.5 1  have  now  the  full 
effect  of  your  care  and  benevolence;  and  am  far 
from  thinking  it  a  slight  honour,  or  a  small  ad¬ 
vantage;  since  it  will  put  the  enjoyment  of  your 
conversation  more  frequently  in  the  power  of, 
dear  Sir,  your  most  obliged  and  affectionate, 

Sam.  Johnson 

4His  degree  had  now  past,  according  to  the  usual 
form,  the  suffrages  of  the  heads  of  Colleges;  but  was 
not  yet  finally  granted  by  the  University.  It  was 
carried  without  a  single  dissentient  voice.  Warton. 

2On  Spenser.  Warton. 

3Of  the  degree.  Warton. 

4Principal  of  St.  Mary  Hall  at  Oxford.  He 
brought  with  him  the  diploma  from  Oxford.  War- 
ton. 

5I  suppose  Johnson  means  that  my  kind  intention 
of  being  the  first  to  give  him  the  good  news  of  the 
degree  being  granted  was  jrustrated ,  because  Dr. 

King  brought  it  before  my  intelligence  arrived. 

Warton. 


P.S.  I  have  enclosed  a  letter  to  the  Vice- 
Chancellor,6  which  you  will  read;  and,  if  you 
like  it,  seal  and  give  him. 

[London]  Feb.  1755 

As  the  Publick  will  doubtless  be  pleased  to 
see  the  whole  progress  of  this  well-earned  aca¬ 
demical  honour,  I  shall  insert  the  Chancellor  of 
Oxford’s  letter  to  the  University,7  the  diploma, 
and  Johnson’s  letter  of  thanks  to  the  Vice- 
Chancellor. 

To  the  Reverend  Dr.  Huddesford,  Vice-Chancel¬ 
lor  of  the  University  of  Oxford;  to  be  communi¬ 
cated  to  the  Heads  of  Houses ,  and  proposed  in  Con¬ 
vocation. 

Mr.  Vice-Chancellor,  and  Gentlemen, 
Mr.  Samuel  Johnson,  who  was  formerly  of  Pem¬ 
broke  College,  having  very  eminently  distin¬ 
guished  himself  by  the  publication  of  a  series  of 
essays,  excellently  calculated  to  form  the  man¬ 
ners  of  the  people,  and  in  which  the  cause  of  re¬ 
ligion  and  morality  is  every  where  maintained 
by  the  strongest  powers  of  argument  and  lan¬ 
guage;  and  who  shortly  intends  to  publish  a 
Dictionary  of  the  English  Tongue ,  formed  on  a  new 
plan,  and  executed  with  the  greatest  labour  and 
judgement;  I  persuade  myself  that  I  shall  act 
agreeably  to  the  sentiments  of  the  whole  Uni¬ 
versity,  in  desiring  that  it  may  be  proposed  in 
convocation  to  confer  on  him  the  degree  of  Mas¬ 
ter  of  Arts  by  diploma,  to  which  I  readily  give 
my  consent;  and  am,  Mr.  Vice-Chancellor,  and 
Gentlemen,  your  affectionate  friend  and  servant, 
Grosvenor-street,  Feb.  4,  1755  Arran 

“Term.  Scti. 

“Hilarii.  “Diploma  Magistri  Tohnson 

“*755 

“ CANCELLARIUS ,  Magistri  et  Scholares  Uni - 
versitatis  Oxoniensis  omnibus  ad  quos  hoc  presens 
scriptum  pervenerit ,  salutem  in  Domino  sempiternam. 

“ Cum  eum  in  finem  gradus  academici  d  majoribus 
nostris  instituti  fuerint ,  ut  viri  ingenio  et  doctrina 
prcestantes  titulis  quoque  prceter  cceteros  insigniren- 
tur ;  ciimque  vir  doctissimus  Samuel  Johnson  e 
Collegio  Pembrochiensi ,  scriptis  suis  popularium  mores 
informantibus  dudum  literato  orbi  innotuerit;  quin  et 
linguae  patriae  turn  ornandae  turn  stabillendae  {Lexi¬ 
con  scilicet  Anglicanum  summo  studio ,  summo  a  se 
judicio  congestum  propediem  editurus)  etiam  nunc  uti- 
lissimam  impendat  operam ;  Nos  igitur  Cancellarius , 
Magistri ,  et  Scholares  antedicti ,  ne  virum  de  literis 
humanioribus  optime  meritum  diutius  inhonoratum 
praetereamus ,  in  solenni  Convocatione  Doctorum ,  Ma- 
gistrorum ,  Regentium ,  et  non  Re  gentium,  decimo  die 

6Dr.  Huddesford,  President  of  Trinity  College. 
Warton. 

Extracted  from  the  Convocation-Register,  Ox¬ 
ford. 


78 

Mensis  Februarii  Anno  Domini  Millesimo  Septui- 
gentesimo  Quinquagesimo  quinto  habitd ,  prcefatum 
virum  Samuelem  Johnson  [conspir antibus  omnium 
suffragiis)  Magistrum  in  Artibus  renunciavimus  et 
constituimus ;  eumque ,  virtute  pr  mentis  diplomat  is, 
singulis  juribus  privilegiis  et  honoribus  ad  istum  gra- 
dum  quaqua  pertinentibus  frui  et  gaudere  jussimus. 

“In  cujus  rei  testimonium  sigillum  Universitatis 
Oxoniensis  prcesentibus  apponi  jecimus. 

“ Datum  in  Domo  nostra  Convocations  die  i  o° 
Mensis  Feb.  Anno  Dom.  prcedicto. 

“Diploma  supra  scriptum  per  Registrarium  lectum 
erat ,  et  ex  decreto  venerabilis  Domiis  communi  Uni¬ 
versitatis  sigillo  muni  turn.’ 31 

Dom.  Doctori  Huddesford,  Oxoniensis 
Academic  Vice-Cancellario 

IjXGRA  TUS plane  et  tibi  et  mihi  videar ,  nisi  quan¬ 
to  me  gaudio  affecerint ,  quos  nuper  mihi  honor es  (te  cre¬ 
do  auctore)  decrevit  Senatus  Academicus ,  literarum, 
quo  tamen  nihil  levius ,  officio ,  significem :  ingratus 
etiam ,  nisi  comitatem,  qua  vir  eximius 2  mihi  vestri  tes¬ 
timonium  amoris  in  manus  tradidit ,  agnoscam  et  lau- 
dem.  Si  quid  est  unde  rei  tarn  gratce  accedat  gratia ,  hoc 
ipso  magis  mihi  placet ,  quod  eo  tempore  in  ordines 
Academicos  denuo  cooptatus  sim ,  quo  tuam  imminuere 
auctoritatem ,  famamque  Oxonii  Icedere ,  omnibus  mo- 
dis  conantur  homines  vafri ,  nec  tamen  acuti:  quibus 
ego ,  prout  viro  umbratico  licuit ,  semper  restiti ,  semper 
restiturus.  Qui  enim ,  inter  has  rerum  procellas ,  vel 
Tibi  vel  Academics  defuerit ,  ilium  virtuti  et  Uteris , 
sibique  et  poster  is,  defuturum  existimo. 

Sam.  Johnson 

To  the  Reverend  Mr.  Thomas  Warton 

Dear  Sir,  After  I  received  my  diploma,  I 
wrote  you  a  letter  of  thanks,  with  a  letter  to  the 
Vice-Chancellor,  and  sent  another  to  Mr.  Wise; 
but  have  heard  from  nobody  since,  and  begin  to 
think  myself  forgotten.  It  is  true,  I  sent  you  a 
double  letter,  and  you  may  fear  an  expensive 
correspondent;  but  I  would  have  taken  it  kind¬ 
ly,  if  you  had  returned  it  treble:  and  what  is  a 
double  letter  to  a  petty  king,  that  having  fellow¬ 
ship  and  fines,  can  sleep  without  a  Modus  in  his 
head ?3 

Dear  Mr.  Warton,  let  me  hear  from  you, 
and  tell  me  something,  I  care  not  what,  so  I 
hear  it  but  from  you.  Something  I  will  tell  you: 
I  hope  to  see  my  Dictionary  bound  and  lettered, 
next  week;  vasta  mole  super  bus.  And  I  have  a 
great  mind  to  come  to  Oxford  at  Easter;  but 
you  will  not  invite  me.  Shall  I  come  uninvited, 

irThe  original  is  in  my  possession. 

2We  may  conceive  what  a  high  gratification  it 
must  have  been  to  Johnson  to  receive  his  diploma 
from  the  hands  of  the  great  Dr.  King,  whose  prin¬ 
ciples  were  so  congenial  with  his  own. 

3The  works  in  Italicks  are  allusions  to  passages 
in  Mr.  Warton’s  poem  called  The  Progress  oj  Dis¬ 
content,  now  lately  published.  Warton. 


[  1755 

or  stay  here  where  nobody  perhaps  would  miss 
me  if  I  went?  A  hard  choice!  But  such  is  the 
world  to,  dear  Sir,  your,  &c. 

[London]  March  20,  1755  Sam.  Johnson 

To  the  Same 

Dear  Sir,  Though  not  to  write,  when  a  man 
can  write  so  well,  is  an  offence  sufficiently  hein¬ 
ous,  yet  I  shall  pass  it  by.  I  am  very  glad  that  the 
Vice-Chancellor  was  pleased  with  my  note.  I 
shall  impatiently  expect  you  at  London,  that  we 
may  consider  what  to  do  next.  I  intend  in  the 
winter  to  open  a  Bibliotheque,  and  remember, 
that  you  are  to  subscribe  a  sheet  a  year;  let  us 
try,  likewise,  if  we  cannot  persuade  your  broth¬ 
er  to  subscribe  another.  My  book  is  now  coming 
in  luminis  or  as.  What  will  be  its  fate  I  know  not, 
nor  think  much,  because  thinking  is  to  no  pur¬ 
pose.  It  must  stand  the  censure  of  the  great  vulgar 
and  the  small ;  of  those  that  understand  it,  and 
that  understand  it  not.  But  in  all  this,  I  suffer 
not  alone:  every  writer  has  the  same  difficulties, 
and,  perhaps,  every  writer  talks  of  them  more 
than  he  thinks. 

You  will  be  pleased  to  make  my  compliments 
to  all  my  friends:  and  be  so  kind,  at  every  idle 
hour,  as  to  remember,  dear  Sir,  your,  &c. 

[London]  March  25,  1755  Sam.  Johnson 

Dr.  Adams  told  me,  that  this  scheme  of  a 
Bibliotheque  was  a  serious  one:  for  upon  his  visit¬ 
ing  him  one  day,  he  found  his  parlour  floor  cov¬ 
ered  with  parcels  of  foreign  and  English  literary 
journals,  and  he  told  Dr.  Adams  he  meant  to 
undertake  a  Review.  “How,  Sir,  (said  Dr. 
Adams)  can  you  think  of  doing  it  alone?  AH 
branches  of  knowledge  must  be  considered  in  it. 
Do  you  know  Mathematicks?  Do  you  know 
Natural  History?5’  Johnson  answered,  “Why, 
Sir,  I  must  do  as  well  as  I  can.  My  chief  pur¬ 
pose  is  to  give  my  countrymen  a  view  of  what  is 
doing  in  literature  upon  the  continent;  and  I 
shall  have,  in  a  good  measure,  the  choice  of  my 
subject,  for  I  shall  select  such  books  as  I  best 
understand.”  Dr.  Adams  suggested,  that  as  Dr. 
Maty  had  just  then  finished  his  Bibliotheque  Bri- 
tannique,  which  was  a  well-executed  work,  giv¬ 
ing  foreigners  an  account  of  British  publications, 
he  might,  with  great  advantage,  assume  him  as 
an  assistant.  “He,  (said  Johnson)  the  little  black 
dog!  I’d  throw  him  into  the  Thames.”  The 
scheme,  however,  was  dropped. 

In  one  of  his  little  memorandum-books  I  find 
the  following  hints  for  his  intended  Review  or 
Literary  Journal: 

“The  Annals  of  Literature,  foreign  as  well  as 
domestick.  Imitate  Le  Clerk — Bayle — Barbeyrac. 
Infelicity  of  Journals  in  England.  Works  of  the 
learned.  We  cannot  take  in  all.  Sometimes  copy 
from  foreign  Journalists.  Always  tell.” 


BOSWELL 


1755] 

To  Dr.  Birch 

March  29,  1755 

Sir,  I  have  sent  some  parts  of  my  Dictionary , 
such  as  were  at  hand,  for  your  inspection.  The 
favour  which  I  beg  is,  that  if  you  do  not  like 
them,  you  will  say  nothing.  I  am,  Sir,  your  most 
affectionate  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

To  Mr.  Samuel  Johnson 

Norfolk-street,  April  23,  1755 

Sir,  The  part  of  your  Dictionary  which  you 
have  favoured  me  with  the  sight  of  has  given  me 
such  an  idea  of  the  whole,  that  I  most  sincerely 
congratulate  the  publick  upon  the  acquisition 
of  a  work  long  wanted,  and  now  executed  with 
an  industry,  accuracy,  and  judgement,  equal  to 
the  importance  of  the  subject.  You  might,  per¬ 
haps,  have  chosen  one  in  which  your  genius 
would  have  appeared  to  more  advantage;  but 
you  could  not  have  fixed  upon  any  other  in 
which  your  labours  would  have  done  such 
substantial  service  to  the  present  age  and  to 
posterity.  I  am  glad  that  your  health  has  sup¬ 
ported  the  application  necessary  to  the  per¬ 
formance  of  so  vast  a  task;  and  can  undertake  to 
promise  you  as  one  (though  perhaps  the  only) 
reward  of  it,  the  approbation  and  thanks  of 
every  well-wisher  to  the  honour  of  the  English 
language.  I  am,  with  the  greatest  regard,  Sir, 
your  most  faithful  and  most  affectionate  humble 
servant, 

Tho.  Birch 

Mr.  Charles  Burney,  who  has  since  distin¬ 
guished  himself  so  much  in  the  science  of  Mu- 
sick,  and  obtained  a  Doctor’s  degree  from  the 
University  of  Oxford,  had  been  driven  from  the 
capital  by  bad  health,  and  was  now  residing  at 
Lynne  Regis,  in  Norfolk.  He  had  been  so  much 
delighted  with  Johnson’s  Rambler  and  the  Plan 
of  his  Dictionary ,  that  when  the  great  work  was 
announced  in  the  news-papers  as  nearly  fin¬ 
ished,  he  wrote  to  Dr.  Johnson,  begging  to  be 
informed  when  and  in  what  manner  his  Dic¬ 
tionary  would  be  published;  intreating,  if  it 
should  be  by  subscription,  or  he  should  have 
any  books  at  his  own  disposal,  to  be  favoured 
with  six  copies  for  himself  and  friends. 

In  answer  to  this  application,  Dr.  Johnson 
wrote  the  following  letter,  of  which  (to  use  Dr. 
Burney’s  own  words)  “if  it  be  remembered  that 
it  was  written  to  an  obscure  young  man,  who  at 
this  time  had  not  much  distinguished  himself 
even  in  his  own  profession,  but  whose  name 
could  never  have  reached  the  authour  of  The 
Rambler ,  the  politeness  and  urbanity  may  be  op¬ 
posed  to  some  of  the  stories  which  have  been 
lately  circulated  of  Dr.  Johnson’s  natural  rude¬ 
ness  and  ferocity.” 


79 

To  Mr.  Burney,  in  Lynne  Regis,  Norfolk 

Sir,  If  you  imagine  that  by  delaying  my  an¬ 
swer  I  intended  to  shew  any  neglect  of  the  no¬ 
tice  with  which  you  have«favoured  me,  you  will 
neither  think  jusdy  of  yourself  nor  of  me.  Your 
civilities  were  offered  with  too  much  elegance 
not  to  engage  attention;  and  I  have  too  much 
pleasure  in  pleasing  men  like  you,  not  to  feel 
very  sensibly  the  distinction  which  you  have  be¬ 
stowed  upon  me. 

Few  consequences  of  my  endeavours  to  please 
or  to  benefit  mankind  have  delighted  me  more 
than  your  friendship  thus  voluntarily  offered, 
which  now  I  have  it  I  hope  to  keep,  because  I 
hope  to  continue  to  deserve  it. 

I  have  no  Dictionaries  to  dispose  of  for  myself, 
but  shall  be  glad  to  have  you  direct  your  friends 
to  Mr.  Dodsley,  because  it  was  by  his  recom¬ 
mendation  that  I  was  employed  in  the  work. 

When  you  have  leisure  to  think  again  upon 
me,  let  me  be  favoured  with  another  letter;  and 
another  yet,  when  you  have  looked  into  my  Dic¬ 
tionary.  If  you  find  faults,  I  shall  endeavour  to 
mend  them;  if  you  find  none,  I  shall  think  you 
blinded  by  kind  partiality:  but  to  have  made 
you  partial  in  his  favour,  will  very  much  gratify 
the  ambition  of,  Sir,  your  most  obliged  and  most 
humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

Gough-square,  Fleet-street,  April  8,  1775 

Mr.  Andrew  Millar,  bookseller  in  the  Strand, 
took  the  principal  charge  of  conducting  the 
publication  of  Johnson’s  Dictionary ;  and  as  the 
patience  of  the  proprietors  was  repeatedly  tried 
and  almost  exhausted,  by  their  expecting  that 
the  work  would  be  completed  within  the  time 
which  Johnson  had  sanguinely  supposed,  the 
learned  authour  was  often  goaded  to  dispatch, 
more  especially  as  he  had  received  all  the  copy- 
money,  by  different  drafts,  a  considerable  time 
before  he  had  finished  his  task.  When  the  mes¬ 
senger  who  carried  the  last  sheet  to  Millar  re¬ 
turned,  Johnson  asked  him,  “Well,  what  did  he 
say?” — “Sir,  (answered  the  messenger)  he  said, 
thank  God  I  have  done  with  him.”  “I  am  glad 
(replied  Johnson,  with  a  smile)  that  he  thanks 
God  for  any  thing.”1  It  is  remarkable  that  those 
with  whom  Johnson  chiefly  contracted  for  his 
literary  labours  were  Scotchmen,  Mr.  Millar 
and  Mr.  Strahan.  Millar,  though  himself  no 
great  judge  of  literature,  had  good  sense  enough 
to  have  for  his  friends  very  able  men  to  give  him 

JSir  John  Hawkins,  p.  341,  inserts  two  notes  as 
having  passed  formally  between  Andrew  Millar 
and  Johnson,  to  the  above  effect.  I  am  assured  this 
was  not  the  case.  In  the  way  of  incidental  remark 
it  was  a  pleasant  play  of  raillery.  To  have  deliber¬ 
ately  written  notes  in  such  terms  would  have  been 
morose. 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


8o  BOSWELL  [  1755 


their  opinion  and  advice  in  the  purchase  of 
copyright;  the  consequence  of  which  was  his 
acquiring  a  very  large  fortune,  with  great  lib¬ 
erality.  Johnson  said  <3f  him,  “I  respect  Millar, 
Sir;  he  has  raised  the  price  of  literature. ”  The 
same  praise  may  be  justly  given  to  Panckoucke, 
the  eminent  bookseller  of  Paris.  Mr.  Strahan’s 
liberality,  judgement,  and  success,  are  well 
known. 

To  Bennet  Langton,  Esq.,  at  Langton  near 
Spilsby,  Lincolnshire 

Sir,  It  has  been  long  observed,  that  men  do 
not  suspect  faults  which  they  do  not  commit; 
your  own  elegance  of  manners,  and  punctuality 
of  complaisance,  did  not  suffer  you  to  impute  to 
me  that  negligence  of  which  I  was  guilty,  and 
which  I  have  not  since  atoned.  I  received  both 
your  letters,  and  received  them  with  pleasure 
proportionate  to  the  esteem  which  so  short  an 
acquaintance  strongly  impressed,  and  which  I 
hope  to  confirm  by  nearer  knowledge,  though  I 
am  afraid  that  gratification  will  be  for  a  time 
withheld. 

I  have,  indeed,  published  my  Book,1  of  which 
I  beg  to  know  your  father’s  judgement,  and 
yours;  and  I  have  now  staid  long  enough  to 
watch  its  progress  into  the  world.  It  has,  you 
see,  no  patrons,  and,  I  think,  has  yet  had  no  op¬ 
ponents,  except  the  criticks  of  the  coffee-house, 
whose  outcries  are  soon  dispersed  into  the  air, 
and  are  thought  on  no  more:  from  this,  there¬ 
fore,  I  am  at  liberty,  and  think  of  taking  the  op¬ 
portunity  of  this  interval  to  make  an  excursion; 
and  why  not  then  into  Lincolnshire?  or,  to  men¬ 
tion  a  stronger  attraction,  why  not  to  dear  Mr. 
Langton?  I  will  give  the  true  reason,  which  I 
know  you  will  approve: — I  have  a  mother  more 
than  eighty  years  old,  who  has  counted  the  days 
to  the  publication  of  my  book,  in  hopes  of  seeing 
me;  and  to  her,  if  I  can  disengage  myself  here,  I 
resolve  to  go. 

As  I  know,  dear  Sir,  that  to  delay  my  visit  for 
a  reason  like  this,  will  not  deprive  me  of  your  es¬ 
teem,  I  beg  it  may  not  lessen  your  kindness.  I 
have  very  seldom  received  an  offer  of  friendship 
which  I  so  earnestly  desire  to  cultivate  and  ma¬ 
ture.  I  shall  rejoice  to  hear  from  you,  till  I  can 
see  you,  and  will  see  you  as  soon  as  I  can;  for 
when  the  duty  that  calls  me  to  Lichfield  is  dis¬ 
charged,  my  inclination  will  carry  me  to  Lang¬ 
ton.  I  shall  delight  to  hear  the  ocean  roar,  or  see 
the  stars  twinkle,  in  the  company  of  men  to 
whom  Nature  does  not  spread  her  volumes  or 
utter  her  voice  in  vain. 

Do  not,  dear  Sir,  make  the  slowness  of  this 
letter  a  precedent  for  delay,  or  imagine  that  I 
approved  the  incivility  that  I  have  committed; 
for  I  have  known  you  enough  to  love  you,  and 
sincerely  to  wish  a  further  knowledge;  and  I  as- 

1His  Dictionary. 


sure  you,  once  more,  that  to  live  in  a  house  that 
contains  such  a  father  and  such  a  son,  will  be 
accounted  a  very  uncommon  degree  of  pleasure, 
by,  dear  Sir,  your  most  obliged,  and  most  hum¬ 
ble  servant, 

May  6,  1 755  Sam.  Johnson 

To  the  Reverend  Mr.  Thomas  Warton 

Dear  Sir,  I  am  grieved  that  you  should  think 
me  capable  of  neglecting  your  letters;  and  beg 
you  will  never  admit  any  such  suspicion  again. 
I  purpose  to  come  down  next  week,  if  you  shall 
be  there;  or  any  other  week,  that  shall  be  more 
agreeable  to  you.  Therefore  let  me  know.  I  can 
stay  this  visit  but  a  week,  but  intend  to  make 
preparations  for  a  longer  stay  next  time;  being 
resolved  not  to  lose  sight  of  the  University.  How 
goes  Apollonius?2  Don’t  let  him  be  forgot¬ 
ten.  Some  things  of  this  kind  must  be  done,  to 
keep  us  up.  Pay  my  compliments  to  Mr.  Wise, 
and  all  my  other  friends.  I  think  to  come  to 
Kettel-Hall.3 1  am,  Sir,  your  most  affectionate, 
&c. 

[London]  May  13,  1755  Sam.  Johnson 
To  the  Same 

Dear  Sir,  It  is  strange  how  many  things  will 
happen  to  intercept  every  pleasure,  though  it 
[be]  only  that  of  two  friends  meeting  together.  I 
have  promised  myself  every  day  to  inform  you 
when  you  might  expect  me  at  Oxford,  and  have 
not  been  able  to  fix  a  time.  The  time,  however, 
is,  I  think,  at  last  come;  and  I  promise  myself  to 
repose  in  Kettel-Hall,  one  of  the  first  nights  of 
the  next  week.  I  am  afraid  my  stay  with  you 
cannot  be  long;  but  what  is  the  inference?  We 
must  endeavour  to  make  it  chearful.  I  wish  your 
brother  could  meet  us,  that  we  might  go  and 
drink  tea  with  Mr.  Wise  in  a  body.  I  hope  he 
will  be  at  Oxford,  or  at  his  nest  of  British  and 
Saxon  antiquities.4 1  shall  expect  to  see  Spenser 
finished,  and  many  other  things  begun.  Dodsley 
is  gone  to  visit  the  Dutch.  The  Dictionary  sells 
well.  The  rest  of  the  world  goes  on  as  it  did. 
Dear  Sir,  your  most  affectionate,  & c. 

[London]  June  10,  1755  Sam.  Johnson 

To  the  Same 

Dear  Sir,  To  talk  of  coming  to  you,  and  not 
yet  to  come,  has  an  air  of  trifling  which  I  would 
not  willingly  have  among  you;  and  which,  I  be¬ 
lieve,  you  will  not  willingly  impute  to  me,  when 
I  have  told  you,  that  since  my  promise,  two  of 

2  A  translation  of  Apollonius  Rhodius  was  now  in¬ 
tended  by  Mr.  Warton.  Warton. 

3Kettel  Hall  is  an  ancient  tenement  built  about 
the  year  1615  by  Dr.  Ralph  Kettel,  President  of 
Trinity  College,  for  the  accommodation  of  com¬ 
moners  of  that  Society.  It  adjoins  the  College;  and 
was  a  few  years  ago  converted  into  a  private  house. 
[M.] 

4At  Ellsfield,  a  village  three  miles  from  Oxford. 
Warton. 


1755]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  81 


our  partners1  are  dead,  and  that  I  was  solicited 
to  suspend  my  excursion  till  we  could  recover 
from  our  confusion. 

I  have  not  laid  aside  my  purpose;  for  every 
day  makes  me  more  impatient  of  staying  from 
you.  But  death,  you  know,  hears  not  supplica¬ 
tions,  nor  pays  any  regard  to  the  convenience  of 
mortals.  I  hope  now  to  see  you  next  week;  but 
next  week  is  but  another  name  for  to-morrow, 
which  has  been  noted  for  promising  and  deceiv¬ 
ing.  I  am,  &c. 

[London]  June  24,  1755  Sam.  Johnson 
To  the  Same 

Dear  Sir,  I  told  you,  that  among  the  manu¬ 
scripts  are  some  things  of  Sir  Thomas  More.  I 
beg  you  to  pass  an  hour  in  looking  on  them,  and 
procure  a  transcript  of  the  ten  or  twenty  first 
lines  of  each,  to  be  compared  with  what  I  have; 
that  I  may  know  whether  they  are  yet  published. 
The  manuscripts  are  these: 

Catalogue  of  Bodl.  MS.  pag.  122.  F.  3.  Sir 
Thomas  More. 

1.  Fall  of  angels.  2.  Creation  and  fall  of  man¬ 
kind.  3.  Determination  of  the  Trinity  for  the 
rescue  of  mankind.  4.  Five  lectures  of  our  Sav¬ 
iour’s  passion.  5.  Of  the  institution  of  the  sacra¬ 
ment,  three  lectures.  6.  How  to  receive  the 
blessed  body  of  our  Lord  sacramentally.  7.  Neo- 
menia,  the  new  moon.  8.  De  tristitia ,  tcedio ,  pa- 
vore ,  et  oratione  Christi ,  ante  captionem  ejus. 

Catalogue,  pag.  1 54.  Life  of  Sir  Thomas  More. 
Qu.  Whether  Roper’s?  Pag.  363.  De  resignatione 
Magni  Sigilli  in  manus  Regis  per  D.  Thomam  Mo- 
rum.  Pag.  364.  Mori  Defensio  Morice. 

If  you  procure  the  young  gendeman  in  the  li¬ 
brary  to  write  out  what  you  think  fit  to  be  writ¬ 
ten,  I  will  send  to  Mr.  Prince  the  bookseller  to 
pay  him  what  you  shall  think  proper. 

Be  pleased  to  make  my  compliments  to  Mr. 
Wise,  and  all  my  friends.  I  am,  Sir,  your  affec¬ 
tionate,  &c. 

[London]  Aug.  7,  1755  Sam.  Johnson 

The  Dictionary,  with  a  Grammar  and  History  of 
the  English  Language ,  being  now  at  length  pub¬ 
lished,  in  two  volumes  folio,  the  world  contem¬ 
plated  with  wonder  so  stupendous  a  work  at- 
chieved  by  one  man,  while  other  countries  had 
thought  such  undertakings  fit  only  for  whole 
academies.  Vast  as  his  powers  were,  I  cannot 
but  think  that  his  imagination  deceived  him, 
when  he  supposed  that  by  constant  application 
he  might  have  performed  the  task  in  three  years. 
Let  the  Preface  be  attentively  perused,  in  which 
is  given,  in  a  clear,  strong,  and  glowing  style,  a 
comprehensive,  yet  particular  view  of  what  he 
had  done;  and  it  will  be  evident,  that  the  time 
he  employed  upon  it  was  comparatively  short. 

booksellers  concerned  in  his  Dictionary.  War- 
ton. 


I  am  unwilling  to  swell  my  book  with  long 
quotations  from  what  is  in  every  body’s  hands, 
and  I  believe  there  are  few  prose  compositions 
in  the  English  language  that  are  read  with  more 
delight,  or  are  more  impressed  upon  the  mem¬ 
ory,  than  that  preliminary  discourse.  One  of  its 
excellencies  has  always  struck  me  with  peculiar 
admiration:  I  mean  the  perspicuity  with  which 
he  has  expressed  abstract  scientifick  notions.  As 
an  instance  of  this,  I  shall  quote  the  following 
sentence:  “When  the  radical  idea  branches  out 
into  parallel  ramifications,  how  can  a  consecu¬ 
tive  series  be  formed  of  senses  in  their  own  na¬ 
ture  collateral?”  We  have  here  an  example  of 
what  has  been  often  said,  and  I  believe  with 
justice,  that  there  is  for  every  thought  a  certain 
nice  adaptation  of  words  which  none  other 
could  equal,  and  which,  when  a  man  has  been 
so  fortunate  as  to  hit,  he  has  attained,  in  that 
particular  case,  the  perfection  of  language. 

The  extensive  reading  which  was  absolutely 
necessary  for  the  accumulation  of  authorities, 
and  which  alone  may  account  for  Johnson’s  re¬ 
tentive  mind  being  enriched  with  a  very  large 
and  various  store  of  knowledge  and  imagery, 
must  have  occupied  several  years.  The  Preface 
furnishes  an  eminent  instance  of  a  double  tal¬ 
ent,  of  which  Johnson  was  fully  conscious.  Sir 
Joshua  Reynolds  heard  him  say,  “There  are 
two  things  which  I  am  confident  I  can  do  very 
well:  one  is  an  introduction  to  any  literary  work, 
stating  what  it  is  to  contain,  and  how  it  should 
be  executed  in  the  most  perfect  manner;  the 
other  is  a  conclusion,  shewing  from  various 
causes  why  the  execution  has  not  been  equal  to 
what  the  authour  promised  to  himself  and  to 
the  publick.” 

How  should  puny  scribblers  be  abashed  and 
disappointed,  when  they  find  him  displaying  a 
perfect  theory  of  lexicographical  excellence,  yet 
at  the  same  time  candidly  and  modestly  allow¬ 
ing  that  he  “had  not  satisfied  his  own  expecta¬ 
tions.”  Here  was  a  fair  occasion  for  the  exercise 
of  Johnson’s  modesty,  when  he  was  called  upon 
to  compare  his  own  arduous  performance,  not 
with  those  of  other  individuals,  (in  which  case 
his  inflexible  regard  to  truth  would  have  been 
violated,  had  he  affected  diffidence,)  but  with 
speculative  perfection;  as  he,  who  can  outstrip 
all  his  competitors  in  the  race,  may  yet  be  sensi¬ 
ble  of  his  deficiency  when  he  runs  against  time. 
Well  might  he  say,  that  “the  English  Dictionary 
was  written  with  little  assistance  of  the  learned,” 
for  he  told  me,  that  the  only  aid  which  he  re¬ 
ceived  was  a  paper  containing  twenty  etymolo¬ 
gies,  sent  to  him  by  a  person  then  unknown. 


BOSWELL 


82 

who  he  was  afterwards  informed  was  Dr. 
Pearce,  Bishop  of  Rochester.  The  etymologies, 
though  they  exhibit  learning  and  judgement, 
are  not,  I  think,  entitled  to  the  first  praise 
amongst  the  various  parts  of  this  immense  work. 
The  definitions  have  always  appeared  to  me 
such  astonishing  proofs  of  acuteness  of  intellect 
and  precision  of  language,  as  indicate  a  genius 
of  the  highest  rank.  This  it  is  which  marks  the 
superiour  excellence  of  Johnson’s  Dictionary  over 
others  equally  or  even  more  voluminous,  and 
must  have  made  it  a  work  of  much  greater  men¬ 
tal  labour  than  mere  Lexicons,  or  Word-books , 
as  the  Dutch  call  them.  They,  who  will  make 
the  experiment  of  trying  how  they  can  define  a 
few  words  of  whatever  nature,  will  soon  be  satis¬ 
fied  of  the  unquestionable  justice  of  this  obser¬ 
vation,  which  I  can  assure  my  readers  is  founded 
upon  much  study,  and  upon  communication 
with  more  minds  than  my  own. 

A  few  of  his  definitions  must  be  admitted  to 
be  erroneous.  Thus,  Windward  and  Leeward , 
though  directly  of  opposite  meaning,  are  de¬ 
fined  identically  the  same  way;  as  to  which  in¬ 
considerable  specks  it  is  enough  to  observe,  that 
his  Preface  announces  that  he  was  aware  there 
might  be  many  such  in  so  immense  a  work;  nor 
was  he  at  all  disconcerted  when  an  instance  was 
pointed  out  to  him.  A  lady  once  asked  him  how 
he  came  to  define  Pastern  the  knee  of  a  horse:  in¬ 
stead  of  making  an  elaborate  defence,  as  she 
expected,  he  at  once  answered,  “Ignorance, 
Madam,  pure  ignorance.”  His  definition  of 
Network  has  been  often  quoted  with  sportive 
malignity,  as  obscuring  a  thing  in  itself  very 
plain.  But  to  these  frivolous  censures  no  other 
answer  is  necessary  than  that  with  which  we  are 
furnished  by  his  own  Preface. 

“To  explain,  requires  the  use  of  terms  less 
abstruse  than  that  which  is  to  be  explained,  and 
such  terms  cannot  always  be  found.  For  as 
nothing  can  be  proved  but  by  supposing  some¬ 
thing  intuitively  known,  and  evident  without 
proof,  so  nothing  can  be  defined  but  by  the  use 
of  words  too  plain  to  admit  of  definition.  Some¬ 
times  easier  words  are  changed  into  harder;  as, 
burial ,  into  sepulture  or  interment ;  dry ,  into  desicca- 
tive ;  dryness y  into  siccity  or  aridity ;  fit>  into  parox¬ 
ism ;  for  the  easiest  word,  whatever  it  be,  can 
never  be  translated  into  one  more  easy.” 

His  introducing  his  own  opinions,  and  even 
prejudices,  under  general  definitions  of  words, 
while  at  the  same  time  the  original  meaning  of 
the  words  is  not  explained,  as  his  Tory ,  Whig, 
Pension ,  Oats ,  Excise ,  and  a  few  more,  cannot  be 
fully  defended,  and  must  be  placed  to  the  ac¬ 


[  U55 

count  of  capricious  and  humorous  indulgence.1 
Talking  to  me  upon  this  subject  when  we  were 
at  Ashbourne  in  1777,  he  mentioned  a  still 
stronger  instance  of  the  predominance  of  his 
private  feelings  in  the  composition  of  this  work, 
than  any  now  to  be  found  in  it.  “You  know,  Sir, 
Lord  Gower  forsook  the  old  Jacobite  interest. 
When  I  came  to  the  word  Renegadoy  after  telling 
that  it  meant  ‘one  who  deserts  to  the  enemy,  a 
revolter,’  I  added,  Sometimes  we  say  a  Gower. 
Thus  it  went  to  the  press;  but  the  printer  had 
more  wit  than  I,  and  struck  it  out.” 

Let  it,  however,  be  remembered,  that  this  in¬ 
dulgence  does  not  display  itself  only  in  sarcasm 
towards  others,  but  sometimes  in  playful  allu¬ 
sion  to  the  notions  commonly  entertained  of  his 
own  laborious  task.  Thus:  “ Grub-street ,  the  name 
of  a  street  in  London,  much  inhabited  by  writ¬ 
ers  of  small  histories,  dictionaries ,  and  temporary 
poems;  whence  any  mean  production  is  called 
Grub-streetP — “ Lexicographer ,  a  writer  of  dic¬ 
tionaries,  a  harmless  drudge .” 

At  the  time  when  he  was  concluding  his  very 
eloquent  Preface,  Johnson’s  mind  appears  to 
have  been  in  such  a  state  of  depression,  that  we 
cannot  contemplate  without  wonder  the  vigor¬ 
ous  and  splendid  thoughts  which  so  highly  dis¬ 
tinguish  that  performance.  “I  (says  he)  may 
surely  be  contented  without  the  praise  of  per¬ 
fection,  which  if  I  could  obtain  in  this  gloom  of 
solitude,  what  would  it  avail  me?  I  have  pro¬ 
tracted  my  work  till  most  of  those  whom  I 
wished  to  please  have  sunk  into  the  grave;  and 

1He  thus  defines  Excise:  C<A  hateful  tax  levied 
upon  commodities,  and  adjudged  not  by  the  com¬ 
mon  judges  of  property,  but  wretches  hired  by 
those  to  whom  Excise  is  paid.55  The  Commission¬ 
ers  of  Excise  being  offended  by  this  severe  reflec¬ 
tion,  consulted  Mr.  Murray,  then  Attorney  Gen¬ 
eral,  to  know  whether  redress  could  be  legally  ob¬ 
tained.  I  wished  to  have  procured  for  my  readers  a 
copy  of  the  opinion  which  he  gave,  and  which  may 
now  be  justly  considered  as  history;  but  the  mys¬ 
terious  secrecy  of  office,  it  seems,  would  not  permit 
it.  I  am,  however,  informed,  by  very  good  author¬ 
ity,  that  its  import  was,  that  the  passage  might  be 
considered  as  actionable;  but  that  it  would  be 
more  prudent  in  the  board  not  to  prosecute.  John¬ 
son  never  made  the  smallest  alteration  in  this  pas¬ 
sage.  We  find  he  still  retained  his  early  prejudice 
against  Excise;  for  in  The  Idler ,  No.  65,  there  is  the 
following  very  extraordinary  paragraph:  “The  au¬ 
thenticity  of  Clarendon's  history,  though  printed 
with  the  sanction  of  one  of  the  first  Universities  of 
the  world,  had  not  an  unexpected  manuscript  been 
happily  discovered,  would,  with  the  help  of  fac¬ 
tious  credulity,  have  been  brought  into  question  by 
the  two  lowest  of  all  human  beings,  a  Scribbler  for 
a  party,  and  a  Commissioner  of  Excise.55- — The 
persons  to  whom  he  alludes  were  Mr.  John  Old- 
mixon,  and  George  Ducket,  Esq. 


1755]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  83 


success  and  miscarriage  are  empty  sounds.  I 
therefore  dismiss  it  with  frigid  tranquillity,  hav¬ 
ing  little  to  fear  or  hope  from  censure  or  from 
praise.”  That  this  indifference  was  rather  a  tem¬ 
porary  than  an  habitual  feeling,  appears,  I 
think,  from  his  letters  to  Mr.  Warton;  and  how¬ 
ever  he  may  have  been  affected  for  the  moment, 
certain  it  is  that  the  honours  which  his  great 
work  procured  him,  both  at  home  and  abroad, 
were  very  grateful  to  him.  His  friend  the  Earl  of 
Gorke  and  Orrery,  being  at  Florence,  presented 
it  to  the  Academia  della  Crusca.  That  Academy 
sent  Johnson  their  Vocabulario ,  and  the  French 
Academy  sent  him  their  Dictionnaire ,  which  Mr. 
Langton  had  the  pleasure  to  convey  to  him. 

It  must  undoubtedly  seem  strange,  that  the 
conclusion  of  his  Preface  should  be  expressed  in 
terms  so  desponding,  when  it  is  considered  that 
the  authour  was  then  only  in  his  forty-sixth 
year.  But  we  must  ascribe  its  gloom  to  that 
miserable  dejection  of  spirits  to  which  he  was 
constitutionally  subject,  and  which  was  aggra¬ 
vated  by  the  death  of  his  wife  two  years  before. 
I  have  heard  it  ingeniously  observed  by  a  lady 
of  rank  and  elegance,  that  “his  melancholy  was 
then  at  its  meridian.”  It  pleased  God  to  grant 
him  almost  thirty  years  of  life  after  this  time; 
and  once,  when  he  was  in  a  placid  frame  of 
mind,  he  was  obliged  to  own  to  me  that  he  had 
enjoyed  happier  days,  and  had  many  more 
friends,  since  that  gloomy  hour  than  before. 

It  is  a  sad  saying,  that  “most  of  those  whom 
he  wished  to  please  had  sunk  into  the  grave”; 
and  his  case  at  forty-five  was  singularly  un¬ 
happy,  unless  the  circle  of  his  friends  was  very 
narrow.  I  have  often  thought,  that  as  longevity 
is  generally  desired,  and  I  believe,  generally  ex¬ 
pected,  it  would  be  wise  to  be  continually  add¬ 
ing  to  the  number  of  our  friends,  that  the  loss 
of  some  may  be  supplied  by  others.  Friendship, 
“the  wine  of  life,”  should  like  a  well-stocked 
cellar,  be  thus  continually  renewed;  and  it  is 
consolatory  to  think,  that  although  we  can  sel¬ 
dom  add  what  will  equal  the  generous  first- 
growths  of  our  youth,  yet  friendship  becomes  in¬ 
sensibly  old  in  much  less  time  than  is  commonly 
imagined,  and  not  many  years  are  required  to 
make  it  very  mellow  and  pleasant.  Warmth  will, 
no  doubt,  make  a  considerable  difference.  Men 
of  affectionate  temper  and  bright  fancy  will 
coalesce  a  great  deal  sooner  than  those  who  are 
cold  and  dull. 

The  proposition  which  I  have  now  endeav¬ 
oured  to  illustrate  was,  at  a  subsequent  period 
of  his  life,  the  opinion  of  Johnson  himself.  He 
said  to  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  “If  a  man  does  not 


make  new  acquaintance  as  he  advances  through 
life,  he  will  soon  find  himself  left  alone.  A  man. 
Sir,  should  keep  his  friendship  in  constant  repair .” 

The  celebrated  Mr.  Wilkes,  whose  notions 
and  habits  of  life  were  very  opposite  to  his,  but 
who  was  ever  eminent  for  literature  and  vivac¬ 
ity,  sallied  forth  with  a  little  Jeu  d' Esprit  upon 
the  following  passage  in  his  Grammar  of  the 
English  Tongue,  prefixed  to  the  Dictionary:  CiH 
seldom,  perhaps  never,  begins  any  but  the  first 
syllable.”  In  an  Essay  printed  in  The  Publick 
Advertiser ,  this  lively  writer  enumerated  many 
instances  in  opposition  to  this  remark;  for  exam¬ 
ple,  “The  authour  of  this  observation  must  be  a 
man  of  a  quick  appre-hension ,  and  of  a  most 
compre-hensive  genius.”  The  position  is  undoubt¬ 
edly  expressed  with  too  much  latitude. 

This  light  sally,  we  may  suppose,  made  no 
great  impression  on  our  Lexicographer;  for  we 
find  that  he  did  not  alter  the  passage  till  many 
years  afterwards.1 

He  had  the  pleasure  of  being  treated  in  a  very 
different  manner  by  his  old  pupil  Mr.  Garrick, 
in  the  following  complimentary  Epigram: 

On  Johnson’s  Dictionary 
Talk  of  war  with  a  Briton ,  he'll  boldly  advance , 

That  one  English  soldier  will  beat  ten  of  France; 

Would  we  alter  the  boast  from  the  sword  to  the  pen , 

Our  odds  are  still  greater ,  still  greater  our  men: 

In  the  deep  mines  of  science  though  Frenchmen  may  toil , 
Can  their  strength  be  compar'd  to  Locke ,  Newton ,  and 

Boyle? 

Let  them  rally  their  heroes ,  send  forth  all  their  pow'rs , 
Their  verse-men  and  prose-men ,  then  match  them  with  ours! 
First  Shakspeare  and  Milton ,  like  gods  in  the  fight , 

Have  put  their  whole  drama  and  epick  to  fiight; 

In  satires ,  epistles ,  and  odes ,  would  they  cope , 

Their  numbers  retreat  before  Dryden  and  Pope ; 

And  Johnson ,  well  arm'd  like  a  hero  of  yore. 

Has  beat forty  French ,2  and  will  beat  forty  more! 

Johnson  this  year  gave  at  once  a  proof  of  his 
benevolence,  quickness  of  apprehension,  and 
admirable  art  of  composition,  in  the  assistance 
which  he  gave  to  Mr.  Zachariah  Williams,  fa¬ 
ther  of  the  blind  lady  whom  he  had  humanely 
received  under  his  roof.  Mr.  Williams  had  fol¬ 
lowed  the  profession  of  physick  in  Wales;  but 
having  a  very  strong  propensity  to  the  study  of 
natural  philosophy,  had  made  many  ingenious 

xIn  the  third  edition,  published  in  1773,  he  left 
out  the  words  perhaps  never ,  and  added  the  follow¬ 
ing  paragraph: 

“It  sometimes  begins  middle  or  final  syllables  in 
words  compounded,  as  block-head ,  or  derived  from 
the  Latin,  as  compre-hended." 

2The  number  of  the  French  Academy  employed 
in  settling  their  language. 


84 

advances  towards  a  discovery  of  the  longitude, 
and  repaired  to  London  in  hopes  of  obtaining 
the  great  parliamentary  reward.  He  failed  of 
success;  but  Johnson  having  made  himself  mas¬ 
ter  of  his  principles  and  experiments,  wrote  for 
him  a  pamphlet,  published  in  quarto,  with  the 
following  title:  An  Account  of  an  Attempt  to  ascer¬ 
tain  the  Longitude  at  Sea ,  by  an  exact  Theory  of  the 
Variation  of  the  Magnetical  Needle;  with  a  Table  of 
the  Variations  at  the  most  remarkable  Cities  in  Europe , 
from  the  year  1660  to  1680.  f  To  diffuse  it  more 
extensively,  it  was  accompanied  with  an  Italian 
translation  on  the  opposite  page,  which  it  is 
supposed  was  the  work  of  Signor  Baretti,  an 
Italian  of  considerable  literature,  who  having 
come  to  England  a  few  years  before,  had  been 
employed  in  the  capacity  both  of  a  language- 
master  and  an  authour,  and  formed  an  inti¬ 
macy  with  Dr.  Johnson.  This  pamphlet  John¬ 
son  presented  to  the  Bodleian  Library.1  On  a 
blank  leaf  of  it  is  pasted  a  paragraph  cut  out  of 
a  news-paper,  containing  an  account  of  the 
death  and  character  of  Williams,  plainly  writ¬ 
ten  by  Johnson.2 

In  July  this  year  he  had  formed  some  scheme 
of  mental  improvement,  the  particular  purpose 
of  which  does  not  appear.  But  we  find  in  his 
Prayers  and  Meditations ,  p.  25,  a  prayer  entitled 
“On  the  Study  of  Philosophy,  as  an  Instrument 
of  living”;  and  after  it  follows  a  note,  “This 
study  was  not  pursued.” 

On  the  13th  of  the  same  month  he  wrote  in 
his  Journal  the  following  scheme  of  life,  for 
Sunday: 

“Having  lived”  (as  he  with  tenderness  of 
conscience  expresses  himself)  “not  without  an 
habitual  reverence  for  the  Sabbath,  yet  without 
that  attention  to  its  religious  duties  which  Chris¬ 
tianity  requires; 

“1.  To  rise  early,  and  in  order  to  it,  to  go  to 
sleep  early  on  Saturday. 

“2.  To  use  some  extraordinary  devotion  in 
the  morning. 

“3.  To  examine  the  tenour  of  my  life,  and 
particularly  the  last  week;  and  to  mark  my  ad¬ 
vances  in  religion,  or  recession  from  it. 

JSee  note  by  Mr.  Warton,  ante ,  p.  75. 

2“On  Saturday  the  12th,  about  twelve  at  night, 
died  Mr.  Zachariah  Williams,  in  his  eighty-third 
year,  after  an  illness  of  eight  months,  in  full  pos¬ 
session  of  his  mental  faculties.  He  has  been  long 
known  to  philosophers  and  seamen  for  his  skill  in 
magnetism,  and  his  proposal  to  ascertain  the  lon¬ 
gitude  by  a  peculiar  system  of  the  variation  of  the 
compass.  He  was  a  man  of  industry  indefatigable, 
of  conversation  inoffensive,  patient  of  adversity  and 
disease,  eminently  sober,  temperate,  and  pious; 
and  worthy  to  have  ended  life  with  better  fortune.” 


[  !756 

“4.  To  read  the  Scripture  methodically  with 
such  helps  as  are  at  hand. 

“5.  To  go  to  church  twice. 

“6.  To  read  books  of  Divinity,  either  specula¬ 
tive  or  practical. 

“7.  To  instruct  my  family. 

“8.  To  wear  off  by  meditation  any  worldly 
soil  contracted  in  the  week.” 

1756:  ;etat.  47.] — In  1 756  Johnson  found  that 
the  great  fame  of  his  Dictionary  had  not  set  him 
above  the  necessity  of  “making  provision  for  the 
day  that  was  passing  over  him.”  No  royal  or 
noble  patron  extended  a  munificent  hand  to 
give  independence  to  the  man  who  had  con¬ 
ferred  stability  on  the  language  of  his  country. 
We  may  feel  indignant  that  there  should  have 
been  such  unworthy  neglect;  but  we  must,  at 
the  same  time,  congratulate  ourselves,  when  we 
consider,  that  to  this  very  neglect,  operating  to 
rouse  the  natural  indolence  of  his  constitution, 
we  owe  many  valuable  productions,  which 
otherwise,  perhaps,  might  never  have  appeared. 

He  had  spent,  during  the  progress  of  the 
work,  the  money  for  which  he  had  contracted 
to  write  his  Dictionary .  We  have  seen  that  the 
reward  of  his  labour  was  only  fifteen  hundred 
and  seventy-five  pounds;  and  when  the  expence 
of  amanuenses  and  paper,  and  other  articles  are 
deducted,  his  clear  profit  was  very  inconsider¬ 
able.  I  once  said  to  him,  “I  am  sorry,  Sir,  you 
did  not  get  more  for  your  Dictionary .”  His  an¬ 
swer  was,  “I  am  sorry,  too.  But  it  was  very  well. 
The  booksellers  are  generous,  liberal-minded 
men.”  He,  upon  all  occasions,  did  ample  justice 
to  their  character  in  this  respect.  He  considered 
them  as  the  patrons  of  literature;  and,  indeed, 
although  they  have  eventually  been  consider¬ 
able  gainers  by  his  Dictionary ,  it  is  to  them  that 
we  owe  its  having  been  undertaken  and  carried 
through  at  the  risk  of  great  expence,  for  they 
were  not  absolutely  sure  of  being  indemnified. 

On  the  first  day  of  this  year  we  find  from  his 
private  devotions,  that  he  had  then  recovered 
from  sickness;3  and  in  February  that  his  eye  was 
restored  to  its  use.4  The  pious  gratitude  with 
which  he  acknowledges  mercies  upon  every  oc¬ 
casion  is  very  edifying;  as  is  the  humble  submis¬ 
sion  which  he  breathes,  when  it  is  the  will  of  his 
heavenly  Father  to  try  him  with  afflictions.  As 
such  dispositions  become  the  state  of  man  here, 
and  are  the  true  effects  of  religious  discipline, 
we  cannot  but  venerate  in  Johnson  one  of  the 
most  exercised  minds  that  our  holy  religion 

3 Prayers  and  Meditations  p.  40  [25]. 

*Ibid.,  p.  27. 


BOSWELL 


1756]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  85 


hath  ever  formed.  If  there  be  any  thoughtless 
enough  to  suppose  such  exercise  the  weakness 
of  a  great  understanding,  let  them  look  up  to 
Johnson  and  be  convinced  that  what  he  so 
earnestly  practised  must  have  a  rational  founda¬ 
tion. 

His  works  this  year  were,  an  abstract  or  epi¬ 
tome,  in  octavo,  of  his  folio  Dictionary ,  and  a  few 
essays  in  a  monthly  publication,  entitled  The 
Universal  Visiter.  Christopher  Smart,  with  whose 
unhappy  vacillation  of  mind  he  sincerely  sym¬ 
pathised,  was  one  of  the  stated  undertakers  of 
this  miscellany;  and  it  was  to  assist  him  that 
Johnson  sometimes  employed  his  pen.  All  the 
essays  marked  with  two  asterisks  have  been  as¬ 
cribed  to  him;  but  I  am  confident,  from  internal 
evidence,  that  of  these,  neither  “The  Life  of 
Chaucer,”  “Reflections  on  the  State  of  Portu¬ 
gal/’  nor  an  “Essay  on  Architecture,”  were 
written  by  him.  I  am  equally  confident,  upon 
the  same  evidence,  that  he  wrote  “Further 
Thoughts  on  Agriculture” ;  t  being  the  sequel  of 
a  very  inferiour  essay  on  the  same  subject,  and 
which,  though  carried  on  as  if  by  the  same 
hand,  is  both  in  thinking  and  expression  so  far 
above  it,  and  so  strikingly  peculiar,  as  to  leave 
no  doubt  of  its  true  parent;  and  that  he  also 
wrote  “A  Dissertation  on  the  State  of  Literature 
and  Authours,”f  and  “A  Dissertation  on  the 
Epitaphs  written  by  Pope.”f  The  last  of  these, 
indeed,  he  afterwards  added  to  his  Idler.  Why 
the  essays  truly  written  by  him  are  marked  in 
the  same  manner  with  some  which  he  did  not 
write,  I  cannot  explain;  but  with  deference  to 
those  who  have  ascribed  to  him  the  three  essays 
which  I  have  rejected,  they  want  all  the  char- 
acteristical  marks  of  Johnsonian  composition. 

He  engaged  also  to  superintend  and  contrib¬ 
ute  largely  to  another  monthly  publication,  en¬ 
titled  The  Literary  Magazine ;  Or,  Universal  Re¬ 
view ;*  the  first  number  of  which  came  out  in 
May  this  year.  What  were  his  emoluments  from 
this  undertaking,  and  what  other  writers  were 
employed  in  it,  I  have  not  discovered.  He  con¬ 
tinued  to  write  in  it,  with  intermissions,  till  the 
fifteenth  number;  and  I  think  that  he  never 
gave  better  proofs  of  the  force,  acuteness,  and 
vivacity  of  his  mind,  than  in  this  miscellany, 
whether  we  consider  his  original  essays,  or  his 
reviews  of  the  works  of  others.  The  “Prelimi¬ 
nary  Address”  f  to  the  Publick  is  a  proof  how 
this  great  man  could  embellish,  with  the  graces 
of  superiour  composition,  even  so  trite  a  thing 
as  the  plan  of  a  magazine. 

His  original  essays  are,  “An  Introduction  to 
the  Political  State  of  Great  Britain”  ;f  “Re¬ 


marks  on  the  Militia  Bill”;f  “Observations  on 
his  Britannick  Majesty’s  Treaties  with  the  Em¬ 
press  of  Russia  and  the  Landgrave  of  Hesse 
Cassel”;f  “Observations  on  the  Present  State 
of  Affairs”; f  and  “Memoirs  of  Frederick  III, 
King  of  Prussia.”  f  In  all  these  he  displays  ex¬ 
tensive  political  knowledge  and  sagacity,  ex¬ 
pressed  with  uncommon  energy  and  perspicu¬ 
ity,  without  any  of  those  words  which  he  some¬ 
times  took  a  pleasure  in  adopting  in  imitation  of 
Sir  Thomas  Browne;  of  whose  Christian  Morals 
he  this  year  gave  an  edition,  with  his  “Life”f 
prefixed  to  it,  which  is  one  of  Johnson’s  best  bio¬ 
graphical  performances.  In  one  instance  only 
in  these  essays  has  he  indulged  his  Brownism.  Dr. 
Robertson,  the  historian,  mentioned  it  to  me,  as 
having  at  once  convinced  him  that  Johnson  was 
the  author  of  the  “Memoirs  of  the  King  of  Prus¬ 
sia.”  Speaking  of  the  pride  which  the  old  King, 
the  father  of  his  hero,  took  in  being  master  of 
the  tallest  regiment  in  Europe,  he  says,  cTo  re¬ 
view  this  towering  regiment  was  his  daily  pleas¬ 
ure;  and  to  perpetuate  it  was  so  much  his  care, 
that  when  he  met  a  tall  woman  he  immediately 
commanded  one  of  his  Titanian  retinue  to  marry 
her,  that  they  might  propagate  procerityl  For  this 
Anglo-Latin  word  procerity ,  Johnson  had,  how¬ 
ever,  the  authority  of  Addison. 

His  reviews  are  of  the  following  books:  Birch’s 
History  of  the  Royal  Society;  j*  Murphy’s  Grafs  Inn 
Journal;  t  War  ton’s  Essay  on  the  Writings  and  Gen¬ 
ius  of  Pope ,  Vol.  I;  f  Hampton’s  Translation  of 
Polybius;  f  Blackwell’s  Memoirs  of  the  Court  of 
Augustus;  f  Russel’s  Natural  History  of  Aleppo;  f 
Sir  Isaac  Newton’s  Arguments  in  Proof  of  a  Deity ;f 
Borlase’s  History  of  the  Isles  of  Scilly;f  Home’s 
Experiments  on  Bleaching;  f  Browne’s  Christian 
Morals ;f  Hales  On  Distilling  Sea- Water,  Ventila¬ 
tors  in  Ships,  and  curing  an  ill  Taste  in  Milk;\ 
Lucas’s  Essay  on  Waters;  f  Keith’s  Catalogue  of 
the  Scottish  Bishops;  f  Browne’s  History  of  Ja- 
maica;\  Philosophical  Transactions ,  vol.  xlix.f 
Mrs.  Lennox’s  Translation  of  Sully’s  Memoirs;  * 
Miscellanies  by  Elizabeth  Harrison  ;f  Evans’s 
Map  and  Account  of  the  Middle  Colonies  in  Amer¬ 
ica ;f  “Letter  on  the  Case  of  Admiral  Byng”;* 
“Appeal  to  the  People  concerning  Admiral 
Byng”;*  Hanway’s  Eight  Days ’  Journey,  and 
Essay  on  Tea ;*  The  Cadet ,  a  Military  Treatise ;f 
“Some  further  Particulars  in  Relation  to  the 
Case  of  Admiral  Byng,  by  a  Gentleman  of  Ox¬ 
ford”;*  “The  Conduct  of  the  Ministry  Relating 
to  the  Present  War  Impartially  Examined”  ;f 
“A  Free  Inquiry  into  the  Nature  and  Origin  of 
Evil”*  All  these,  from  internal  evidence,  were 
written  by  Johnson;  some  of  them  I  know  he 


BOSWELL 


86 

avowed,  and  have  marked  them  with  an  asterisk 
accordingly.  Mr.  Thomas  Davies  indeed,  as¬ 
cribed  to  him  the  Review  of  Mr.  Burke’s  In¬ 
quiry  into  the  Origin  of  our  Ideas  of  the  Sublime  and 
Beautiful;  and  Sir  John  Hawkins,  with  equal 
discernment,  has  inserted  it  in  his  collection 
of  Johnson’s  works:  whereas  it  has  no  resem¬ 
blance  to  Johnson’s  composition,  and  is  well 
known  to  have  been  written  by  Mr.  Murphy, 
who  has  acknowledged  it  to  me  and  many 
others. 

It  is  worthy  of  remark,  injustice  to  Johnson’s 
political  character,  which  has  been  misrepre¬ 
sented  as  abjectly  submissive  to  power,  that  his 
“Observations  on  the  present  State  of  Affairs” 
glow  with  as  animated  a  spirit  of  constitutional 
liberty  as  can  be  found  any  where.  Thus  he  be¬ 
gins: 

“The  time  is  now  come,  in  which  every  Eng¬ 
lishman  expects  to  be  informed  of  the  national 
affairs;  and  in  which  he  has  a  right  to  have  that 
expectation  gratified.  For,  whatever  may  be 
urged  by  Ministers,  or  those  whom  vanity  or 
interest  make  the  followers  of  ministers,  con¬ 
cerning  the  necessity  of  confidence  in  our  gover- 
nours,  and  the  presumption  of  prying  with  pro¬ 
fane  eyes  into  the  recesses  of  policy,  it  is  evident 
that  this  reverence  can  be  claimed  only  by 
counsels  yet  unexecuted,  and  projects  suspended 
in  deliberation.  But  when  a  design  has  ended 
in  miscarriage  or  success,  when  every  eye  and 
every  ear  is  witness  to  general  discontent  or  gen¬ 
eral  satisfaction,  it  is  then  a  proper  time  to  disen¬ 
tangle  confusion  and  illustrate  obscurity;  to 
shew  by  what  causes  every  event  was  produced, 
and  in  what  effects  it  is  likely  to  terminate;  to 
lay  down  with  distinct  particularity  what  rum¬ 
our  always  huddles  in  general  exclamation,  or 
perplexes  by  indigested  narratives:  to  shew 
whence  happiness  or  calamity  is  derived,  and 
whence  it  may  be  expected;  and  honestly  to 
lay  before  the  people  what  inquiry  can  gather 
of  the  past,  and  conjecture  can  estimate  of  the 
future.” 

Here  we  have  it  assumed  as  an  incontrover¬ 
tible  principle,  that  in  this  country  the  people 
are  the  superintendants  of  the  conduct  and 
measures  of  those  by  whom  government  is  ad¬ 
ministered;  of  the  beneficial  effect  of  which  the 
present  reign  afforded  an  illustrious  example, 
when  addresses  from  all  parts  of  the  kingdom 
controuled  an  audacious  attempt  to  introduce  a 
new  power  subersive  of  the  crown. 

A  still  stronger  proof  of  his  patriotick  spirit 
appears  in  his  review  of  an  Essay  on  Waters ,  by 
Dr.  Lucas;  of  whom,  after  describing  him  as  a 


[1756 

man  well  known  to  the  world  for  his  daring  de¬ 
fiance  of  power,  when  he  thought  it  exerted  on 
the  side  of  wrong,  he  thus  speaks: 

“The  Irish  ministers  drove  him  from  his  na¬ 
tive  country  by  a  proclamation,  in  which  they 
charged  him  with  crimes  of  which  they  never  in¬ 
tended  to  be  called  to  the  proof,  and  oppressed 
by  methods  equally  irresistible  by  guilt  and  in¬ 
nocence. 

“Let  the  man  thus  driven  into  exile,  for  hav¬ 
ing  been  the  friend  of  his  country,  be  received  in 
every  other  place  as  a  confessor  of  liberty;  and 
let  the  tools  of  power  be  taught  in  time,  that 
they  may  rob,  but  cannot  impoverish.” 

Some  of  his  reviews  in  this  Magazine  are  very 
short  accounts  of  the  pieces  noticed,  and  I  men¬ 
tion  them  only  that  Dr.  Johnson’s  opinion  of  the 
works  may  be  known;  but  many  of  them  are  ex¬ 
amples  of  elaborate  criticism,  in  the  most  mas¬ 
terly  style.  In  his  review  of  the  Memoirs  of  the 
Court  of  Augustus ,  he  has  the  resolution  to  think 
and  speak  from  his  own  mind,  regardless  of  the 
cant  transmitted  from  age  to  age,  in  praise  of 
the  ancient  Romans.  Thus. 

“I  know  not  why  any  one  but  a  school-boy  in 
his  declamation  should  whine  over  the  Com¬ 
mon-wealth  of  Rome,  which  grew  great  only 
by  the  misery  of  the  rest  of  mankind.  The  Ro¬ 
mans,  like  others,  as  soon  as  they  grew  rich, 
grew  corrupt;  and  in  their  corruption  sold 
the  lives  and  freedoms  of  themselves,  and  of  one 
another.” 

Again, — “A  people,  who,  while  they  were 
poor,  robbed  mankind;  and  as  soon  as  they  be¬ 
came  rich,  robbed  one  another.” 

In  his  review  of  the  Miscellanies  in  prose  and 
verse,  published  by  Elizabeth  Harrison,  but 
written  by  many  hands,  he  gives  an  eminent 
proof  at  once  of  his  orthodoxy  and  candour: 

“The  authours  of  the  essays  in  prose  seem 
generally  to  have  imitated,  or  tried  to  imitate, 
the  copiousness  and  luxuriance  of  Mrs.  Rowe. 
This,  however,  is  not  all  their  praise;  they  have 
laboured  to  add  to  her  brightness  of  imagery, 
her  purity  of  sentiments.  The  poets  have  had 
Dr.  Watts  before  their  eyes;  a  writer,  who,  if  he 
stood  not  in  the  first  class  of  genius,  compen¬ 
sated  that  defect  by  a  ready  application  of  his 
powers  to  the  promotion  of  piety.  The  attempt 
to  employ  the  ornaments  of  romance  in  the  dec¬ 
oration  of  religion,  was,  I  think  first  made  by 
Mr.  Boyle’s  Martyrdom  of  Theodora ;  but  Boyle’s 
philosophical  studies  did  not  allow  him  time  for 
the  cultivation  of  style;  and  the  completion  of 
the  great  design  was  reserved  for  Mrs.  Rowe.  Dr. 
Watts  was  one  of  the  first  who  taught  the  Dissen- 


1756]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  87 


ters  to  write  and  speak  like  other  men,  by  shew¬ 
ing  them  that  elegance  might  consist  with  piety. 
They  would  have  both  done  honour  to  a  better 
society,  for  they  had  that  charity  which  might 
well  make  their  failings  be  forgotten,  and  with 
which  the  whole  Christian  world  might  wish 
for  communion.  They  were  pure  from  all  the 
heresies  of  an  age,  to  which  every  opinion  is  be¬ 
come  a  favourite  that  the  universal  church  has 
hitherto  detested ! 

4 ‘This  praise,  the  general  interest  of  mankind 
requires  to  be  given  to  writers  who  please  and 
do  not  corrupt,  who  instruct  and  do  not  weary. 
But  to  them  all  human  eulogies  are  vain,  whom 
I  believe  applauded  by  angels,  and  numbered 
with  the  just.” 

His  defence  of  tea  against  Mr.  Jonas  Han¬ 
way’ s  violent  attack  upon  the  elegant  and  popu¬ 
lar  beverage,  shews  how  very  well  a  man  of  gen¬ 
ius  can  write  upon  the  slightest  subject,  when  he 
writes,  as  the  Italians  say,  con  amove:  I  suppose 
no  person  ever  enjoyed  with  more  relish  the 
infusion  of  that  fragrant  leaf  than  Johnson.  The 
quantities  which  he  drank  of  it  at  all  hours  were 
so  great,  that  his  nerves  must  have  been  uncom¬ 
monly  strong,  not  to  have  been  extremely  re¬ 
laxed  by  such  an  intemperate  use  of  it.  He  as¬ 
sured  me,  that  he  never  felt  the  least  inconven¬ 
ience  from  it;  which  is  a  proof  that  the  fault  of 
his  constitution  was  rather  a  too  great  tension 
of  fibres,  than  the  contrary.  Mr.  Hanway  wrote 
an  angry  answer  to  Johnson’s  review  of  his  Es¬ 
say  on  Tea ,  and  Johnson,  after  a  full  and  deliber¬ 
ate  pause,  made  a  reply  to  it;  the  only  instance, 
I  believe,  in  the  whole  course  of  his  life,  when 
he  condescended  to  oppose  any  thing  that 
was  written  against  him.  I  suppose  when  he 
thought  of  any  of  his  little  antagonists,  he  was 
ever  justly  aware  of  the  high  sentiment  of  Ajax 
in  Ovid: 

Iste  tulit pretiumjam  nunc  certaminis  kujusy 

Qui ,  cum  victus  erit ,  mecum  certasse feretur. 

But,  indeed,  the  good  Mr.  Hanway  laid  him¬ 
self  so  open  to  ridicule,  that  Johnson’s  animad¬ 
versions  upon  his  attack  were  chiefly  to  make 
sport. 

The  generosity  with  which  he  pleads  the  cause 
of  Admiral  Byng  is  highly  to  the  honour  of  his 
heart  and  spirit.  Though  Voltaire  affects  to  be 
witty  upon  the  fate  of  that  unfortunate  officer, 
observing  that  he  was  shot  pour  encourager  les  au - 
tres ,  the  nation  has  long  been  satisfied  that  his 
life  was  sacrificed  to  the  political  fervour  of  the 
times.  In  the  vault  belonging  to  the  Torrington 
family,  in  the  church  of  Southill,  in  Bedford¬ 


shire,  there  is  the  following  Epitaph  upon  his 
monument,  which  I  have  transcribed: 

To  THE  PERPETUAL  DISGRACE 
of  public  Justice, 

The  Honourable  John  Byng,  Esq. 

Admiral  of  the  Blue, 

Fell  a  Martyr  to  political 
Persecution, 

March  14,  in  the  Year,  1757; 

when  Bravery  and  Loyalty 

WERE  INSUFFICIENT  SECURITIES 

for  the  Life  and  Honour  of 
a  Naval  Officer 

Johnson’s  most  exquisite  critical  essay  in  the 
Literary  Magazine ,  and  indeed  any  where,  is 
his  review  of  Soame  Jenyns’s  Inquiry  into  the 
Origin  of  Evil.  Jenyns  was  possessed  of  lively 
talents  and  a  style  eminently  pure  and  easy, 
and  could  very  happily  play  with  a  light  sub¬ 
ject,  either  in  prose  or  verse;  but  when  he  spec¬ 
ulated  on  that  most  difficult  and  excruciating 
question,  the  Origin  of  Evil,  he  “ventured  far 
beyond  his  depth,”  and,  accordingly,  was  ex¬ 
posed  by  Johnson,  both  with  acute  argument 
and  brilliant  wit.  I  remember  when  the  late 
Mr.  Bicknell’s  humourous  performance,  en¬ 
titled  The  Musical  Travels  of  Joel  Collyer ,  in 
which  a  slight  attempt  is  made  to  ridicule 
Johnson,  was  ascribed  to  Soame  Jenyns,  “Ha! 
(said  Johnson)  I  thought  I  had  given  him 
enough  of  it.” 

His  triumph  over  Jenyns  is  thus  described  by 
my  friend  Mr.  Courtenay  in  his  Poetical  Review 
of  the  literary  and  moral  Character  of  Dr.  Johnson;  a 
performance  of  such  merit,  that  had  I  not  been 
honoured  with  a  very  kind  and  partial  notice  in 
it,  I  should  echo  the  sentiments  of  men  of  the 
first  taste  loudly  in  its  praise: 

When  specious  sophists  with  presumption  scan 

The  source  of  evil  hidden  still  from  man; 

Revive  Arabian  tales ,  and  vainly  hope 

To  rival  St.  John ,  and  his  scholar  Pope; 

Though  metaphysicks  spread  the  gloom  of  nighty 

By  reason's  star  he  guides  our  aching  sight; 

The  bounds  of  knowledge  marks ,  and  points  the  way 

To  pathless  wastes ,  where  wilder' d  sages  stray; 

Where ,  like  a  farthing  link-boy ,  Jenyns  stands , 

And  the  dim  torch  drops from  his feeble  hands.1 

1Some  time  after  Dr.  Johnson’s  death  there  ap¬ 
peared  in  the  newspapers  and  magazines  an  illib¬ 
eral  and  petulant  attack  upon  him,  in  the  form  of 
an  Epitaph,  under  the  name  of  Mr.  Soame  Jenyns, 
very  unworthy  of  that  gentleman,  who  had  quietly 
submitted  tathe  critical  lash  while  Johnson  lived. 
It  assumed,  as  characteristicks  of  him,  all  the  vul¬ 
gar  circumstances  of  abuse  which  had  circulated 
amongst  the  ignorant.  It  was  an  unbecoming  in- 


BOSWELL 


88 

This  year  Mr.  William  Payne,  brother  of  the 
respectable  Bookseller  of  that  name,  published 
An  Introduction  to  the  Game  of  Draughts ,  to  which 
Johnson  contributed  a  Dedication  to  the  Earl  of 
Rochford,  *  and  a  Preface,  *  both  of  which  are 
admirably  adapted  to  the  treatise  to  which  they 
are  prefixed.  Johnson,  I  believe,  did  not  play  at 
draughts  after  leaving  College,  by  which  he  suf¬ 
fered;  for  it  would  have  afforded  him  an  inno¬ 
cent  soothing  relief  from  the  melancholy  which 
distressed  him  so  often.  I  have  heard  him  regret 
that  he  had  not  learnt  to  play  at  cards;  and  the 
game  of  draughts  we  know  is  peculiarly  calcu¬ 
lated  to  fix  the  attention  without  straining  it. 
There  is  a  composure  and  gravity  in  draughts 
which  insensibly  tranquillises  the  mind;  and,  ac¬ 
cordingly,  the  Dutch  are  fond  of  it,  as  they  are 
of  smoaking,  of  the  sedative  influence  of  which, 
though  he  himself  never  smoaked,  he  had  a  high 
opinion.1  Besides,  there  is  in  draughts  some  exer¬ 
cise  of  the  faculties;  and,  accordingly,  Johnson 
wishing  to  dignify  the  subject  in  his  Dedication 
with  what  is  most  estimable  in  it,  observes, 

“Triflers  may  find  or  make  any  thing  a  trifle; 
but  since  it  is  the  great  characteristick  of  a  wise 
man  to  see  events  in  their  courses,  to  obviate 
consequences,  and  ascertain  contingencies,  your 
Lordship  will  think  nothing  a  trifle  by  which  the 
mind  is  inured  to  caution,  foresight,  and  cir¬ 
cumspection.5’ 

As  one  of  the  little  occasional  advantages 
which  he  did  not  disdain  to  take  by  his  pen,  as  a 

dulgence  of  puny  resentment,  at  a  time  when  he 
himself  was  at  a  very  advanced  age,  and  had  a  near 
prospect  of  descending  to  the  grave.  I  was  truly 
sorry  for  it;  for  he  was  then  become  an  avowed, 
and  (as  my  Lord  Bishop  of  London,  who  had  a 
serious  conversation  with  him  on  the  subject,  as¬ 
sures  me)  a  sincere  Christian.  He  could  not  expect 
that  Johnson’s  numerous  friends  would  patiently 
bear  to  have  the  memory  of  their  master  stigma¬ 
tized  by  no  mean  pen,  but  that,  at  least,  one 
would  be  found  to  retort.  Accordingly,  this  un¬ 
just  and  sarcastick  Epitaph  was  met  in  the  same 
publick  field  by  an  answer,  in  terms  by  no  means 
soft,  and  such  as  wanton  provocation  only  could 

JUStify:  EPITAPH 

Prepared  for  a  creature  not  quite  dead  yet 
Here  lies  a  little  ugly  nauseous  elf , 

Who  judging  only from  its  wretched  self. 

Feebly  attempted ,  petulant  and  vain , 

The  “ Origin  of  Evil”  to  explain. 

A  mighty  Genius  at  this  elf  displeas’d y 
With  a  strong  critick  grasp  the  urchin  squeez'd. 

For  thirty  years  its  coward  spleen  it  kept , 

Till  in  the  dust  the  mighty  Genius  slept; 

Then  stunk  and fretted  in  expiring  snuff , 

And  blink’d  at  Johnson  with  its  last  poor  puff. 

1 Journal  of  a  Tour  to  the  Hebrides ,  3d  edit.,  p.  48. 
[Aug.  19] 


[  *756 

man  whose  profession  was  literature,  he  this 
year  accepted  of  a  guinea  from  Mr.  Robert 
Dodsley,  for  writing  the  introduction  to  The 
London  Chronicle ,  an  evening  news-paper;  and 
even  in  so  slight  a  performance  exhibited  pecu¬ 
liar  talents.  This  Chronicle  still  subsists,  and  from 
what  I  observed,  when  I  was  abroad,  has  a 
more  extensive  circulation  upon  the  Continent 
than  any  of  the  English  news-papers.  It  was 
constantly  read  by  Johnson  himself;  and  it  is 
but  just  to  observe,  that  it  has  all  along  been  dis¬ 
tinguished  for  good  sense,  accuracy,  modera¬ 
tion,  and  delicacy. 

Another  instance  of  the  same  nature  has  been 
communicated  to  me  by  the  Reverend  Dr. 
Thomas  Campbell,  who  has  done  himself  con¬ 
siderable  credit  by  his  own  writings. 

“Sitting  with  Dr.  Johnson  one  morning  alone, 
he  asked  me  if  I  had  known  Dr.  Madden,  who 
was  authour  of  the  premium-scheme  in  Ireland. 
On  my  answering  in  the  affirmative,  and  also 
that  I  had  for  some  years  lived  in  his  neighbour¬ 
hood,  &c.,  he  begged  of  me  that  when  I  re¬ 
turned  to  Ireland,  I  would  endeavour  to  pro¬ 
cure  for  him  a  poem  of  Dr.  Madden’s  called 
Boulter's  Monument.  The  reason  (said  he)  why  I 
wish  for  it,  is  this:  when  Dr.  Madden  came  to 
London,  he  submitted  that  work  to  my  castiga¬ 
tion;  and  I  remember  I  blotted  a  great  many 
lines,  and  might  have  blotted  many  more,  with¬ 
out  making  the  poem  worse.  However,  the  Doc¬ 
tor  was  very  thankful,  and  very  generous,  for  he 
gave  me  ten  guineas,  which  was  to  me  at  that  time 
a  great  sum." 

He  this  year  resumed  his  scheme  of  giving  an 
edition  of  Shakspeare  with  notes.  He  issued  Pro¬ 
posals  of  considerable  length,*2  in  which  he 
shewed  that  he  perfectly  well  knew  what  a  var¬ 
iety  of  research  such  an  undertaking  required; 
but  his  indolence  prevented  him  from  pursuing 
it  with  that  diligence  which  alone  can  collect 
those  scattered  facts  that  genius,  however  acute, 
penetrating,  and  luminous,  cannot  discover  by 
its  own  force.  It  is  remarkable,  that  at  this  time 
his  fancied  activity  was  for  the  moment  so  vigor¬ 
ous,  that  he  promised  his  work  should  be  pub¬ 
lished  before  Christmas,  1757.  Yet  nine  years 
elapsed  before  it  saw  the  light.  His  throes  in 
bringing  it  forth  had  been  severe  and  remittent; 
and  at  last  we  may  almost  conclude  that  the 
Caesarian  operation  was  performed  by  the  knife 
of  Churchill,  whose  upbraiding  satire,  I  dare 
say,  made  Johnson’s  friends  urge  him  to  dis¬ 
patch. 

2They  have  been  reprinted  by  Mr.  Malone,  in 
the  Preface  to  his  edition  of  Shakspeare. 


1757]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  89 


He  for  subscribers  bates  his  hook , 

And  takes  your  cash;  but  where's  the  book? 

No  matter  where;  wise  fear, you  know. 

Forbids  the  robbing  of  a  foe; 

But  what,  to  serve  our  private  ends. 

Forbids  the  cheating  of  our  friends? 

About  this  period  he  was  offered  a  living  of 
considerable  value  in  Lincolnshire,  if  he  were 
inclined  to  enter  into  holy  orders.  It  was  a  rec¬ 
tory  in  the  gift  of  Mr.  Langton,  the  father  of  his 
much  valued  friend.  But  he  did  not  accept  of  it; 
partly  I  believe  from  a  conscientious  motive,  be¬ 
ing  persuaded  that  his  temper  and  habits  ren¬ 
dered  him  unfit  for  that  assiduous  and  familiar 
instruction  of  the  vulgar  and  ignorant  which  he 
held  to  be  essential  duty  in  a  clergyman;  and 
partly  because  his  love  of  a  London  life  was  so 
strong,  that  he  would  have  thought  himself  an 
exile  in  any  other  place,  particularly  if  residing 
in  the  country.  Whoever  would  wish  to  see  his 
thoughts  upon  that  subject  displayed  in  their  full 
force,  may  peruse  The  Adventurer ,  Number  1 26. 

1757:  ,etat.  48.] — In  1757  it  does  not  appear 
that  he  published  any  thing,  except  some  of 
those  articles  in  The  Literary  Magazine ,  which 
have  been  mentioned.  That  magazine,  after 
Johnson  ceased  to  write  in  it,  gradually  de¬ 
clined,  though  the  popular  epithet  of  Antigalli - 
can  was  added  to  it;  and  in  July  1 758  it  expired. 
He  probably  prepared  a  part  of  his  Shakspeare 
this  year,  and  he  dictated  a  speech  on  the  sub¬ 
ject  of  an  Address  to  the  Throne,  after  the  ex¬ 
pedition  to  Rochfort,  which  was  delivered  by 
one  of  his  friends,  I  know  not  in  what  publick 
meeting.  It  is  printed  in  The  Gentleman's  Maga¬ 
zine  for  October  1 785  as  his,  and  bears  sufficient 
marks  of  authenticity. 

By  the  favour  of  Mr.  Joseph  Cooper  Walker, 
of  the  Treasury,  Dublin,  I  have  obtained  a  copy 
of  the  following  letter  from  Johnson  to  the  ven¬ 
erable  authour  of  Dissertations  on  the  History  of 
Ireland . 

To  Charles  O’Connor,  Esq. 

Sir,  I  have  lately,  by  the  favour  of  Mr.  Faulk¬ 
ner,  seen  your  account  of  Ireland,  and  cannot 
forbear  to  solicit  a  prosecution  of  your  design. 
Sir  WilliamTemple  complains  that  Ireland  is  less 
known  than  any  other  country,  as  to  its  ancient 
state.  The  natives  have  had  little  leisure,  and 
little  encouragement  for  enquiry;  and  strangers, 
not  knowing  the  language,  have  had  no  ability. 

I  have  long  wished  that  the  Irish  literature 
were  cultivated.1  Ireland  is  known  by  tradition 

^he  celebrated  oratour,  Mr.  Flood,  has  shewn 
himself  to  be  of  Dr.  Johnson’s  opinion;  having  by 
his  will  bequeathed  his  estate,  after  the  death  of  his 


to  have  been  once  the  seat  of  piety  and  learning; 
and  surely  it  would  be  very  acceptable  to  all 
those  who  are  curious  either  in  the  original  of 
nations,  or  the  affinities  of  languages,  to  be  fur¬ 
ther  informed  of  the  revolution  of  a  people  so 
ancient,  and  once  so  illustrious. 

What  relation  there  is  between  the  Welch  and 
Irish  language,  or  between  the  language  of  Ire¬ 
land  and  that  of  Biscay,  deserves  enquiry.  Of 
these  provincial  and  unextended  tongues,  it  sel¬ 
dom  happens  that  more  than  one  are  under¬ 
stood  by  any  one  man;  and,  therefore,  it  seldom 
happens  that  a  fair  comparison  can  be  made.  I 
hope  you  will  continue  to  cultivate  this  kind  of 
learning,  which  has  too  long  lain  neglected,  and 
which,  if  it  be  suffered  to  remain  in  oblivion  for 
another  century,  may,  perhaps,  never  be  re¬ 
trieved.  As  I  wish  well  to  all  useful  undertak¬ 
ings,  I  would  not  forbear  to  let  you  know  how 
much  you  deserve  in  my  opinion,  from  all  lovers 
of  study,  and  how  much  pleasure  your  work  has 
given  to,  Sir,  your  most  obliged,  and  most  hum¬ 
ble  servant, 

London,  April  9,  1757  Sam.  Johnson 

To  the  Reverend  Mr.  Thomas  Warton 

Dear  Sir,  Dr.  Marsili  of  Padua,  a  learned 
gentleman,  and  good  Latin  poet,  has  a  mind  to 
see  Oxford.  I  have  given  him  a  letter  to  Dr. 
Huddesford,2  and  shall  be  glad  if  you  will  intro¬ 
duce  him,  and  shew  him  any  thing  in  Oxford. 

I  am  printing  my  new  edition  of  Shakspeare. 

I  long  to  see  you  all,  but  cannot  conveniently 
come  yet.  You  might  write  to  me  now  and  then, 
if  you  were  good  for  any  thing.  But  honores  mutant 
mores .  Professors  forget  their  friends.3 1  shall  cer¬ 
tainly  complain  to  Miss  Jones.4 * * * * * * II  I  am,  your,  &c. 

[London]  June  21,  1757  Sam.  Johnson 

Please  to  make  my  compliments  to  Mr.  Wise. 

wife  Lady  Frances,  to  the  University  of  Dublin; 
“desiring  that  immediately  after  the  said  estate 
shall  come  into  their  possession,  they  shall  appoint 
two  professors,  one  for  the  study  of  the  native  Erse 
or  Irish  language,  and  the  other  for  the  study  of 
Irish  antiquities  and  Irish  history,  and  for  the  stu¬ 
dy  of  any  other  European  language  illustrative  of, 
or  auxiliary  to,  the  study  of  Irish  antiquities  or 
Irish  history;  and  that  they  shall  give  yearly  two 
liberal  premiums  for  two  compositions,  one  in  verse, 
and  the  other  in  prose,  in  the  Irish  language.” 

2Now,  or  late,  Vice-Chancellor.  Warton. 

3Mr.  Warton  was  elected  Professor  of  Poetry  at 
Oxford  in  the  preceding  year.  Warton. 

4Miss  Jones  lived  at  Oxford,  and  was  often  of 
our  parties.  She  was  a  very  ingenious  poetess,  and 

published  a  volume  of  poems;  and,  on  the  whole, 

was  a  most  sensible,  agreeable,  and  amiable  wom¬ 

an.  She  was  a  sister  to  the  Reverend  River  Jones, 

Chanter  of  Christ  Church  Cathedral  at  Oxford, 

and  Johnson  used  to  call  her  the  Chantress .  I  have 

heard  him  often  address  her  in  this  passage  from 

II  Penseroso : 

“  Thee,  Chantress,  oft  the  woods  among 
I  woo,"  etc. 

She  died  unmarried.  Warton. 


90 

Mr.  Burney  having  enclosed  to  him  an  ex¬ 
tract  from  the  review  of  his  Dictionary  in  the 
Bibliotheque  des  Savans,1  and  a  list  of  subscribers 
to  his  Shakspeare ,  which  Mr.  Burney  had  pro¬ 
cured  in  Norfolk,  he  wrote  the  following  an¬ 
swer: 

To  Mr.  Burney,  in  Lynne,  Norfolk 
Sir,  That  I  may  shew  myself  sensible  of  your 
favours,  and  not  commit  the  same  fault  a  second 
time,  I  make  haste  to  answer  the  letter  which  I 
received  this  morning.  The  truth  is,  the  other 
likewise  was  received,  and  I  wrote  an  answer; 
but  being  desirous  to  transmit  you  some  propos¬ 
als  and  receipts,  I  waited  till  I  could  find  a  con¬ 
venient  conveyance,  and  day  was  passed  after 
day,  till  other  things  drove  it  from  my  thoughts; 
yet  not  so,  but  that  I  remember  with  great  pleas¬ 
ure  your  commendation  of  my  Dictionary.  Your 
praise  was  welcome,  not  only  because  I  believe 
it  was  sincere,  but  because  praise  has  been  very 
scarce.  A  man  of  your  candour  will  be  surprised 
when  I  tell  you,  that  among  all  my  acquaint¬ 
ance  there  were  only  two,  who  upon  the  publi¬ 
cation  of  my  book  did  not  endeavour  to  depress 
me  with  threats  of  censure  from  the  publick,  or 
with  objections  learned  from  those  who  had 
learned  them  from  my  own  Preface.  Your’s  is  the 
only  letter  of  goodwill  that  I  have  received; 
though,  indeed,  I  am  promised  something  of 
that  sort  from  Sweden. 

How  my  new  edition2  will  be  received  I  know 
not;  the  subscription  has  not  been  very  success¬ 
ful.  I  shall  publish  about  March. 

If  you  can  direct  me  how  to  send  proposals,  I 
should  wish  that  they  were  in  such  hands. 

I  remember,  Sir,  in  some  of  the  first  letters 
with  which  you  favoured  me,  you  mentioned 
your  lady.  May  I  enquire  after  her?  In  return 
for  the  favours  which  you  have  shewn  me,  it  is 
not  much  to  tell  you,  that  I  wish  you  and  her  all 
that  can  conduce  to  your  happiness.  I  am,  Sir, 
your  most  obliged,  and  most  humble  servant, 
Gough-square,  Dec.  24, 1 757  Sam.  Johnson 

In  1758  we  find  him,  it  should  seem,  in  as 
easy  and  pleasant  a  state  of  existence,  as  consti¬ 
tutional  unhappiness  ever  permitted  him  to  en¬ 
joy. 

To  Bennet  Langton,  Esq.,  at 
Langton,  Lincolnshire 
Dearest  Sir,  I  must  indeed  have  slept  very 
fast,  not  to  have  been  awakened  by  your  letter. 
None  of  your  suspicions  are  true;  I  am  not  much 
richer  than  when  you  left  me ;  and,  what  is  worse, 
my  omission  of  an  answer  to  your  first  letter,  will 
prove  that  I  am  not  much  wiser.  But  I  go  on  as 
I  formerly  did,  designing  to  be  some  time  or 
other  both  rich  and  wise;  and  yet  cultivate  neith¬ 
er  mind  nor  fortune.  Do  you  take  notice  of  my 
Took  iii,  p.  482. 

2Of  Shakspeare . 


[  058 

example,  and  learn  the  danger  of  delay.  When 
I  was  as  you  are  now,  towering  in  the  confi¬ 
dence  of  twenty-one,  little  did  I  suspect  that  I 
should  be  at  forty-nine,  what  I  now  am. 

But  you  do  not  seem  to  need  my  admonition. 
You  are  busy  in  acquiring  and  in  communicat¬ 
ing  knowledge,  and  while  you  are  studying,  en¬ 
joy  the  end  of  study,  by  making  others  wiser  and 
happier.  I  was  much  pleased  with  the  tale  that 
you  told  me  of  being  tutour  to  your  sisters.  I, 
who  have  no  sisters  nor  brothers,  look  with  some 
degree  of  innocent  envy  on  those  who  may  be 
said  to  be  born  to  friends;  and  cannot  see,  with¬ 
out  wonder,  how  rarely  that  native  union  is  af¬ 
terwards  regarded.  It  sometimes,  indeed,  hap¬ 
pens,  that  some  supervenient  cause  of  discord 
may  overpower  this  original  amity;  but  it  seems 
to  me  more  frequently  thrown  away  with  levity, 
or  lost  by  negligence,  than  destroyed  by  injury 
or  violence.  We  tell  the  ladies  that  good  wives 
make  good  husbands;  I  believe  it  is  a  more  cer¬ 
tain  position  that  good  brothers  make  good 
sisters. 

I  am  satisfied  with  your  stay  at  home,  as  Ju¬ 
venal  with  his  friend’s  retirement  to  Cumae:  I 
know  that  your  absence  is  best,  though  it  be  not 
best  for  me. 

Qiiamvis  digressu  veteris  conjusus  amici , 

Laudo  tamen  vacuis  quod  sedem figere  Cumis 
Destinet ,  atque  unum  civem  donare  Sibylla. 

Langton  is  a  good  Cumae,  but  who  must  be 
Sibylla?  Mrs.  Langton  is  as  wise  as  Sibyl,  and  as 
good;  and  will  live,  if  my  wishes  can  prolong 
life,  till  she  shall  in  time  be  as  old.  But  she  dif¬ 
fers  in  this,  that  she  has  not  scattered  her  pre¬ 
cepts  in  the  wind,  at  least  not  those  which  she 
bestowed  upon  you. 

The  two  Wartons  just  looked  into  the  town, 
and  were  taken  to  see  Cleone,  where,  David3  says, 
they  were  starved  for  want  of  company  to  keep 
them  warm.  David  and  Doddy4  have  had  a  new 
quarrel,  and,  I  think,  cannot  conveniently  quar¬ 
rel  any  more.  Cleone  was  well  acted  by  all  the 
characters,  but  Bellamy  left  nothing  to  be  de¬ 
sired.  I  went  the  first  night,  and  supported  it,  as 
well  as  I  might;  for  Doddy,  you  know,  is  my  pa¬ 
tron,  and  I  would  not  desert  him.  The  play  was 
very  well  received.  Doddy,  after  the  danger  was 
over,  went  every  night  to  the  stage-side,  and 
cried  at  the  distress  of  poor  Cleone. 

I  have  left  off  housekeeping,  and  therefore 
made  presents  of  the  game  which  you  were 
pleased  to  send  me.  The  pheasant  I  gave  to  Mr. 
Richardson,5  the  bustard  to  Dr.  Lawrence,  and 
the  pot  I  placed  with  Miss  Williams,  to  be  eaten 
by  myself.  She  desires  that  her  compliments  and 
good  wishes  may  be  accepted  by  the  family;  and 
I  make  the  same  request  for  myself. 

3Mr.  Garrick. 

4Mr.  Dodsley,  the  Authour  of  Cleone. 

5Mr.  Samuel  Richardson,  authour  of  Clarissa. 


BOSWELL 


1758]  LIFE  OF 

Mr.  Reynolds  has  within  these  few  days  raised 
his  price  to  twenty  guineas  a  head,  and  Miss  is 
much  employed  in  miniatures.  I  know  not  any 
body  [else]  whose  prosperity  has  encreased  since 
you  left  them. 

Murphy  is  to  have  his  Orphan  of  China  acted 
next  month;  and  is  therefore,  I  suppose,  happy.1 
I  wish  I  could  tell  you  of  any  great  good  to 
which  I  was  approaching,  but  at  present  my 
prospects  do  not  much  delight  me;  however,  I 
am  always  pleased  when  I  find  that  you,  dear 
Sir,  remember,  your  affectionate,  humble 
servant, 

Jan.  9,  1 758  Sam.  Johnson 

To  Mr.  Burney,  at  Lynne,  Norfolk 

Sir,  Your  kindness  is  so  great,  and  my  claim 
to  any  particular  regard  from  you  so  little,  that 
I  am  at  a  loss  how  to  express  my  sense  of  your 
favours;  but  I  am,  indeed,  much  pleased  to  be 
thus  distinguished  by  you. 

I  am  ashamed  to  tell  you  that  my  Shakspeare 
will  not  be  out  so  soon  as  I  promised  my  sub¬ 
scribers;  but  I  did  not  promise  them  more  than 
I  promised  myself.  It  will,  however,  be  pub¬ 
lished  before  summer. 

I  have  sent  you  a  bundle  of  proposals,  which, 
I  think,  do  not  profess  more  than  I  have  hither¬ 
to  performed.  I  have  printed  many  of  the  plays, 
and  have  hitherto  left  very  few  passages  unex¬ 
plained;  where  I  am  quite  at  a  loss,  I  confess 
my  ignorance,  which  is  seldom  done  by  com¬ 
mentators. 

I  have,  likewise,  enclosed  twelve  receipts;  not 
that  I  mean  to  impose  upon  you  the  trouble  of 
pushing  them,  with  more  importunity  than  may 
seem  proper,  but  that  you  may  rather  have 
more  than  fewer  than  you  shall  want.  The  pro¬ 
posals  you  will  disseminate  as  there  shall  be  an 
opportunity.  I  once  printed  them  at  length  in 
the  Chronicle ,  and  some  of  my  friends  (I  believe 
Mr.  Murphy,  who  formerly  wrote  the  Grafs-Inn 
Journal)  introduced  them  with  a  splendid  en¬ 
comium. 

Since  the  Life  of  Browne ,  I  have  been  a  little 
engaged,  from  time  to  time,  in  the  Literary  Mag¬ 
azine ,  but  not  very  lately.  I  have  not  the  collec¬ 
tion  by  me,  and  therefore  cannot  draw  out  a 
catalogue  of  my  own  parts,  but  will  do  it,  and 
send  it.  Do  not  buy  them,  for  I  will  gather  all 
those  that  have  anything  of  mine  in  them,  and 
send  them  to  Mrs.  Burney,  as  a  small  token  of 
gratitude  for  the  regard  which  she  is  pleased  to 
bestow  upon  me.  I  am,  Sir,  your  most  obliged 
and  most  humble  servant, 

London,  March  8,  1 758  Sam.  Johnson 

Dr.  Burney  has  kindly  favoured  me  with  the 
following  memorandum,  which  I  take  the  lib- 

Hhis  letter  was  an  answer  to  one  in  which  was 
enclosed  a  draft  for  the  payment  of  some  subscrip¬ 
tions  to  his  Shakspeare. 


JOHNSON  91 

erty  to  insert  in  his  own  genuine  easy  style.  I 
love  to  exhibit  sketches  of  my  illustrious  friend 
by  various  eminent  hands. 

“Soon  after  this,  Mr.  Burney,  during  a  visit 
to  the  capital,  had  an  interview  with  him  in 
Gough-square,  where  he  dined  and  drank  tea 
with  him,  and  was  introduced  to  the  acquain¬ 
tance  of  Mrs.  Williams.  After  dinner,  Mr.  John¬ 
son  proposed  to  Mr.  Burney  to  go  up  with  him 
into  his  garret,  which  being  accepted,  he  there 
found  about  five  or  six  Greek  folios,  a  deal  writ¬ 
ing-desk,  and  a  chair  and  a  half.  Johnson  giving 
to  his  guest  the  entire  seat,  tottered  himself  on 
one  with  only  three  legs  and  one  arm.  Here  he 
gave  Mr.  Burney  Mrs.  Williams’s  history,  and 
shewed  him  some  volumes  of  his  Shakspeare  al¬ 
ready  printed,  to  prove  that  he  was  in  earnest. 
Upon  Mr.  Burney’s  opening  the  first  volume,  at 
the  Merchant  of  Venice ,  he  observed  to  him,  that 
he  seemed  to  be  more  severe  on  Warburton 
than  Theobald.  'O  poor  Tib. !  (said  Johnson) 
he  was  ready  knocked  down  to  my  hands;  War- 
burton  stands  between  me  and  him.’  'But,  Sir, 
(said  Mr.  Burney,)  you’ll  have  Warburton 
upon  your  bones,  won’t  you?’  £No,  Sir;  he’ll  not 
come  out:  he’ll  only  growl  in  his  den.’  'But  you 
think,  Sir,  that  Warburton  is  a  superiour  critick 
to  Theobald?’  cO,  Sir,  he’d  make  two-and-fifty 
Theobalds,  cut  into  slices !  The  worst  of  War¬ 
burton  is,  that  he  has  a  rage  for  saying  some¬ 
thing,  when  there’s  nothing  to  be  said.’  Mr. 
Burney  then  asked  him  whether  he  had  seen 
the  letter  which  Warburton  had  written  in  ans¬ 
wer  to  a  pamphlet  addressed  'To  the  most  im¬ 
pudent  Man  alive.’  He  answered  in  the  nega¬ 
tive.  Mr.  Burney  told  him  it  was  supposed  to  be 
written  by  Mallet.  The  controversy  now  raged 
between  the  friends  of  Pope  and  Bolingbroke; 
and  Warburton  and  Mallet  were  the  leaders  of 
the  several  parties.  Mr.  Burney  asked  him  then 
if  he  had  seen  Warburton’s  book  against  Boling- 
broke’s  Philosophy?  'No,  Sir,  I  have  never  read 
Bolingbroke’s  impiety,  and  therefore  am  not  in¬ 
terested  about  its  confutation.’  ” 

On  the  fifteenth  of  April  he  began  a  new  per¬ 
iodical  paper,  entitled  The  Idler ,  *  which  came 
out  every  Saturday  in  a  weekly  news-paper, 
called  The  Universal  Chronicle;  Or,  Weekly  Gaz¬ 
ette,  published  by  Newberry.  These  essays  were 
continued  till  April  5,  1760.  Of  one  hundred 
and  three,  their  total  number,  twelve  were  con¬ 
tributed  by  his  friends;  of  which,  Numbers  33, 
93,  and  96,  were  written  by  Mr.  Thomas  War- 
ton;  No.  67  by  Mr.  Langton;  and  Nos.  76,  79, 
and  82,  by  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds;  the  concluding 
words  of  No.  82,  'and  pollute  his  canvas  with 


BOSWELL 


92 

deformity/  being  added  by  Johnson,  as  Sir  Jos¬ 
hua  informed  me. 

The  Idler  is  evidently  the  work  of  the  same 
mind  which  produced  The  Rambler ,  but  has  less 
body  and  more  spirit.  It  has  more  variety  of  real 
life,  and  greater  facility  of  language.  He  de¬ 
scribes  the  miseries  of  idleness,  with  the  lively 
sensations  of  one  who  has  felt  them;  and  in  his 
private  memorandums  while  engaged  in  it,  we 
find  “This  year  I  hope  to  learn  diligence.”1 
Many  of  these  excellent  essays  were  written  as 
hastily  as  an  ordinary  letter.  Mr.  Langton  re¬ 
members  Johnson,  when  on  a  visit  at  Oxford, 
asking  him  one  evening  how  long  it  was  till  the 
post  went  out;  and  on  being  told  about  half  an 
hour,  he  exclaimed,  “Then  we  shall  do  very 
well.”  He  upon  this  instantly  sat  down  and  fin¬ 
ished  an  Idler ,  which  it  was  necessary  should  be 
in  London  the  next  day. 

Mr.  Langton  having  signified  a  wish  to  read 
it,  “Sir,  (said  he)  you  shall  not  do  more  than 
I  have  done  myself.”  He  then  folded  it  up  and 
sent  it  off. 

Yet  there  are  in  The  Idler  several  papers  which 
she w  as  much  profundity  of  thought,  and  labour 
of  language,  as  any  of  this  great  man’s  writings. 
No.  14,  “Robbery  of  Time”;  No.  24,  “Think¬ 
ing”;  No.  41,  “Death  of  a  Friend”;  No.  43, 
“Flight  of  Time”;  No.  51,  “Domestick  great¬ 
ness  unattainable”;  No.  52,  “Self-denial”;  No. 
58,  “Actual,  how  short  of  fancied,  excellence”; 
No.  89,  “Physical  evil  moral  good”;  and  his 
concluding  paper  on  “The  horrour  of  the  last”; 
will  prove  this  assertion.  I  know  not  why  a  mot¬ 
to,  the  usual  trapping  of  periodical  papers,  is 
prefixed  to  very  few  of  the  Idlers ,  as  I  have  heard 
Johnson  commend  the  custom:  and  he  never 
could  be  at  a  loss  for  one,  his  memory  being 
stored  with  innumerable  passages  of  the  clas- 
sicks.  In  this  series  of  essays  he  exhibits  admir¬ 
able  instances  of  grave  humour,  of  which  he  had 
an  uncommon  share.  Nor  on  some  occasions  has 
he  repressed  that  power  of  sophistry  which  he 
possessed  in  so  eminent  a  degree.  In  No.  1 1,  he 
treats  with  the  utmost  contempt  the  opinion 
that  our  mental  faculties  depend,  in  some  de¬ 
gree,  upon  the  weather;  an  opinion,  which  they 
who  have  never  experienced  its  truth  are  not 
to  be  envied,  and  of  which  he  himself  could 
not  but  be  sensible,  as  the  effects  of  weather 
upon  him  were  very  visible.  Yet  thus  he  de¬ 
claims: 

“Surely,  nothing  is  more  reproachful  to  a  be¬ 
ing  endowed  with  reason,  than  to  resign  its 
powers  to  the  influence  of  the  air,  and  live  in 

lPrayers  and  Meditations,  p.  30  [36]. 


[  I75& 

dependence  on  the  weather  and  the  wind  for 
the  only  blessings  which  nature  has  put  into  our 
power,  tranquillity  and  benevolence.  This  dis¬ 
tinction  of  seasons  is  produced  only  by  imagina¬ 
tion  operating  on  luxury.  To  temperance,  every 
day  is  bright;  and  every  hour  is  propitious  to 
diligence.  He  that  shall  resolutely  excite  his  fac¬ 
ulties,  or  exert  his  virtues,  will  soon  make  him¬ 
self  superiour  to  the  seasons;  and  may  set  at  de¬ 
fiance  the  morning  mist  and  the  evening  damp, 
the  blasts  of  the  east,  and  the  clouds  of  the 
south.” 

Alas!  it  is  too  certain,  that  where  the  frame 
has  delicate  fibres,  and  there  is  a  fine  sensibility, 
such  influences  of  the  air  are  irresistible.  He 
might  as  well  have  bid  defiance  to  the  ague,  the 
palsy,  and  all  other  bodily  disorders.  Such 
boasting  of  the  mind  is  false  elevation. 

I  think  the  Romans  call  it  Stoicism. 

But  in  this  number  of  his  Idler  his  spirits  seem  to 
run  riot;  for  in  the  wantonness  of  his  disquisi¬ 
tion  he  forgets,  for  a  moment,  even  the  rever¬ 
ence  for  that  which  he  held  in  high  respect;  and 
describes  “the  attendant  on  a  Court”  as  one 
“whose  business  is  to  watch  the  looks  of  a  being, 
weak  and  foolish  as  himself.” 

His  unqualified  ridicule  of  rhetorical  gesture 
or  action  is  not,  surely,  a  test  of  truth;  yet  we 
cannot  help  admiring  how  well  it  is  adapted  to 
produce  the  effect  which  he  wished.  “Neither 
the  judges  of  our  laws,  nor  the  representatives 
of  our  people,  would  be  much  affected  by  la¬ 
boured  gesticulation,  or  believe  any  man  the 
more  because  he  rolled  his  eyes,  or  puffed  his 
cheeks,  or  spread  abroad  his  arms,  or  stamped 
the  ground,  or  thumped  his  breast;  or  turned 
his  eyes  sometimes  to  the  ceiling,  and  some¬ 
times  to  the  floor.” 

A  casual  coincidence  with  other  writers,  or  an 
adoption  of  a  sentiment  or  image  which  has 
been  found  in  the  writings  of  another,  and  after¬ 
wards  appears  in  the  mind  as  one’s  own,  is  not 
unfrequent.  The  richness  of  Johnson’s  fancy, 
which  could  supply  his  page  abundantly  on  all 
occasions,  and  the  strength  of  his  memory, 
which  at  once  detected  the  real  owner  of  any 
thought,  made  him  less  liable  to  the  imputation 
of  plagiarism  than,  perhaps,  any  of  our  writers. 
In  The  Idler ,  however,  there  is  a  paper,  in  which 
conversation  is  assimilated  to  a  bowl  of  punch, 
where  there  is  the  same  train  of  comparison  as 
in  a  poem  by  Blacklock,  in  his  collection  pub¬ 
lished  in  1 756,  in  which  a  parallel  is  ingeniously 
drawn  between  human  life  and  that  liquor.  It 
ends: 


1758]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  93 


Say,  then ,  physicians  of  each  kind. 

Who  cure  the  body  or  the  mind , 

What  harm  in  drinking  can  there  be. 

Since  punch  and  life  so  well  agree ? 

To  The  Idler ,  when  collected  in  volumes,  he 
added,  beside  the  “Essay  on  Epitaphs”  and  the 
“Dissertation  on  those  of  Pope,”  an  Essay  on 
the  “Bravery  of  the  English  Common  Soldiers.” 
He,  however,  omitted  one  of  the  original  papers, 
which  in  the  folio  copy  is  No.  22. 1 

To  the  Reverend  Mr.  Thomas  Warton 

Dear  Sir,  Your  notes  upon  my  poet  were 
very  acceptable.  I  beg  that  you  will  be  so  kind 
as  to  continue  your  searches.  It  will  be  reputa¬ 
ble  to  my  work,  and  suitable  to  your  professor¬ 
ship,  to  have  something  of  yours  in  the  notes.  As 
you  have  given  no  directions  about  your  name, 
I  shall  therefore  put  it.  I  wish  your  brother 
would  take  the  same  trouble.  A  commentary 
must  arise  from  the  fortuitous  discoveries  of  many 
men  in  devious  walks  of  literature.  Some  of  your 
remarks  are  on  plays  already  printed:  but  I  pur¬ 
pose  to  add  an  Appendix  of  Notes,  so  that  noth¬ 
ing  comes  too  late. 

You  give  yourself  too  much  uneasiness,  dear 
Sir,  about  the  loss  of  the  papers.2  The  loss  is 
nothing,  if  nobody  has  found  them;  nor  even 
then,  perhaps,  if  the  numbers  be  known.  You 
are  not  the  only  friend  that  has  had  the  same 
mischance.  You  may  repair  your  want  out  of  a 
stock,  which  is  deposited  with  Mr.  Allen,  of 
Magdalen-Hall;  or  out  of  a  parcel  which  I  have 
just  sent  to  Mr.  Chambers3  for  the  use  of  any 
body  that  will  be  so  kind  as  to  want  them.  Mr. 
Langtons  are  well;  and  Miss  Roberts,  whom  I 
have  at  last  brought  to  speak  upon  the  informa¬ 
tion  which  you  gave  me,  that  she  had  some¬ 
thing  to  say.  I  am,  &c. 

[London]  April  14,  1758  Sam.  Johnson 

To  the  Same 

Dear  Sir,  You  will  receive  this  by  Mr.  Baret- 
ti,  a  gentleman  particularly  intitled  to  the  no¬ 
tice  and  kindness  of  the  Professor  of  poesy.  He 
has  time  but  for  a  short  stay,  and  will  be  glad  to 
have  it  filled  up  with  as  much  as  he  can  hear 
and  see. 

In  recommending  another  to  your  favour, 
I  ought  not  to  omit  thanks  for  the  kindness 
which  you  have  shewn  to  myself.  Have  you  any 
more  notes  on  Shakspeare?  I  shall  be  glad  of 
them. 

I  see  your  pupil  sometimes:4  his  mind  is  as  ex¬ 
alted  as  his  stature.  I  am  half  afraid  of  him;  but 

4This  paper  may  be  found  in  Stockdale’s  sup¬ 
plemental  volume  of  Johnson’s  Miscellaneous  Pieces. 

2Receipts  for  Shakespeare.  Warton. 

3Then  of  Lincoln  College.  Now  Sir  Robert 
Chambers,  one  of  the  Judges  in  India.  Warton. 

4Mr.  Langton.  Warton. 


he  is  no  less  amiable  than  formidable.  He  will, 
if  the  forwardness  of  his  spring  be  not  blasted, 
be  a  credit  to  you,  and  to  the  University.  He 
brings  some  of  my  plays5  with  him,  which  he  has 
my  permission  to  shew  you,  on  condition  you 
will  hide  them  from  every  body  else.  I  am,  dear 
Sir,  &c. 

[London]  June  1,  1758  Sam.  Johnson 

To  Bennet  Langton,  Esq.,  of  Trinity 
College,  Oxford 

Dear  Sir,  Though  I  might  have  expected  to 
hear  from  you,  upon  your  entrance  into  a  new 
state  of  life  at  a  new  place,  yet  recollecting,  (not 
without  some  degree  of  shame,)  that  I  owe  you 
a  letter  upon  an  old  account,  I  think  it  my  part 
to  write  first.  This,  indeed,  I  do  not  only  from 
complaisance  but  from  interest;  for  living  on  in 
the  old  way,  I  am  very  glad  of  a  correspondent 
so  capable  as  yourself  to  diversify  the  hours.  You 
have,  at  present,  too  many  novelties  about  you 
to  need  any  help  from  me  to  drive  along  your 
time. 

I  know  not  any  thing  more  pleasant,  or  more 
instructive,  than  to  compare  experience  with 
expectation,  or  to  register  from  time  to  time  the 
difference  between  idea  and  reality.  It  is  by  this 
kind  of  observation  that  we  grow  daily  less  liable 
to  be  disappointed.  You,  who  are  very  capable 
of  anticipating  futurity,  and  raising  phantoms 
before  your  own  eyes,  must  often  have  imagined 
to  yourself  an  academical  life  and  have  con¬ 
ceived  what  would  be  the  manners,  the  views, 
and  the  conversation,  of  men  devoted  to  letters; 
how  they  would  choose  their  companions,  how 
they  would  direct  their  studies,  and  how  they 
would  regulate  their  lives.  Let  me  know  what 
you  expected,  and  what  you  have  found.  At 
least  record  it  to  yourself  before  custom  has  rec¬ 
onciled  you  to  the  scenes  before  you,  and  the 
disparity  of  your  discoveries  to  your  hopes  has 
vanished  from  your  mind.  It  is  a  rule  never  to  be 
forgotten,  that  whatever  strikes  strongly,  should 
be  described  while  the  first  impression  remains 
fresh  upon  the  mind. 

I  love,  dear  Sir,  to  think  on  you,  and  there¬ 
fore,  should  willingly  write  more  to  you,  but 
that  the  post  will  not  now  give  me  leave  to  do 
more  than  send  my  compliments  to  Mr.  War- 
ton,  and  tell  you  that  I  am,  dear  Sir,  most  affec¬ 
tionately,  your  very  humble  servant, 

June  28,  1 757  Sam.  Johnson 

To  Bennet  Langton,  Esq.,  at  Langton, 

NEAR  SpILSBY,  LINCOLNSHIRE 

Dear  Sir,  I  should  be  sorry  to  think  that 
what  engrosses  the  attention  of  my  friend,  should 
have  no  part  of  mine.  Your  mind  is  now  full  of 

BPart  of  the  impression  of  the  Shakespeare,  which 
Dr.  Johnson  conducted  alone,  and  published  by 
subscription.  This  edition  came  out  in  1 765.  War- 
ton. 


94 


BOSWELL 


t  059 


the  fate  of  Dury1;  but  his  fate  is  past,  and  noth¬ 
ing  remains  but  to  try  what  reflection  will  sug¬ 
gest  to  mitigate  the  terrours  of  a  violent  death, 
which  is  more  formidable  at  the  first  glance, 
than  on  a  nearer  and  more  steady  view.  A  vio¬ 
lent  death  is  never  very  painful;  the  only  danger 
is  lest  it  should  be  unprovided.  But  if  a  man  can 
be  supposed  to  make  no  provision  for  death  in 
war,  what  can  be  the  state  that  would  have 
awakened  him  to  the  care  of  futurity?  When 
would  that  man  have  prepared  himself  to  die, 
who  went  to  seek  death  without  preparation? 
What  then  can  be  the  reason  why  we  lament 
more  him  that  dies  of  a  wound,  than  him  that 
dies  of  a  fever?  A  man  that  languishes  with  dis¬ 
ease,  ends  his  life  with  more  pain,  but  with  less 
virtue;  he  leaves  no  example  to  his  friends,  nor 
bequeaths  any  honour  to  his  descendants.  The 
only  reason  why  we  lament  a  soldier’s  death,  is, 
that  we  think  he  might  have  lived  longer;  yet 
this  cause  of  grief  is  common  to  many  other 
kinds  of  death  which  are  not  so  passionately  be¬ 
wailed.  The  truth  is,  that  every  death  is  violent 
which  is  the  effect  of  accident;  every  death,  which 
is  not  gradually  brought  on  by  the  miseries  of 
age,  or  when  life  is  extinguished  for  any  other 
reason  than  that  it  is  burnt  out.  He  that  dies  be¬ 
fore  sixty,  of  a  cold  or  consumption,  dies,  in 
reality,  by  a  violent  death;  yet  his  death  is  borne 
with  patience  only  because  the  cause  of  his  un¬ 
timely  end  is  silent  and  invisible.  Let  us  endeav¬ 
our  to  see  things  as  they  are,  and  then  enquire 
whether  we  ought  to  complain.  Whether  to  see 
life  as  it  is,  will  give  us  much  consolation,  I  know 
not;  but  the  consolation  which  is  drawn  from 
truth,  if  any  there  be,  is  solid  and  durable;  that 
which  may  be  derived  from  errour  must  be,  like 
its  original,  fallacious  and  fugitive.  I  am,  dear, 
dear  Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

Sept.  21,1758  Sam.  Johnson 

1759:  >etat.  50.] — In  1759,  in  the  month  of 
January,  his  mother  died  at  the  great  age  of 
ninety,  an  event  which  deeply  affected  him;  not 
that  “his  mind  had  acquired  no  firmness  by  the 
contemplation  of  mortality”;2  but  that  his  rev¬ 
erential  affection  for  her  was  not  abated  by 
years,  as  indeed  he  retained  all  his  tender  feel¬ 
ings  even  to  the  latest  period  of  his  life.  I  have 
been  told  that  he  regretted  much  his  not  having 
gone  to  visit  his  mother  for  several  years,  previ¬ 
ous  to  her  death.  But  he  was  constantly  engaged 
in  literary  labours  which  confined  him  to  Lon- 

1Major-General  Alexander  Dury,  of  the  first  reg¬ 
iment  of  foot-guards,  who  fell  in  the  gallant  dis¬ 
charge  of  his  duty,  near  St.  Gas,  in  the  well-known 
unfortunate  expedition  against  France,  in  1 758. 
His  lady  and  Mr.  Langton’s  mother  were  sisters. 
He  left  an  only  son,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Dury,  who 
has  a  company  in  the  same  regiment. 

-Hawkins’s  Life  of  Johnson,  p.  365. 


don;  and  though  he  had  not  the  comfort  of  see¬ 
ing  his  aged  parent,  he  contributed  liberally  to 
her  support. 

Soon  after  this  event,  he  wrote  his  Rasselas, 
Prince  of  Abyssinia;  *  concerning  the  publication 
of  which  Sir  John  Hawkins  guesses  vaguely  and 
idly,  instead  of  having  taken  the  trouble  to  in¬ 
form  himself  with  authentick  precision.  Not  to 
trouble  my  readers  with  a  repetition  of  the 
Knight’s  reveries,  I  have  to  mention,  that  the 
late  Mr.  Strahan  the  printer  told  me,  that  John¬ 
son  wrote  it,  that  with  the  profits  he  might  de¬ 
fray  the  expence  of  his  mother’s  funeral,  and 
pay  some  little  debts  which  she  had  left.  He  told 
Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  that  he  composed  it  in  the 
evenings  of  one  week,  sent  it  to  the  press  in  por¬ 
tions  as  it  was  written,  and  had  never  since  read 
it  over.3  Mr.  Strahan,  Mr.  Johnston,  and  Mr. 
Dodsley  purchased  it  for  a  hundred  pounds,  but 
afterwards  paid  him  twenty-five  pounds  more, 
when  it  came  to  a  second  edition. 

Considering  the  large  sums  which  have  been 
received  for  compilations,  and  works  requiring 
not  much  more  genius  than  compilations,  we 
cannot  but  wonder  at  the  very  low  price  which 
he  was  content  to  receive  for  this  admirable  per¬ 
formance;  which,  though  he  had  written  noth¬ 
ing  else,  would  have  rendered  his  name  immor¬ 
tal  in  the  world  of  literature.  None  of  his  writ¬ 
ings  has  been  so  extensively  diffused  over  Eu¬ 
rope;  for  it  has  been  translated  into  most,  if  not 
all,  of  the  modern  languages.  This  Tale,  with  all 
the  charms  of  oriental  imagery,  and  all  the  force 
and  beauty  of  which  the  English  language  is 
capable,  leads  us  through  the  most  important 
scenes  of  human  life,  and  shews  us  that  this 
stage  of  our  being  is  full  of  “vanity  and  vexation 
of  spirit.”4  To  those  who  look  no  further  than 
the  present  life,  or  who  maintain  that  human 
nature  has  not  fallen  from  the  state  in  which  it 
was  created,  the  instruction  of  this  sublime  story 
will  be  of  no  avail.  But  they  who  think  justly, 
and  feel  with  strong  sensibility,  will  listen  with 
eagerness  and  admiration  to  its  truth  and  wis¬ 
dom.  Voltaire’s  Candide ,  written  to  refute  the 
system  of  Optimism,  which  it  has  accomplished 
with  brilliant  success,  is  wonderfully  similar  in 
its  plan  and  conduct  to  Johnson’s  Rasselas;  inso¬ 
much,  that  I  have  heard  Johnson  say,  that  if 
they  had  not  been  published  so  closely  one  after 
the  other  that  there  was  not  time  for  imitation, 

3See/?o jejune  2,  1781.  Finding  it  then  accident¬ 
ally  in  a  chaise  with  Mr.  Boswell,  he  read  it  eager¬ 
ly.  This  was  doubtless  long  after  his  declaration  to 
Sir  Joshua  Reynolds.  [M.J 

4  Ecclesiastes  1.  14. 


,759]  LIFE  OF 

it  would  have  been  in  vain  to  deny  that  the 
scheme  of  that  which  came  latest  was  taken  from 
the  other.  Though  the  proposition  illustrated  by 
both  these  works  was  the  same,  namely,  that  in 
our  present  state  there  is  more  evil  than  good, 
the  intention  of  the  writers  was  very  different. 
Voltaire,  I  am  afraid,  meant  only  by  wanton 
profaneness  to  obtain  a  sportive  victory  over  re¬ 
ligion,  and  to  discredit  the  belief  of  a  superin¬ 
tending  Providence:  Johnson  meant,  by  shew¬ 
ing  the  unsatisfactory  nature  of  things  temporal, 
to  direct  the  hopes  of  man  to  things  eternal.  Ras - 
selas,  as  was  observed  to  me  by  a  very  accom¬ 
plished  lady,  may  be  considered  as  a  more  en¬ 
larged  and  more  deeply  philosophical  discourse 
in  prose,  upon  the  interesting  truth,  which  in  his 
Vanity  of  Human  Wishes  he  had  so  successfully  en¬ 
forced  in  verse. 

The  fund  of  thinking  which  this  work  con¬ 
tains  is  such,  that  almost  every  sentence  of  it 
may  furnish  a  subject  of  long  meditation.  I  am 
not  satisfied  if  a  year  passes  without  my  having 
read  it  through;  and  at  every  perusal,  my  ad¬ 
miration  of  the  mind  which  produced  it  is  so 
highly  raised,  that  I  can  scarcely  believe  that  I 
had  the  honour  of  enjoying  the  intimacy  of  such 
a  man. 

I  restrain  myself  from  quoting  passages  from 
this  excellent  work,  or  even  referring  to  them, 
because  I  should  not  know  what  to  select,  or 
rather,  what  to  omit.  I  shall,  however,  tran¬ 
scribe  one,  as  it  shews  how  well  he  could  state 
the  arguments  of  those  who  believe  in  the  ap¬ 
pearance  of  departed  spirits;  a  doctrine  which 
it  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  he  himself  ever 
positively  held: 

“If  all  your  fear  be  of  apparitions,  (said  the 
Prince,)  I  will  promise  you  safety:  there  is  no 
danger  from  the  dead;  he  that  is  once  buried 
will  be  seen  no  more. 

“That  the  dead  are  seen  no  more,  (said  Im- 
lac,)  I  will  not  undertake  to  maintain,  against 
the  concurrent  and  unvaried  testimony  of  all 
ages,  and  of  all  nations.  There  is  no  people,  rude 
or  learned,  among  whom  apparitions  of  the 
dead  are  not  related  and  believed.  This  opin¬ 
ion,  which  prevails  as  far  as  human  nature  is 
diffused,  could  become  universal  only  by  its 
truth;  those  that  never  heard  of  one  another, 
would  not  have  agreed  in  a  tale  which  nothing 
but  experience  can  make  credible.  That  it 
is  doubted  by  single  cavillers,  can  very  little 
weaken  the  general  evidence;  and  some  who 
deny  it  with  their  tongues,  confess  it  by  their 
fears.5’ 

Notwithstanding  my  high  admiration  of  Ras - 


JOHNSON  95 

selas ,  I  will  not  maintain  that  the  “morbid  mel¬ 
ancholy55  in  Johnson’s  constitution  may  not, 
perhaps,  have  made  life  appear  to  him  more  in¬ 
sipid  and  unhappy  than  it  generally  is;  for  I  am 
sure  that  he  had  less  enjoyment  from  it  than  I 
have.  Yet,  whatever  additional  shade  his  own 
particular  sensations  may.  have  thrown  on  his 
representation  of  life,  attentive  observation  and 
close  enquiry  have  convinced  me,  that  there  is 
too  much  of  reality  in  the  gloomy  picture.  The 
truth,  however,  is,  that  we  judge  of  the  happi¬ 
ness  and  misery  of  life  differently  at  different 
times,  according  to  the  state  of  our  changeable 
frame.  I  always  remember  a  remark  made  to 
me  by  a  Turkish  lady,  educated  in  France,  “ Ma 
foi ,  Monsieur ,  notre  bonheur  depend  de  la  faqon  que 
notre  sang  circule ,55  This  have  I  learnt  from  a 
pretty  hard  course  of  experience,  and  would, 
from  sincere  benevolence,  impress  upon  all  who 
honour  this  book  with  a  perusal,  that  until  a 
steady  conviction  is  obtained,  that  the  present 
life  is  an  imperfect  state,  and  only  a  passage  to  a 
better,  if  we  comply  with  the  divine  scheme  of 
progressive  improvement;  and  also  that  it  is  a 
part  of  the  mysterious  plan  of  Providence,  that 
intellectual  beings  must  “be  made  perfect 
through  suffering55;  there  will  be  a  continual  re¬ 
currence  of  disappointment  and  uneasiness.  But 
if  we  walk  with  hope  in  “the  mid-day  sun55  of 
revelation,  our  temper  and  disposition  will  be 
such,  that  the  comforts  and  enjoyments  in  our 
way  will  be  relished,  while  we  patiently  support 
the  inconveniences  and  pains.  After  much  spec¬ 
ulation  and  various  reasonings,  I  acknowledge 
myself  convinced  of  the  truth  of  Voltaire’s  con¬ 
clusion,  “ Apres  tout  c'est  un  monde  passable .”  But 
we  must  not  think  too  deeply; 

Where  ignorance  is  bliss ,  ’tis folly  to  be  wise , 

is,  in  many  respects,  more  than  poetically 
just.  Let  us  cultivate,  under  the  command  of 
good  principles,  la  theorie  des  sensations  agreables ; 
and,  as  Mr.  Burke  once  admirably  counselled 
a  grave  and  anxious  gentleman,  “live  pleas¬ 
ant.55 

The  effect  of  Rasselas,  and  of  Johnson’s  other 
moral  tales,  is  thus  beautifully  illustrated  by 
Mr.  Courtenay: 

Impressive  truth ,  in  splendid fiction  drest, 

Checks  the  vain  wish ,  and  calms  the  troubled  breast ; 

O'er  the  dark  mind  a  light  celestial  throws , 

And  sooths  the  angry  passions  to  repose ; 

As  oil  effus'd  illumes  and  smooths  the  deep , 

When  round  the  bark  the  swelling  surges  sweep} 

1  Literary  and  Moral  Character  of  Dr.  Johnson . 


BOSWELL 


96 

It  will  be  recollected,  that  during  all  this  year 
he  carried  on  his  Idler,1  and,  no  doubt,  was  pro¬ 
ceeding,  though  slowly,  in  his  edition  of  Shak- 
speare.  He,  however,  from  that  liberality  which 
never  failed,  when  called  upon  to  assist  other 
labourers  in  literature,  found  time  to  translate 
for  Mrs.  Lennox’s  English  version  of  Brumoy, 
“A  Dissertation  on  the  Greek  Comedy,”  f  and 
“The  General  Conclusion  of  the  book.”f 

An  inquiry  into  the  state  of  foreign  countries 
was  an  object  that  seems  at  all  times  to  have  in¬ 
terested  Johnson.  Hence  Mr.  Newberry  found 
no  great  difficulty  in  persuading  him  to  write 
the  Introduction*  to  a  collection  of  voyages  and 
travels  published  by  him  under  the  title  of  The 
World  Displayed;  the  first  volume  of  which  ap¬ 
peared  this  year,  and  the  remaining  volumes  in 
subsequent  years. 

Hffiis  paper  was  in  such  high  estimation  before 
it  was  collected  into  volumes,  that  it  was  seized  on 
with  avidity  by  various  publishers  of  newspapers 
and  magazines,  to  enrich  their  publications.  John¬ 
son,  to  put  a  stop  to  this  unfair  proceeding,  wrote 
for  the  Universal  Chronicle  the  following  advertise¬ 
ment;  in  which  there  is,  perhaps,  more  pomp  of 
words  than  the  occasion  demanded: 

“London,  January  5,  1 759.  Advertisement.  The 
proprietors  of  the  paper  intitled  The  Idler,  having 
found  that  those  essays  are  inserted  in  the  news¬ 
papers  and  magazines  with  so  little  regard  to  jus¬ 
tice  or  decency,  that  the  Universal  Chronicle,  in 
which  they  first  appear,  is  not  always  mentioned, 
think  it  necessary  to  declare  to  the  publishers  of 
those  collections,  that  however  patiently  they  have 
hitherto  endured  these  injuries,  made  yet  more  in¬ 
jurious  by  contempt,  they  have  now  determined  to 
endure  them  no  longer.  They  have  already  seen 
essays,  for  which  a  very  large  price  is  paid,  trans¬ 
ferred,  with  the  most  shameless  rapacity,  into  the 
weekly  or  monthly  compilations,  and  their  right, 
at  least  for  the  present,  alienated  from  them,  be¬ 
fore  they  could  themselves  be  said  to  enjoy  it.  But 
they  would  not  willingly  be  thought  to  want  ten¬ 
derness,  even  for  men  by  whom  no  tenderness  hath 
been  shewn.  The  past  is  without  remedy,  and  shall 
be  without  resentment.  But  those  who  have  been 
thus  busy  with  their  sickles  in  the  fields  of  their 
neighbours,  are  henceforward  to  take  notice,  that 
the  time  of  impunity  is  at  an  end.  Whoever  shall, 
without  our  leave,  lay  the  hand  of  rapine  upon  our 
papers,  is  to  expect  that  we  shall  vindicate  our  due, 
by  the  means  which  justice  prescribes,  and  which 
are  warranted  by  the  immemorial  prescriptions  of 
honourable  trade.  We  shall  lay  hold,  in  our  turn, 
on  their  copies,  degrade  them  from  the  pomp  of 
wide  margin  and  diffuse  typography,  contract  them 
into  a  narrow  space,  and  sell  them  at  an  humble 
price;  yet  not  with  a  view  of  growing  rich  by  con¬ 
fiscations,  for  we  think  not  much  better  of  money 
got  by  punishment  than  by  crimes.  We  shall,  there¬ 
fore,  when  our  losses  are  repaid,  give  what  profit 
shall  remain  to  the  Magdalens;  for  we  know  not  who 
can  be  more  properly  taxed  for  the  support  of  pen¬ 
itent  prostitutes,  than  prostitutes  in  whom  there 
yet  appears  neither  penitence  nor  shame.” 


[  1759 

I  would  ascribe  to  this  year  the  following  let¬ 
ter  to  a  son  of  one  of  his  early  friends  at  Lich¬ 
field,  Mr.  Joseph  Simpson,  Barrister,  and  auth- 
our  of  a  tract  entitled  Reflections  on  the  Study  of  the 
Law. 

To  Joseph  Simpson,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  Your  father’s  inexorability  not  only 
grieves  but  amazes  me:  he  is  your  father;  he  was 
always  accounted  a  wise  man;  nor  do  I  remem¬ 
ber  any  thing  to  the  disadvantage  of  his  good¬ 
nature;  but  in  his  refusal  to  assist  you  there  is 
neither  good-nature,  fatherhood,  nor  wisdom. 
It  is  the  practice  of  good-nature  to  overlook 
faults  which  have  already,  by  the  consequences, 
punished  the  delinquent.  It  is  natural  for  a  fath¬ 
er  to  think  more  favourably  than  others  of  his 
children;  and  it  is  always  wise  to  give  assistance 
while  a  little  help  will  prevent  the  necessity  of 
greater. 

If  you  married  imprudently,  you  miscarried 
at  your  own  hazard,  at  an  age  when  you  had  a 
right  of  choice.  It  would  be  hard  if  the  man 
might  not  choose  his  own  wife,  who  has  a  right 
to  plead  before  the  Judges  of  his  country. 

If  your  imprudence  has  ended  in  difficulties 
and  inconveniences,  you  are  yourself  to  support 
them;  and,  with  the  help  of  a  little  better  health, 
you  would  support  them  and  conquer  them. 
Surely,  that  want  which  accident  and  sickness 
produces,  is  to  be  supported  in  every  region  of 
humanity,  though  there  were  neither  friends  nor 
fathers  in  the  world.  You  have  certainly  from 
your  father  the  highest  claim  of  charity,  though 
none  of  right;  and  therefore  I  would  counsel  you 
to  omit  no  decent  nor  manly  degree  of  impor¬ 
tunity.  Your  debts  in  the  whole  are  not  large, 
and  of  the  whole  but  a  small  part  is  troublesome. 
Small  debts  are  like  small  shot;  they  are  rattling 
on  every  side,  and  can  scarcely  be  escaped 
without  a  wound:  great  debts  are  like  cannon; 
of  loud  noise,  but  little  danger.  You  must,  there¬ 
fore,  be  enabled  to  discharge  petty  debts,  that 
you  may  have  leisure,  with  security,  to  struggle 
with  the  rest.  Neither  the  great  nor  little  debts 
disgrace  you.  I  am  sure  you  have  my  esteem  for 
the  courage  with  which  you  contracted  them, 
and  the  spirit  with  which  you  endure  them.  I 
wish  my  esteem  could  be  of  more  use.  I  have 
been  invited,  or  have  invited  myself,  to  several 
parts  of  the  kingdom;  and  will  not  incommode 
my  dear  Lucy  by  coming  to  Lichfield,  while  her 
present  lodging  is  of  any  use  to  her.  I  hope,  in  a 
few  days,  to  be  at  leisure,  and  to  make  visits. 
Whither  I  shall  fly  is  matter  of  no  importance. 
A  man  unconnected  is  at  home  every  where;  un¬ 
less  he  may  be  said  to  be  at  home  no  where.  I 
am  sorry,  dear  Sir,  that  where  you  have  par¬ 
ents,  a  man  of  your  merits  should  not  have  an 
home.  I  wish  I  could  give  it  you.  I  am,  my  dear 
Sir,  affectionately  yours, 


Sam.  Johnson 


1759] 

He  now  refreshed  himself  by  an  excursion  to 
Oxford,  of  which  the  following  short  character- 
istical  notice,  in  his  own  words,  is  preserved: 

“  *  *  *  is  now  making  tea  for  me.  I  have  been 
in  my  gown  ever  since  I  came  here.  It  was,  at 
my  first  coming,  quite  new  and  handsome.  I 
have  swum  thrice,  which  I  had  disused  for  many 
years.  I  have  proposed  to  Vansittart,1  climbing 
over  the  wall,  but  he  has  refused  me.  And  I 
have  clapped  my  hands  till  they  are  sore,  at  Dr. 
King’s  speech.552 

His  negro  servant,  Francis  Barber,  having  left 
him,  and  been  some  time  at  sea,  not  pressed  as 
has  been  supposed,  but  with  his  own  consent,  it 
appears  from  a  letter  to  John  Wilkes,  Esq.,  from 
Dr.  Smollet,  that  his  master  kindly  interested 
himself  in  procuring  his  release  from  a  state  of 
life  of  which  Johnson  always  expressed  the  ut¬ 
most  abhorrence.  He  said,  “No  man  will  be  a 
sailor  who  has  contrivance  enough  to  get  him¬ 
self  into  a  jail;  for  being  in  a  ship  is  being  in  a 
jail,  with  the  chance  of  being  drowned.553  And 
at  another  time,  “A  man  in  a  jail  has  more 
room,  better  food,  and  commonly  better  com¬ 
pany.554  The  letter  was  as  follows: 

Chelsea,  March  16,  1759 

Dear  Sir,  I  am  again  your  petitioner,  in  be¬ 
half  of  that  great  Cham5  of  literature,  Samuel 
Johnson.  His  black  servant,  whose  name  is  Fran¬ 
cis  Barber,  has  been  pressed  on  board  the  Stag 
Frigate,  Captain  Angel,  and  our  lexicographer 

JDr.  Robert  Vansittart,  of  the  ancient  and  re¬ 
spectable  family  of  that  name  in  Berkshire.  He  was 
eminent  for  learning  and  worth,  and  much  es¬ 
teemed  by  Dr.  Johnson. 

2The  Gentleman’s  Magazine ,  April,  1785. 

3 Journal  of  a  Tour  of  the  Hebrides ,  3d  edit.,  p.  126 
[Aug.  31]. 

Hbid.y  p.  251  [Sept.  23]. 

6In  my  first  edition  this  word  was  printed  Chum , 
as  it  appears  in  one  of  Mr.  Wilkes’s  Miscellanies , 
and  I  animadverted  on  Dr.  Smollet’s  ignorance; 
for  which  let  me  propitiate  the  manes  of  that  ingen¬ 
ious  and  benevolent  gentleman.  Chum  was  certain¬ 
ly  a  mistaken  reading  for  Cham ,  the  title  of  the 
Sovereign  of  Tartary,  which  is  well  applied  to  John¬ 
son,  the  Monarch  of  Literature;  and  was  an  epi¬ 
thet  familiar  to  Smollet.  See  Roderick  Random ,  chap. 
56.  For  this  correction  I  am  indebted  to  Lord  Palm¬ 
erston,  whose  talents  and  literary  acquirements  ac¬ 
cord  well  with  his  respectable  pedigree  of  Temple. 
Boswell. — After  the  publication  of  the  second  edi¬ 
tion  of  this  work,  the  authour  was  furnished  by  Mr. 
Abercrombie,  of  Philadelphia,  with  the  copy  of  a 
letter  written  by  Dr.  John  Armstrong,  the  poet,  to 
Dr.  Smollet  at  Leghorne,  containing  the  following 
paragraph: — “As  to  the  K.  Bench  patriot,  it  is 
hard  to  say  from  what  motive  he  published  a  letter 
of  yours  asking  some  trifling  favour  of  him  in  be¬ 
half  of  somebody,  for  whom  the  great  Cham  of  lit¬ 
erature,  Mr.  Johnson,  had  interested  himself.” 

[MJ 


97 

is  in  great  distress.  He  says  the  boy  is  a  sickly 
lad,  of  a  delicate  frame,  and  particularly  sub¬ 
ject  to  a  malady  in  his  throat,  which  renders  him 
very  unfit  for  his  Majesty’s  service.  You  know 
what  manner  of  animosity  the  said  Johnson  has 
against  you;  and  I  dare  say  you  desire  no  other 
opportunity  of  resenting  it  than  that  of  laying 
him  under  an  obligation.  He  was  humble  enough 
to  desire  my  assistance  on  this  occasion,  though 
he  and  I  were  never  cater-cousins;  and  I  gave 
him  to  understand  that  I  would  make  applica¬ 
tion  to  my  friend  Mr.  Wilkes,  who,  perhaps,  by 
his  interest  with  Dr.  Hay  and  Mr.  Elliot,  might 
be  able  to  procure  the  discharge  of  his  lacquey. 
It  would  be  superfluous  to  say  more  on  the  sub¬ 
ject,  which  I  leave  to  your  own  consideration; 
but  I  cannot  let  slip  this  opportunity  of  declar¬ 
ing  that  I  am,  with  the  most  inviolable  esteem 
and  attachment,  dear  Sir,  your  affectionate,  ob¬ 
liged,  humble  servant, 

T.  Smollet 

Mr.  Wilkes,  who  upon  all  occasions  has  acted, 
as  a  private  gentleman,  with  most  polite  liber¬ 
ality,  applied  to  his  friend  Sir  George  Hay,  then 
one  of  the  Lords  Commissioners  of  the  Admiral¬ 
ty;  and  Francis  Barber  was  discharged,  as  he 
has  told  me,  without  any  wish  of  his  own.  He 
found  his  old  master  in  Chambers  in  the  Inner 
Temple,  and  returned  to  his  service. 

What  particular  new  scheme  of  life  Johnson 
had  in  view  this  year,  I  have  not  discovered; 
but  that  he  meditated  one  of  some  sort,  is  clear 
from  his  private  devotions,  in  which  we  find,6 
“the  change  of  outward  things  which  I  am  now 
to  make”;  and,  “Grant  me  the  grace  of  thy 
Holy  Spirit,  that  the  course  which  I  am  now 
beginning  may  proceed  according  to  thy  laws, 
and  end  in  the  enjoyment  of  thy  favour.”  But 
he  did  not,  in  fact,  make  any  external  or  visible 
change. 

At  this  time,  there  being  a  competition  among 
the  architects  of  London  to  be  employed  in  the 
building  of  Blackfriars-bridge,  a  question  was 
very  warmly  agitated  whether  semicircular  or 
elliptical  arches  were  preferable.  In  the  design 
offered  by  Mr.  Mylne  the  elliptical  form  was 
adopted,  and  therefore  it  was  the  great  object  of 
his  rivals  to  attack  it.  Johnson’s  regard  for  his 
friend  Mr.  Gwyn  induced  him  to  engage  in  this 
controversy  against  Mr.  Mylne;7  and  after  be- 

6 Prayers  and  Meditations ,  pp.  30  [39]  and  40. 

7Sir  John  Hawkins  {Life,  p.  373)  has  given  a  long 
detail  of  it,  in  that  manner  vulgarly,  but  signifi¬ 
cantly,  called  rigmarole ;  in  which,  amidst  an  osten¬ 
tatious  exhibition  of  arts  and  artists,  he  talks  of 
“proportions  of  a  column  being  taken  from  that  of 
the  human  figure,  and  adjusted  by  Nature — mascu¬ 
line  and  feminine — in  a  man,  sesquioctave  of  the 
head,  and  in  a  woman  sesquinonal” ;  nor  has  he 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


BOSWELL 


98 

ing  at  considerable  pains  to  study  the  subject, 
he  wrote  three  several  letters  in  the  Gazetteer ,  in 
opposition  to  his  plan. 

If  it  should  be  remarked  that  this  was  a  con¬ 
troversy  which  lay  quite  out  of  Johnson’s  way, 

failed  to  introduce  a  jargon  of  musical  terms,  which 
do  not  seem  much  to  correspond  with  the  subject, 
but  serve  to  make  up  the  heterogeneous  mass.  To 
follow  the  Knight  through  all  this,  would  be  an 
useless  fatigue  to  myself,  and  not  a  little  disgusting 
to  my  readers.  I  shall,  therefore,  only  make  a  few 
remarks  upon  his  statement. — He  seems  to  exult  in 
having  detected  Johnson  in  procuring  “from  a  per¬ 
son  eminently  skilled  in  Mathematicks  and  the 
principles  of  architecture,  answers  to  a  string  of 
questions  drawn  up  by  himself,  touching  the  com¬ 
parative  strength  of  semicircular  and  elliptical 
arches.”  Now  I  cannot  conceive  howjohnson  could 
have  acted  more  wisely.  Sir  John  complains  that 
the  opinion  of  that  excellent  mathematician,  Mr. 
Thomas  Simpson,  did  not  preponderate  in  favour 
of  the  semicircular  arch.  But  he  should  have  known, 
that  however  eminent  Mr.  Simpson  was  in  the 
higher  parts  of  abstract  mathematical  science,  he 
was  little  versed  in  mixed  and  practical  mechan- 
icks.  Mr.  Muller,  of  Woolwich  Academy,  the  scho- 
lastick  father  of  all  the  great  engineers  which  this 
country  has  employed  for  forty  years,  decided  the 
question  by  declaring  clearly  in  favour  of  the  ellip¬ 
tical  arch. 

It  is  ungraciously  suggested,  that  Johnson’s  mo¬ 
tive  for  opposing  Mr.  Mylne’s  scheme  may  have 
been  his  prejudice  against  him  as  a  native  of  North 
Britain;  when,  in  truth,  as  has  been  stated,  he  gave 
the  aid  of  his  able  pen  to  a  friend,  who  was  one  of 
the  candidates;  and  so  far  was  he  from  having  any 
illiberal  antipathy  to  Mr.  Mylne,  that  he  after¬ 
wards  lived  with  that  gentleman  upon  very  agree¬ 
able  terms  of  acquaintance,  and  dined  with  him  at 
his  house.  Sir  John  Hawkins,  indeed,  gives  full 
vent  to  his  own  prejudice  in  abusing  Blackfriars- 
bridge,  calling  it  “an  edifice,  in  which  beauty  and 
symmetry  are  in  vain  sought  for;  by  which  the  cit¬ 
izens  of  London  have  perpetuated  their  own  dis¬ 
grace,  and  subjected  a  whole  nation  to  the  re¬ 
proach  of  foreigners.”  Whoever  has  contemplated, 
placido  famine,  this  stately,  elegant,  and  airy  struc¬ 
ture,  which  has  so  fine  an  effect,  especially  on  ap¬ 
proaching  the  capital  on  that  quarter,  must  won¬ 
der  at  such  unjust  and  ill-tempered  censure;  and  I 
appeal  to  all  foreigners  of  good  taste,  whether  this 
bridge  be  not  one  of  the  most  distinguished  orna¬ 
ments  of  London.  As  to  the  stability  of  the  fabrick, 
it  is  certain  that  the  City  of  London  took  every  pre¬ 
caution  to  have  the  best  Portland  stone  for  it;  but 
as  this  is  to  be  found  in  the  quarries  belonging  to 
the  publick,  under  the  direction  of  the  Lords  of  the 
Treasury,  it  so  happened  that  parliamentary  in¬ 
terest,  which  is  often  the  bane  of  fair  pursuits, 
thwarted  their  endeavours.  Notwithstanding  this 
disadvantage,  it  is  well  known  that  not  only  has 
Blackfriars-bridge  never  sunk  either  in  its  founda¬ 
tion  or  in  its  arches,  which  were  so  much  the  sub¬ 
ject  of  contest,  but  any  injuries  which  it  has  suf¬ 
fered  from  the  effects  of  severe  frosts  have  been  al¬ 
ready,  in  some  measure,  repaired  with  sounder 
stone,  and  every  necessary  renewal  can  be  com¬ 
pleted  at  a  moderate  expence. 


[  1760 

let  it  be  remembered,  that  after  all,  his  employ¬ 
ing  his  powers  of  reasoning  and  eloquence  upon 
a  subject  which  he  had  studied  on  the  moment, 
is  not  more  strange  than  what  we  often  observe 
in  lawyers,  who,  as  quicquid  agunt  homines  in  the 
matter  of  law-suits,  are  sometimes  obliged  to 
pick  up  a  temporary  knowledge  of  an  art  or 
science,  of  which  they  understood  nothing  till 
their  brief  was  delivered,  and  appear  to  be  much 
masters  of  it.  In  like  manner,  members  of  the 
legislature  frequently  introduce  and  expatiate 
upon  subjects  of  which  they  have  informed 
themselves  for  the  occasion. 

1760:  jetat.  51.]— In  1760  he  wrote  An  Ad¬ 
dress  of  the  Painters  to  George  III  on  his  Accession  to 
the  Throne  of  these  Kingdoms ,  f  which  no  monarch 
ever  ascended  with  more  sincere  congratula¬ 
tions  from  his  people.  Two  generations  of  for¬ 
eign  princes  had  prepared  their  minds  to  re¬ 
joice  in  having  again  a  King,  who  gloried  in 
being  “born  a  Briton.”  He  also  wrote  for  Mr. 
Baretti  the  Dedication  f  of  his  Italian  and  English 
Dictionary ,  to  the  Marquis  of  Abreu,  then  En¬ 
voy-Extraordinary  from  Spain  at  the  Court  of 
Great  Britain. 

Johnson  was  now  either  very  idle,  or  very 
busy  with  his  Shakspeare;  for  I  can  find  no  other 
publick  composition  by  him  except  an  Intro¬ 
duction  to  the  proceedings  of  the  Committee 
for  cloathing  the  French  Prisoners;*  one  of  the 
many  proofs  that  he  was  ever  awake  to  the  calls 
of  humanity;  and  an  account  which  he  gave  in 
The  Gentleman! s  Magazine  of  Mr.  Ty tier’s  acute 
and  able  vindication  of  Mary  Queen  of  Scots.  * 
The  generosity  of  Johnson’s  feelings  shines  forth 
in  the  following  sentence: 

“It  has  now  been  fashionable,  for  near  half  a 
century,  to  defame  and  vilify  the  house  of 
Stuart,  and  to  exalt  and  magnify  the  reign  of 
Elizabeth.  The  Stuarts  have  found  few  apolo¬ 
gists,  for  the  dead  cannot  pay  for  praise;  and 
who  will,  without  reward,  oppose  the  tide  of 
popularity?  Yet  there  remains  still  among  us,  not 
wholly  extinguished,  a  zeal  for  truth,  a  desire  of 
establishing  right  in  opposition  to  fashion.” 

In  this  year  I  have  not  discovered  a  single 
private  letter  written  by  him  to  any  of  his 
friends.  It  should  seem,  however,  that  he  had  at 
this  period  a  floating  intention  of  writing  a  his¬ 
tory  of  the  recent  and  wonderful  successes  of  the 
British  arms  in  all  quarters  of  the  globe;  for 
among  his  resolutions  or  memorandums,  Sep¬ 
tember  18,  there  is,  “Send  for  books  for  Hist,  of 
War.”1  How  much  is  it  to  be  regretted  that  this 

1  Prayers  and  Meditations ,  p.  42. 


1760]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  99 


intention  was  not  fulfilled.  His  majestick  expres¬ 
sion  would  have  carried  down  to  the  latest  pos¬ 
terity  the  glorious  achievements  of  his  country 
with  the  same  fervent  glow  which  they  pro¬ 
duced  on  the  mind  at  the  time.  He  would  have 
been  under  no  temptation  to  deviate  in  any  de¬ 
gree  from  truth,  which  he  held  very  sacred,  or  to 
take  a  licence,  which  a  learned  divine  told  me 
he  once  seemed,  in  a  conversation,  jocularly  to 
allow  to  historians. 

“There  are  (said  he)  inexcusable  lies,  and 
consecrated  lies.  For  instance,  we  are  told  that 
on  the  arrival  of  the  news  of  the  unfortunate 
battle  of  Fontenoy,  every  heart  beat,  and  every 
eye  was  in  tears.  Now  we  know  that  no  man  eat 
his  dinner  the  worse,  but  there  should  have  been 
all  this  concern;  and  to  say  there  was ,  (smiling) 
may  be  reckoned  a  consecrated  lie.” 

This  year  Mr.  Murphy,  having  thought  him¬ 
self  ill-treated  by  the  Reverend  Dr.  Francklin, 
who  was  one  of  the  writers  of  The  Critical  Review , 
published  an  indignant  vindication  in  A  Poetical 
Epistle  to  Samuel  Johnson ,  A. M.  in  which  he  com¬ 
pliments  Johnson  in  a  just  and  elegant  manner: 

Transcendant  Genius!  whose  prolifick,  vein 
Ne'er  knew  the  frigid  poet's  toil  and  pain; 

To  whom  Apollo  opens  all  his  store , 

And  every  Muse  presents  her  sacred  lore; 

Say ,  powerful  Johnson,  whence  thy  verse  is fraught 
With  so  much  grace ,  such  energy  of  thought; 

Whether  ^Juvenal  instructs  the  age 
In  chaster  numbers ,  and  new-points  his  rage; 

Or  fair  Irene  sees ,  alas!  too  late 
Her  innocence  exchang'd  for  guilty  state; 

Whate'eryou  write ,  in  every  golden  line 
Sublimity  and  elegance  combine; 

Thy  nervous  phrase  impresses  every  soul , 

While  harmony  gives  rapture  to  the  whole . 

Again,  towards  the  conclusion: 

Thou  then ,  my  friend,  who  see'st  the  dang'rous  strife 
In  which  some  demon  bids  me  plunge  my  life , 

To  the  Aonian  fount  direct  my  feet , 

Say  where  the  Nine  thy  lonely  musings  meet ? 

Where  warbles  to  thy  ear  the  sacred  throng , 

Thy  moral  sense ,  thy  dignity  of  song? 

Tell,  for  you  can,  by  what  unerring  art 
You  wake  to  finer  feelings  every  heart; 

In  each  bright  page  some  truth  important  give. 

And  bid  to  future  times  thy  Rambler  live . 

I  take  this  opportunity  to  relate  the  manner 
in  which  an  acquaintance  first  commenced  be¬ 
tween  Dr.  Johnson  and  Mr.  Murphy.  During 
the  publication  of  The  Gray' s-Inn  Journal,  a  peri¬ 
odical  paper  which  was  successfully  carried  on  by 
Mr.  Murphy  alone,  when  a  very  young  man,  he 
happened  to  be  in  the  country  with  Mr.  Foote; 
and  having  mentioned  that  he  was  obliged  to  go 


to  London  in  order  to  get  ready  for  the  press  one 
of  the  numbers  of  that  Journal ,  Foote  said  to 
him,  “You  need  not  go  on  that  account.  Here  is 
a  French  magazine,  in  which  you  will  find  a 
very  pretty  oriental  tale;  translate  that,  and 
sent  it  to  your  printer.”  Mr.  Murphy  having 
read  the  tale,  was  highly  pleased  with  it,  and 
followed  Foote’s  advice.  When  he  returned  to 
town,  this  tale  was  pointed  out  to  him  in  The 
Rambler ,  from  whence  it  had  been  translated 
into  the  French  magazine.  Mr.  Murphy  then 
waited  upon  Johnson,  to  explain  this  curious 
incident.  His  talents,  literature,  and  gentleman¬ 
like  manners,  were  soon  perceived  by  Johnson, 
and  a  friendship  was  formed  which  was  never 
broken.1 

To  Bennet  Langton,  Esq.,  at  Langton, 

NEAR  SPILSBY,  LINCOLNSHIRE 

Dear  Sir,  You  that  travel  about  the  world, 
have  more  materials  for  letters,  than  I  who  stay 
at  home;  and  should,  therefore,  write  with  fre¬ 
quency  equal  to  your  opportunities.  I  should  be 
glad  to  have  all  England  surveyed  by  you,  if  you 
would  impart  your  observations  in  narratives  as 
agreeable  as  your  last.  Knowledge  is  always  to 
be  wished  to  those  who  can  communicate  it  well. 
While  you  have  been  riding  and  running,  and 
seeing  the  tombs  of  the  learned,  and  the  camps 
of  the  valiant,  I  have  only  staid  at  home,  and  in¬ 
tended  to  do  great  things,  which  I  have  not 
done.  Beau2  went  away  to  Cheshire,  and  has  not 
yet  found  his  way  back.  Chambers  passed  the 
vacation  at  Oxford. 

I  am  very  sincerely  solicitous  for  the  preserva¬ 
tion  or  curing  of  Mr.  Langton’s  sight,  and  am 
glad  that  the  chirurgeon  at  Coventry  gives  him 
so  much  hope.  Mr.  Sharpe  is  of  opinion  that  the 
tedious  maturation  of  the  cataract  is  a  vulgar 
errour,  and  that  it  may  be  removed  as  soon  as  it 
is  formed.  This  notion  deserves  to  be  consid¬ 
ered;  I  doubt  whether  it  be  universally  true; 
but  if  be  true  in  some  cases,  and  those  cases  can 
be  distinguished,  it  may  save  a  long  and  uncom¬ 
fortable  delay. 

Of  dear  Mrs.  Langton  you  give  me  no  ac¬ 
count;  which  is  the  less  friendly,  as  you  know 
how  highly  I  think  of  her,  and  how  much  I  in¬ 
terest  myself  in  her  health.  I  suppose  you  told 
her  of  my  opinion,  and  likewise  suppose  it  was  not 
followed;  however,  I  still  believe  it  to  be  right. 

Let  me  hear  from  you  again,  wherever  you 
are,  or  whatever  you  are  doing;  whether  you 
wander  or  sit  still,  plant  trees  or  make  Rusticksfi 

xThe  paper  mentioned  in  the  text  is  No.  38  of 
the  second  series  of  the  Gray'  s-Inn  Journal,  published 
on  June  15,  1754;  which  is  a  translation  from  the 
French  version  of  Johnson’s  Rambler ,  No.  190.  [M.] 

^opham  Beauclerk,  Esq. 

3Essays  with  that  title,  written  about  this  time  by 
Mr.  Langton,  but  not  published. 


100 

play  with  your  sisters  or  muse  alone;  and  in  re¬ 
turn  I  will  tell  you  the  success  of  Sheridan,  who 
at  this  instant  is  playing  Cato,  and  has  already 
played  Richard  twice.  He  had  more  company 
the  second  than  the  first  night,  and  will  make,  I 
believe,  a  good  figure  in  the  whole,  though  his 
faults  seem  to  be  very  many;  some  of  natural  de- 
ficience,  and  some  of  laborious  affectation.  He 
has,  I  think,  no  power  of  assuming  either  that 
dignity  or  elegance  which  some  men,  who  have 
little  of  either  in  common  life,  can  exhibit  on  the 
stage.  His  voice  when  strained  is  unpleasing, 
and  when  low  is  not  always  heard.  He  seems  to 
think  too  much  on  the  audience,  and  turns  his 
face  too  often  to  the  galleries. 

However,  I  wish  him  well;  and  among  other 
reasons,  because  I  like  his  wife.1  Make  haste  to 
write  to,  dear  Sir,  your  most  affectionate  servant, 

Oct.  1 8,  1760  Sam.  Johnson 

1761:  /Etat.  52.] — In  1761  Johnson  appears 
to  have  done  little.  He  was  still,  no  doubt,  pro¬ 
ceeding  in  his  edition  of  Shakspeare;  but  what 
advances  he  made  in  it  cannot  be  ascertained. 
He  certainly  was  at  this  time  not  active;  for  in 
his  scrupulous  examination  of  himself  on  Easter 
eve,  he  laments,  in  his  too  rigorous  mode  of 
censuring  his  own  conduct,  that  his  life,  since 
the  communion  of  the  preceding  Easter,  had 
been  “dissipated  and  useless.”2  He,  however, 
contributed  this  year  the  Preface*  to  Rolt’s 
Dictionary  of  Trade  and  Commerce ,  in  which  he  dis¬ 
plays  such  a  clear  and  comprehensive  know¬ 
ledge  of  the  subject,  as  might  lead  the  reader  to 
think  that  its  authour  had  devoted  all  his  life  to 
it.  I  asked  him  whether  he  knew  much  of  Rolt, 
and  of  his  work.  “Sir,  (said  he)  I  never  saw  the 
man,  and  never  read  the  book.  The  booksellers 
wanted  a  Preface  to  a  Dictionary  of  Trade  and 
Commerce.  I  knew  very  well  what  such  a  Diction¬ 
ary  should  be,  and  I  wrote  a  Preface  according¬ 
ly.”  Rolt,  who  wrote  a  great  deal  for  the  book¬ 
sellers,  was,  as  Johnson  told  me,  a  singular  char¬ 
acter.  Though  not  in  the  least  acquainted  with 
him,  he  used  to  say,  “I  am  just  come  from  Sam. 
Johnson.”  This  was  a  sufficient  specimen  of  his 
vanity  and  impudence.  But  he  gave  a  more  emi¬ 
nent  proof  of  it  in  our  sister  kingdom,  as  Dr. 
Johnson  informed  me.  When  Akenside’s  Pleas¬ 
ures  of  the  Imagination  first  came  out,  he  did  not 
put  his  name  to  the  poem.  Rolt  went  over  to 
Dublin,  published  an  edition  of  it,  and  put  his 
own  name  to  it.  Upon  the  fame  of  this  he  lived 

JMrs.  Sheridan  was  authour  of  Memoirs  of  Miss 
Sydney  Biddulph ,  a  novel  of  great  merit,  and  of  some 
other  pieces. — See  her  character,  post,  beginning  of 
1763. 

2 Prayers  and  Meditations ,  p.  44. 


[  1761 

for  several  months,  being  entertained  at  the  best 
tables  as  “the  ingenious  Mr.  Rolt.”3  His  conver¬ 
sation  indeed,  did  not  discover  much  of  the  fire 
of  a  poet;  but  it  was  recollected,  that  both  Addi¬ 
son  and  Thomson  were  equally  dull  till  excited 
by  wine.  Akenside  having  been  informed  of  this 
imposition,  vindicated  his  right  by  publishing 
the  poem  with  its  real  authour’s  name.  Several 
instances  of  such  literary  fraud  have  been  de¬ 
tected.  The  Reverend  Dr.  Campbell,  of  St. 
Andrew’s,  wrote  An  Enquiry  into  the  original  of 
Moral  Virtue ,  the  manuscript  of  which  he  sent  to 
Mr.  Innes,  a  clergyman  in  England,  who  was 
his  countryman  and  acquaintance.  Innes  pub¬ 
lished  it  with  his  own  name  to  it;  and  before  the 
imposition  was  discovered,  obtained  consider¬ 
able  promotion,  as  a  reward  of  his  merit.4  The 
celebrated  Dr.  Hugh  Blair,  and  his  cousin  Mr. 
George  Bannatine,  when  students  in  divinity, 
wrote  a  poem,  entitled,  The  Resurrection ,  copies 
of  which  were  handed  about  in  manuscript. 
They  were,  at  length,  very  much  surprised  to 
see  a  pompous  edition  of  it  in  folio,  dedicated  to 
the  Princess  Dowager  of  Wales,  by  a  Dr.  Doug¬ 
las,  as  his  own.  Some  years  ago  a  little  novel,  en¬ 
titled  The  Man  of  Feeling ,  was  assumed  by  Mr. 
Eccles,  a  young  Irish  clergyman,  who  was  after¬ 
wards  drowned  near  Bath.  He  had  been  at  the 
pains  to  transcribe  the  whole  book,  with  blot- 
tings,  interlineations,  and  corrections,  that  it 
might  be  shewn  to  several  people  as  an  original. 
It  was,  in  truth,  the  production  of  Mr.  Henry 
Mackenzie,  an  Attorney  in  the  Exchequer  at 
Edinburgh,  who  is  the  authour  of  several  other 
ingenious  pieces;  but  the  belief  with  regard  to 
Mr.  Eccles  became  so  general,  that  it  was 
thought  necessary  for  Messieurs  Strahan  and 
Cadell  to  publish  an  advertisement  in  the  news¬ 
papers,  contradicting  the  report,  and  mention¬ 
ing  that  they  purchased  the  copyright  of  Mr. 
Mackenzie.  I  can  conceive  this  kind  of  fraud  to 
be  very  easily  practised  with  successful  effron¬ 
tery.  The  Filiation  of  a  literary  performance  is 
difficult  of  proof;  seldom  is  there  any  witness 
present  at  its  birth.  A  man,  either  in  confidence 

3I  have  had  inquiry  made  in  Ireland  as  to  this 
story,  but  do  not  find  it  recollected  there.  I  give  it 
on  the  authority  of  Dr.  Johnson,  to  which  may  be 
added  that  of  the  Biographical  Dictionary ,  and  Bio- 
graphia  Dramatica ;  in  both  of  which  it  has  stood 
many  years.  Mr.  Malone  observes,  that  the  truth 
probably  is,  not  that  an  edition  was  published  with 
Rolt’s  name  in  the  title-page,  but,  that  the  poem 
being  then  anonymous,  Rolt  acquiesced  in  its  be¬ 
ing  attributed  to  him  in  conversation. 

4I  have  both  the  books.  Innes  was  the  clergyman 
who  brought  Psalmanazar  to  England,  and  was  an 
accomplice  in  his  extraordinary  fiction. 


BOSWELL 


i76i]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


or  by  improper  means,  obtains  possession  of  a 
copy  of  it  in  manuscript,  and  boldly  publishes  it 
as  his  own.  The  true  authour,  in  many  cases, 
may  not  be  able  to  make  his  title  clear.  Johnson, 
indeed,  from  the  peculiar  features  of  his  literary 
offspring,  might  bid  defiance  to  any  attempt  to 
appropriate  them  to  others. 

But  Shakspeare*  s  magick  could  not  copied  be, 

Within  that  circle  none  durst  walk  but  he! 

He  this  year  lent  his  friendly  assistance  to  cor¬ 
rect  and  improve  a  pamphlet  written  by  Mr. 
Gwyn,  the  architect,  entitled,  Thoughts  on  the 
Coronation  of  George  III.  * 

Johnson  had  now  for  some  years  admitted 
Mr.  Baretti  to  his  intimacy;  nor  did  their  friend¬ 
ship  cease  upon  their  being  separated  by  Baretti’ s 
revisiting  his  native  country,  as  appears  from 
Johnson’s  letters  to  him. 

To  Mr.  Joseph  Baretti,  at  Milan1 

You  reproach  me  very  often  with  parsimony 
of  writing:  but  you  may  discover  by  the  extent 
of  my  paper,  that  I  design  to  recompence  rarity 
by  length.  A  short  letter  to  a  distant  friend  is,  in 
my  opinion,  an  insult  like  that  of  a  slight  bow  or 
cursory  salutation; — a  proof  of  unwillingness  to 
do  much,  even  where  there  is  a  necessity  of  doing 
something.  Yet  it  must  be  remembered,  that  he 
who  continues  the  same  course  of  life  in  the 
same  place,  will  have  little  to  tell.  One  week  and 
one  year  are  very  like  one  another.  The  silent 
changes  made  by  time  are  not  always  perceived; 
and  if  they  are  not  perceived,  cannot  be  re¬ 
counted.  I  have  risen  and  lain  down,  talked  and 
mused,  while  you  have  roved  over  a  consider¬ 
able  part  of  Europe;  yet  I  have  not  envied  my 
Baretti  any  of  his  pleasures,  though,  perhaps,  I 
have  envied  others  his  company:  and  I  am  glad 
to  have  other  nations  made  acquainted  with  the 
character  of  the  English,  by  a  traveller  who  has 
so  nicely  inspected  our  manners,  and  so  success¬ 
fully  studied  our  literature.  I  received  your  kind 
letter  from  Falmouth,  in  which  you  gave  me  no¬ 
tice  of  your  departure  for  Lisbon,  and  another 
from  Lisbon,  in  which  you  told  me,  that  you 
were  to  leave  Portugal  in  a  few  days.  To  either 
of  these  how  could  any  answer  be  returned?  I 
have  had  a  third  from  Turin,  complaining  that 
I  have  not  answered  the  former.  Your  English 
style  still  continues  in  its  purity  and  vigour.  With 
vigour  your  genius  will  supply  it;  but  its  purity 
must  be  continued  by  close  attention.  To  use  two 
languages  familiarly,  and  without  contaminat- 

iThe  originals  of  Dr.  Johnson’s  three  letters  to 
Mr.  Baretti,  which  are  among  the  very  best  he  ever 
wrote,  were  communicated  to  the  proprietors  of 
that  instructive  and  elegant  monthly  miscellany. 
The  European  Magazine ,  in  which  they  first  ap¬ 
peared. 


ing  one  by  the  other,  is  very  difficult:  and  to  use 
more  than  two  is  hardly  to  be  hoped.  The 
praises  which  some  have  received  for  their  mul¬ 
tiplicity  of  languages,  may  be  sufficient  to  ex¬ 
cite  industry,  but  can  hardly  generate  con¬ 
fidence. 

I  know  not  whether  I  can  heartily  rejoice  at 
the  kind  reception  which  you  have  found,  or  at 
the  popularity  to  which  you  are  exalted.  I  am 
willing  that  your  merit  should  be  distinguished; 
but  cannot  wish  that  your  affections  may  be 
gained.  I  would  have  you  happy  wherever  you 
are:  yet  I  would  have  you  wish  to  return  to  Eng¬ 
land.  If  ever  you  visit  us  again,  you  fill  find  the 
kindness  of  your  friends  undiminished.  To  tell 
you  how  many  enquiries  are  made  after  you, 
would  be  tedious,  or  if  not  tedious,  would  be 
vain;  because  you  may  be  told  in  a  very  few 
words,  that  all  who  knew  you  wish  you  well; 
and  that  all  that  you  embraced  at  your  depar¬ 
ture,  will  caress  you  at  your  return:  therefore  do 
not  let  Italian  academicians  nor  Italian  ladies 
drive  us  from  your  thoughts.  You  may  find 
among  us  what  you  will  leave  behind,  soft  smiles 
and  easy  sonnets.  Yet  I  shall  not  wonder  if  all 
our  invitations  should  be  rejected:  for  there  is  a 
pleasure  in  being  considerable  at  home,  which 
is  not  easily  resisted. 

By  conducting  Mr.  Southwell  to  Venice,  you 
fulfilled,  I  know,  the  original  contract:  yet  I 
would  wish  you  not  wholly  to  lose  him  from 
your  notice,  but  to  recommend  him  to  such  ac¬ 
quaintance  as  may  best  secure  him  from  suffer¬ 
ing  by  his  own  follies,  and  to  take  such  general 
care  both  of  his  safety  and  his  interest  as  may 
come  within  your  power.  His  relations  will  thank 
you  for  any  such  gratuitous  attention:  at  least 
they  will  not  blame  you  for  any  evil  that  may 
happen,  whether  they  thank  you  or  not  for  any 
good. 

You  know  that  we  have  a  new  King  and  a 
new  Parliament.  Of  the  new  Parliament  Fitz- 
herbert  is  a  member.  We  were  so  weary  of  our 
old  King,  that  we  are  much  pleased  with  his 
successor;  of  whom  we  are  so  much  inclined  to 
hope  great  things,  that  most  of  us  begin  already 
to  believe  them.  The  young  man  is  hitherto 
blameless;  but  it  would  be  unreasonable  to  ex¬ 
pect  much  from  the  immaturity  of  juvenile  years, 
and  the  ignorance  of  princely  education.  He  has 
been  long  in  the  hands  of  the  Scots,  and  has  al¬ 
ready  favoured  them  more  than  the  English 
will  contentedly  endure.  But,  perhaps,  he  scarce¬ 
ly  knows  whom  he  has  distinguished,  or  whom 
he  has  disgusted. 

The  Artists  have  instituted  a  yearly  Exhibi¬ 
tion  of  pictures  and  statues,  in  imitation,  as  I  am 
told,  of  foreign  academies.  This  year  was  the 
second  Exhibition.  They  please  themselves  much 
with  the  multitude  of  spectators,  and  imagine 
that  the  English  School  will  rise  in  reputation. 
Reynolds  is  without  a  rival,  and  continues  to 


102 

add  thousands  to  thousands,  which  he  deserves, 
among  other  excellencies,  by  retaining  his  kind¬ 
ness  for  Baretti.  This  Exhibition  has  filled  the 
heads  of  the  Artists  and  lovers  of  art.  Surely  life, 
if  it  be  not  long,  is  tedious,  since  we  are  forced  to 
call  in  the  assistance  of  so  many  trifles  to  rid  us 
of  our  time,  of  that  time  which  never  can  return. 

I  know  my  Baretti  will  not  be  satisfied  with  a 
letter  in  which  I  give  him  no  account  of  myself: 
yet  what  account  shall  I  give  him?  I  have  not, 
since  the  day  of  our  separation,  suffered  or  done 
any  thing  considerable.  The  only  change  in  my 
way  of  life  is,  that  I  have  frequented  the  theatre 
more  than  in  former  seasons.  But  I  have  gone 
thither  only  to  escape  from  myself.  We  have  had 
many  new  farces,  and  the  comedy  called  The 
Jealous  Wife ,  which,  though  not  written  with 
much  genius,  was  yet  so  well  adapted  to  the 
stage,  and  so  well  exhibited  by  the  actors,  that 
it  was  crowded  for  near  twenty  nights.  I  am  di¬ 
gressing  from  myself  to  the  playhouse;  but  a 
barren  plan  must  be  filled  with  episodes.  Of  my¬ 
self  I  have  nothing  to  say,  but  that  I  have  hith¬ 
erto  lived  without  the  concurrence  of  my  own 
judgment;  yet  I  continue  to  flatter  myself,  that, 
when  you  return,  you  will  find  me  mended.  I  do 
not  wonder  that,  where  the  monastick  life  is 
permitted,  every  order  finds  votaries,  and  every 
monastery  inhabitants.  Men  will  submit  to  any 
rule,  by  which  they  may  be  exempted  from  the 
tyranny  of  caprice  and  of  chance.  They  are  glad 
to  supply  by  external  authority  their  own  want 
of  constancy  and  resolution,  and  court  the  gov¬ 
ernment  of  others,  when  long  experience  has 
convinced  them  of  their  own  inability  to  govern 
themselves.  If  I  were  to  visit  Italy,  my  curiosity 
would  be  more  attracted  by  convents  than  by 
palaces:  though  I  am  afraid  that  I  should  find 
expectation  in  both  places  equally  disappointed, 
and  life  in  both  places  supported  with  impa¬ 
tience  and  quitted  with  reluctance.  That  it  must 
be  so  soon  quitted,  is  a  powerful  remedy  against 
impatience;  but  what  shall  free  us  from  reluct¬ 
ance?  Those  who  have  endeavoured  to  teach  us 
to  die  well,  have  taught  few  to  die  willingly:  yet 
I  cannot  but  hope  that  a  good  life  might  end  at 
last  in  a  contented  death. 

You  see  to  what  a  train  of  thought  I  am  drawn 
by  the  mention  of  myself.  Let  me  now  turn  my 
attention  upon  you.  I  hope  you  take  care  to 
keep  an  exact  journal,  and  to  register  all  occur¬ 
rences  and  observations;  for  your  friends  here 
expect  such  a  book  of  travels  as  has  not  been  of¬ 
ten  seen.  You  have  given  us  good  specimens  in 
your  letters  from  Lisbon.  I  wish  you  had  staid 
longer  in  Spain,  for  no  country  is  less  known  to 
the  rest  of  Europe;  but  the  quickness  of  your 
discernment  must  make  amends  for  the  celerity 
of  your  motions.  He  that  knows  which  way  to 
direct  his  view,  sees  much  in  a  little  time. 

Write  to  me  very  often,  and  I  will  not  neglect 
to  write  to  you;  and  I  may,  perhaps,  in  time, 


[  1762 

get  something  to  write:  at  least,  you  will  know 
by  my  letters,  whatever  else  they  may  have  or 
want,  that  I  continue  to  be  your  most  affection¬ 
ate  friend, 

London,  June  10,  1761  Sam.  Johnson 

1762:  je tat.  53.] — In  1762  he  wrote  for  the 
Reverend  Dr.  Kennedy,  Rector  of  Bradley  in 
Derbyshire,  in  a  strain  of  very  courtly  elegance, 
a  Dedication  to  the  King.*  of  that  gentleman’s 
work,  entitled,  A  complete  System  of  Astronomical 
Chronology ,  unfolding  the  Scriptures.  He  had  cer¬ 
tainly  looked  at  this  work  before  it  was  printed; 
for  the  concluding  paragraph  is  undoubtedly  of 
his  composition,  of  which  let  my  readers  judge: 

“Thus  have  I  endeavoured  to  free  Religion 
and  History  from  the  darkness  of  a  disputed  and 
uncertain  chronology;  from  difficulties  which 
have  hitherto  appeared  insuperable,  and  dark¬ 
ness  which  no  luminary  of  learning  has  hitherto 
been  able  to  dissipate.  I  have  established  the 
truth  of  the  Mosaical  account,  by  evidence 
which  no  transcription  can  corrupt,  no  negli¬ 
gence  can  lose,  and  no  interest  can  pervert.  I 
have  shewn  that  the  universe  bears  witness  to 
the  inspiration  of  its  historian,  by  the  revolution 
of  its  orbs  and  the  succession  of  its  seasons;  that 
the  stars  in  their  courses  fight  against  incredulity, 
that  the  works  of  God  give  hourly  confirmation 
to  the  law,  the  prophets ,  and  the  gospel ,  of  which 
one  day  telleth  another ,  and  one  night  certifieth  another; 
and  that  the  validity  of  the  sacred  writings  can 
never  be  denied,  while  the  moon  shall  increase 
and  wane,  and  the  sun  shall  know  his  going 
down.” 

He  this  year  wrote  also  the  Dedication  j*  to  the 
Earl  of  Middlesex  of  Mrs.  Lennox’s  Female  Qui¬ 
xote ,  and  the  Preface  to  the  Catalogue  of  the  Art¬ 
ists ’  Exhibition .  f 

The  following  letter,  which,  on  account  of  its 
intrinsick  merit,  it  would  have  been  unjust  both 
to  Johnson  and  the  publick  to  have  with-held, 
was  obtained  for  me  by  the  solicitation  of  my 
friend  Mr.  Seward: 

To  Dr.  Staunton  (now  Sir  George 
Staunton,  Baronet) 

Dear  Sir,  I  make  haste  to  answer  your  kind 
letter,  in  hope  of  hearing  again  from  you  before 
you  leave  us.  I  cannot  but  regret  that  a  man  of 
your  qualifications  should  find  it  necessary  to 
seek  an  establishment  in  Guadaloupe,  which  if  a 
peace  should  restore  to  the  French,  I  shall  think 
it  some  alleviation  of  the  loss,  that  it  must  re¬ 
store  likewise  Dr.  Staunton  to  the  English. 

It  is  a  melancholy  consideration,  that  so  much 
of  our  time  is  necessarily  to  be  spent  upon  the 
care  of  living,  and  that  we  can  seldom  obtain 


BOSWELL 


1762  ] 

ease  in  one  respect  but  by  resigning  it  in  anoth¬ 
er;  yet  I  suppose  we  are  by  this  dispensation  not 
less  happy  in  the  whole,  than  if  the  spontaneous 
bounty  of  Nature  poured  all  that  we  want  into 
our  hands.  A  few,  if  they  were  thus  left  to  them¬ 
selves,  would,  perhaps,  spend  their  time  in  laud¬ 
able  pursuits;  but  the  greater  part  would  prey 
upon  the  quiet  of  each  other,  or,  in  the  want  of 
other  objects,  would  prey  upon  themselves. 

This,  however,  is  our  condition,  which  we  must 
improve  and  solace  as  we  can:  and  though  we 
cannot  choose  always  our  place  of  residence,  we 
may  in  every  place  find  rational  amusements, 
and  possess  in  every  place  the  comforts  of  piety 
and  a  pure  conscience. 

In  America  there  is  little  to  be  observed  ex¬ 
cept  natural  curiosities.  The  new  world  must 
have  many  vegetables  and  animals  with  which 
philosophers  are  but  little  acquainted.  I  hope 
you  will  furnish  yourself  with  some  books  of  nat¬ 
ural  history,  and  some  glasses  and  other  instru¬ 
ments  of  observation.  Trust  as  little  as  you  can 
to  report;  examine  all  you  can  by  your  own 
senses.  I  do  not  doubt  but  you  will  be  able  to 
add  much  to  knowledge,  and,  perhaps,  to  medi¬ 
cine.  Wild  nations  trust  to  simples;  and,  per¬ 
haps,  the  Peruvian  bark  is  not  the  only  specifick 
which  those  extensive  regions  may  afford  us. 

Wherever  you  are,  and  whatever  be  your  for¬ 
tune,  be  certain,  dear  Sir,  that  you  carry  with 
you  my  kind  wishes;  and  that  whether  you  re¬ 
turn  hither,  or  stay  in  the  other  hemisphere,  to 
hear  that  you  are  happy  will  give  pleasure  to, 
Sir,  your  most  affectionate  humble  servant, 

June  1,  1762  Sam.  Johnson 

A  lady  having  at  this  time  solicited  him  to  ob¬ 
tain  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury’s  patronage 
to  have  her  son  sent  to  the  University,  one  of 
those  solicitations  which  are  too  frequent,  where 
people,  anxious  for  a  particular  object,  do  not 
consider  propriety,  or  the  opportunity  which 
the  persons  whom  they  solicit  have  to  assist 
them,  he  wrote  to  her  the  following  answer, 
with  a  copy  of  which  I  am  favoured  by  the  Rev¬ 
erend  Dr.  Farmer,  Master  of  Emanuel  Col¬ 
lege,  Cambridge. 

Madam,  I  hope  you  will  believe  that  my  de¬ 
lay  in  answering  your  letter  could  proceed  only 
from  my  unwillingness  to  destroy  any  hope  that 
you  had  formed.  Hope  is  itself  a  species  of  hap¬ 
piness,  and,  perhaps,  the  chief  happiness  which 
this  world  affords:  but,  like  all  other  pleasures 
immoderately  enjoyed,  the  excesses  of  hope  must 
be  expiated  by  pain;  and  expectations  improp¬ 
erly  indulged,  must  end  in  disappointment.  If  it 
be  asked,  what  is  the  improper  expectation  which 
it  is  dangerous  to  indulge,  experience  will  quick¬ 
ly  answer,  that  it  is  such  expectation  as  is  dic¬ 
tated  not  by  reason,  but  by  desire;  expectation 
raised,  not  by  the  common  occurrences  of  life, 


103 

but  by  the  wants  of  the  expectant;  an  expecta¬ 
tion  that  requires  the  common  course  of  things 
to  be  changed,  and  the  general  rules  of  action  to 
be  broken. 

When  you  made  your  request  to  me,  you 
should  have  considered,  Madam, what  you  were 
asking.  You  ask  me  to  solicit  a  great  man,  to 
whom  I  never  spoke,  for  a  young  person  whom 
I  had  never  seen,  upon  a  supposition  which  I 
had  no  means  of  knowing  to  be  true.  There  is  no 
reason  why,  amongst  all  the  great,  I  should 
chuse  to  supplicate  the  Archbishop,  nor  why, 
among  all  the  possible  objects  of  his  bounty,  the 
Archbishop  should  chuse  your  son.  I  know,  Ma¬ 
dam,  how  unwillingly  conviction  is  admitted, 
when  interest  opposes  it;  but  surely,  Madam, 
you  must  allow,  that  there  is  no  reason  why  that 
should  be  done  by  me,  which  every  other  man 
may  do  with  equal  reason,  and  which,  indeed 
no  man  can  do  properly,  without  some  very 
particular  relation  both  to  the  Archbishop  and 
to  you.  If  I  could  help  you  in  this  exigence  by 
any  proper  means,  it  would  give  me  pleasure; 
but  this  proposal  is  so  very  remote  from  all  usual 
methods,  that  I  cannot  comply  with  it,  but  at 
the  risk  of  such  answer  and  suspicions  as  I  be¬ 
lieve  you  do  not  wish  me  to  undergo. 

I  have  seen  your  son  this  morning;  he  seems  a 
pretty  youth,  and  will,  perhaps,  find  some  bet¬ 
ter  friend  than  I  can  procure  him;  but,  though 
he  should  at  last  miss  the  University,  he  may 
still  be  wise,  useful,  and  happy.  I  am,  Madam, 
your  most  humble  servant, 

June  8,  1762  Sam.  Johnson 

To  Mr.  Joseph  Baretti,  at  Milan 

London,  July  20,  1762 

Sir,  However  justly  you  may  accuse  me  for 
want  of  punctuality  in  correspondence,  I  am 
not  so  far  lost  in  negligence  as  to  omit  the  op¬ 
portunity  of  writing  to  you,  which  Mr.  Beau- 
clerk’s  passage  through  Milan  affords  me. 

I  suppose  you  received  the  Idlers ,  and  I  intend 
that  you  shall  soon  receive  Shakspeare ,  that  you 
may  explain  his  works  to  the  ladies  of  Italy,  and 
tell  them  the  story  of  the  editor,  among  the  oth¬ 
er  strange  narratives  with  which  your  long  resi¬ 
dence  in  this  unknown  region  has  supplied  you. 

As  you  have  now  been  long  away,  I  suppose 
your  curiosity  may  pant  for  some  news  of  your 
old  friends.  Miss  Williams  and  I  live  much  as 
we  did.  Miss  Gotterel  still  continues  to  cling  to 
Mrs.  Porter,  and  Charlotte  is  now  big  of  the 
fourth  child.  Mr.  Reynolds  gets  six  thousands  a 
year.  Levet  is  lately  married,  not  without  much 
suspicion  that  he  has  been  wretchedly  cheated 
in  his  match.  Mr.  Chambers  is  gone  this  day, 
for  the  first  time,  the  circuit  with  the  Judges.  Mr. 
Richardson  is  dead  of  an  apoplexy,  and  his  sec¬ 
ond  daughter  has  married  a  merchant. 

My  vanity,  or  my  kindness,  makes  me  flatter 
myself,  that  you  would  rather  hear  of  me  than  of 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


io4  BOSWELL  [  1762 


those  whom  I  have  mentioned;  but  of  myself  I 
have  very  little  which  I  care  to  tell.  Last  winter 
I  went  down  to  my  native  town,  where  I  found 
the  streets  much  narrower  and  shorter  than  I 
thought  I  had  left  them,  inhabited  by  a  new 
race  of  people,  to  whom  I  was  very  little  known. 
My  play-fellows  were  grown  old,  and  forced  me 
to  suspect  that  I  was  no  longer  young.  My  only 
remaining  friend  has  changed  his  principles, 
and  was  become  the  tool  of  the  predominant 
faction.  My  daughter-in-law,  from  whom  I  ex¬ 
pected  most,  and  whom  I  met  with  sincere  be¬ 
nevolence,  has  lost  the  beauty  and  gaiety  of 
youth,  without  having  gained  much  of  the  wis¬ 
dom  of  age.  I  wandered  about  for  five  days,  and 
took  the  first  convenient  opportunity  of  return¬ 
ing  to  a  place,  where,  if  there  is  not  much  hap¬ 
piness,  there  is,  at  least,  such  a  diversity  of  good 
and  evil,  that  slight  vexations  do  not  fix  upon 
the  heart.1 

I  think  in  a  few  weeks  to  try  another  excur¬ 
sion;  though  to  what  end?  Let  me  know,  my 
Baretti,  what  has  been  the  result  of  your  return 
to  your  own  country:  whether  time  has  made 
any  alteration  for  the  better,  and  whether,  when 
the  first  raptures  of  salutation  were  over,  you 
did  not  find  your  thoughts  confessed  their  dis¬ 
appointment. 

Moral  sentences  appear  ostentatious  ana  tu¬ 
mid,  when  they  have  no  greater  occasions  than 
the  journey  of  a  wit  to  his  own  town:  yet  such 
pleasures  and  such  pains  make  up  the  general 
mass  of  life;  and  as  nothing  is  little  to  him  that 
feels  it  with  great  sensibility,  a  mind  able  to  see 
common  incidents  in  their  real  state,  is  disposed 
by  very  common  incidents  to  very  serious  con¬ 
templations.  Let  us  trust  that  a  time  will  come, 
when  the  present  moment  shall  be  no  longer  irk¬ 
some;  when  we  shall  not  borrow  all  our  happi¬ 
ness  from  hope,  which  at  last  is  to  end  in  dis¬ 
appointment. 

I  beg  that  you  will  shew  Mr.  Beauclerk  all  the 
civilities  which  you  have  in  your  power;  for  he 
has  always  been  kind  to  me. 

I  have  lately  seen  Mr.  Stratico,  Professor  of 
Padua,  who  has  told  me  of  your  quarrel  with  an 
Abbot  of  the  Celestine  order;  but  had  not  the 
particulars  very  ready  in  his  memory.  When  you 
write  to  Mr.  Marsili,  let  him  know  that  I  re¬ 
member  him  with  kindness. 

May  you,  my  Baretti,  be  very  happy  at  Mi¬ 
lan,  or  some  other  place  nearer  to,  Sir,  your 
most  affectionate  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

The  accession  of  George  the  Third  to  the 
throne  of  these  kingdoms,  opened  a  new  and 
brighter  prospect  to  men  of  literary  merit,  who 
had  been  honoured  with  no  mark  of  royal 
favour  in  the  preceding  reign.  His  present  Maj- 

xThis  is  a  very  just  account  of  the  relief  which 
London  affords  to  melancholy  minds. 


esty’s  education  in  this  country,  as  well  as  his 
taste  and  beneficence,  prompted  him  to  be  the 
patron  of  science  and  the  arts;  and  early  this 
year  Johnson,  having  been  represented  to  him 
as  a  very  learned  and  good  man,  without  any 
certain  provision,  his  Majesty  was  pleased  to 
grant  him  a  pension  of  three  hundred  pounds  a 
year.  The  Earl  of  Bute,  who  was  then  Prime 
Minister,  had  the  honour  to  announce  this  in¬ 
stance  of  his  Sovereign’s  bounty,  concerning 
which,  many  and  various  stories,  all  equally  er¬ 
roneous,  have  been  propagated:  maliciously 
representing  it  as  a  political  bribe  to  Johnson, 
to  desert  his  avowed  principles,  and  become  the 
tool  of  a  government  which  he  held  to  be  founded 
in  usurpation.  I  have  taken  care  to  have  it  in 
my  power  to  refute  them  from  the  most  authen- 
tick  information.  Lord  Bute  told  me,  that  Mr. 
Wedderburne,  now  Lord  Loughborough,  was 
the  person  who  first  mentioned  this  subject  to 
him.  Lord  Loughborough  told  me,  that  the  pen¬ 
sion  was  granted  to  Johnson  solely  as  the  reward 
of  his  literary  merit,  without  any  stipulation 
whatever,  or  even  tacit  understanding  that  he 
should  write  for  administration.  His  Lordship 
added,  that  he  was  confident  the  political  tracts 
which  Johnson  afterwards  did  write,  as  they 
were  entirely  consonant  with  his  own  opinions, 
would  have  been  written  by  him  though  no  pen¬ 
sion  had  been  granted  to  him. 

Mr.  Thomas  Sheridan  and  Mr.  Murphy,  who 
then  lived  a  good  deal  both  with  him  and  Mr. 
Wedderburne,  told  me,  that  they  previously 
talked  with  Johnson  upon  this  matter,  and  that 
it  was  perfectly  understood  by  all  parties  that 
the  pension  was  merely  honorary.  Sir  Joshua 
Reynolds  told  me,  that  Johnson  called  on  him 
after  his  Majesty’s  intention  had  been  notified 
to  him,  and  said  he  wished  to  consult  his  friends 
as  to  the  propriety  of  his  accepting  this  mark  of 
the  royal  favour,  after  the  definitions  which  he 
had  given  in  his  Dictionary  of  pension  and  pen¬ 
sioners.  He  said  he  would  not  have  Sir  Joshua’s 
answer  till  next  day,  when  he  would  call  again, 
and  desired  he  might  think  of  it.  Sir  Joshua  an¬ 
swered  that  he  was  clear  to  give  his  opinion 
then,  that  there  could  be  no  objection  to  his  re¬ 
ceiving  from  the  King  a  reward  for  literary 
merit;  and  that  certainly  the  definitions  in  his 
Dictionary  were  not  applicable  to  him.  Johnson, 
it  should  seem,  was  satisfied,  for  he  did  not  call 
again  till  he  had  accepted  the  pension,  and  had 
waited  on  Lord  Bute  to  thank  him.  He  then 
told  Sir  Joshua  that  Lord  Bute  said  to  him  ex¬ 
pressly,  “It  is  not  given  you  for  anything  you 
are  to  do,  but  for  what  you  have  done.”  His 


1762  ] 

Lordship,  he  said,  behaved  in  the  handsomest 
manner.  He  repeated  the  words  twice,  that  he 
might  be  sure  Johnson  heard  them,  and  thus  set 
his  mind  perfectly  at  ease.  This  nobleman,  who 
has  been  so  virulently  abused,  acted  with  great 
honour  in  this  instance,  and  displayed  a  mind 
truly  liberal.  A  minister  of  a  more  narrow  and 
selfish  disposition  would  have  availed  himself  of 
such  an  opportunity  to  fix  an  implied  obligation 
on  a  man  of  Johnson’s  powerful  talents  to  give 
him  his  support. 

Mr.  Murphy  and  the  late  Mr.  Sheridan  sev¬ 
erally  contended  for  the  distinction  of  having 
been  the  first  who  mentioned  to  Mr.  Wedder- 
burne  that  Johnson  ought  to  have  a  pension. 
When  I  spoke  of  this  to  Lord  Loughborough, 
wishing  to  know  if  he  recollected  the  prime 
mover  in  the  business,  he  said,  “All  his  friends 
assisted”:  and  when  I  told  him  that  Mr.  Sheri¬ 
dan  strenuously  asserted  his  claim  to  it,  his 
Lordship  said,  “He  rang  the  bell.”  And  it  is  but 
just  to  add,  that  Mr.  Sheridan  told  me,  that 
when  he  communicated  to  Dr.  Johnson  that  a 
pension  was  to  be  granted  him,  he  replied  in  a 
fervour  of  gratitude,  “The  English  language 
does  not  afford  me  terms  adequate  to  my  feel¬ 
ings  on  this  occasion.  I  must  have  recourse  to 
the  French.  I  am  penetre  with  his  Majesty’s 
goodness.”  When  I  repeated  this  to  Dr.  John¬ 
son,  he  did  not  contradict  it. 

His  definitions  of  pension  and  pensioner ,  partly 
founded  on  the  satirical  verses  of  Pope,  which  he 
quotes,  may  be  generally  true;  and  yet  every 
body  must  allow,  that  there  may  be,  and  have 
been,  instances  of  pensions  given  and  received 
upon  liberal  and  honourable  terms.  Thus,  then, 
it  is  clear,  that  there  was  nothing  inconsistent  or 
humiliating  in  Johnson’s  accepting  of  a  pension 
so  unconditionally  and  so  honourably  offered  to 
him. 

But  I  shall  not  detain  my  readers  longer  by 
any  words  of  my  own,  on  a  subject  on  which  I 
am  happily  enabled,  by  the  favour  of  the  Earl 
of  Bute,  to  present  them  with  what  Johnson 
himself  wrote;  his  lordship  having  been  pleased 
to  communicate  to  me  a  copy  of  the  following 
letter  to  his  late  father,  which  does  great  honour 
both  to  the  writer,  and  to  the  noble  person  to 
whom  it  is  addressed: 

To  the  Right  Honourable  the  Earl  of 
Bute 

My  Lord,  When  the  bills  were  yesterday  de¬ 
livered  to  me  by  Mr.  Wedderburne,  I  was  in¬ 
formed  by  him  of  the  future  favours  which  his 
Majesty  has,  by  your  Lordship’s  recommenda¬ 
tion,  been  induced  to  intend  for  me. 


105 

Bounty  always  receives  part  of  its  value  from 
the  manner  in  which  it  is  bestowed;  your  Lord¬ 
ship’s  kindness  includes  every  circumstance  that 
can  gratify  delicacy,  or  enforce  obligation.  You 
have  conferred  your  favours  on  a  man  who  has 
neither  alliance  nor  interest,  who  has  not  mer¬ 
ited  them  by  services,  nor  courted  them  by  offi¬ 
ciousness;  you  have  spared  him  the  shame  of  so¬ 
licitation,  and  the  anxiety  of  suspense. 

What  has  been  thus  elegantly  given,  will,  I 
hope,  not  be  reproachfully  enjoyed;  I  shall  en¬ 
deavour  to  give  your  Lordship  the  only  recom¬ 
pense  which  generosity  desires,  the  gratification 
of  finding  that  your  benefits  are  not  improperly 
bestowed.  I  am,  my  Lord,  your  Lordship’s  most 
obliged,  most  obedient,  and  most  humble 
servant, 

July  20,  1762  Sam.  Johnson 

This  year  his  friend  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  paid 
a  visit  of  some  weeks  to  his  native  country, 
Devonshire,  in  which  he  was  accompanied  by 
Johnson,  who  was  much  pleased  with  this  jaunt, 
and  declared  he  had  derived  from  it  a  great  ac¬ 
cession  of  new  ideas.  He  was  entertained  at  the 
seats  of  several  noblemen  and  gentlemen  in  the 
West  of  England;1  but  the  greatest  part  of  the 
time  was  passed  at  Plymouth,  where  the  magni¬ 
ficence  of  the  navy,  the  ship-building  and  all  its 
circumstances,  afforded  him  a  grand  subject  of 
contemplation.  The  Commissioner  of  the  Dock¬ 
yard  paid  him  the  compliment  of  ordering  the 
yacht  to  convey  him  and  his  friend  to  the  Eddy- 
stone,  to  which  they  accordingly  sailed.  But  the 
weather  was  so  tempestuous  that  they  could  not 
land. 

Reynolds  and  he  were  at  this  time  the  guests 
of  Dr.  Mudge,  the  celebrated  surgeon,  and  now 
physician  of  that  place,  not  more  distinguished 
for  quickness  of  parts  and  variety  of  knowledge, 
than  loved  and  esteemed  for  his  amiable  man¬ 
ners;  and  here  Johnson  formed  an  acquaintance 
with  Dr.  Mudge’s  father,  that  very  eminent  di¬ 
vine,  the  Reverend  Zachariah  Mudge,  Preben¬ 
dary  of  Exeter,  who  was  idolised  in  the  west, 
both  for  his  excellence  as  a  preacher  and  the 
uniform  perfect  propriety  of  his  private  conduct. 
He  preached  a  sermon  purposely  that  Johnson 

JAt  one  of  these  seats  Dr.  Amyat,  Physician  in 
London,  told  me  he  happened  to  meet  him.  In  or¬ 
der  to  amuse  him  till  dinner  should  be  ready,  ho 
was  taken  out  to  walk  in  the  garden.  The  master  of 
the  house,  thinking  it  proper  to  introduce  some¬ 
thing  scientifick  into  the  conversation,  addressed 
him  thus:  “Are  you  a  botanist,  Dr.  Johnson?”  “No, 
Sir,  (answered  Johnson,)  I  am  not  a  botanist;  and, 
(alluding,  no  doubt,  to  his  near  sightedness)  should 
I  wish  to  become  a  botanist,  I  must  first  turn  myself 
into  a  reptile.” 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


io6 

might  hear  him;  and  we  shall  see  afterwards 
that  Johnson  honoured  his  memory  by  drawing 
his  character.  While  Johnson  was  at  Plymouth, 
he  saw  a  great  many  of  its  inhabitants,  and  was 
not  sparing  of  his  very  entertaining  conversa¬ 
tion.  It  was  here  that  he  made  that  frank  and 
truly  original  confession,  that  “ignorance,  pure 
ignorance,”  was  the  cause  of  a  wrong  definition 
in  his  Dictionary  of  the  word  pastern J  to  the  no 
small  surprise  of  the  Lady  who  put  the  question 
to  him;  who  having  the  most  profound  rever¬ 
ence  for  his  character,  so  as  almost  to  suppose 
him  endowed  with  infallibility,  expected  to  hear 
an  explanation  (of  what,  to  be  sure,  seemed 
strange  to  a  common  reader,)  drawn  from  some 
deep-learned  source  with  which  she  was  unac¬ 
quainted. 

Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  to  whom  I  was  obliged 
for  my  information  concerning  this  excursion, 
mentions  a  very  characteristical  anecdote  of 
Johnson  while  at  Plymouth.  Having  observed 
that  in  consequence  of  the  Dock-yard  a  new 
town  had  arisen  about  two  miles  off  as  a  rival  to 
the  old;  and  knowing  from  his  sagacity,  and  just 
observation  of  human  nature,  that  it  is  certain  if 
a  man  hates  at  all,  he  will  hate  his  next  neigh¬ 
bour;  he  concluded  that  this  new  and  rising 
town  could  not  but  excite  the  envy  and  jealousy 
of  the  old,  in  which  conjecture  he  was  very  soon 
confirmed;  he  therefore  set  himself  resolutely  on 
the  side  of  the  old  town,  the  established  town,  in 
which  his  lot  was  cast,  considering  it  as  a  kind  of 
duty  to  stand  by  it.  He  accordingly  entered 
warmly  into  its  interests,  and  upon  every  occa¬ 
sion  talked  of  the  dockers ,  as  the  inhabitants  of 
the  new  town  were  called,  as  upstarts  and  aliens. 
Plymouth  is  very  plentifully  supplied  with  water 
by  a  river  brought  into  it  from  a  great  distance, 
which  is  so  abundant  that  it  runs  to  waste  in  the 
town.  The  Dock,  or  New-town,  being  totally 
destitute  of  water,  petitioned  Plymouth  that  a 
small  portion  of  the  conduit  might  be  permitted 
to  go  to  them,  and  this  was  now  under  consider¬ 
ation.  Johnson,  affecting  to  entertain  the  pas¬ 
sions  of  the  place,  was  violent  in  opposition; 
and,  half-laughing  at  himself  for  his  pretended 
zeal  where  he  had  no  concern,  exclaimed,  “No, 
no!  I  am  against  the  dockers;  I  am  a  Plymouth 
man.  Rogues!  let  them  die  of  thirst.  They  shall 
not  have  a  drop!” 

Lord  Macartney  obligingly  favoured  me  with 
a  copy  of  the  following  letter,  in  his  own  hand¬ 
writing,  from  the  original,  which  was  found,  by 
the  present  Earl  of  Bute,  among  his  father’s 
papers. 

*See  ante)  p.  82. 


[  1762 

To  the  Right  Honourable  the  Earl  of 
Bute 

My  Lord,  That  generosity,  by  which  I  was 
recommended  to  the  favour  of  his  Majesty,  will 
not  be  offended  at  a  solicitation  necessary  to 
make  that  favour  permanent  and  effectual. 

The  pension  appointed  to  be  paid  me  at  Mi¬ 
chaelmas  I  have  not  received,  and  know  not 
where  or  from  whom*I  am  to  ask  it.  I  beg,  there¬ 
fore,  that  your  Lordship  will  be  pleased  to  sup¬ 
ply  Mr.  Wedderburne  with  such  directions  as 
may  be  necessary,  which,  I  believe,  his  friend¬ 
ship  will  make  him  think  it  no  trouble  to  convey 
to  me. 

To  interrupt  your  Lordship,  at  a  time  like 
this,  with  such  petty  difficulties,  is  improper  and 
unseasonable;  but  your  knowledge  of  the  world 
has  long  since  taught  you,  that  every  man’s  af¬ 
fairs,  however  little,  are  important  to  himself. 
Every  man  hopes  that  he  shall  escape  neglect; 
and,  with  reason,  may  every  man,  whose  vices 
do  not  preclude  his  claim,  expect  favour  from 
that  beneficence  which  has  been  extended  to, 
my  Lord,  your  Lordship’s  most  obliged  and 
most  humble  servant, 

Temple  Lane,  Nov.  3,  1762  Sam.  Johnson 

To  Mr.  Joseph  Baretti,  at  Milan 
London,  Dec.  21,  1762 

Sir,  You  are  not  to  suppose,  with  all  your 
conviction  of  my  idleness,  that  I  have  passed  all 
this  time  without  writing  to  my  Baretti.  I  gave  a 
letter  to  Mr.  Beauclerk,  who,  in  my  opinion, 
and  in  his  own,  was  hastening  to  Naples  for  the 
recovery  of  his  health;  but  he  has  stopped  at 
Paris,  and  I  know  not  when  he  will  proceed. 
Langton  is  with  him. 

I  will  not  trouble  you  with  speculations  about 
peace  and  war.  The  good  or  ill  success  of  battles 
and  embassies  extends  itself  to  a  very  small  part 
of  domestick  life:  we  all  have  good  and  evil, 
which  we  feel  more  sensibly  than  our  petty  part 
of  publick  miscarriage  or  prosperity.  I  am  sorry 
for  your  disappointment,  with  which  you  seem 
more  touched  than  I  should  expect  a  man  of 
your  resolution  and  experience  to  have  been, 
did  I  not  know  that  general  truths  are  seldom 
applied  to  particular  occasions;  and  that  the  fal¬ 
lacy  of  our  self-love  extends  itself  as  wide  as  our 
interest  or  affections.  Every  man  believes  that 
mistresses  are  unfaithful,  and  patrons  capricious; 
but  he  excepts  his  own  mistress,  and  his  own 
patron.  We  have  all  learned  that  greatness  is 
negligent  and  contemptuous,  and  that  in  Courts 
life  is  often  languished  away  in  ungratified  ex¬ 
pectation;  but  he  that  approaches  greatness,  or 
glitters  in  a  Court,  imagines  that  destiny  has  at 
last  exempted  him  from  the  common  lot. 

Do  not  let  such  evils  overwhelm  you  as  thou¬ 
sands  have  suffered,  and  thousands  have  sur¬ 
mounted;  but  turn  your  thoughts  with  vigour 
to  some  other  plan  of  life,  and  keep  always  in 


BOSWELL 


1763]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  107 


your  mind,  that,  with  due  submission  to  Provi¬ 
dence,  a  man  of  genius  has  been  seldom  ruined 
but  by  himself.  Your  Patron’s  weakness  or  in¬ 
sensibility  will  finally  do  you  little  hurt,  if  he  is 
not  assisted  by  your  own  passions.  Of  your  love 
I  know  not  the  propriety,  nor  can  estimate  the 
power;  but  in  love,  as  in  every  other  passion,  of 
which  hope  is  the  essence,  we  ought  always  to 
remember  the  uncertainty  of  events.  There  is, 
indeed,  nothing  that  so  much  seduces  reason 
from  vigilance,  as  the  thought  of  passing  life 
with  an  amiable  woman;  and  if  all  would  hap¬ 
pen  that  a  lover  fancies,  I  know  not  what  other 
terrestrial  happiness  would  deserve  pursuit.  But 
love  and  marriage  are  different  states.  Those 
who  are  to  suffer  the  evils  together,  and  to  suffer 
often  for  the  sake  of  one  another,  soon  lose  that 
tenderness  of  look,  and  that  benevolence  of 
mind,  which  arose  from  the  participation  of 
unmingled  pleasure  and  successive  amusement. 
A  woman,  we  are  sure,  will  not  be  always  fair; 
we  are  not  sure  she  will  always  be  virtuous;  and 
man  cannot  retain  through  life  that  respect  and 
assiduity  by  which  he  pleases  for  a  day  or  for  a 
month.  I  do  not,  however,  pretend  to  have  dis¬ 
covered  that  life  has  any  thing  more  to  be  de¬ 
sired  than  a  prudent  and  virtuous  marriage; 
therefore  know  not  what  counsel  to  give  you. 

If  you  can  quit  your  imagination  of  love  and 
greatness,  and  leave  your  hopes  of  preferment 
and  bridal  raptures  to  try  once  more  the  fortune 
of  literature  and  industry,  the  way  through 
France  is  now  open.  We  flatter  ourselves  that 
we  shall  cultivate,  with  great  diligence,  the  arts 
of  peace;  and  every  man  will  be  welcome  among 
us  who  can  teach  us  any  thing  we  do  not  know. 
For  your  part,  you  will  find  all  your  old  friends 
willing  to  receive  you. 

Reynolds  still  continues  to  increase  in  reputa¬ 
tion  and  in  riches.  Miss  Williams,  who  very 
much  loves  you,  goes  on  in  the  old  way.  Miss 
Cotterel  is  still  with  Mrs.  Porter.  Miss  Charlotte 
is  married  to  Dean  Lewis,  and  has  three  chil¬ 
dren.  Mr.  Levet  has  married  a  street-walker. 
But  the  gazette  of  my  narration  must  now  ar¬ 
rive  to  tell  you,  that  Bathurst  went  physician  to 
the  army,  and  died  at  the  Havannah. 

I  know  not  whether  I  have  not  sent  you  word 
that  Huggins  and  Richardson  are  both  dead. 
When  we  see  our  enemies  and  friends  gliding 
away  before  us,  let  us  not  forget  that  we  are  sub¬ 
ject  to  the  general  law  of  mortality,  and  shall 
soon  be  where  our  doom  will  be  fixed  for  ever.  I 
pray  God  to  bless  you,  and  am,  Sir,  your  most 
affectionate  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

Write  soon. 

1763:  at.  54.] — In  1763  he  furnished  to 

The  Poetical  Calendar ,  published  by  Fawkes  and 
Woty,  a  character  of  Collins,  *  which  he  after¬ 
wards  ingrafted  into  his  entire  life  of  that  ad¬ 


mirable  poet,  in  the  collection  of  lives  which  he 
wrote  for  the  body  of  English  poetry,  formed 
and  published  by  the  booksellers  of  London.  His 
account  of  the  melancholy  depression  with  which 
Collins  was  severely  afflicted,  and  which  brought 
him  to  his  grave,  is,  I  think,  one  of  the  most 
tender  and  interesting  passages  in  the  whole 
series  of  his  writings.  He  also  favoured  Mr. 
Hoole  with  the  Dedication  of  his  translation  of 
Tasso  to  the  Queen,  *  which  is  so  happily  con¬ 
ceived  and  elegantly  expressed,  that  I  cannot 
but  point  it  out  to  the  peculiar  notice  of  my 
readers.1 

This  is  to  me  a  memorable  year;  for  in  it  I 
had  the  happiness  to  obtain  the  acquaintance  of 
that  extraordinary  man  whose  memoirs  I  am 
now  writing;  an  acquaintance  which  I  shall  ever 
esteem  as  one  of  the  most  fortunate  circumstan¬ 
ces  in  my  life.  Though  then  but  two-and-twen- 
ty,  I  had  for  several  years  read  his  works  with 
delight  and  instruction,  and  had  the  highest 
reverence  for  their  authour,  which  had  grown 
up  in  my  fancy  into  a  kind  of  mysterious  venera¬ 
tion,  by  figuring  to  myself  a  state  of  solemn  ele¬ 
vated  abstraction,  in  which  I  supposed  him  to 
live  in  the  immense  metropolis  of  London.  Mr. 
Gentleman,  a  native  of  Ireland,  who  passed 
some  years  in  Scotland  as  a  player,  and  as  an  in¬ 
structor  in  the  English  language,  a  man  whose 
talents  and  worth  were  depressed  by  misfor¬ 
tunes,  had  given  me  a  representation  of  the  fig¬ 
ure  and  manner  of  Dictionary  Johnson  !  as  he 

1<cMadam,  To  approach  the  high  and  the  il¬ 
lustrious  has  been  in  all  ages  the  privilege  of  Poets; 
and  though  translators  cannot  justly  claim  the  same 
honour,  yet  they  naturally  follow  their  authours  as 
attendants;  and  I  hope  that  in  return  for  having 
enabled  Tasso  to  diffuse  his  fame  through  the  Brit¬ 
ish  dominions,  I  may  be  introduced  by  him  to  the 
presence  of  Your  Majesty. 

“Tasso  has  a  peculiar  claim  to  Your  Majesty’s 
favour,  as  follower  and  panegyrist  of  the  House  of 
Este ,  which  has  one  common  ancestor  with  the 
House  of  Hanover;  and  in  reviewing  his  life  it  is 
not  easy  to  forbear  a  wish  that  he  had  lived  in  a 
happier  time,  when  he  might,  among  the  descend¬ 
ants  of  that  illustrious  family,  have  found  a  more 
liberal  and  potent  patronage. 

“I  cannot  but  observe,  Madam,  how  unequally 
reward  is  proportioned  to  merit,  when  I  reflect 
that  the  happiness  which  was  withheld  from  Tasso 
is  reserved  for  me;  and  that  the  poem  which  once 
hardly  procured  to  its  authour  the  countenance  o 
the  Princess  of  Ferrara,  has  attracted  to  its  trans¬ 
lator  the  favourable  notice  of  a  British  Queen. 

“Had  this  been  the  fate  of  Tasso,  he  would  have 
been  able  to  have  celebrated  the  condescension  of 
Your  Majesty  in  nobler  language,  but  could  not 
have  felt  it  with  more  ardent  gratitude,  than  Ma¬ 
dam,  your  Majesty’s  most  faithful  and  devoted 
servant.” 


BOSWELL 


108 

was  then  generally  called;1  and  during  my  first 
visit  to  London,  which  was  for  three  months  in 
1760,  Mr.  Derrick  the  poet,  who  was  Gentle¬ 
man’s  friend  and  countryman,  flattered  me  with 
hopes  that  he  would  introduce  me  to  Johnson, 
an  honour  of  which  I  was  very  ambitious.  But 
he  never  found  an  opportunity;  which  made 
me  doubt  that  he  had  promised  to  do  what  was 
not  in  his  power;  till  Johnson  some  years  after¬ 
wards  told  me,  “Derrick,  Sir,  might  very  well 
have  introduced  you.  I  had  a  kindness  for  Der¬ 
rick,  and  am  sorry  he  is  dead.” 

In  the  summer  of  1761  Mr.  Thomas  Sheridan 
was  at  Edinburgh,  and  delivered  lectures  upon 
the  English  Language  and  Publick  Speaking  to 
large  and  respectable  audiences.  I  was  often  in 
his  company,  and  heard  him  frequently  expati¬ 
ate  upon  Johnson’s  extraordinary  knowledge, 
talents,  and  virtues,  repeat  his  pointed  sayings, 
describe  his  particularities,  and  boast  of  his  be¬ 
ing  his  guest  sometimes  till  two  or  three  in  the 
morning.  At  this  house  1  hoped  to  have  many 
opportunities  of  seeing  the  sage,  as  Mr.  Sheri¬ 
dan  oblingingly  assured  me  I  should  not  be  dis¬ 
appointed. 

When  I  returned  to  London  in  the  end  of 
1762,  to  my  surprise  and  regret  I  found  an  irre- 
concileable  difference  had  taken  place  between 
Johnson  and  Sheridan.  A  pension  of  two  hun¬ 
dred  pounds  a  year  had  been  given  to  Sheridan, 
Johnson,  who,  as  has  already  been  mentioned, 
thought  slightingly  of  Sheridan’s  art,  upon  hear¬ 
ing  that  he  was  also  pensioned,  exclaimed, 
“What!  have  they  given  him  a  pension?  Then  it 
is  time  for  me  to  give  up  mine.”  Whether  this 
proceeded  from  a  momentary  indignation,  as  if 
it  were  an  affront  to  his  exalted  merit  that  a 
player  should  be  rewarded  in  the  same  manner 
with  him,  or  was  the  sudden  effect  of  a  fit  of 
peevishness,  it  was  unluckily  said,  and,  indeed, 
cannot  be  justified.  Mr.  Sheridan’s  pension  was 
granted  to  him  not  as  a  player,  but  as  a  sufferer 
in  the  cause  of  government,  when  he  was  mana¬ 
ger  of  the  Theatre  Royal  in  Ireland,  when  par¬ 
ties  ran  high  in  1753.  And  it  must  also  be  al¬ 
lowed  that  he  was  a  man  of  literature,  and  had 

1As  great  men  of  antiquity  such  as  Scipio  Afri- 
canus  had  an  epithet  added  to  their  names,  in  con¬ 
sequence  of  some  celebrated  action,  so  my  illus¬ 
trious  friend  was  often  called  Dictionary  John¬ 
son,  from  that  wonderful  atchievement  of  genius 
and  labour,  his  Dictionary  oj  the  English  Language ; 
the  merit  of  which  I  contemplate  with  more  and 
more  admiration.  Boswell.  In  like  manner  we 
have  “Hermes  Harris,”  “Pliny  Melmoth,”  “De¬ 
mosthenes  Taylor,”  “Persian  Jones,”  “Abyssinian 
Bruce,”  “Microscope  Baker,”  “Leonidas  Glover,” 
“Hesiod  Cooke,”  and  “Corsica  Boswell.” 


[  1763 

considerably  improved  the  arts  of  reading  and 
speaking  with  distinctness  and  propriety. 

Besides,  Johnson  should  have  recollected  that 
Mr.  Sheridan  taught  pronunciation  to  Mr.  Alex¬ 
ander  Wedderburne,  whose  sister  was  married 
to  Sir  Harry  Erskine,  an  intimate  friend  of  Lord 
Bute,  who  was  the  favourite  of  the  King;  and 
surely  the  most  outrageous  Whig  will  not  main¬ 
tain,  that,  whatever  ought  to  be  the  principle  in 
the  disposal  of  offices ,  a  pension  ought  never  to  be 
granted  from  any  bias  of  court  connection.  Mr. 
Macklin,  indeed,  shared  with  Mr.  Sheridan  the 
honour  of  instructing  Mr.  Wedderburne;  and 
thought  it  was  too  late  in  life  for  a  Caledonian  to 
acquire  the  genuine  English  cadence,  yet  so  suc¬ 
cessful  were  Mr.  Wedderburne’s  instructors, 
and  his  own  unabating  endeavours,  that  he  got 
rid  of  the  coarse  part  of  his  Scotch  accent,  re¬ 
taining  only  as  much  of  the  “native  wood-note 
wild,”  as  to  mark  his  country;  which,  if  any 
Scotchman  should  affect  to  forget,  I  should 
heartily  despise  him.  Notwithstanding  the  diffi¬ 
culties  which  are  to  be  encountered  by  those 
who  have  not  had  the  advantage  of  an  English 
education,  he  by  degrees  formed  a  mode  of 
speaking  to  which  Englishmen  do  not  deny  the 
praise  of  elegance.  Hence  his  distinguished  ora¬ 
tory,  which  he  exerted  in  his  own  country  as  an 
advocate  in  the  Court  of  Session,  and  a  ruling 
elder  of  the  Kirk ,  has  had  its  fame  and  ample  re¬ 
ward,  in  much  higher  spheres.  When  I  look 
back  on  this  noble  person  at  Edinburgh,  in  situ¬ 
ations  so  unworthy  of  his  brilliant  powers,  and 
behold  Lord  Loughborough  at  London,  the 
change  seems  almost  like  one  of  the  metamor¬ 
phoses  in  Ovid;  and  as  his  two  preceptors,  by  re¬ 
fining  his  utterance,  gave  currency  to  his  tal¬ 
ents,  we  may  say  in  the  words  of  that  poet,  Nam 
vos  mutastis. 

I  have  dwelt  the  longer  upon  this  remarkable 
instance  of  successful  parts  and  assiduity;  be¬ 
cause  it  affords  animating  encouragement  to 
other  gentlemen  of  North-Britain  to  try  their 
fortunes  in  the  southern  part  of  the  Island,  where 
they  may  hope  to  gratify  their  utmost  ambition; 
and  now  that  we  are  one  people  by  the  Union, 
it  would  surely  be  illiberal  to  maintain,  that 
they  have  not  an  equal  title  with  the  natives  of 
any  other  part  of  his  Majesty’s  dominions. 

Johnson  complained  that  a  man  who  disliked 
him  repeated  his  sarcasm  to  Mr.  Sheridan,  with¬ 
out  telling  him  what  followed,  which  was,  that 
after  a  pause  he  added,  “However,  I  am  glad 
that  Mr.  Sheridan  has  a  pension,  for  he  is  a  very 
good  man.”  Sheridan  could  never  forgive  this 
hasty  contemptuous  expression.  It  rankled  in 


1 763]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  109 


his  mind;  and  though  I  informed  him  of  all  that 
Johnson  said,  and  that  he  would  be  very  glad  to 
meet  him  amicably,  he  positively  declined  re¬ 
peated  offers  which  I  made,  and  once  went  off 
abruptly  from  a  house  where  he  and  I  were  en¬ 
gaged  to  dine,  because  he  was  told  that  Dr. 
Johnson  was  to  be  there.  I  have  no  sympathetick 
feeling  with  such  persevering  resentment.  It  is 
painful  when  there  is  a  breach  between  those 
who  have  lived  together  socially  and  cordially; 
and  I  wonder  that  there  is  not,  in  all  such  cases, 
a  mutual  wish  that  it  should  be  healed.  I  could 
perceive  that  Mr.  Sheridan  was  by  no  means 
satisfied  with  Johnson’s  acknowledging  him  to 
be  a  good  man.  That  could  not  sooth  his  injured 
vanity.  I  could  not  but  smile,  at  the  same  time 
that  I  was  offended,  to  observe  Sheridan  in  The 
Life  of  Swift  f  which  he  afterwards  published, 
attempting,  in  the  writhings  of  his  resentment, 
to  depreciate  Johnson,  by  characterising  him  as 
“A  writer  of  gigantick  fame  in  these  days  of  little 
men”;  that  very  Johnson  whom  he  once  so 
highly  admired  and  venerated. 

This  rupture  with  Sheridan  deprived  John¬ 
son  of  one  of  his  most  agreeable  resources  for 
amusement  in  his  lonely  evenings;  for  Sheri¬ 
dan’s  well-informed,  animated,  and  bustling 
mind  never  suffered  conversation  to  stagnate; 
and  Mrs.  Sheridan  was  a  most  agreeable  com¬ 
panion  to  an  intellectual  man.  She  was  sensible, 
ingenious,  unassuming,  yet  communicative.  I 
recollect,  with  satisfaction,  many  pleasing  hours 
which  I  passed  with  her  under  the  hospitable 
roof  of  her  husband,  who  was  to  me  a  very  kind 
friend.  Her  novel,  entitled  Memoirs  of  Miss  Syd¬ 
ney  Biddulph ,  contains  an  excellent  moral  while 
it  inculcates  a  future  state  of  retribution;2  and 

T.  447. 

2My  position  has  been  very  well  illustrated  by 
Mr.  Belsham  of  Bedford,  in  his  Essay  on  Dramatic 
Poetry.  “The  fashionable  doctrine  (says  he)  both  of 
moralists  and  criticks  in  these  times  is,  that  virtue 
and  happiness  are  constant  concomitants;  and  it  is 
regarded  as  a  kind  of  dramatick  impiety  to  main¬ 
tain  that  virtue  should  not  be  rewarded,  nor  vice 
punished  in  the  last  scene  of  the  last  act  of  every 
tragedy.  This  conduct  in  our  modern  poets  is,  how¬ 
ever,  in  my  opinion,  extremely  injudicious;  for,  it 
labours  in  vain  to  inculcate  a  doctrine  in  theory, 
which  every  one  knows  to  be  false  in  fact,  viz.  that 
virtue  in  real  life  is  always  productive  of  happi¬ 
ness;  and  vice  of  misery.  Thus  Congreve  concludes 
the  Tragedy  of  The  Mourning  Bride  with  the  follow¬ 
ing  foolish  couplet: 

iiFor  blessings  ever  wait  on  virtuous  deeds , 

And  though  a  late ,  a  sure  reward  succeeds. 

“When  a  man  eminently  virtuous,  a  Brutus,  a 
Cato,  or  a  Socrates,  finally  sinks  under  the  pres¬ 
sure  of  accumulated  misfortune,  we  are  not  only 
led  to  entertain  a  more  indignant  hatred  of  vice 


what  it  teaches  is  impressed  upon  the  mind  by  a 
series  of  as  deep  distress  as  can  affect  humanity, 
in  the  amiable  and  pious  heroine  who  goes  to 
her  grave  unrelieved,  but  resigned,  and  full  of 
hope  of  “heaven’s  mercy.”  Johnson  paid  her 
this  high  compliment  upon  it:  “I  know  not, 
Madam,  that  you  have  a  right,  upon  moral 
principles,  to  make  your  readers  suffer  so  much.” 

Mr.  Thomas  Davies  the  actor,  who  then  kept 
a  bookseller’s  shop  in  Russel-street,  Covent-gar- 
den,3  told  me  that  Johnson  was  very  much  his 
friend,  and  came  frequently  to  his  house,  where 
he  more  than  once  invited  me  to  meet  him;  but 
by  some  unlucky  accident  or  other  he  was  pre¬ 
vented  from  coming  to  us. 

Mr.  Thomas  Davies  was  a  man  of  good  under¬ 
standing  and  talents,  with  the  advantage  of  a 
liberal  education.  Though  somewhat  pompous, 
he  was  an  entertaining  companion;  and  his  lit¬ 
erary  performances  have  no  inconsiderable  share 
of  merit.  He  was  a  friendly  and  very  hospitable 
man.  Both  he  and  his  wife  (who  has  been  cele¬ 
brated  for  her  beauty),  though  upon  the  stage 
for  many  years,  maintained  an  uniform  decency 
of  character;  and  Johnson  esteemed  them,  and 
lived  in  as  easy  an  intimacy  with  them,  as  with 
any  family  which  he  used  to  visit.  Mr.  Davies 
recollected  several  of  Johnson’s  remarkable  say¬ 
ings,  and  was  one  of  the  best  of  the  many  imita¬ 
tors  of  his  voice  and  manner,  while  relating 
them.  He  increased  my  impatience  more  and 
more  to  see  the  extraordinary  man  whose  works 
I  highly  valued,  and  whose  conversation  was  re¬ 
ported  to  be  so  peculiarly  excellent. 

than  if  he  rose  from  his  distress,  but  we  are  inevit¬ 
ably  induced  to  cherish  the  sublime  idea  that  a  day 
of  future  retribution  will  arrive  when  he  shall  re¬ 
ceive  not  merely  poetical,  but  real  and  substantial 
justice.”  Essays  Philosophical ,  Historical ,  and  Literary , 
London,  1791,  vol.  ii,  8vo,  p.  317. 

This  is  well  reasoned  and  well  expressed.  I  wish, 
indeed,  that  the  ingenious  authour  had  not  thought 
it  necessary  to  introduce  any  instance  of  “a  man 
eminently  virtuous”;  as  he  would  then  have  avoid¬ 
ed  mentioning  such  a  ruffian  as  Brutus  under  that 
description.  Mr.  Belsham  discovers  in  his  Essays  so 
much  reading  and  thinking,  and  good  composi¬ 
tion,  that  I  regret  his  not  having  been  fortunate 
enough  to  be  educated  a  member  of  our  excellent 
national  establishment.  Had  he  not  been  nursed  in 
nonconformity,  he  probably  would  not  have  been 
tainted  with  those  heresies  (as  I  sincerely,  and  on 
no  slight  investigation,  think  them)  both  in  reli¬ 
gion  and  politicks,  which,  while  I  read,  I  am  sure, 
with  candour,  I  cannot  read  without  offence. 

3No.  8.— The  very  place  where  I  was  fortunate 
enough  to  be  introduced  to  the  illustrious  subject 
of  this  work,  deserves  to  be  particularly  marked.  I 
never  pass  by  it  without  feeling  reverence  and  re¬ 
gret. 


I  IO 


BOSWELL  [1763 


At  last,  on  Monday  the  16th  of  May,  when  I 
was  sitting  in  Mr.  Davies’s  back-parlour,  after 
having  drunk  tea  with  him  and  Mrs.  Davies, 
Johnson  unexpectedly  came  into  the  shop;1  and 
Mr.  Davies  having  perceived  him  through  the 
glass-door  in  the  room  in  which  we  were  sitting, 
advancing  towards  us, — he  announced  his  awe¬ 
ful  approach  to  me,  somewhat  in  the  manner  of 
an  actor  in  the  part  of  Horatio,  when  he  ad¬ 
dresses  Hamlet  on  the  appearance  of  his  father’s 
ghost,  “Look,  my  Lord,  it  comes.”  I  found  that 
I  had  a  very  perfect  idea  of  Johnson’s  figure, 
from  the  portrait  of  him  painted  by  Sir  Joshua 
Reynolds  soon  after  he  had  published  his  Dic¬ 
tionary ,  in  the  attitude  of  sitting  in  his  easy  chair 
in  deep  meditation,  which  was  the  first  picture 
his  friend  did  for  him,  which  Sir  Joshua  very 
kindly  presented  to  me,  and  from  which  an  en¬ 
graving  has  been  made  for  this  work.  Mr.  Davies 
mentioned  my  name,  and  respectfully  intro¬ 
duced  me  to  him.  I  was  much  agitated;  and  re¬ 
collecting  his  prejudice  against  the  Scotch,  of 
which  I  had  heard  much,  I  said  to  Davies, 
“Don’t  tell  where  I  come  from.” — “From  Scot¬ 
land,”  cried  Davies  roguishly.  “Mr.  Johnson, 
(said  I)  I  do  indeed  come  from  Scotland,  but  I 
cannot  help  it.”  I  am  willing  to  flatter  myself 
that  I  meant  this  as  light  pleasantry  to  sooth  and 
conciliate  him,  and  not  as  an  humiliating  abase¬ 
ment  at  the  expence  of  my  country.  But  how¬ 
ever  that  might  be,  this  speech  was  somewhat 
unlucky;  for  with  that  quickness  of  wit  for  which 
he  was  so  remarkable,  he  seized  the  expression 
“come  from  Scotland,”  which  I  used  in  the 
sense  of  being  of  that  country;  and,  as  if  I  had 
said  that  I  had  come  away  from  it,  or  left,  re¬ 
torted,  “That,  Sir,  I  find,  is  what  a  very  great 
many  of  your  countrymen  cannot  help.”  This 
stroke  stunned  me  a  good  deal;  and  when  we 
had  sat  down,  I  felt  myself  not  a  little  embar¬ 
rassed,  and  apprehensive  of  what  might  come 
next.  He  then  addressed  himself  to  Davies: 

JMr.  Murphy,  in  his  Essay  on  the  Life  and  Genius  of 
Dr.  Johnson ,  [p.  106],  has  given  an  account  of  this 
meeting  considerably  different  from  mine,  I  am 
persuaded  without  any  consciousness  of  errour.  His 
memory,  at  the  end  of  near  thirty  years,  has  un¬ 
doubtedly  deceived  him,  and  he  supposes  himself 
to  have  been  present  at  a  scene,  which  he  has  prob¬ 
ably  heard  inaccurately  described  by  others.  In  my 
note  taken  on  the  very  day ,  in  which  I  am  confident  I 
marked  every  thing  material  that  passed,  no  men¬ 
tion  is  made  of  this  gentleman;  and  I  am  sure,  that 
I  should  not  have  omitted  one  so  well  known  in  the 
literary  world.  It  may  easily  be  imagined  that  this, 
my  first  interview  with  Dr.  Johnson,  with  all  its  cir¬ 
cumstances,  made  a  strong  impression  on  my  mind, 
and  would  be  registered  with  peculiar  attention. 


“What  do  you  think  of  Garrick?  He  has  refused 
me  an  order  for  the  play  for  Miss  Williams,  be¬ 
cause  he  knows  the  house  will  be  full,  and  that 
an  order  would  be  worth  three  shillings.”  Eager 
to  take  any  opening  to  get  into  conversation 
with  him,  I  ventured  to  say,  “O,  Sir,  I  cannot 
think  Mr.  Garrick  would  grudge  such  a  trifle  to 
you.”  “Sir,  (said  he,  with  a  stern  look,)  I  have 
known  David  Garrick  longer  than  you  have 
done:  and  I  know  no  right  you  have  to  talk 
to  me  on  the  subject.”  Perhaps  I  deserved  this 
check;  for  it  was  rather  presumptuous  in  me,  an 
entire  stranger,  to  express  any  doubt  of  the  jus¬ 
tice  of  his  animadversion  upon  his  old  acquaint¬ 
ance  and  pupil.2  I  now  felt  myself  much  morti¬ 
fied,  and  began  to  think  that  the  hope  which  I 
had  long  indulged  of  obtaining  his  acquaint¬ 
ance  was  blasted.  And,  in  truth,  had  not  my  ar¬ 
dour  been  uncommonly  strong,  and  my  resolu¬ 
tion  uncommonly  persevering,  so  rough  a  re¬ 
ception  might  have  deterred  me  for  ever  from 
making  any  further  attempts.  Fortunately,  how¬ 
ever,  I  remained  upon  the  field  not  wholly  dis¬ 
comfited;  and  was  soon  rewarded  by  hearing 
some  of  his  conversation,  of  which  I  preserved 
the  following  short  minute,  without  marking 
the  questions  and  observations  by  which  it  was 
produced. 

“People  (he  remarked)  may  be  taken  in  once, 
who  imagine  that  an  authour  is  greater  in  private 
life  than  other  men.  Uncommon  parts  require 
uncommon  opportunities  for  their  exertion.” 

“In  barbarous  society,  superiority  of  parts  is 
of  real  consequence.  Great  strength  or  great 
wisdom  is  of  much  value  to  an  individual.  But  in 
more  polished  times  there  are  people  to  do  every 
thing  for  money;  and  then  there  are  a  number 
of  other  superiorities,  such  as  those  of  birth  and 
fortune,  and  rank,  that  dissipate  men’s  atten¬ 
tion,  and  leave  no  extraordinary  share  of  res¬ 
pect  for  personal  and  intellectual  superiority. 
This  is  wisely  ordered  by  Providence,  to  pre¬ 
serve  some  equality  among  mankind.” 

“Sir,  this  book  ( The  Elements  of  Criticism,  which 
he  had  taken  up,)  is  a  pretty  essay,  and  deserves 
to  be  held  in  some  estimation,  though  much  of 
it  is  chimerical.” 

2That  this  was  a  momentary  sally  against  Gar¬ 
rick  there  can  be  no  doubt;  for  at  Johnson’s  desire 
he  had,  some  years  before,  given  a  benefit-night  at 
his  theatre  to  this  very  person,  by  which  she  had 
got  two  hundred  pounds.  Johnson,  indeed,  upon 
all  other  occasions,  when  I  was  in  his  company, 
praised  the  very  liberal  charity  of  Garrick.  I  once 
mentioned  to  him,  “It  is  observed,  Sir,  that  you  at¬ 
tack  Garrick  yourself,  but  will  suffer  nobody  else  to 
do  it.”  Johnson,  (smiling)  “Why,  Sir,  that  is  true.” 


1763]  LIFE  OF 

Speaking  of  one  who  with  more  than  ordi¬ 
nary  boldness  attacked  publick  measures  and 
the  royal  family,  he  said, 

“I  think  he  is  safe  from  the  law,  but  he  is  an 
abusive  scoundrel;  and  instead  of  applying  to 
my  Lord  Chief  Justice  to  punish  him,  I  would 
send  half  a  dozen  footmen  and  have  him  well 
ducked.5’ 

“The  notion  of  liberty  amuses  the  people  of 
England,  and  helps  to  keep  off  the  tadium  vita. 
When  a  butcher  tells  you  that  his  heart  bleeds  for 
his  country ,  he  has,  in  fact,  no  uneasy  feeling.” 

“Sheridan  will  not  succeed  at  Bath  with  his 
oratory.  Ridicule  has  gone  down  before  him, 
and,  I  doubt,  Derrick  is  his  enemy.”1 

“Derrick  may  do  very  well,  as  long  as  he  can 
outrun  his  character;  but  the  moment  his  char¬ 
acter  gets  up  with  him,  it  is  all  over.” 

It  is,  however,  but  just  to  record,  that  some 
years  afterwards,  when  I  reminded  him  of  this 
sarcasm,  he  said,  “Well,  but  Derrick  has  now 
got  a  character  that  he  need  not  run  away  from.” 

I  was  highly  pleased  with  the  extraordinary 
vigour  of  his  conversation,  and  regretted  that  I 
was  drawn  away  from  it  by  an  engagement  at 
another  place.  I  had,  for  a  part  of  the  evening, 
been  left  alone  with  him,  and  had  ventured  to 
make  an  observation  now  and  then,  which  he 
received  very  civilly;  so  that  I  was  satisfied  that 
though  there  was  a  roughness  in  his  manner, 
there  was  no  ill-nature  in  his  disposition.  Davies 
followed  me  to  the  door,  and  when  I  complained 
to  him  a  little  of  the  hard  blows  which  the  great 
man  had  given  me  he  kindly  took  upon  him  to 
console  me  by  saying,  “Don’t  be  uneasy.  I  can 
see  he  likes  you  very  well.” 

A  few  days  afterwards  I  called  on  Davies, 
and  asked  him  if  he  thought  I  might  take  the 
liberty  of  waiting  on  Mr.  Johnson  at  his  Cham¬ 
bers  in  the  Temple.  He  said  I  certainly  might, 
and  that  Mr.  Johnson  would  take  it  as  a  compli¬ 
ment.  So  upon  Tuesday  the  24th  of  May,  after 
having  been  enlivened  by  the  witty  sallies  of 
Messieurs  Thornton,  Wilkes,  Churchill  and 
Lloyd,  with  whom  I  had  passed  the  morning,  I 
boldly  repaired  to  Johnson.  His  Chambers  were 
on  the  first  floor  of  No.  1,  Inner-Temple-lane, 
and  I  entered  them  with  an  impression  given 
me  by  the  Reverend  Dr.  Blair,  of  Edinburgh, 
who  had  been  introduced  to  him  not  long  be¬ 
fore,  and  described  his  having  “found  the  Giant 
in  his  den”;  an  expression  which,  when  I  came 
to  be  pretty  well  acquainted  with  Johnson,  I  re- 

1Mr.  Sheridan  was  then  reading  lectures  upon 
Oratory  at  Bath,  where  Derrick  was  Master  of  the 
Ceremonies;  or,  as  the  phrase  is.  King. 


JOHNSON  in 

peated  to  him,  and  he  was  diverted  at  this  pic¬ 
turesque  account  of  himself.  Dr.  Blair  had  been 
presented  to  him  by  Dr.  James  Fordyce.  At  this 
time  the  controversy  concerning  the  pieces  pub¬ 
lished  by  Mr.  James  Macpherson,  as  transla¬ 
tions  of  Ossian ,  was  at  its  height.  Johnson  had  all 
along  denied  their  authenticity;  and,  what  was 
still  more  provoking  to  their  admirers,  main¬ 
tained  that  they  had  no  merit.  The  subject  hav¬ 
ing  been  introduced  by  Dr.  Fordyce,  Dr.  Blair, 
relying  on  the  internal  evidence  of  their  antiq¬ 
uity,  asked  Dr.  Johnson  whether  he  thought  any 
man  of  a  modern  age  could  have  written  such 
poems?  Johnson  replied,  “Yes,  Sir,  many  men, 
many  women,  and  many  children.”  Johnson,  at 
this  time,  did  not  know  that  Dr.  Blair  had  just 
published  a  Dissertation ,  not  only  defending  their 
authenticity,  but  seriously  ranking  them  with 
the  poems  of  Homer  and  Virgil;  and  when  he  was 
afterwards  informed  of  this  circumstance,  he  ex¬ 
pressed  some  displeasure  at  Dr.  Fordyce’s  hav¬ 
ing  suggested  the  topick,  and  said,  “I  am  not 
sorry  that  they  got  thus  much  for  their  pains. 
Sir,  it  was  like  leading  one  to  talk  of  a  book 
when  the  authour  is  concealed  behind  the  door.” 

He  received  me  very  courteously;  but,  it 
must  be  confessed,  that  his  apartment,  and  fur¬ 
niture,  and  morning  dress,  were  sufficiently  un¬ 
couth.  His  brown  suit  of  cloaths  looked  very 
rusty;  he  had  on  a  little  old  shrivelled  unpow¬ 
dered  wig,  which  was  too  small  for  his  head;  his 
shirt-neck  and  knees  of  his  breeches  were  loose; 
his  black  worsted  stockings  ill  drawn  up;  and  he 
had  a  pair  of  unbuckled  shoes  by  way  of  slip¬ 
pers.  But  all  these  slovenly  particularities  were 
forgotten  the  moment  that  he  began  to  talk. 
Some  gentlemen,  whom  I  do  not  recollect,  were 
sitting  with  him;  and  when  they  went  away,  I 
also  rose;  but  he  said  to  me,  “Nay,  don’t  go.” 
“Sir,  (said  I,)  I  am  afraid  that  I  intrude  upon 
you.  It  is  benevolent  to  allow  me  to  sit  and  hear 
you.”  He  seemed  pleased  with  this  compliment, 
which  I  sincerely  paid  him,  and  answered,  “Sir, 
I  am  obliged  to  any  man  who  visits  me.”  I  have 
preserved  the  following  short  minute  of  what 
passed  this  day: 

“Madness  frequently  discovers  itself  merely 
by  unnecessary  deviation  from  the  usual  modes 
of  the  world.  My  poor  friend  Smart  shewed  the 
disturbance  of  his  mind,  by  falling  upon  his 
knees,  and  saying  his  prayers  in  the  street,  or  in 
any  other  unusual  place.  Now  although,  ration¬ 
ally  speaking,  it  is  greater  madness  not  to  pray 
at  all,  than  to  pray  as  Smart  did,  I  am  afraid 
there  are  so  many  who  do  not  pray,  that  their 
understanding  is  not  called  in  question.” 


1 1 2 


BOSWELL 


Concerning  this  unfortunate  poet,  Christo¬ 
pher  Smart,  who  was  confined  in  a  mad-house, 
he  had,  at  another  time,  the  following  conversa¬ 
tion  with  Dr.  Burney:— Burney.  “How  does 
poor  Smart  do,  Sir;  is  he  likely  to  recover?” 
Johnson.  “It  seems  as  if  his  mind  had  ceased  to 
struggle  with  the  disease;  for  he  grows  fat  upon 
it.”  Burney.  “Perhaps,  Sir,  that  may  be  from 
want  of  exercise.”  Johnson.  “No,  Sir;  he  has 
partly  as  much  exercise  as  he  used  to  have,  for 
he  digs  in  the  garden.  Indeed,  before  his  con¬ 
finement,  he  used  for  exercise  to  walk  to  the  ale¬ 
house;  but  he  was  carried  back  again.  I  did  not 
think  he  ought  to  be  shut  up.  His  infirmities 
were  not  noxious  to  society.  He  insisted  on  people 
praying  with  him;  and  I’d  as  lief  pray  with  Kit 
Smart  as  any  one  else.  Another  charge  was,  that 
he  did  not  love  clean  linen;  and  I  have  no  passion 
for  it.” — Johnson  continued.  “Mankind  have  a 
great  aversion  to  intellectual  labour;  but  even 
supposing  knowledge  to  be  easily  attainable, 
more  people  would  be  content  to  be  ignorant  than 
would  take  even  a  little  trouble  to  acquire  it.” 

“The  morality  of  an  action  depends  on  the 
motive  from  which  we  act.  If  I  fling  half  a  crown 
to  a  beggar  with  intention  to  break  his  head, 
and  he  picks  it  up  and  buys  victuals  with  it,  the 
physical  effect  is  good;  but,  with  respect  to  me, 
the  action  is  very  wrong.  So,  religious  exercises, 
if  not  performed  with  an  intention  to  please 
God,  avail  us  nothing.  As  our  Saviour  says  of 
those  who  perform  them  from  other  motives, 
cVerily  they  have  their  reward.’  ” 

“The  Christian  religion  has  very  strong  evi¬ 
dences.  It,  indeed,  appears  in  some  degree 
strange  to  reason;  but  in  History  we  have  un¬ 
doubted  facts,  against  which,  reasoning  a  priori , 
we  have  more  arguments  than  we  have  for  them; 
but  then,  testimony  has  great  weight,  and  casts 
the  balance.  I  would  recommend  to  every  man 
whose  faith  is  yet  unsettled,  Grotius, — Dr. 
Pearson, — and  Dr.  Clarke.” 

Talking  of  Garrick,  he  said,  “He  is  the  first 
man  in  the  world  for  sprightly  conversation.” 

When  I  rose  a  second  time  he  again  pressed 
me  to  stay,  which  I  did. 

He  told  me,  that  he  generally  went  abroad  at 
four  in  the  afternoon,  and  seldom  came  home  till 
two  in  the  morning.  I  took  the  liberty  to  ask  if  he 
did  not  think  it  wrong  to  live  thus,  and  not  make 
more  use  of  his  great  talents.  He  owned  it  was  a 
bad  habit.  On  reviewing,  at  the  distance  of  many 
years,  my  journal  of  this  period,  I  wonder  how,  at 
my  first  visit,  I  ventured  to  talk  to  him  so  freely, 
and  that  he  bore  it  with  so  much  indulgence. 

Before  we  parted,  he  was  so  good  as  to  prom¬ 


[  1763 

ise  to  favour  me  with  his  company  one  evening 
at  my  lodgings;  and,  as  I  took  my  leave,  shook 
me  cordially  by  the  hand.  It  is  almost  needless 
to  add,  that  I  felt  no  little  elation  at  having  now 
so  happily  established  an  acquaintance  of  which 
I  had  been  so  long  ambitious. 

My  readers  will,  I  trust,  excuse  me  for  being 
thus  minutely  circumstantial,  when  it  is  con¬ 
sidered  that  the  acquaintance  of  Dr.  Johnson 
was  to  me  a  most  valuable  acquisition,  and  laid 
the  foundation  of  whatever  instruction  and  en¬ 
tertainment  they  may  receive  from  my  collec¬ 
tions  concerning  the  great  subject  of  the  work 
which  they  are  now  perusing. 

I  did  not  visit  him  again  till  Monday,  June 
13,  at  which  time  I  recollect  no  part  of  his  con¬ 
versation,  except  that  when  I  told  him  I  had 
been  to  see  Johnson  ride  upon  three  horses,  he 
said,  “Such  a  man,  Sir,  should  be  encouraged; 
for  his  performances  shew  the  extent  of  the  hu¬ 
man  powers  in  one  instance,  and  thus  tend  to 
raise  our  opinion  of  the  faculties  of  man.  He 
shews  what  may  be  attained  by  persevering  ap¬ 
plication;  so  that  every  man  may  hope,  that  by 
giving  as  much  application,  although  perhaps  he 
may  never  ride  three  horses  at  a  time,  or  dance 
upon  a  wire,  yet  he  may  be  equally  expert  in 
whatever  profession  he  has  chosen  to  pursue.” 

He  again  shook  me  by  the  hand  at  parting, 
and  asked  me  why  I  did  not  come  oftener  to 
him.  Trusting  that  I  was  now  in  his  good  graces, 
I  answered,  that  he  had  not  given  me  much  en¬ 
couragement,  and  reminded  him  of  the  check  I 
had  received  from  him  at  our  first  interview. 
“Poh,  poh !  (said  he,  with  a  complacent  smile,) 
never  mind  these  things.  Come  to  me  as  often  as 
you  can.  I  shall  be  glad  to  see  you.” 

I  had  learnt  that  his  place  of  frequent  resort 
was  the  Mitre  tavern  in  Fleet-street,  where  he 
loved  to  sit  up  late,  and  I  begged  I  might  be  al¬ 
lowed  to  pass  an  evening  with  him  there  soon, 
which  he  promised  I  should.  A  few  days  after¬ 
wards  I  met  him  near  Temple-bar,  about  one 
o’clock  in  the  morning,  and  asked  if  he  would 
then  go  to  the  Mitre.  “Sir,  (said  he)  it  is  too 
late;  they  won’t  let  us  in.  But  I’ll  go  with  you 
another  night  with  all  my  heart.” 

A  revolution  of  some  importance  in  my  plan 
of  life  had  just  taken  place;  for  instead  of  pro¬ 
curing  a  commission  in  the  foot-guards,  which 
was  my  own  inclination,  I  had,  in  compliance 
with  my  father’s  wishes,  agreed  to  study  the 
law;  and  was  soon  to  set  out  for  Utrecht,  to  hear 
the  lectures  of  an  excellent  Civilian  in  that  Uni¬ 
versity,  and  then  to  proceed  on  my  travels. 
Though  very  desirous  of  obtaining  Dr.  John- 


1763]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


son’s  advice  and  instructions  on  the  mode  of 
pursuing  my  studies,  I  was  at  this  time  so  occu¬ 
pied,  shall  I  call  it?  or  so  dissipated,  by  the 
amusements  of  London,  that  our  next  meeting 
was  not  till  Saturday,  June  25,  when  happening 
to  dine  at  Clifton’s  eating-house,  in  Butcher- 
row,  I  was  surprized  to  perceive  Johnson  come 
in  and  take  his  seat  at  another  table.  The  mode 
of  dining,  or  rather  being  fed,  at  such  houses 
in  London,  is  well  known  to  many  to  be  par¬ 
ticularly  unsocial,  as  there  is  no  Ordinary,  or 
united  company,  but  each  person  has  his  own 
mess,  and  is  under  no  obligation  to  hold  any  in¬ 
tercourse  with  any  one.  A  liberal  and  full- 
minded  man,  however,  who  loves  to  talk,  will 
break  through  this  churlish  and  unsocial  re¬ 
straint.  Johnson  and  an  Irish  gentleman  got  into 
a  dispute  concerning  the  cause  of  some  part  of 
mankind  being  black.  “Why,  Sir,  (said  John¬ 
son,)  it  has  been  accounted  for  in  three  ways: 
either  by  supposing  that  they  are  the  posterity 
of  Ham,  who  was  cursed;  or  that  God  at  first 
created  two  kinds  of  men,  one  black  and  an¬ 
other  white;  or  that  by  the  heat  of  the  sun  the 
skin  is  scorched,  and  so  acquires  a  sooty  hue. 
This  matter  has  been  much  canvassed  among 
naturalists,  but  has  never  been  brought  to  any 
certain  issue.”  What  the  Irishman  said  is  totally 
obliterated  from  my  mind;  but  I  remember  that 
he  became  very  warm  and  intemperate  in  his  ex¬ 
pressions;  upon  which  Johnson  rose,  and  quietly 
walked  away.  When  he  had  retired,  his  antag¬ 
onist  took  his  revenge,  as  he  thought,  by  saying, 
“He  has  a  most  ungainly  figure,  and  an  affecta¬ 
tion  of  pomposity,  unworthy  of  a  man  of  genius.” 

Johnson  had  not  observed  that  I  was  in  the 
room.  I  followed  him,  however,  and  he  agreed 
to  meet  me  in  the  evening  at  the  Mitre.  I  called 
on  him,  and  we  went  thither  at  nine.  We  had  a 
good  supper,  and  port  wine,  of  which  he  then 
sometimes  drank  a  bottle.  The  orthodox  high- 
church  sound  of  the  Mitre, — the  figure  and 
manner  of  the  celebrated  Samuel  Johnson, — 
the  extraordinary  power  and  precision  of  his 
conversation,  and  the  pride  arising  from  finding 
myself  admitted  as  his  companion,  produced  a 
variety  of  sensations,  and  a  pleasing  elevation  of 
mind  beyond  what  I  had  ever  before  experi¬ 
enced.  I  find  in  my  journal  the  following  minute 
of  our  conversation,  which,  though  it  will  give 
but  a  very  faint  notion  of  what  passed,  is  in  some 
degree  a  valuable  record;  and  it  will  be  curious 
in  this  view,  as  shewing  how  habitual  to  his  mind 
were  some  opinions  which  appear  in  his  works. 

“Colley  Cibber,  Sir,  was  by  no  means  a  block¬ 
head;  but  by  arrogating  to  himself  too  much,  he 


was  in  danger  of  losing  that  degree  of  estimation 
to  which  he  was  entitled.  His  friends  gave  out 
that  he  intended  his  birth-day  Odes  should  be  bad: 
but  that  was  not  the  case,  Sir;  for  he  kept  them 
many  months  by  him,  and  a  few  years  before  he 
died  he  shewed  me  one  of  them,  with  great  solic¬ 
itude  to  render  it  as  perfect  as  might  be,  and  I 
made  some  corrections,  to  which  he  was  not 
very  willing  to  submit.  I  remember  the  following 
couplet  in  allusion  to  the  King  and  himself: 
Perch'd  on  the  eagle's  soaring  wing , 

The  lowly  linnet  loves  to  sing. 

Sir,  he  had  heard  something  of  the  fabulous  tale 
of  the  wren  sitting  upon  the  eagle’s  wing,  and 
he  had  applied  it  to  a  linnet.  Cibber’s  familiar 
style,  however,  was  better  than  that  which 
Whitehead  has  assumed.  Grand  nonsense  is  in¬ 
supportable.  Whitehead  is  but  a  little  man  to 
inscribe  verses  to  players.” 

I  did  not  presume  to  controvert  this  censure, 
which  was  tinctured  with  his  prejudice  against 
players;  but  I  could  not  help  thinking  that  a 
dramatick  poet  might  with  propriety  pay  a 
compliment  to  an  eminent  performer,  as  White- 
head  has  very  happily  done  in  his  verses  to  Mr. 
Garrick. 

“Sir,  I  do  not  think  Gray  a  first-rate  poet.  He 
has  not  a  bold  imagination,  nor  much  com¬ 
mand  of  words.  The  obscurity  in  which  he  has 
involved  himself  will  not  persuade  us  that  he  is 
sublime.  His  Elegy  in  a  Church-yard  has  a  happy 
selection  of  images,  but  I  don’t  like  what  are 
called  his  great  things.  His  Ode  which  begins 
Ruin  seize  thee>  ruthless  King , 

Confusion  on  thy  banners  wait ! 
has  been  celebrated  for  its  abruptness,  and 
plunging  into  the  subject  all  at  once.  But  such 
arts  as  these  have  no  merit,  unless  when  they  are 
original.  We  admire  them  only  once;  and  this 
abruptness  has  nothing  new  in  it.  We  have  had 
it  often  before.  Nay,  we  have  it  in  the  old  song 
of  Johnny  Armstrong: 

Is  there  ever  a  man  in  all  Scotland 
From  the  highest  estate  to  the  lowest  degree ,  & c. 
And  then,  Sir, 

Tes,  there  is  a  man  in  Westmoreland , 

And  Johnny  Armstrong  they  do  him  call . 

There,  now,  you  plunge  at  once  into  the  sub¬ 
ject.  You  have  no  previous  narration  to  lead 
you  to  it.  The  two  next  lines  in  that  Ode  are,  I 
think,  very  good: 

Though  fann' d  by  conquest's  crimson  wingy 
They  mock  the  air  with  idle  state." 1 

*My  friend  Mr.  Malone,  in  his  valuable  com¬ 
ments  on  Shakspeare,  has  traced  in  that  great 
poet  the  disjecta  membra  of  these  lines. 


BOSWELL 


114 

Here  let  it  be  observed,  that  although  his 
opinion  of  Gray’s  poetry  was  widely  different 
from  mine,  and  I  believe  from  that  of  most  men 
of  taste,  by  whom  it  is  with  justice  highly  ad¬ 
mired,  there  is  certainly  much  absurdity  in  the 
clamour  which  has  been  raised,  as  if  he  had 
been  culpably  injurious  to  the  merit  of  that 
bard,  and  had  been  actuated  by  envy.  Alas !  ye 
little  short-sighted  cri ticks,  could  Johnson  be  en¬ 
vious  of  the  talents  of  any  of  his  contemporaries? 
That  his  opinion  on  this  subject  was  what  in 
private  and  in  publick  he  uniformly  expressed, 
regardless  of  what  others  might  think,  we  may 
wonder,  and  perhaps  regret;  but  it  is  shallow 
and  unjust  to  charge  him  with  expressing  what 
he  did  not  think. 

Finding  him  in  a  placid  humour,  and  wishing 
to  avail  myself  of  the  opportunity  which  I  for¬ 
tunately  had  of  consulting  a  sage,  to  hear  whose 
wisdom,  I  conceived  in  the  ardour  of  youthful 
imagination,  that  men  filled  with  a  noble  en¬ 
thusiasm  for  intellectual  improvement  would 
gladly  have  resorted  from  distant  lands; — I 
opened  my  mind  to  him  ingenuously,  and  gave 
him  a  little  sketch  of  my  life,  to  which  he  was 
pleased  to  listen  with  great  attention. 

I  acknowledged,  that  though  educated  very 
strictly  in  the  principles  of  religion,  I  had  for 
some  time  been  misled  into  a  certain  degree  of 
infidelity;  but  that  I  was  come  now  to  a  better 
way  of  thinking,  and  was  fully  satisfied  of  the 
truth  of  the  Christian  revelation,  though  I  was 
not  clear  as  to  every  point  considered  to  be  or¬ 
thodox.  Being  at  all  times  a  curious  examiner  of 
the  human  mind,  and  pleased  with  an  undis¬ 
guised  display  of  what  had  passed  in  it,  he  called 
to  me  with  warmth,  “Give  me  your  hand;  I 
have  taken  a  liking  to  you.”  He  then  began  to 
descant  upon  the  force  of  testimony,  and  the 
little  we  could  know  of  final  causes;  so  that  the 
objections  of,  why  was  it  so?  or  why  was  it  not 
so?  ought  not  to  disturb  us:  adding,  that  he  him¬ 
self  had  at  one  period  been  guilty  of  a  tempo¬ 
rary  neglect  of  religion,  but  that  it  was  not  the 
result  of  argument,  but  mere  absence  of  thought. 

After  having  given  credit  to  reports  of  his  big¬ 
otry,  I  was  agreeably  surprized  when  he  ex¬ 
pressed  the  following  very  liberal  sentiment, 
which  has  the  additional  value  of  obviating  an 
objection  to  our  holy  religion,  founded  upon  the 
discordant  tenets  of  Christians  themselves:  “For 
my  part,  Sir,  I  think  all  Christians,  whether 
Papists  or  Protestants,  agree  in  the  essential  arti¬ 
cles,  and  that  their  differences  are  trivial,  and 
rather  political  than  religious.” 

We  talked  of  belief  in  ghosts.  He  said,  “Sir,  I 


1 1763 

make  a  distinction  between  what  a  man  may 
experience  by  the  mere  strength  of  his  imagina¬ 
tion,  and  what  imagination  cannot  possibly  pro¬ 
duce.  Thus,  suppose  I  should  think  that  I  saw  a 
form,  and  heard  a  voice  cry  ‘Johnson,  you  are 
a  very  wicked  fellow,  and  unless  you  repent  you 
will  certainly  be  punished5;  my  own  unworthi¬ 
ness  is  so  deeply  impressed  upon  my  mind,  that 
I  might  imagine  I  thus  saw  and  heard,  and  there¬ 
fore  I  should  not  believe  that  an  external  com¬ 
munication  had  been  made  to  me.  But  if  a  form 
should  appear,  and  a  voice  should  tell  me  that  a 
particular  man  had  died  at  a  particular  place, 
and  a  particular  hour,  a  fact  which  I  had  no 
apprehension  of,  nor  any  means  of  knowing, 
and  this  fact,  with  all  its  circumstances,  should 
afterwards  be  unquestionably  proved,  I  should, 
in  that  case,  be  persuaded  that  I  had  supernatu¬ 
ral  intelligence  imparted  to  me.” 

Here  it  is  proper,  once  for  all,  to  give  a  true 
and  fair  statement  of  Johnson’s  way  of  thinking 
upon  the  question,  whether  departed  spirits  are 
ever  permitted  to  appear  in  this  world,  or  in 
any  way  to  operate  upon  human  life.  He  has 
been  ignorantly  misrepresented  as  weakly  cred¬ 
ulous  upon  that  subject;  and,  therefore,  though 
I  feel  an  inclination  to  disdain  and  treat  with 
silent  contempt  so  foolish  a  notion  concerning 
my  illustrious  friend,  yet  as  I  find  it  has  gained 
ground,  it  is  necessary  to  refute  it.  The  real  fact 
then  is,  that  Johnson  had  a  very  philosophical 
mind,  and  such  a  rational  respect  for  testimony, 
as  to  make  him  submit  his  understanding  to 
what  was  authentically  proved,  though  he  could 
not  comprehend  why  it  was  so.  Being  thus  dis¬ 
posed,  he  was  willing  to  inquire  into  the  truth 
of  any  relation  of  supernatural  agency,  a  gen¬ 
eral  belief  of  which  has  prevailed  in  all  nations 
and  ages.  But  so  far  was  he  from  being  the  dupe 
of  implicit  faith,  that  he  examined  the  matter 
with  a  jealous  attention,  and  no  man  was  more 
ready  to  refute  its  falsehood  when  he  had  dis¬ 
covered  it.  Churchill,  in  his  poem  entitled  The 
Ghost ,  availed  himself  of  the  absurd  credulity  im¬ 
puted  to  Johnson,  and  drew  a  caricature  of  him 
under  the  name  of  “Pomposo,”  representing  him 
as  one  of  the  believers  of  the  story  of  a  Ghost  in 
Cock-lane,  which,  in  the  year  1762,  had  gained 
very  general  credit  in  London.  Many  of  my  read¬ 
ers,  I  am  convinced,  are  to  this  hour  under  an  im¬ 
pression  that  J ohnson  was  thus  foolishly  deceived. 
It  will  therefore  surprize  them  a  good  deal  when 
they  are  informed  upon  undoubted  authority, 
that  Johnson  was  one  of  those  by  whom  the  im¬ 
posture  was  detected.  The  story  had  become  so 
popular,  that  he  thought  it  should  be  investiga- 


1763  ] 

ted;  and  in  this  research  he  was  assisted  by  the 
Reverend  Dr.  Douglas,  now  Bishop  of  Salisbury, 
the  great  detector  of  impostures;  who  informs 
me,  that  after  the  gentlemen  who  went  and 
examined  into  the  evidence  were  satisfied  of 
its  falsity,  Johnson  wrote  in  their  presence  an 
account  of  it,  which  was  published  in  the  news¬ 
papers  and  Gentleman's  Magazine ,  and  unde¬ 
ceived  the  world.1 

Our  conversation  proceeded.  “Sir,  (said  he) 
I  am  a  friend  to  subordination,  as  most  condu¬ 
cive  to  the  happiness  of  society.  There  is  a  recip- 

xThe  account  was  as  follows:  “On  the  night  of 
the  1st  of  February  [1762]  many  gentlemen  emi¬ 
nent  for  their  rank  and  character  were,  by  the  in¬ 
vitation  of  the  Reverend  Mr.  Aldrich,  of  Clerken- 
well,  assembled  at  his  house,  for  the  examination 
of  the  noises  supposed  to  be  made  by  a  departed 
spirit,  for  the  detection  of  some  enormous  crime. 

“About  ten  at  night  the  gentlemen  met  in  the 
chamber  in  which  the  girl,  supposed  to  be  dis¬ 
turbed  by  a  spirit,  had,  with  proper  caution,  been 
put  to  bed  by  several  ladies.  They  sat  rather  more 
than  an  hour,  and  hearing  nothing,  went  down 
stairs,  when  they  interrogated  the  father  of  the  girl, 
who  denied,  in  the  strongest  terms,  any  knowledge 
or  belief  of  fraud. 

“The  supposed  spirit  had  before  publickly  prom¬ 
ised,  by  an  affirmative  knock,  that  it  would  attend 
one  of  the  gentlemen  into  the  vault  under  the 
Church  of  St.  John,  Clerkenwell,  where  the  body 
is  deposited,  and  give  a  token  of  her  presence  there, 
by  a  knock  upon  her  coffin;  it  was  therefore  deter¬ 
mined  to  make  this  trial  of  the  existence  or  veracity 
of  the  supposed  spirit. 

“While  they  were  enquiring  and  deliberating, 
they  were  summoned  into  the  girl’s  chamber  by 
some  ladies  who  were  near  her  bed,  and  who  had 
heard  knocks  and  scratches.  When  the  gentlemen 
entered,  the  girl  declared  that  she  felt  the  spirit 
like  a  mouse  upon  her  back,  and  was  required  to 
hold  her  hands  out  of  bed.  From  that  time,  though 
the  spirit  was  very  solemnly  required  to  manifest 
its  existence  by  appearance,  by  impression  on  the 
hand  or  body  of  any  present,  by  scratches,  knocks 
or  any  other  agency,  no  evidence  of  any  preter¬ 
natural  power  was  exhibited. 

“The  spirit  was  then  very  seriously  advertised 
that  the  person  to  whom  the  promise  was  made  of 
striking  the  coffin,  was  then  about  to  visit  the  vault, 
and  that  the  performance  of  the  promise  was  then 
claimed.  The  company  at  one  o’clock  went  into 
the  church,  and  the  gentleman  to  whom  the  prom¬ 
ise  was  made,  went  with  another  into  the  vault. 
The  spirit  was  solemnly  required  to  perform  its 
promise,  but  nothing  more  than  silence  ensued:  the 
person  supposed  to  be  accused  by  the  spirit,  then 
went  down  with  several  others,  but  no  effect  was 
perceived.  Upon  their  return  they  examined  the 
girl,  but  could  draw  no  confession  from  her.  Be¬ 
tween  two  and  three  she  desired  and  was  permitted 
to  go  home  with  her  father. 

“It  is,  therefore,  the  opinion  of  the  whole  assem¬ 
bly,  that  the  child  has  some  art  of  making  or  coun¬ 
terfeiting  a  particular  noise,  and  that  there  is  no 
agency  of  any  higher  cause.” 


rocal  pleasure  in  governing  and  being  gov¬ 
erned.” 

“Dr.  Goldsmith  is  one  of  the  first  men  we  now 
have  as  an  authour,  and  he  is  a  very  worthy 
man  too.  He  has  been  loose  in  his  principles, 
but  he  is  coming  right.” 

I  mentioned  Mallet’s  tragedy  of  Elvira ,  which 
had  been  acted  the  preceding  winter  at  Drury- 
lane,  and  that  the  Honourable  Andrew  Erskine, 
Mr.  Dempster,  and  myself,  had  joined  in  writing 
a  pamphlet,  entitled,  Critical  Strictures ,  against 
it.2  That  the  mildness  of  Dempster’s  disposition 
had,  however,  relented;  and  he  had  candidly 
said,  “We  have  hardly  a  right  to  abuse  this 
tragedy:  for  bad  as  it  is,  how  vain  should  either 
of  us  be  to  write  one  not  near  so  good.”  John¬ 
son.  “Why  no,  Sir;  this  is  not  just  reasoning. 
You  may  abuse  a  tragedy,  though  you  cannot 
write  one.  You  may  scold  a  carpenter  who  has 
made  you  a  bad  table,  though  you  cannot  make 
a  table.  It  is  not  your  trade  to  make  tables.” 

When  I  talked  to  him  of  the  paternal  estate 
to  which  I  was  heir,  he  said,  “Sir,  let  me  tell 
you,  that  to  be  a  Scotch  landlord,  where  you 
have  a  number  of  families  dependent  upon  you, 
and  attached  to  you,  is,  perhaps,  as  high  a  situa¬ 
tion  as  humanity  can  arrive  at.  A  merchant 
upon  the  ’Change  of  London,  with  a  hundred 
thousand  pounds,  is  nothing;  an  English  Duke, 
with  an  immense  fortune,  is  nothing;  he  has  no 
tenants  who  consider  themselves  as  under  his 
patriarchal  care,  and  who  will  follow  him  to  the 
field  upon  an  emergency.” 

His  notion  of  the  dignity  of  a  Scotch  landlord 
had  been  formed  upon  what  he  had  heard  of  the 
Highland  Chiefs;  for  it  is  long  since  a  lowland 
landlord  has  been  so  curtailed  in  his  feudal 
authority,  that  he  has  little  more  influence  over 
his  tenants  than  an  English  landlord;  and  of  late 
years  most  of  the  Highland  Chiefs  have  de¬ 
stroyed,  by  means  too  well  known,  the  princely 
power  which  they  once  enjoyed. 

He  proceeded:  “Your  going  abroad,  Sir,  and 
breaking  off  idle  habits,  may  be  of  great  import¬ 
ance  to  you.  I  would  go  where  there  are  courts 
and  learned  men.  There  is  a  good  deal  of  Spain 
that  has  not  been  perambulated.  I  would  have 
you  go  thither.  A  man  of  inferiour  talents  to 
yours  may  furnish  us  with  useful  observations 
upon  that  country.”  His  supposing  me,  at  that 
period  of  life,  capable  of  writing  an  account  of 

2The  Critical  Review ,  in  which  Mallet  himself 
sometimes  wrote,  characterised  this  pamphlet  as 
“the  crude  efforts  of  envy,  petulance  and  self-con¬ 
ceit.”  There  being  thus  three  epithets,  we,  the  three 
authours,  had  a  humourous  contention  how  each 
should  be  appropriated. 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


BOSWELL 


1 16 

my  travels  that  would  deserve  to  be  read  elated 
me  not  a  little. 

I  appeal  to  every  impartial  reader  whether 
this  faithful  detail  of  his  frankness,  complacency, 
and  kindness  to  a  young  man,  a  stranger  and  a 
Scotchman,  does  not  refute  the  unjust  opinion 
of  the  harshness  of  his  general  demeanour.  His 
occasional  reproofs  of  folly,  impudence,  or  im¬ 
piety,  and  even  the  sudden  sallies  of  his  consti¬ 
tutional  irritability  of  temper,  which  have  been 
preserved  for  the  poignancy  of  their  wit,  have 
produced  that  opinion  among  those  who  have 
not  considered  that  such  instances,  though  col¬ 
lected  by  Mrs.  Piozzi  into  a  small  volume,  and 
read  over  in  a  few  hours,  were,  in  fact,  scattered 
through  a  long  series  of  years;  years,  in  which  his 
time  was  chiefly  spent  in  instructing  and  delight¬ 
ing  mankind  by  his  writings  and  conversation, 
in  acts  of  piety  to  God,  and  good-will  to  men. 

I  complained  to  him  that  I  had  not  yet  ac¬ 
quired  much  knowledge,  and  asked  his  advice 
as  to  my  studies.  He  said,  “Don’t  talk  of  study 
now.  I  will  give  you  a  plan;  but  it  will  require 
some  time  to  consider  of  it.55  “It  is  very  good  in 
you  (I  replied,)  to  allow  me  to  be  with  you  thus. 
Had  it  been  foretold  to  me  some  years  ago  that 
I  should  pass  an  evening  with  the  authour  of 
The  Rambler ,  how  should  I  have  exulted !”  What 
I  then  expressed,  was  sincerely  from  the  heart. 
He  was  satisfied  that  it  was,  and  cordially  an¬ 
swered,  “Sir,  I  am  glad  we  have  met.  I  hope  we 
shall  pass  many  evenings  and  mornings  too,  to¬ 
gether.”  We  finished  a  couple  of  bottles  of  port, 
and  sat  till  between  one  and  two  in  the  morning. 

He  wrote  this  year  in  The  Critical  Review  the 
account  of  Telemachus,  a  Mask ,  by  the  Reverend 
George  Graham,  of  Eton  College.  The  subject 
of  this  beautiful  poem  was  particularly  interest¬ 
ing  to  Johnson,  who  had  much  experience  of 
“the  conflict  of  opposite  principles,”  which  he 
describes  as  “The  contention  between  pleasure 
and  virtue,  a  struggle  which  will  always  be  con¬ 
tinued  while  the  present  system  of  nature  shall 
subsist:  nor  can  history  or  poetry  exhibit  more 
than  pleasure  triumphing  over  virtue,  and  vir¬ 
tue  subjugating  pleasure.” 

As  Dr.  Oliver  Goldsmith  will  frequently  ap¬ 
pear  in  this  narrative,  I  shall  endeavour  to  make 
my  readers  in  some  degree  acquainted  with  his 
singular  character.  He  was  a  native  of  Ireland, 
and  a  contemporary  with  Mr.  Burke  at  Trinity 
College,  Dublin,  but  did  not  then  give  much 
promise  of  future  celebrity.  He,  however,  ob¬ 
served  to  Mr.  Malone,  that  “though  he  made 
no  great  figure  in  mathematicks,  which  was  a 
study  in  much  repute  there,  he  could  turn  an 


[  1763 

Ode  of  Horace  into  English  better  than  any  of 
them.”  He  afterwards  studied  physick  at  Edin¬ 
burgh,  and  upon  the  Continent;  and  I  have 
been  informed,  was  enabled  to  pursue  his  travels 
on  foot,  partly  by  demanding  at  Universities  to 
enter  the  lists  as  a  disputant,  by  which,  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  custom  of  many  of  them,  he  was  en¬ 
titled  to  the  premium  of  a  crown,  when  luckily 
for  him  his  challenge  was  not  accepted;  so  that, 
as  I  once  observed  to  Dr.  Johnson,  he  disputed 
his  passage  through  Europe.  He  then  came  to 
England,  and  was  employed  successively  in  the 
capacities  of  an  usher  to  an  academy,  a  correc¬ 
tor  of  the  press,  a  reviewer,  and  a  writer  for  a 
news-paper.  He  had  sagacity  enough  to  cultivate 
assiduously  the  acquaintance  of  Johnson,  and 
his  faculties  were  gradually  enlarged  by  the  con¬ 
templation  of  such  a  model.  To  me  and  many 
others  it  appeared  that  he  studiously  copied  the 
manner  of  Johnson,  though,  indeed,  upon  a 
smaller  scale. 

At  this  time  I  think  he  had  published  nothing 
with  his  name,  though  it  was  pretty  generally 
known  that  one  Dr.  Goldsmith  was  the  authour  of 
An  Enquiry  into  the  present  State  of  polite  Learning  in 
Europe ,  and  of  The  Citizen  of  the  W orld,  a  series  of 
letters  supposed  to  be  written  from  London  by 
a  Chinese.  No  man  had  the  art  of  displaying 
with  more  advantage  as  a  writer,  whatever  lit¬ 
erary  acquisitions  he  made.  Nihil  quod  tetigit  non 
ornavit }  His  mind  resembled  a  fertile,  but  thin 
soil.  There  was  a  quick,  but  not  a  strong  vegeta¬ 
tion,  of  whatever  chanced  to  be  thrown  upon  it. 
No  deep  root  could  be  struck.  The  oak  of  the 
forest  did  not  grow  there;  but  the  elegant  shrub¬ 
bery  and  the  fragrant  parterre  appeared  in  gay 
succession.  It  has  been  generally  circulated  and 
believed  that  he  was  a  mere  fool  in  conversa¬ 
tion;2  but,  in  truth,  this  has  been  greatly  exag- 

JSee  his  Epitaph  in  Westminster  Abbey,  written 
by  Dr.  Johnson. 

2In  allusion  to  this,  Mr.  Horace  Walpole,  who 
admired  his  writings,  said  he  was  “an  inspired 
ideot”;  and  Garrick  described  him  as  one 

- for  shortness  calVd  Noll , 

Who  wrote  like  an  angel ,  and  talk'd  like  poor  Poll. 

Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  mentioned  to  me  that  he 
frequently  heard  Goldsmith  talk  warmly  of  the 
pleasure  of  being  liked,  and  observe  how  hard  it 
would  be  if  literary  excellence  should  preclude  a 
man  from  that  satisfaction,  which  he  perceived  it 
often  did,  from  the  envy  which  attended  it;  and 
therefore  Sir  Joshua  was  convinced  that  he  was  in¬ 
tentionally  more  absurd,  in  order  to  lessen  himself 
in  social  intercourse,  trusting  that  his  character 
would  be  sufficiently  supported  by  his  works.  If  it 
indeed  was  his  intention  to  appear  absurd  in  com¬ 
pany,  he  was  often  very  successful.  But  with  due 
deference  to  Sir  Joshua’s  ingenuity,  I  think  the 
conjecture  too  refined. 


1763]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  1171 


gerated.  He  had,  no  doubt,  a  more  than  com¬ 
mon  share  of  that  hurry  of  ideas  which  we  often 
find  in  his  countrymen,  and  which  sometimes 
produces  a  laughable  confusion  in  expressing 
them.  He  was  very  much  what  the  French  call 
un  etourdi ,  and  from  vanity  and  an  eager  desire 
of  being  conspicuous  wherever  he  was,  he  fre¬ 
quently  talked  carelessly  without  knowledge  of 
the  subject,  or  even  without  thought.  His  person 
was  short,  his  countenance  coarse  and  vulgar, 
his  deportment  that  of  a  scholar  aukwardly  af¬ 
fecting  the  easy  gentleman.  Those  who  were  in 
any  way  distinguished,  excited  envy  in  him  to 
so  ridiculous  an  excess,  that  the  instances  of  it 
are  hardly  credible.  When  accompanying  two 
beautiful  young  ladies1  with  their  mother  on  a 
tour  in  France,  he  was  seriously  angry  that  more 
attention  was  paid  to  them  than  to  him;  and 
once  at  the  exhibition  of  the  Fantoccini  in  Lon¬ 
don,  when  those  who  sat  next  him  observed 
with  what  dexterity  a  puppet  was  made  to  toss 
a  pike,  he  could  not  bear  that  it  should  have 
such  praise,  and  exclaimed  with  some  warmth, 
“Pshaw !  I  can  do  it  better  myself.” 2 

He,  I  am  afraid,  had  no  settled  system  of  any 
sort,  so  that  his  conduct  must  not  be  strictly 
scrutinised;  but  his  affections  were  social  and 
generous,  and  when  he  had  money  he  gave  it 
away  very  liberally.  His  desire  of  imaginary 
consequence  predominated  over  his  attention 
to  truth.  When  he  began  to  rise  into  notice,  he 
said  he  had  a  brother  who  was  Dean  of  Dur¬ 
ham,3  a  fiction  so  easily  detected,  that  it  is  won¬ 
derful  how  he  should  have  been  so  inconsiderate 
as  to  hazard  it.  He  boasted  to  me  at  this  time  of 
the  power  of  his  pen  in  commanding  money, 
which  I  believe  was  true  in  a  certain  degree, 
though  in  the  instance  he  gave  he  was  by  no 
means  correct.  He  told  me  that  he  had  sold  a 
novel  for  four  hundred  pounds.  This  was  his 
Vicar  of  Wakefield .  But  Johnson  informed  me, 
that  he  had  made  the  bargain  for  Goldsmith, 
and  the  price  was  sixty  pounds.  “And,  Sir,  (said 
he,)  a  sufficient  price  too,  when  it  was  sold;  for 
then  the  fame  of  Goldsmith  had  not  been  ele¬ 
vated,  as  it  afterwards  was,  by  his  Traveller;  and 

1Miss  Hornecks,  one  of  whom  is  now  married  to 
Henry  Bunbury,  Esq.,  and  the  other  to  Colonel 
Gwyn. 

2He  went  home  with  Mr.  Burke  to  supper;  and 
broke  his  shin  by  attempting  to  exhibit  to  the  com¬ 
pany  how  much  better  he  could  jump  over  a  stick 
than  the  puppets. 

3I  am  willing  to  hope  that  there  may  have  been 
some  mistake  as  to  this  anecdote,  though  I  had  it 
from  a  Dignitary  of  the  Church.  Dr.  Isaac  Gold¬ 
smith,  his  near  relation,  was  Dean  of  Cloyne,  in 

*747* 


the  bookseller  had  such  faint  hopes  of  profit  by 
his  bargain,  that  he  kept  the  manuscript  by  him 
a  long  time,  and  did  not  publish  it  till  after  The 
Traveller  had  appeared.  Then,  to  be  sure,  it  was 
accidentally  worth  more  money.” 

Mrs.  Piozzi4  and  Sir  John  Hawkins5  have 
strangely  misstated  the  history  of  Goldsmith’s 
situation  and  Johnson’s  friendly  interference, 
when  this  novel  was  sold.  I  shall  give  it  authen¬ 
tically  from  Johnson’s  own  exact  narration: — 
“I  received  one  morning  a  message  from  poor 
Goldsmith  that  he  was  in  great  distress,  and  as 
it  was  not  in  his  power  to  come  to  me,  begging 
that  I  would  come  to  him  as  soon  as  possible.  I 
sent  him  a  guinea,  and  promised  to  come  to 
him  directly.  I  accordingly  went  as  soon  as  I 
was  drest,  and  found  that  his  landlady  had  ar¬ 
rested  him  for  his  rent,  at  which  he  was  in  a 
violent  passion.  I  perceived  that  he  had  already 
changed  my  guinea,  and  had  got  a  bottle  of 
Madeira  and  a  glass  before  him.  I  put  the  cork 
into  the  bottle,  desired  he  would  be  calm,  and 
began  to  talk  to  him  of  the  means  by  which  he 
might  be  extricated.  He  then  told  me  that  he 
had  a  novel  ready  for  the  press,  which  he  pro¬ 
duced  to  me.  I  looked  into  it,  and  saw  its  merit; 
told  the  landlady  I  should  soon  return,  and 
having  gone  to  a  bookseller,  sold  it  for  sixty 
pounds.  I  brought  Goldsmith  the  money  and  he 
discharged  his  rent,  not  without  rating  his  land¬ 
lady  in  a  high  tone  for  having  used  him  so  ill.6” 

My  next  meeting  with  Johnson  was  on  Friday 
the  1  st  of  July,  when  he  and  I  and  Dr.  Goldsmith 
supped  together  at  the  Mitre.  I  was  before  this 
time  pretty  well  acquainted  with  Goldsmith, 
who  was  one  of  the  brightest  ornaments  of  the 

4 Anecdotes  of  Johnson,  p.  119. 

hLife  of  Johnson,  p.  420. 

6It  may  not  be  improper  to  annex  here  Mrs. 
Piozzi’s  account  of  this  transaction,  in  her  own 
words,  as  a  specimen  of  the  extreme  inaccuracy 
with  which  all  her  anecdotes  of  Dr.  Johnson  are  re¬ 
lated,  or  rather  discoloured  and  distorted: — “I 
have  forgotten  the  year,  but  it  could  scarcely,  I 
think,  be  later  than  1 765  or  1 766,  that  he  was  called 
abruptly  from  our  house  after  dinner ,  and  returning  in 
about  three  hours ,  said  he  had  been  with  an  enraged 
authour,  whose  landlady  pressed  him  for  payment 
within  doors,  while  the  bailiffs  beset  him  without; 
that  he  was  drinking  himself  drunk  with  Madeira,  to 
drown  care,  and  fretting  over  a  novel,  which,  when 
finished,  was  to  be  his  whole  fortune,  but  he  could  not 
get  it  done  for  distraction,  nor  could  he  step  out  of 
doors  to  offer  it  for  sale.  Mr.  Johnson,  therefore, 
sent  away  the  bottle,  and  went  to  the  bookseller, 
recommending  the  performance,  and  desiring  some 
immediate  relief;  which  when  he  brought  back  to  the 
writer,  he  called  the  woman  of  the  house  directly  to  par¬ 
take  of  punch,  and  pass  their  time  in  merriment .”  Anec¬ 
dotes  of  Dr .  Johnson,  p.  119. 


n8  BOSWELL  [1763 


Johnsonian  school.  Goldsmith’s  respectful  at¬ 
tachment  to  Johnson  was  then  at  its  height;  for 
his  own  literary  reputation  had  not  yet  distin¬ 
guished  him  so  much  as  to  excite  a  vain  desire 
of  competition  with  his  great  Master.  He  had 
increased  my  admiration  of  the  goodness  of 
Johnson’s  heart,  by  incidental  remarks  in  the 
course  of  conversation,  such  as,  when  I  men¬ 
tioned  Mr.  Levet,  whom  he  entertained  under 
his  roof,  “He  is  poor  and  honest,  which  is  rec¬ 
ommendation  enough  to  Johnson”;  and  when  I 
wondered  that  he  was  very  kind  to  a  man  of 
whom  I  had  heard  a  very  bad  character,  “He 
is  now  become  miserable,  and  that  insures  the 
protection  of  Johnson.” 

Goldsmith  attempted  this  evening  to  main¬ 
tain,  I  suppose  from  an  affectation  of  paradox, 
“that  knowledge  was  not  desirable  on  its  own 
account,  for  it  often  was  a  source  of  unhappi¬ 
ness.”  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  that  knowledge 
may  in  some  cases  produce  unhappiness,  I  allow. 
But,  upon  the  whole,  knowledge,  per  se,  is  cer¬ 
tainly  an  object  which  every  man  would  wish  to 
attain,  although,  perhaps  he  may  not  take  the 
trouble  necessary  for  attaining  it.” 

Dr.  John  Campbell,  the  celebrated  political 
and  biographical  wri ter,  being  mentioned,  John¬ 
son  said,  “Campbell  is  a  man  of  much  knowl¬ 
edge,  and  has  a  good  share  of  imagination.  His 
Hermippus  Redivivus  is  very  entertaining,  as  an 
account  of  the  Hermetick  philosophy,  and  as 
furnishing  a  curious  history  of  the  extravagan¬ 
cies  of  the  human  mind.  If  it  were  merely  imag¬ 
inary  it  would  be  nothing  at  all.  Campbell  is 
not  always  rigidly  careful  of  truth  in  his  conver¬ 
sation;  but  I  do  not  believe  there  is  any  thing  of 
this  carelessness  in  his  books.  Campbell  is  a  good 
man,  a  pious  man.  I  am  afraid  he  has  not  been 
in  the  inside  of  a  church  for  many  years;1  but  he 

T  am  inclined  to  think  that  he  was  misinformed 
as  to  this  circumstance.  I  own  I  am  jealous  for  my 
worthy  friend  Dr.  John  Campbell.  For  though  Mil- 
ton  could  without  remorse  absent  himself  from  pub- 
lick  worship  I  cannot.  On  the  contrary,  I  have  the 
same  habitual  impressions  upon  my  mind,  with 
those  of  a  truly  venerable  Judge,  who  said  to  Mr. 
Langton,  “Friend  Langton,  If  I  have  not  been  at 
church  on  Sunday,  I  do  not  feel  myself  easy.”  Dr. 
Campbell  was  a  sincerely  religious  man.  Lord  Mac¬ 
artney,  who  is  eminent  for  his  variety  of  knowledge, 
and  attention  to  men  of  talents,  and  knew  him 
well,  told  me,  that  when  he  called  on  him  in  a 
morning,  he  found  him  reading  a  chapter  in  the 
Greek  New  Testament,  which  he  informed  his 
Lordship  was  his  constant  practice.  The  quantity 
of  Dr.  Campbell’s  composition  is  almost  incredible, 
and  his  labours  brought  him  large  profits.  Dr.  Jos¬ 
eph  Warton  told  me  that  Johnson  said  of  him,  “He 
is  the  richest  authour  that  ever  grazed  the  common 
of  literature.” 


never  passes  a  church  without  pulling  off  his  hat. 
This  shews  that  he  has  good  principles.  I  used  to 
go  pretty  often  to  Campbell’s  on  a  Sunday  eve¬ 
ning  till  I  began  to  consider  that  the  shoals  of 
Scotchmen  who  flocked  about  him  might  prob¬ 
ably  say,  when  any  thing  of  mine  was  well  done, 
cAy,  ay,  he  has  learnt  this  of  Cawmell!’  ” 

He  talked  very  contemptuously  of  Churchill’s 
poetry,  observing,  that  “it  had  a  temporary  cur¬ 
rency,  only  from  its  audacity  of  abuse,  and  be¬ 
ing  filled  with  living  names,  and  that  it  would 
sink  into  oblivion.”  I  ventured  to  hint  that  he 
was  not  quite  a  fair  judge,  as  Churchill  had 
attacked  him  violently.  Johnson.  “Nay,  Sir,  I 
am  a  very  fair  judge.  He  did  not  attack  me  vio¬ 
lently  till  he  found  I  did  not  like  his  poetry;  and 
his  attack  on  me  shall  not  prevent  me  from  con¬ 
tinuing  to  say  what  I  think  of  him,  from  an 
apprehension  that  it  may  be  ascribed  to  resent¬ 
ment.  No,  Sir,  I  called  the  fellow  a  blockhead  at 
first,  and  I  will  call  him  a  blockhead  still.  How¬ 
ever,  I  will  acknowledge  that  I  have  a  better 
opinion  of  him  now,  than  I  once  had;  for  he  has 
shewn  more  fertility  than  I  expected.  To  be  sure, 
he  is  a  tree  that  cannot  produce  good  fruit:  he 
only  bears  crabs.  But,  Sir,  a  tree  that  produces 
a  great  many  crabs  is  better  than  a  tree  which 
produces  only  a  few.” 

In  this  depreciation  of  Churchill’s  poetry  I 
could  not  agree  with  him.  It  is  very  true  that 
the  greatest  part  of  it  is  upon  the  topicks  of  the 
day,  on  which  account,  as  it  brought  him  great 
fame  and  profit  at  the  time,  it  must  proportion¬ 
ally  slide  out  of  the  publick  attention  as  other 
occasional  objects  succeed.  But  Churchill  had 
extraordinary  vigour  both  of  thought  and  ex¬ 
pression.  His  portraits  of  the  players  will  ever  be 
valuable  to  the  true  lovers  of  the  drama;  and  his 
strong  caricatures  of  several  eminent  men  of  his 
age,  will  not  be  forgotten  by  the  curious.  Let  me 
add,  that  there  are  in  his  works  many  passages 
which  are  of  a  general  nature;  and  his  Prophecy 
of  Famine  is  a  poem  of  no  ordinary  merit.  It  is,  in¬ 
deed,  falsely  injurious  to  Scotland,  but  therefore 
may  be  allowed  a  greater  share  of  invention. 

Bonnell  Thornton  had  just  published  a  bur¬ 
lesque  Ode  on  St.  Cecilia’s  day ,  adapted  to  the  an¬ 
cient  British  musick ,  viz.  the  salt-box ,  the  jew’ s -harp , 
the  marrow-bones  and  cleaver ,  the  humstrum  or  hurdy- 
gurdy ',  &c.  Johnson  praised  its  humour,  and 
seemed  much  diverted  with  it.  He  repeated  the 
following  passage: 

In  strains  more  exalted  the  salt-box  shall  join , 

And  clattering  and  battering  and  clapping  combine ; 

With  a  rap  and  a  tap  while  the  hollow  side  sounds , 

Up  and  down  leaps  the  flapy  and  with  rattling  rebounds 


1763]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  119 


I  mentioned  the  periodical  paper  called  The 
Connoisseur.  He  said  it  wanted  matter. — No 
doubt  it  has  not  the  deep  thinking  of  Johnson’s 
writings.  But  surely  it  has  just  views  of  the  sur¬ 
face  of  life,  and  a  very  sprightly  manner.  His 
opinion  of  The  World  was  not  much  higher  than 
of  The  Connoisseur. 

Let  me  here  apologize  for  the  imperfect  man¬ 
ner  in  which  I  am  obliged  to  exhibit  Johnson’s 
conversation  at  this  period.  In  the  early  part  of 
my  acquaintance  with  him,  I  was  so  wrapt  in 
admiration  of  his  extraordinary  colloquial  tal¬ 
ents,  and  so  little  accustomed  to  his  peculiar 
mode  of  expression,  that  I  found  it  extremely 
difficult  to  recollect  and  record  his  conversation 
with  its  genuine  vigour  and  vivacity.  In  progress 
of  time,  when  my  mind  was,  as  it  were,  strongly 
impregnated  with  the  Johnsonian  tether ,  I  could, 
with  much  more  facility  and  exactness,  carry  in 
my  memory  and  commit  to  paper  the  exuber¬ 
ant  variety  of  his  wisdom  and  wit. 

At  this  time  Miss  Williams,  as  she  was  then 
called,  though  she  did  not  reside  with  him  in 
the  Temple  under  his  roof,  but  had  lodgings  in 
Bolt-court,  Fleet-street,  had  so  much  of  his  at¬ 
tention,  that  he  every  night  drank  tea  with  her 
before  he  went  home,  however  late  it  might  be, 
and  she  always  sat  up  for  him.  This,  it  may  be 
fairly  conjectured,  was  not  alone  a  proof  of  his 
regard  for  her ,  but  of  his  own  unwillingness  to  go 
into  solitude,  before  that  unseasonable  hour  at 
which  he  had  habituated  himself  to  expect  the 
oblivion  of  repose.  Dr.  Goldsmith,  being  a  privi¬ 
leged  man,  went  with  him  this  night,  strutting 
away,  and  calling  to  me  with  an  air  of  superior¬ 
ity,  like  that  of  an  esoterick  over  an  exoterick 
disciple  of  a  sage  of  antiquity,  “I  go  to  Miss 
Williams.”  I  confess,  I  then  envied  him  this 
mighty  privilege,  of  which  he  seemed  so  proud; 
but  it  was  not  long  before  I  obtained  the  same 
mark  of  distinction. 

On  Tuesday  the  5th  of  July,  I  again  visited 
Johnson.  He  told  me  he  had  looked  into  the 
poems  of  a  pretty  voluminous  writer,  Mr.  (now 
Dr.)  John  Ogilvie,  one  of  the  Presbyterian 
ministers  of  Scotland,  which  had  lately  come 
out,  but  could  find  no  thinking  in  them.  Bos¬ 
well.  “Is  there  not  imagination  in  them, 
Sir?”  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  there  is  in  them  what 
was  imagination,  but  it  is  no  more  imagina¬ 
tion  in  him ,  than  sound  is  sound  in  the  echo.  And 
his  diction  too  is  not  his  own.  We  have  long  ago 
seen  white-robed  innocence ,  and  flower-bespangled 
meads.” 

Talking  of  London,  he  observed,  “Sir,  if  you 
wish  to  have  a  just  notion  of  the  magnitude  of 


this  city,  you  must  not  be  satisfied  with  seeing 
its  great  streets  and  squares,  but  must  survey 
the  innumerable  little  lanes  and  courts.  It  is  not 
in  the  showy  evolutions  of  buildings,  but  in  the 
multiplicity  of  human  habitations  which  are 
crowded  together,  that  the  wonderful  immensity 
of  London  consists.” — I  have  often  amused  my¬ 
self  with  thinking  how  different  a  place  London 
is  to  different  people.  They,  whose  narrow  minds 
are  contracted  to  the  consideration  of  some  one 
particular  pursuit,  view  it  only  through  that 
medium.  A  politician  thinks  of  it  merely  as  the 
seat  of  government  in  its  different  departments; 
a  grazier,  as  a  vast  market  for  cattle;  a  mercan¬ 
tile  man,  as  a  place  where  a  prodigious  deal  of 
business  is  done  upon  ’Change;  a  dramatick 
enthusiast,  as  the  grand  scene  of  theatrical  en¬ 
tertainments;  a  man  of  pleasure,  as  an  assem¬ 
blage  of  taverns,  and  the  great  emporium  for 
ladies  of  easy  virtue.  But  the  intellectual  man  is 
struck  with  it,  as  comprehending  the  whole  of 
human  life  in  all  its  variety,  the  contemplation 
of  which  is  inexhaustible. 

On  Wednesday,  July  6,  he  was  engaged  to 
sup  with  me  at  my  lodgings  in  Downing-street, 
Westminster.  But  on  the  preceding  night  my 
landlord  having  behaved  very  rudely  to  me  and 
some  company  who  were  with  me,  I  had  re¬ 
solved  not  to  remain  another  night  in  his  house. 
I  was  exceedingly  uneasy  at  the  awkward  ap¬ 
pearance  I  supposed  I  should  make  to  Johnson 
and  the  other  gentlemen  whom  I  had  invited, 
not  being  able  to  receive  them  at  home,  and  be¬ 
ing  obliged  to  order  supper  at  the  Mitre.  I  went 
to  Johnson  in  the  morning,  and  talked  of  it  as  a 
serious  distress.  He  laughed,  and  said,  “Con¬ 
sider,  Sir,  how  insignificant  this  will  appear  a 
twelvemonth  hence.” — Were  this  consideration 
to  be  applied  to  most  of  the  little  vexatious  inci¬ 
dents  of  life,  by  which  our  quiet  is  too  often  dis¬ 
turbed,  it  would  prevent  many  painful  sensa¬ 
tions.  I  have  tried  it  frequently,  with  good 
effect.  “There  is  nothing  (continued  he)  in  this 
mighty  misfortune;  nay,  we  shall  be  better  at 
the  Mitre.”  I  told  him  that  I  had  been  at  Sir 
John  Fielding’s  office,  complaining  of  my  land¬ 
lord,  and  had  been  informed,  that  though  I  had 
taken  my  lodgings  for  a  year,  I  might,  upon 
proof  of  his  bad  behaviour,  quit  them  when  I 
pleased,  without  being  under  an  obligation  to 
pay  rent  for  any  longer  time  than  while  I  pos¬ 
sessed  them.  The  fertility  of  Johnson’s  mind 
could  shew  itself  even  upon  so  small  a  matter  as 
this.  “Why,  Sir,  (said  he,)  I  suppose  this  must 
be  the  law,  since  you  have  been  told  so  in  Bow- 
street.  But,  if  your  landlord  could  hold  you  to 


120 

your  bargain,  and  the  lodgings  should  be  yours 
for  a  year,  you  may  certainly  use  them  as  you 
think  fit.  So,  Sir,  you  may  quarter  two  life- 
guardsmen  upon  him;  or  you  may  send  the 
greatest  scoundrel  you  can  find  into  your  apart¬ 
ments;  or  you  may  say  that  you  want  to  make 
some  experiments  in  natural  philosophy,  and 
may  burn  a  large  quantity  of  assafoetida  in  his 
house.” 

I  had  as  my  guests  this  evening  at  the  Mitre 
tavern,  Dr.  Johnson,  Dr.  Goldsmith,  Mr.  Thomas 
Davies,  Mr.  Eccles,  an  Irish  gentleman,  for 
whose  agreeable  company  I  was  obliged  to  Mr. 
Davies,  and  the  Reverend  Mr.  John  Ogilvie,1 
who  was  desirous  of  being  in  company  with  my 
illustrious  friend,  while  I,  in  my  turn,  was  proud 
to  have  the  honour  of  shewing  one  of  my  coun¬ 
trymen  upon  what  easy  terms  Johnson  per¬ 
mitted  me  to  live  with  him. 

Goldsmith,  as  usual,  endeavoured,  with  too 
much  eagerness,  to  shine ,  and  disputed  very 
warmly  with  Johnson  against  the  well-known 
maxim  of  the  British  constitution,  “the  King 
can  do  no  wrong”;  affirming,  that  “what  was 
morally  false  could  not  be  politically  true;  and 
as  the  King  might,  in  the  exercise  of  his  regal 
power,  command  and  cause  the  doing  of  what 
was  wrong,  it  certainly  might  be  said,  in  sense 
and  in  reason,  that  he  could  do  wrong.”  John¬ 
son.  “Sir,  you  are  to  consider,  that  in  our  consti¬ 
tution,  according  to  its  true  principles,  the  King 
is  the  head;  he  is  supreme;  he  is  above  every 
thing,  and  there  is  no  power  by  which  he  can  be 
tried.  Therefore,  it  is,  Sir,  that  we  hold  the  King 
can  do  no  wrong;  that  whatever  may  happen  to 
be  wrong  in  government  may  not  be  above  our 
reach,  by  being  ascribed  to  Majesty.  Redress  is 
always  to  be  had  against  oppression,  by  punish¬ 
ing  the  immediate  agents.  The  King,  though  he 
should  command,  cannot  force  a  Judge  to  con¬ 
demn  a  man  unjustly;  therefore  it  is  the  Judge 
whom  we  prosecute  and  punish.  Political  insti¬ 
tutions  are  formed  upon  the  consideration  of 
what  will  most  frequently  tend  to  the  good  of 
the  whole,  although  now  and  then  exceptions 
may  occur.  Thus  it  is  better  in  general  that  a 
nation  should  have  a  supreme  legislative  power, 

xThe  northern  bard  mentioned  page  1 1 9.  When 
I  asked  Dr.  Johnson’s  permission  to  introduce  him, 
he  obligingly  agreed;  adding,  however,  with  a  sly 
pleasantry,  “but  he  must  give  us  none  of  his  poet¬ 
ry.”  It  is  remarkable  that  Johnson  and  Churchill, 
however  much  they  differed  in  other  points,  agreed 
on  this  subject.  See  Churchill’s  Journey.  It  is,  how¬ 
ever,  but  justice  to  Dr.  Ogilvie  to  observe,  that  his 
Day  of  Judgement  has  no  inconsiderable  share  of 
merit. 


[  1763 

although  it  may  at  times  be  abused.  And  then, 
Sir,  there  is  this  consideration,  that  if  the  abuse  be 
enormous ,  Nature  will  rise  up ,  and  claiming  her  orig¬ 
inal  rights ,  overturn  a  corrupt  political  system .”  I 
mark  this  animated  sentence  with  peculiar  pleas¬ 
ure,  as  a  noble  instance  of  that  truly  dignified 
spirit  of  freedom  which  ever  glowed  in  his  heart, 
though  he  was  charged  with  slavish  tenets  by 
superficial  observers;  because  he  was  at  all  times 
indignant  against  that  false  patriotism,  that  pre¬ 
tended  love  of  freedom,  that  unruly  restlessness, 
which  is  inconsistent  with  the  stable  authority 
of  any  good  government. 

This  generous  sentiment,  which  he  uttered 
with  great  fervour,  struck  me  exceedingly,  and 
stirred  my  blood  to  that  pitch  of  fancied  resist¬ 
ance,  the  possibility  of  which  I  am  glad  to  keep 
in  mind,  but  to  which  I  trust  I  never  shall  be 
forced. 

“Great  abilities  (said  he)  are  not  requisite  for 
an  Historian;  for  in  historical  composition,  all 
the  greatest  powers  of  the  human  mind  are 
quiescent.  He  has  facts  ready  to  his  hand;  so 
there  is  no  exercise  of  invention.  Imagination  is 
not  required  in  any  high  degree;  only  about  as 
much  as  is  used  in  the  lower  kinds  of  poetry. 
Some  penetration,  accuracy,  and  colouring  will 
fit  a  man  for  the  task,  if  he  can  give  the  applica¬ 
tion  which  is  necessary.” 

“Bayle’s  Dictionary  is  a  very  useful  work  for 
those  to  consult  who  love  the  biographical  part 
of  literature,  which  is  what  I  love  most.” 

Talking  of  the  eminent  writers  in  Queen 
Anne’s  reign,  he  observed,  “I  think  Dr.  Arbuth- 
not  the  first  man  among  them.  He  was  the  most 
universal  genius,  being  an  excellent  physician, 
a  man  of  deep  learning,  and  a  man  of  much 
humour.  Mr.  Addison  was,  to  be  sure,  a  great 
man;  his  learning  was  not  profound;  but  his 
morality,  his  humour,  and  his  elegance  of  writ¬ 
ing,  set  him  very  high.” 

Mr.  Ogilvie  was  unlucky  enough  to  choose 
for  the  topick  of  his  conversation  the  praises  of 
his  native  country.  He  began  with  saying,  that 
there  was  very  rich  land  round  Edinburgh. 
Goldsmith,  who  had  studied  physick  there,  con¬ 
tradicted  this,  very  untruly,  with  a  sneering 
laugh.  Disconcerted  a  little  by  this,  Mr.  Ogilvie 
then  took  new  ground,  where  I  suppose,  he 
thought  himself  perfectly  safe;  for  he  observed, 
that  Scotland  had  a  great  many  noble  wild  pros¬ 
pects.  Johnson.  “I  believe,  Sir,  you  have  a  great 
many.  Norway,  too,  has  noble  wild  prospects; 
and  Lapland  is  remarkable  for  prodigious  noble 
wild  prospects.  But,  Sir,  let  me  tell  you,  the  no¬ 
blest  prospect  which  a  Scotchman  ever  sees,  is 


BOSWELL 


1763]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  121 


the  high  road  that  leads  him  to  England !55  This 
unexpected  and  pointed  sally  produced  a  roar 
of  applause.  After  all,  however,  those,  who  ad¬ 
mire  the  rude  grandeur  of  Nature,  cannot  deny 
it  to  Caledonia. 

On  Saturday,  July  9,  I  found  Johnson  sur¬ 
rounded  with  a  numerous  levee,  but  have  not 
preserved  any  part  of  his  conversation.  On  the 
14th  we  had  another  evening  by  ourselves  at  the 
Mitre.  It  happening  to  be  a  very  rainy  night,  I 
made  some  common-place  observations  on  the 
relaxation  of  nerves  and  depression  of  spirits 
which  such  weather  occasioned;  adding,  how¬ 
ever,  that  it  was  good  for  the  vegetable  creation. 
Johnson,  who,  as  we  have  already  seen,  denied 
that  the  temperature  of  the  air  had  any  influ¬ 
ence  on  the  human  frame,  answered,  with  a 
smile  of  ridicule,  “Why  yes,  Sir,  it  is  good  for 
vegetables,  and  for  the  animals  who  eat  those 
vegetables,  and  for  the  animals  who  eat  those 
animals.55  This  observation  of  his  aptly  enough 
introduced  a  good  supper;  and  I  soon  forgot,  in 
Johnson’s  company,  the  influence  of  a  moist  at¬ 
mosphere. 

Feeling  myself  now  quite  at  ease  as  his  com¬ 
panion,  though  I  had  all  possible  reverence  for 
him,  I  expressed  a  regret  that  I  could  not  be  so 
easy  with  my  father,  though  he  was  not  much 
older  than  Johnson,  and  certainly  however  re¬ 
spectable  had  not  more  learning  and  greater 
abilities  to  depress  me.  I  asked  him  the  reason 
of  this.  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  I  am  a  man  of  the 
world.  I  live  in  the  world,  and  I  take,  in  some 
degree,  the  colour  of  the  world  as  it  moves  along. 
Your  father  is  a  Judge  in  a  remote  part  of  the 
island,  and  all  his  notions  are  taken  from  the 
old  world.  Besides,  Sir,  there  must  always  be  a 
struggle  between  a  father  and  son,  while  one 
aims  at  power  and  the  other  at  independence.55 
I  said,  I  was  afraid  my  father  would  force  me  to 
be  a  lawyer.  Johnson.  “Sir,  you  need  not  be 
afraid  of  his  forcing  you  to  be  a  laborious  prac¬ 
tising  lawyer;  that  is  not  in  his  power.  For  as  the 
proverb  says,  cOne  man  may  lead  a  horse  to  the 
water,  but  twenty  cannot  make  him  drink.5  He 
may  be  displeased  that  you  are  not  what  he 
wishes  you  to  be;  but  that  displeasure  will  not 
go  far.  If  he  insists  only  on  your  having  as  much 
law  as  is  necessary  for  a  man  of  property,  and 
then  endeavours  to  get  you  into  Parliament,  he 
is  quite  in  the  right.55 

He  enlarged  very  convincingly  upon  the  ex¬ 
cellence  of  rhyme  over  blank  verse  in  English 
poetry.  I  mentioned  to  him  that  Dr.  Adam 
Smith,  in  his  lectures  upon  composition,  when  I 
studied  under  him  in  the  College  of  Glasgow, 


had  maintained  the  same  opinion  strenuously, 
and  I  repeated  some  of  his  arguments.  Johnson. 
“Sir,  I  was  once  in  company  with  Smith,  and 
we  did  not  take  to  each  other;  but  had  I  known 
that  he  loved  rhyme  as  much  as  you  tell  me  he 
does,  I  should  have  hugged  him.55 

Talking  of  those  who  denied  the  truth  of 
Christianity,  he  said,  “It  is  always  easy  to  be  on 
the  negative  side.  If  a  man  were  now  to  deny 
that  there  is  salt  upon  the  table,  you  could  not 
reduce  him  to  an  absurdity.  Come,  let  us  try 
this  a  little  further.  I  deny  that  Canada  is  taken, 
and  I  can  support  my  denial  by  pretty  good 
arguments.  The  French  are  a  much  more  nu¬ 
merous  people  than  we;  and  it  is  not  likely  that 
they  would  allow  us  to  take  it.  ‘But  the  ministry 
have  assured  us,  in  all  the  formality  of  The  Ga¬ 
zette ,  that  it  is  taken.5 — Very  true.  But  the  min¬ 
istry  have  put  us  to  an  enormous  expence  by  the 
war  in  America,  and  it  is  their  interest  to  per¬ 
suade  us  that  we  have  got  something  for  our 
money. —  ‘But  the  fact  is  confirmed  by  thous¬ 
ands  of  men  who  were  at  the  taking  of  it.5  — Ay, 
but  these  men  have  still  more  interest  in  de¬ 
ceiving  us.  They  don’t  want  that  you  should 
think  the  French  have  beat  them,  but  that  they 
have  beat  the  French.  Now  suppose  you  should 
go  over  and  find  that  it  is  really  taken,  that 
would  only  satisfy  yourself;  for  when  you  come 
home  we  will  not  believe  you.  We  will  say,  you 
have  been  bribed. — Yet,  Sir,  notwithstanding 
all  these  plausible  objections,  we  have  no  doubt 
that  Canada  is  really  ours.  Such  is  the  weight  of 
common  testimony.  How  much  stronger  are  the 
evidences  of  the  Christian  religion  !55 

“Idleness  is  a  disease  which  must  be  com¬ 
bated;  but  I  would  not  advise  a  rigid  adherence 
to  a  particular  plan  of  study.  I  myself  have  never 
persisted  in  any  plan  for  two  days  together.  A 
man  ought  to  read  just  as  inclination  leads  him; 
for  what  he  reads  as  a  task  will  do  him  little 
good.  A  young  man  should  read  five  hours  in  a 
day,  and  so  may  acquire  a  great  deal  of  knowl¬ 
edge.55 

To  a  man  of  vigorous  intellect  and  arduous 
curiosity  like  his  own,  reading  without  a  regular 
plan  may  be  beneficial;  though  even  such  a  man 
must  submit  to  it,  if  he  would  attain  a  full  un¬ 
derstanding  of  any  of  the  sciences. 

To  such  a  degree  of  unrestrained  frankness 
had  he  now  accustomed  me,  that  in  the  course 
of  this  evening  I  talked  of  the  numerous  reflec¬ 
tions  which  had  been  thrown  out  against  him 
on  account  of  his  having  accepted  a  pension 
from  his  present  Majesty.  “Why,  Sir,  (said  he, 
with  a  hearty  laugh,)  it  is  a  mighty  foolish  noise 


122 


BOSWELL 


that  they  make.1  I  have  accepted  of  a  pension 
as  a  reward  which  has  been  thought  due  to  my 
literary  merit;  and  now  that  I  have  this  pension, 
I  am  the  same  man  in  every  respect  that  I  have 
ever  been;  I  retain  the  same  principles.  It  is 
true,  that  I  cannot  now  curse  (smiling)  the 
House  of  Hanover;  nor  would  it  be  decent  for 
me  to  drink  King  James’s  health  in  the  wine 
that  King  George  gives  me  money  to  pay  for. 
But,  Sir,  I  think  that  the  pleasure  of  cursing  the 
House  of  Hanover,  and  drinking  King  James’s 
health,  are  amply  overbalanced  by  three  hun¬ 
dred  pounds  a  year.” 

There  was  here,  most  certainly,  an  affecta¬ 
tion  of  more  Jacobitism  than  he  really  had;  and 
indeed  an  intention  of  admitting,  for  the  mo¬ 
ment,  in  a  much  greater  extent  than  it  really 
existed,  the  charge  of  disaffection  imputed  to 
him  by  the  world,  merely  for  the  purpose  of 
shewing  how  dexterously  he  could  repel  an  at¬ 
tack,  even  though  he  were  placed  in  the  most 
disadvantageous  position;  for  I  have  heard  him 
declare  that  if  holding  up  his  right  hand  would 
have  secured  victory  at  Culloden  to  Prince 
Charles’s  army,  he  was  not  sure  he  would  have 
held  it  up;  so  little  confidence  had  he  in  the 
right  claimed  by  the  house  of  Stuart,  and  so 
fearful  was  he  of  the  consequences  of  another 
revolution  on  the  throne  of  Great-Britain;  and 
Mr.  Topham  Beauclerk  assured  me,  he  had 
heard  him  say  this  before  he  had  his  pension.  At 
another  time  he  said  to  Mr.  Langton,  “Nothing 
has  ever  offered,  that  has  made  it  worth  my 
while  to  consider  the  question  fully.”  He,  how¬ 
ever,  also  said  to  the  same  gentleman,  talking  of 
King  James  the  Second,  “It  was  become  impos¬ 
sible  for  him  to  reign  any  longer  in  this  coun¬ 
try.”  He  no  doubt  had  an  early  attachment  to 
the  House  of  Stuart;  but  his  zeal  had  cooled  as 
his  reason  strengthened.  Indeed  I  heard  him 
once  say,  that  “after  the  death  of  a  violent  Whig, 
with  whom  he  used  to  contend  with  great  eager¬ 
ness,  he  felt  his  Toryism  much  abated.”2 1  sup¬ 
pose  he  meant  Mr.  Walmsley. 

Yet  there  is  no  doubt  that  at  earlier  periods 
he  was  wont  often  to  exercise  both  his  pleasan¬ 
try  and  ingenuity  in  talking  Jacobitism.  My 
much  respected  friend,  Dr.  Douglas,  now  Bishop 
of  Salisbury,  has  favoured  me  with  the  following 
admirable  instance  from  his  Lordship’s  own 
recollection.  One  day  when  dining  at  old  Mr. 

JWhen  I  mentioned  the  same  idle  clamour  to 
him  several  years  afterwards,  he  said,  with  a  smile, 
4 ‘I  wish  my  pension  were  twice  as  large,  that  they 
might  make  twice  as  much  noise.” 

2 Journal  of  a  Tour  to  the  Hebrides ,  3rd  edit.,  p.  402 
(Nov.  10]. 


1 1763 

Langton’s  where  Miss  Roberts,  his  niece,  was 
one  of  the  company,  Johnson,  with  his  usual 
complacent  attention  to  the  fair  sex,  took  her  by 
the  hand  and  said,  “My  dear,  I  hope  you  are  a 
Jacobite.”  Old  Mr.  Langton,  who,  though  a 
high  and  steady  Tory,  was  attached  to  the  pres¬ 
ent  Royal  Family,  seemed  offended,  and  asked 
Johnson,  with  great  warmth,  what  he  could 
mean  by  putting  such  a  question  to  his  niece? 
“Why,  Sir,  (said  Johnson)  I  meant  no  offence  to 
your  niece,  I  meant  her  a  great  compliment.  A 
Jacobite,  Sir,  believes  in  the  divine  right  of 
Kings.  He  that  believes  in  the  divine  right  of 
Kings  believes  in  a  Divinity.  A  Jacobite  believes 
in  the  divine  right  of  Bishops.  He  that  believes 
in  the  divine  right  of  Bishops  believes  in  the 
divine  authority  of  the  Christian  religion.  There¬ 
fore,  Sir,  a  Jacobite  is  neither  an  Atheist  nor  a 
Deist.  That  cannot  be  said  of  a  Whig;  for  Whig - 
gism  is  a  negation  of  all  principle .”  3 

He  advised  me,  when  abroad,  to  be  as  much  as 
I  could  with  the  Professors  in  the  Universities, 
and  with  the  Clergy;  for  from  their  conversation 
I  might  expect  the  best  accounts  of  every  thing 
in  whatever  country  I  should  be,  with  the  addi¬ 
tional  advantage  of  keeping  my  learning  alive. 

It  will  be  observed,  that  when  giving  me  ad¬ 
vice  as  to  my  travels,  Dr.  Johnson  did  not  dwell 
upon  cities,  and  palaces,  and  pictures,  and 
shows,  and  Arcadian  scenes.  He  was  of  Lord 
Essex’s  opinion,  who  advises  his  kinsman  Roger 
Earl  of  Rutland,  “rather  to  go  an  hundred 
miles  to  speak  with  one  wise  man,  than  five 
miles  to  see  a  fair  town.”4 

I  described  to  him  an  impudent  fellow  from 
Scotland,  who  affected  to  be  a  savage,  and  railed 
at  all  established  systems.  Johnson.  “There  is 
nothing  surprizing  in  this,  Sir.  He  wants  to  make 
himself  conspicuous.  He  would  tumble  in  a  hog- 
stye,  as  long  as  you  looked  at  him  and  called  to 
him  to  come  out.  But  let  him  alone,  never  mind 
him,  and  he’ll  soon  give  it  over.” 

I  added,  that  the  same  person  maintained 
that  there  was  no  distinction  between  virtue 
and  vice.  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  if  the  fellow  does 
not  think  as  he  speaks,  he  is  lying;  and  I  see  not 
what  honour  he  can  propose  to  himself  from 

3He  used  to  tell,  with  great  humour,  from  my 
relation  to  him,  the  following  little  story  of  my 
early  years,  which  was  literally  true:  “Boswell,  in 
the  year  1 745,  was  a  fine  boy,  wore  a  white  cock¬ 
ade,  and  prayed  for  King  James,  till  one  of  his 
uncles  (General  Cochran)  gave  him  a  shilling  on 
condition  that  he  should  pray  for  King  George, 
which  he  accordingly  did.  So  you  see  (says  Bos¬ 
well)  that  Whigs  of  all  ages  are  made  the  same  way.” 

4 Letter  to  Rutland  on  Travel ,  i6mo.,  1596. 


1763] 

having  the  character  of  a  lyar.  But  if  he  does 
really  think  that  there  is  no  distinction  between 
virtue  and  vice,  why.  Sir,  when  he  leaves  our 
houses  let  us  count  our  spoons.” 

Sir  David  Dalrymple,  now  one  of  the  Judges 
of  Scotland  by  the  title  of  Lord  Hailes,  had  con¬ 
tributed  much  to  increase  my  high  opinion  of 
Johnson,  on  account  of  his  writings,  long  before 
I  attained  to  a  personal  acquaintance  with  him; 
I,  in  return,  had  informed  Johnson  of  Sir  David’s 
eminent  character  for  learning  and  religion; 
and  Johnson  was  so  much  pleased,  that  at  one 
of  our  evening  meetings  he  gave  him  for  his 
toast.  I  at  this  time  kept  up  a  very  frequent  cor¬ 
respondence  with  Sir  David;  and  I  read  to  Dr. 
Johnson  to-night  the  following  passage  from  the 
letter  which  I  had  last  received  from  him: 

“It  gives  me  pleasure  to  think  that  you  have 
obtained  the  friendship  of  Mr.  Samuel  Johnson. 
He  is  one  of  the  best  moral  writers  which  Eng¬ 
land  has  produced.  At  the  same  time,  I  envy 
you  the  free  and  undisguised  converse  with  such 
a  man.  May  I  beg  you  to  present  my  best  re¬ 
spects  to  him,  and  to  assure  him  of  the  venera¬ 
tion  which  I  entertain  for  the  authour  of  the 
Rambler  and  of  Rasselas ?  Let  me  recommend  this 
last  work  to  you;  with  the  Rambler  you  certainly 
are  acquainted.  In  Rasselas  you  will  see  a  tender¬ 
hearted  operator,  who  probes  the  wound  only 
to  heal  it.  Swift,  on  the  contrary,  mangles  hu¬ 
man  nature.  He  cuts  and  slashes,  as  if  he  took 
pleasure  in  the  operation,  like  the  tyrant  who 
said,  Ita  feri  ut  se  sentiat  emori” 

Johnson  seemed  to  be  much  gratified  by  this 
just  and  well-turned  compliment. 

He  recommended  to  me  to  keep  a  journal  of 
my  life,  full  and  unreserved.  He  said  it  would  be 
a  very  good  exercise,  and  would  yield  me  great 
satisfaction  when  the  particulars  were  faded 
from  my  remembrance.  I  was  uncommonly  for¬ 
tunate  in  having  had  a  previous  coincidence  of 
opinion  with  him  upon  this  subject,  for  I  had 
kept  such  a  journal  for  some  time;  and  it  was  no 
small  pleasure  to  me  to  have  this  to  tell  him, 
and  to  receive  his  approbation.  He  counselled 
me  to  keep  it  private,  and  said  I  might  surely 
have  a  friend  who  would  burn  it  in  case  of  my 
death.  From  this  habit  I  have  been  enabled  to 
give  the  world  so  many  anecdotes,  which  would 
otherwise  have  been  lost  to  posterity.  I  men¬ 
tioned  that  I  was  afraid  I  put  into  my  journal 
too  many  little  incidents.  Johnson.  “There  is 
nothing,  Sir,  too  little  for  so  little  a  creature  as 
man.  It  is  by  studying  little  things  that  we  at¬ 
tain  the  great  art  of  having  as  little  misery  and 
as  much  happiness  as  possible.” 


123 

Next  morning  Mr.  Dempster  happened  to 
call  on  me,  and  was  so  much  struck  even  with 
the  imperfect  account  which  I  gave  him  of  Dr. 
Johnson’s  conversation,  that  to  his  honour  be  it 
recorded,  when  I  complained  that  drinking 
port  and  sitting  up  late  with  him  affected  my 
nerves  for  some  time  after,  he  said,  “One  had 
better  be  palsied  at  eighteen  than  not  keep  com¬ 
pany  with  such  a  man.” 

On  Tuesday,  July  18,  I  found  tall  Sir  Thomas 
Robinson  sitting  with  Johnson.  Sir  Thomas  said, 
that  the  King  of  Prussia  valued  himself  upon 
three  things; — upon  being  a  hero,  a  musician, 
and  an  authour.  Johnson.  “Pretty  well,  Sir, 
for  one  man.  As  to  his  being  an  authour.  I  have 
not  looked  at  his  poetry;  but  his  prose  is  poor 
stuff.  He  writes  just  as  you  might  suppose  Vol¬ 
taire’s  footboy  to  do,  who  has  been  his  amanu¬ 
ensis.  He  has  such  parts  as  the  valet  might  have, 
and  about  as  much  of  the  colouring  of  the  style 
as  might  be  got  by  transcribing  his  works.” 
When  I  was  at  Ferney,  I  repeated  this  to  Vol¬ 
taire,  in  order  to  reconcile  him  somewhat  to 
Johnson,  whom  he,  in  affecting  the  English 
mode  of  expression,  had  previously  character¬ 
ised  as  “a  superstitious  dog”;  but  after  hearing 
such  a  criticism  on  Frederick  the  Great,  with 
whom  he  was  then  on  bad  terms,  he  exclaimed, 
“An  honest  fellow !” 

But  I  think  the  criticism  much  too  severe;  for 
the  Memoirs  of  the  House  of  Brandenburgh  are  writ¬ 
ten  as  well  as  many  works  of  that  kind.  His  po¬ 
etry,  for  the  style  of  which  he  himself  makes  a 
frank  apology,  ilJargonnant  un  Franqois  barb  are” 
though  fraught  with  pernicious  ravings  of  infi¬ 
delity,  has,  in  many  places,  great  animation, 
and  in  some  a  pathetick  tenderness. 

Upon  this  contemptuous  animadversion  on 
the  King  of  Prussia,  I  observed  to  Johnson,  “It 
would  seem  then,  Sir,  that  much  less  parts  are 
necessary  to  make  a  King,  than  to  make  an 
Authour;  for  the  King  of  Prussia  is  confessedly 
the  greatest  King  now  in  Europe,  yet  you  think 
he  makes  a  very  poor  figure  as  an  Authour.” 

Mr.  Levet  this  day  shewed  me  Dr.  Johnson’s 
library,  which  was  contained  in  two  garrets  over 
his  Chambers,  where  Lintot,  son  of  the  cele¬ 
brated  bookseller  of  that  name,  had  formerly 
his  warehouse.  I  found  a  number  of  good  books, 
but  very  dusty  and  in  great  confusion.  The  floor 
was  strewed  with  manuscript  leaves,  in  John¬ 
son’s  own  handwriting,  which  I  beheld  with  a 
degree  of  veneration,  supposing  they  perhaps 
might  contain  portions  of  The  Rambler  or  of 
Rasselas.  I  observed  an  apparatus  for  chymical 
experiments,  of  which  Johnson  was  all  his  life 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


BOSWELL 


124 

very  fond.  The  place  seemed  to  be  very  favour¬ 
able  for  retirement  and  meditation.  Johnson 
told  me,  that  he  went  up  thither  without  men¬ 
tioning  it  to  his  servant,  when  he  wanted  to 
study,  secure  from  interruption;  for  he  would 
not  allow  his  servant  to  say  he  was  not  at  home 
when  he  really  was.  “A  servant’s  strict  regard 
for  truth,  (said  he)  must  be  weakened  by  such  a 
practice.  A  philosopher  may  know  that  it  is 
merely  a  form  of  denial;  but  few  servants  are 
such  nice  distinguishes.  If  I  accustom  a  servant 
to  tell  a  lie  for  me ,  have  I  not  reason  to  appre¬ 
hend  that  he  will  tell  many  lies  for  himself”  I 
am,  however,  satisfied  that  every  servant,  of  any 
degree  of  intelligence,  understands  saying  his 
master  is  not  at  home,  not  at  all  as  the  affirma¬ 
tion  of  a  fact,  but  as  customary  words,  intimat¬ 
ing  that  his  master  wishes  not  to  be  seen;  so  that 
there  can  be  no  bad  effect  from  it. 

Mr.  Temple,  now  vicar  of  St.  Gluvias,  Corn¬ 
wall,  who  had  been  my  intimate  friend  for  many 
years,  had  at  this  time  chambers  in  Farrar’s- 
buildings,  at  the  bottom  of  Inner  Temple-lane, 
which  he  kindly  lent  me  upon  my  quitting  my 
lodgings,  he  being  to  return  to  Trinity  Hall, 
Cambridge.  I  found  them  particularly  conveni¬ 
ent  for  me,  as  they  were  so  near  Dr.  Johnson’s. 

On  Wednesday,  July  20,  Dr.  Johnson,  Mr. 
Dempster,  and  my  uncle  Dr.  Boswell,  who  hap¬ 
pened  to  be  now  in  London,  supped  with  me  at 
these  Chambers.  Johnson.  “Pity  is  not  natural 
to  man.  Children  are  always  cruel.  Savages  are 
always  cruel.  Pity  is  acquired  and  improved  by 
the  cultivation  of  reason.  We  may  have  uneasy 
sensations  from  seeing  a  creature  in  distress, 
without  pity;  for  we  have  not  pity  unless  we 
wish  to  relieve  them.  When  I  am  on  my  way  to 
dine  with  a  friend,  and  finding  it  late,  have  bid 
the  coachman  make  haste,  if  I  happen  to  attend 
when  he  whips  his  horses,  I  may  feel  unpleas¬ 
antly  that  the  animals  are  put  to  pain,  but  I  do 
not  wish  him  to  desist.  No,  Sir,  I  wish  him  to 
drive  on.” 

Mr.  Alexander  Donaldson,  bookseller  of  Edin¬ 
burgh,  had  for  some  time  opened  a  shop  in  Lon¬ 
don,  and  sold  his  cheap  editions  of  the  most 
popular  English  books,  in  defiance  of  the  sup¬ 
posed  common-law  right  of  Literary  Property. 
Johnson,  though  he  concurred  in  the  opinion 
which  was  afterwards  sanctioned  by  a  judgement 
of  the  House  of  Lords,  that  there  was  no  such 
right,  was  at  this  time  very  angry  that  the  Book¬ 
sellers  of  London,  for  whom  he  uniformly  pro¬ 
fessed  much  regard,  should  suffer  from  an  in¬ 
vasion  of  what  they  had  ever  considered  to  be 
secure:  and  he  was  loud  and  violent  against  Mr. 


[  1763 

Donaldson.  “He  is  a  fellow  who  takes  advantage 
of  the  law  to  injure  his  brethren;  for,  notwith¬ 
standing  that  the  statute  secures  only  fourteen 
years  of  exclusive  right,  it  has  always  been  un¬ 
derstood  by  the  trade ,  that  he,  who  buys  the 
copyright  of  a  book  from  the  authour,  obtains  a 
perpetual  property;  and  upon  that  belief,  num¬ 
berless  bargains  are  made  to  transfer  that  prop¬ 
erty  after  the  expiration  of  the  statutory  term. 
Now  Donaldson,  I  say,  takes  advantage  here, 
of  people  who  have  really  an  equitable  title 
from  usage;  and  if  we  consider  how  few  of  the 
books,  of  which  they  buy  the  property,  succeed 
so  well  as  to  being  profit,  we  should  be  of  opin¬ 
ion  that  the  term  of  fourteen  years  is  too  short; 
it  should  be  sixty  years.”  Dempster.  “Donald¬ 
son,  Sir,  is  anxious  for  the  encouragement  of 
literature.  He  reduces  the  price  of  books,  so  that 
poor  students  may  buy  them.”  Johnson,  (laugh¬ 
ing,)  “Well,  Sir,  allowing  that  to  be  his  motive, 
he  is  no  better  than  Robin  Hood,  who  robbed 
the  rich  in  order  to  give  to  the  poor.” 

It  is  remarkable  that  when  the  great  question 
concerning  Literary  Property  came  to  be  ulti¬ 
mately  tried  before  the  supreme  tribunal  of  this 
country,  in  consequence  of  the  very  spirited 
exertions  of  Mr.  Donaldson,  Dr.  Johnson  was 
zealous  against  a  perpetuity;  but  he  thought 
that  the  term  of  the  exclusive  right  of  authours 
should  be  considerably  enlarged.  He  was  then 
for  granting  a  hundred  years. 

The  conversation  now  turned  upon  Mr.  David 
Hume’s  style.  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  his  style  is 
not  English;  the  structure  of  his  sentences  is 
French.  Now  the  French  structure  and  the  Eng¬ 
lish  structure  may,  in  the  nature  of  things,  be 
equally  good.  But  if  you  allow  that  the  English 
language  is  established,  he  is  wrong.  My  name 
might  originally  have  been  Nicholson,  as  well 
as  Johnson;  but  were  you  to  call  me  Nicholson 
now,  you  would  call  me  very  absurdly.” 

Rousseau’s  treatise  on  the  inequality  of  man¬ 
kind  was  at  this  time  a  fashionable  topick.  It 
gave  rise  to  an  observation  by  Mr.  Dempster, 
that  the  advantages  of  fortune  and  rank  were 
nothing  to  a  wise  man,  who  ought  to  value  only 
merit.  Johnson.  “If  man  were  a  savage,  living 
in  the  woods  by  himself,  this  might  be  true;  but 
in  civilized  society  we  all  depend  upon  each 
other,  and  our  happiness  is  very  much  owing  to 
the  good  opinion  of  mankind.  Now,  Sir,  in  civil¬ 
ized  society,  external  advantages  make  us  more 
respected.  A  man  with  a  good  coat  upon  his 
back  meets  with  a  better  reception  than  he  who 
has  a  bad  one.  Sir,  you  may  analyse  this,  and 
say  what  is  there  in  it?  But  that  will  avail  you 


1763]  LIFE  OF 

nothing,  for  it  is  a  part  of  a  general  system. 
Pound  St.  Paul’s  Church  into  atoms,  and  con¬ 
sider  any  single  atom;  it  is,  to  be  sure,  good  for 
nothing:  but,  put  all  these  atoms  together,  and 
you  have  St.  Paul’s  Church.  So  it  is  with  human 
felicity,  which  is  made  up  of  many  ingredients, 
each  of  which  may  be  shewn  to  be  very  insigni¬ 
ficant.  In  civilized  society,  personal  merit  will 
not  serve  you  so  much  as  money  will.  Sir,  you 
may  make  the  experiment.  Go  into  the  street, 
and  give  one  man  a  lecture  on  morality,  and 
another  a  shilling,  and  see  which  will  respect 
you  most.  If  you  wish  only  to  support  nature, 
Sir  William  Petty  fixes  your  allowance  at  three 
pounds  a  year;  but  as  times  are  much  altered, 
let  us  call  it  six  pounds.  This  sum  will  fill  your 
belly,  shelter  you  from  the  weather,  and  even 
get  you  a  strong  lasting  coat,  supposing  it  to  be 
made  of  good  bull’s  hide.  Now,  Sir,  all  beyond 
this  is  artificial,  and  is  desired  in  order  to  obtain 
a  greater  degree  of  respect  from  our  fellow- 
creatures.  And,  Sir,  if  six  hundred  pounds  a 
year  procure  a  man  more  consequence,  and,  of 
course,  more  happiness  than  six  pounds  a  year, 
the  same  proportion  will  hold  as  to  six  thousand, 
and  so  on  as  far  as  opulence  can  be  carried. 
Perhaps  he  who  has  a  large  fortune  may  not  be 
so  happy  as  he  who  has  a  small  one;  but  that 
must  proceed  from  other  causes  than  from  his 
having  the  large  fortune:  for,  cateris  paribus,  he 
who  is  rich  in  a  civilized  society,  must  be  hap¬ 
pier  than  he  who  is  poor;  as  riches,  if  properly 
used,  (and  it  is  a  man’s  own  fault  if  they  are 
not,)  must  be  productive  of  the  highest  advan¬ 
tages.  Money,  to  be  sure,  of  itself  is  of  no  use;  for 
its  only  use  is  to  part  with  it.  Rousseau,  and  all 
those  who  deal  in  paradoxes,  are  led  away  by  a 
childish  desire  of  novelty.  When  I  was  a  boy,  I 
used  always  to  choose  the  wrong  side  of  a  de¬ 
bate,  because  most  ingenious  things,  that  is  to 
say,  most  new  things  could  be  said  upon  it.  Sir, 
there  is  nothing  for  which  you  may  not  muster 
up  more  plausible  arguments,  than  those  which 
are  urged  against  wealth  and  other  external  ad¬ 
vantages.  Why,  now,  there  is  stealing;  why 
should  it  be  thought  a  crime?  When  we  con¬ 
sider  by  what  unjust  methods  property  has  been 
often  acquired,  and  that  what  was  unjustly  got 
it  must  be  unjust  to  keep,  where  is  the  harm  in 
one  man’s  taking  the  property  of  another  from 
him?  Besides,  Sir,  when  we  consider  the  bad  use 
that  many  people  make  of  their  property,  and 
how  much  better  use  the  thief  may  make  of  it, 
it  may  be  defended  as  a  very  allowable  practice. 
Yet,  Sir,  the  experience  of  mankind  has  discov¬ 
ered  stealing  to  be  so  very  bad  a  thing,  that  they 


JOHNSON  125 

make  no  scruple  to  hang  a  man  for  it.  When  I 
was  running  about  this  town  a  very  poor  fellow, 
I  was  a  great  arguer  for  the  advantages  of  pov¬ 
erty;  but  I  was,  at  the  same  time,  very  sorry  to 
be  poor.  Sir,  all  the  arguments  which  are  brought 
to  represent  poverty  as  no  evil,  shew  it  to  be 
evidently  a  great  evil.  You  never  find  people 
labouring  to  convince  you  that  you  may  live 
very  happily  upon  a  plentiful  fortune. — So  you 
hear  people  talking  how  miserable  a  King  must 
be;  and  yet  they  all  wish  to  be  in  his  place.” 

It  was  suggested  that  Kings  must  be  unhappy, 
because  they  are  deprived  of  the  greatest  of  all 
satisfactions,  easy  and  unreserved  society.  John¬ 
son.  “That  is  an  ill-founded  notion.  Being  a 
King  does  not  exclude  a  man  from  such  society. 
Great  Kings  have  always  been  social.  The  King 
of  Prussia,  the  only  great  King  at  present,  is 
very  social.  Charles  the  Second,  the  last  King  of 
England  who  was  a  man  of  parts,  was  social; 
and  our  Henrys  and  Edwards  were  all  social.” 

Mr.  Dempster  having  endeavoured  to  main¬ 
tain  that  intrinsick  merit  ought  to  make  the  only 
distinction  amongst  mankind.  Johnson.  “Why, 
Sir,  mankind  have  found  that  this  cannot  be. 
How  shall  we  determine  the  proportion  of  in¬ 
trinsick  merit?  Were  that  to  be  the  only  distinc¬ 
tion  amongst  mankind,  we  should  soon  quarrel 
about  the  degrees  of  it.  Were  all  distinctions 
abolished,  the  strongest  would  not  long  acquiesce, 
but  would  endeavour  to  obtain  a  superiority  by 
their  bodily  strength.  But,  Sir,  as  subordination 
is  very  necessary  for  society,  and  contentions 
for  superiority  very  dangerous,  mankind,  that  is 
to  say,  all  civilized  nations,  have  settled  it  upon 
a  plain  principle.  A  man  is  born  to  hereditary 
rank;  or  his  being  appointed  to  certain  offices, 
gives  him  a  certain  rank.  Subordination  tends 
greatly  to  human  happiness.  Were  we  all  upon 
an  equality,  we  should  have  no  other  enjoyment 
than  mere  animal  pleasure.” 

I  said,  I  considered  distinction  of  rank  to  be 
of  so  much  importance  in  civilized  society,  that 
if  I  were  asked  on  the  same  day  to  dine  with 
the  first  Duke  in  England,  and  with  the  first 
man  in  Britain  for  genius,  I  should  hesitate 
which  to  prefer.  Johnson.  “To  be  sure,  if  you 
were  to  dine  only  once,  and  it  were  never  to  be 
known  where  you  dined,  you  would  choose 
rather  to  dine  with  the  first  man  for  genius;  but 
to  gain  most  respect,  you  should  dine  with  the 
first  Duke  in  England.  For  nine  people  in  ten 
that  you  meet  with,  would  have  a  higher  opin¬ 
ion  of  you  for  having  dined  with  a  Duke;  and 
the  great  genius  himself  would  receive  you  bet¬ 
ter,  because  you  had  been  with  the  great  Duke.” 


BOSWELL 


126 

He  took  care  to  guard  himself  against  any 
possible  suspicion  that  his  settled  principles  of 
reverence  for  rank  and  respect  for  wealth  were 
at  all  owing  to  mean  or  interested  motives;  for 
he  asserted  his  own  independence  as  a  literary 
man.  “No  man  (said  he)  who  ever  lived  by 
literature,  has  lived  more  independently  than  I 
have  done/’  He  said  he  had  taken  longer  time 
than  he  needed  to  have  done  in  composing  his 
Dictionary.  He  received  our  compliments  upon 
that  great  work  with  complacency,  and  told  us 
that  the  Academia  della  Crusca  could  scarcely  be¬ 
lieve  that  it  was  done  by  one  man. 

Next  morning  I  found  him  alone,  and  have 
preserved  the  following  fragments  of  his  con¬ 
versation.  Of  a  gentleman  who  was  mentioned, 
he  said,  “I  have  not  met  with  any  man  for  a 
long  time  who  has  given  me  such  general  dis¬ 
pleasure.  He  is  totally  unfixed  in  his  principles, 
and  wants  to  puzzle  other  people.”  I  said  his 
principles  had  been  poisoned  by  a  noted  infidel 
writer,  but  that  he  was,  nevertheless,  a  benev¬ 
olent  good  man.  Johnson.  “We  can  have  no 
dependence  upon  that  instinctive,  that  consti¬ 
tutional  goodness  which  is  not  founded  upon 
principle.  I  grant  you  that  such  a  man  may  be  a 
very  amiable  member  of  society.  I  can  conceive 
him  placed  in  such  a  situation  that  he  is  not 
much  tempted  to  deviate  from  what  is  right; 
and  as  every  man  prefers  virtue,  when  there  is 
not  some  strong  incitement  to  transgress  its  pre¬ 
cepts,  I  can  conceive  him  doing  nothing  wrong. 
But  if  such  a  man  stood  in  need  of  money,  I 
should  not  like  to  trust  him;  and  I  should  certainly 
not  trust  him  with  young  ladies,  for  there  there 
is  always  temptation.  Hume,  and  other  scep¬ 
tical  innovators,  are  vain  men,  and  will  gratify 
themselves  at  any  expence.  Truth  will  not  afford 
sufficient  food  to  their  vanity;  so  they  have  be¬ 
taken  themselves  to  errour.  Truth,  Sir,  is  a  cow 
which  will  yield  such  people  no  more  milk,  and 
so  they  are  gone  to  milk  the  bull.  If  I  could  have 
allowed  myself  to  gratify  my  vanity  at  the  ex¬ 
pence  of  truth,  what  fame  might  I  have  ac¬ 
quired.  Every  thing  which  Hume  has  advanced 
against  Christianity  had  passed  through  my 
mind  long  before  he  wrote.  Always  remember 
this,  that  after  a  system  is  well  settled  upon  posi¬ 
tive  evidence,  a  few  partial  objections  ought  not 
to  shake  it.  The  human  mind  is  so  limited,  that 
it  cannot  take  in  all  the  parts  of  a  subject,  so  that 
there  may  be  objections  raised  against  any  thing. 
There  are  objections  against  a  plenum ,  and  ob¬ 
jections  against  a  vacuum;  yet  one  of  them  must 
certainly  be  true.” 

I  mentioned  Hume’s  argument  against  the 


[  1763 

belief  of  miracles,  that  it  is  more  probable  that 
the  witnesses  to  the  truth  of  them  are  mistaken, 
or  speak  falsely,  than  that  the  miracles  should 
be  true.  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  the  great  diffi¬ 
culty  of  proving  miracles  should  make  us  very 
cautious  in  believing  them.  But  let  us  consider; 
although  God  has  made  Nature  to  operate  by 
certain  fixed  laws,  yet  it  is  not  unreasonable  to 
think  that  he  may  suspend  those  laws,  in  order 
to  establish  a  system  highly  advantageous  to 
mankind.  Now  the  Christian  religion  is  a  most 
beneficial  system,  as  it  gives  us  light  and  cer¬ 
tainty  where  we  were  before  in  darkness  and 
doubt.  The  miracles  which  prove  it  are  attested 
by  men  who  had  no  interest  in  deceiving  us;  but 
who,  on  the  contrary,  were  told  that  they  should 
suffer  persecution,  and  did  actually  lay  down 
their  lives  in  confirmation  of  the  truth  of  the 
facts  which  they  asserted.  Indeed,  for  some  cen¬ 
turies  the  heathens  did  not  pretend  to  deny  the 
miracles;  but  said  they  were  performed  by  the 
aid  of  evil  spirits.  This  is  a  circumstance  of  great 
weight.  Then,  Sir,  when  we  take  the  proofs  de¬ 
rived  from  prophecies  which  have  been  so  ex¬ 
actly  fulfilled,  we  have  most  satisfactory  evi¬ 
dence.  Supposing  a  miracle  possible,  as  to  which, 
in  my  opinion,  there  can  be  no  doubt,  we  have 
as  strong  evidence  for  the  miracles  in  support  of 
Christianity,  as  the  nature  of  the  thing  admits.” 

At  night  Mr.  Johnson  and  I  supped  in  a  pri¬ 
vate  room  at  the  Turk’s  Head  coffee-house,  in 
the  Strand.  “I  encourage  this  house  (said  he;) 
for  the  mistress  of  it  is  a  good  civil  woman,  and 
has  not  much  business.” 

“Sir,  I  love  the  acquaintance  of  young  peo¬ 
ple;  because,  in  the  first  place,  I  don’t  like  to 
think  myself  growing  old.  In  the  next  place, 
young  acquaintances  must  last  longest,  if  they 
do  last;  and  then,  Sir,  young  men  have  more 
virtue  than  old  men;  they  have  more  generous 
sentiments  in  every  respect.  I  love  the  young 
dogs  of  this  age:  they  have  more  wit  and  humour 
and  knowledge  of  life  than  we  had;  but  then  the 
dogs  are  not  so  good  scholars.  Sir,  in  my  early 
years  I  read  very  hard.  It  is  a  sad  reflection,  but 
a  true  one,  that  I  knew  almost  as  much  at  eight¬ 
een  as  I  do  now.  My  judgement,  to  be  sure,  was 
not  so  good;  but  I  had  all  the  facts.  I  remember 
very  well,  when  I  was  at  Oxford,  an  old  gentle¬ 
man  said  to  me,  ‘Young  man,  ply  your  book 
diligently  now,  and  acquire  a  stock  of  knowl¬ 
edge;  for  when  years  come  upon  you,  you  will 
find  that  poring  upon  books  will  be  but  an  irk¬ 
some  task.’  ” 

This  account  of  his  reading,  given  by  himself 
in  plain  words,  sufficiently  confirms  what  I  have 


1763]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  127 


already  advanced  upon  the  disputed  question 
as  to  his  application.  It  reconciles  any  seeming 
inconsistency  in  his  way  of  talking  upon  it  at 
different  times;  and  shews  that  idleness  and 
reading  hard  were  with  him  relative  terms,  the 
import  of  which,  as  used  by  him,  must  be  gath¬ 
ered  from  a  comparison  with  what  scholars  of 
different  degrees  of  ardour  and  assiduity  have 
been  known  to  do.  And  let  it  be  remembered, 
that  he  was  now  talking  spontaneously,  and  ex¬ 
pressing  his  genuine  sentiments;  whereas  at  other 
times  he  might  be  induced  from  his  spirit  of  con¬ 
tradiction,  or  more  properly  from  his  love  of 
argumentative  contest,  to  speak  lightly  of  his 
own  application  to  study.  It  is  pleasing  to  con¬ 
sider  that  the  old  gentleman’s  gloomy  prophecy 
as  to  the  irksomeness  of  books  to  men  of  an  ad¬ 
vanced  age,  which  is  too  often  fulfilled,  was  so 
far  from  being  verified  in  Johnson,  that  his  ar¬ 
dour  for  literature  never  failed,  and  his  last 
writings  had  more  ease  and  vivacity  than  any 
of  his  earlier  productions. 

He  mentioned  to  me  now,  for  the  first  time, 
that  he  had  been  distrest  by  melancholy,  and 
for  that  reason  had  been  obliged  to  fly  from 
study  and  meditation,  to  the  dissipating  variety 
of  life.  Against  melancholy  he  recommended 
constant  occupation  of  mind,  a  great  deal  of 
exercise,  moderation  in  eating  and  drinking, 
and  especially  to  shun  drinking  at  night.  He 
said  melancholy  people  were  apt  to  fly  to  intem¬ 
perance  for  relief,  but  that  it  sunk  them  much 
deeper  in  misery.  He  observed,  that  labouring 
men  who  work  hard,  and  live  sparingly,  are  sel¬ 
dom  or  never  troubled  with  low  spirits. 

He  again  insisted  on  the  duty  of  maintaining 
subordination  of  rank.  “Sir,  I  would  no  more 
deprive  a  nobleman  of  his  respect,  than  of  his 
money.  I  consider  myself  as  acting  a  part  in  the 
great  system  of  society,  and  I  do  to  others  as  I 
would  have  them  to  do  to  me.  I  would  behave 
to  a  nobleman  as  I  should  expect  he  would  be¬ 
have  to  me,  were  I  a  nobleman  and  he  Sam. 
Johnson.  Sir,  there  is  one  Mrs.  Macaulay1  in 
this  town,  a  great  republican.  One  day  when  I 
was  at  her  house,  I  put  on  a  very  grave  coun¬ 
tenance,  and  said  to  her,  £  Madam,  I  am  now 
become  a  convert  to  your  way  of  thinking.  I  am 
convinced  that  all  mankind  are  upon  an  equal 
footing;  and  to  give  you  an  unquestionable 
proof,  Madam,  that  I  am  in  earnest,  here  is  a 
very  sensible,  civil,  well-behaved  fellow-citizen, 
your  footman;  I  desire  that  he  may  be  allowed 

1This  one  Mrs.  Macaulay  was  the  same  person¬ 
age  who  afterwards  made  herself  so  much  known 
as  “the  celebrated  female  historian.” 


to  sit  down  and  dine  with  us.’  I  thus,  Sir,  shewed 
her  the  absurdity  of  the  levelling  doctrine.  She 
has  never  liked  me  since.  Sir,  your  levellers  wish 
to  level  down  as  far  as  themselves;  but  they  can¬ 
not  bear  levelling  up  to  themselves.  They  would 
all  have  some  people  under  them;  why  not  then 
have  some  people  above  them?”  I  mentioned 
a  certain  authour  who  disgusted  me  by  his  for¬ 
wardness,  and  by  shewing  no  deference  to  noble¬ 
men  into  whose  company  he  was  admitted. 
Johnson.  “Suppose  a  shoemaker  should  claim 
an  equality  with  him,  as  he  does  with  a  Lord; 
how  he  would  stare.  £Why,  Sir,  do  you  stare? 
(says  the  shoemaker,)  I  do  great  service  to  soci¬ 
ety.  5Tis  true  I  am  paid  for  doing  it;  but  so  are 
you,  Sir:  and  I  am  sorry  to  say  it,  paid  better 
than  I  am,  for  doing  something  not  so  necessary. 
For  mankind  could  do  better  without  your  books, 
than  without  my  shoes.5  Thus,  Sir,  there  would 
be  a  perpetual  struggle  for  precedence,  were 
there  no  fixed  invariable  rules  for  the  distinction 
of  rank,  which  creates  no  jealousy,  as  it  is  al¬ 
lowed  to  be  accidental.55 

He  said,  Dr.  Joseph  Warton  was  a  very  agree¬ 
able  man,  and  his  Essay  on  the  Genius  and  Writings 
of  Pope ,  a  very  pleasing  book.  I  wondered  that 
he  delayed  so  long  to  give  us  the  continuation 
of  it.  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  I  suppose  he  finds 
himself  a  little  disappointed,  in  not  having  been 
able  to  persuade  the  world  to  be  of  his  opinion 
as  to  Pope.55 

We  have  now  been  favoured  with  the  conclud¬ 
ing  volume,  in  which,  to  use  a  parliamentary 
expression,  he  has  explained ,  so  as  not  to  appear 
quite  so  adverse  to  the  opinion  of  the  world, 
concerning  Pope,  as  was  at  first  thought;  and 
we  must  all  agree  that  his  work  is  a  most  valu¬ 
able  accession  to  English  literature. 

A  writer  of  deserved  eminence  being  men¬ 
tioned,  Johnson  said,  “Why,  Sir,  he  is  a  man  of 
good  parts,  but  being  originally  poor,  he  has  got 
a  love  of  mean  company  and  low  jocularity;  a 
very  bad  thing,  Sir.  To  laugh  is  good,  as  to  talk 
is  good.  But  you  ought  no  more  to  think  it 
enough  if  you  laugh,  than  you  are  to  think  it 
enough  if  you  talk.  You  may  laugh  in  as  many 
ways  as  you  talk;  and  surely  every  way  of  talking 
that  is  practised  cannot  be  esteemed.55 

I  spoke  of  Sir  James  Macdonald  as  a  young 
man  of  most  distinguished  merit,  who  united 
the  highest  reputation  at  Eton  and  Oxford,  with 
the  patriarchal  spirit  of  a  great  Highland  Chief¬ 
tain.  I  mentioned  that  Sir  James  had  said  to  me, 
that  he  had  never  seen  Mr.  Johnson,  but  he  had 
a  great  respect  for  him,  though  at  the  same  time 
it  was  mixed  with  some  degree  of  terrour.  John- 


BOSWELL 


128 

son.  “Sir,  if  he  were  to  be  acquainted  with  me, 
it  might  lessen  both.” 

The  mention  of  this  gentleman  led  us  to  talk 
of  the  Western  Islands  of  Scotland,  to  visit  which 
he  expressed  a  wish  that  then  appeared  to  me  a 
very  romantick  fancy,  which  I  little  thought 
would  be  afterwards  realised.  He  told  me,  that 
his  father  had  put  Martin’s  account  of  those 
islands  into  his  hands  when  he  was  very  young, 
and  that  he  was  highly  pleased  with  it;  that  he 
was  particularly  struck  with  the  St.  Kilda  man’s 
notion  that  the  high  church  of  Glasgow  had 
been  hollowed  out  of  a  rock;  a  circumstance  to 
which  old  Mr.  Johnson  had  directed  his  atten¬ 
tion.  He  said  he  would  go  to  the  Hebrides  with 
me,  when  I  returned  from  my  travels,  unless 
some  very  good  companion  should  offer  when  I 
was  absent,  which  he  did  not  think  probable; 
adding,  “There  are  few  people  to  whom  I  take 
so  much  to  as  you.”  And  when  I  talked  of  my 
leaving  England,  he  said  with  a  very  affection¬ 
ate  air,  “My  dear  Boswell,  I  should  be  very  un¬ 
happy  at  parting,  did  I  think  we  were  not  to 
meet  again.”  I  cannot  too  often  remind  my 
readers,  that  although  such  instances  of  his  kind¬ 
ness  are  doubtless  very  flattering  to  me,  yet  I 
hope  my  recording  them  will  be  ascribed  to  a 
better  motive  than  to  vanity;  for  they  afford 
unquestionable  evidence  of  his  tenderness  and 
complacency,  which  some,  while  they  were 
forced  to  acknowledge  his  great  powers,  have 
been  so  strenuous  to  deny. 

He  maintained  that  a  boy  at  school  was  the 
happiest  of  human  beings.  I  supported  a  differ¬ 
ent  opinion,  from  which  I  have  never  yet  varied, 
that  a  man  is  happier;  and  I  enlarged  upon  the 
anxiety  and  sufferings  which  are  endured  at 
school.  Johnson.  “Ah !  Sir,  a  boy’s  being  flogged 
is  not  so  severe  as  a  man’s  having  the  hiss  of  the 
world  against  him.  Men  have  a  solicitude  about 
fame;  and  the  greater  share  they  have  of  it,  the 
more  afraid  they  are  of  losing  it.”  I  silently  asked 
myself,  “Is  it  possible  that  the  great  Samuel 
Johnson  really  entertains  any  such  apprehen¬ 
sion,  and  is  not  confident  that  his  exalted  fame 
is  established  upon  a  foundation  never  to  be 
shaken?” 

He  this  evening  drank  a  bumper  to  Sir  David 
Dalrymple,  “as  a  man  of  worth,  a  scholar,  and 
a  wit.”  “I  have  (said  he)  never  heard  of  him 
except  from  you;  but  let  him  know  my  opinion 
of  him:  for  as  he  does  not  shew  himself  much  in 
the  world,  he  should  have  the  praise  of  the  few 
who  hear  of  him.” 

On  Tuesday,  July  26,  I  found  Mr.  Johnson 
alone.  It  was  a  very  wet  day,  and  I  again  com- 


1 1763 

plained  of  the  disagreeable  effects  of  such  weath¬ 
er.  Johnson.  “Sir,  this  is  all  imagination,  which 
physicians  encourage;  for  man  lives  in  air,  as  a 
fish  lives  in  water;  so  that  if  the  atmosphere 
press  heavy  from  above,  there  is  an  equal  resist¬ 
ance  from  below.  To  be  sure,  bad  weather  is 
hard  upon  people  who  are  obliged  to  be  abroad; 
and  men  cannot  labour  so  well  in  the  open  air 
in  bad  weather,  as  in  good:  but,  Sir,  a  smith  or 
a  taylor,  whose  work  is  within  doors,  will  surely 
do  as  much  in  rainy  weather,  as  in  fair.  Some 
very  delicate  frames,  indeed,  may  be  affected  by 
wet  weather;  but  not  common  constitutions.” 

We  talked  of  the  education  of  children;  and  I 
asked  him  what  he  thought  was  best  to  teach 
them  first.  Johnson.  “Sir,  it  is  no  matter  what 
you  teach  them  first,  any  more  than  what  leg 
you  shall  put  into  your  breeches  first.  Sir,  you 
may  stand  disputing  which  is  best  to  put  in  first, 
but  in  the  mean  time  your  breech  is  bare.  Sir, 
while  you  are  considering  which  of  two  things 
you  should  teach  your  child  first,  another  boy 
has  learnt  them  both.” 

On  Thursday,  July  28,  we  again  supped  in 
private  at  the  Turk’s  Head  coffee-house.  John¬ 
son.  “Swift  has  a  higher  reputation  than  he 
deserves.  His  excellence  is  strong  sense;  for  his 
humour,  though  very  well,  is  not  remarkably 
good.  I  doubt  whether  the  Tale  of  a  Tub  be  his; 
for  he  never  owned  it,  and  it  is  much  above  his 
usual  manner.”1 

“Thompson,  I  think,  had  as  much  of  the  poet 
about  him  as  most  writers.  Every  thing  ap¬ 
peared  to  him  through  the  medium  of  his  fa¬ 
vourite  pursuit.  He  could  not  have  viewed  those 
two  candles  burning  but  with  a  poetical  eye.” 

“Has  not - a  great  deal  of  wit,  Sir?”  John¬ 

son.  “I  do  not  think  so,  Sir.  He  is,  indeed,  con¬ 
tinually  attempting  wit,  but  he  fails.  And  I  have 
no  more  pleasure  in  hearing  a  man  attempting 
wit  and  failing,  than  in  seeing  a  man  trying  to 
leap  over  a  ditch  and  tumbling  into  it.” 

He  laughed  heartily,  when  I  mentioned  to 
him  a  saying  of  his  concerning  Mr.  Thomas 
Sheridan,  which  Foote  took  a  wicked  pleasure 
to  circulate.  “Why,  Sir,  Sherry  is  dull,  naturally 
dull;  but  it  must  have  taken  him  a  great  deal  of 
pains  to  become  what  we  now  see  him.  Such  an 
excess  of  stupidity,  Sir,  is  not  in  Nature.”  “So 
(said  he,)  I  allowed  him  all  his  own  merit.” 

He  now  added,  “Sheridan  cannot  bear  me. 
I  bring  his  declamation  to  a  point.  I  ask  him  a 
plain  question,  cWhat  do  you  mean  to  teach?’ 

1  This  opinion  was  given  by  him  more  at  large  at 
a  subsequent  period.  See  Journal  of  a  Tour  to  the 
Hebrides ,  3rd  edit.,  p.  32  [Aug.  16]. 


1763]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  129 


Besides,  Sir,  what  influence  can  Mr.  Sheridan 
have  upon  the  language  of  this  great  country,  by 
his  narrow  exertions?  Sir,  it  is  burning  a  far¬ 
thing  candle  at  Dover,  to  shew  light  at  Calais.” 

Talking  of  a  young  man  who  was  uneasy  from 
thinking  that  he  was  very  deficient  in  learning 
and  knowledge,  he  said,  “A  man  has  no  reason 
to  complain  who  holds  a  middle  place,  and  has 
many  below  him;  and  perhaps  he  has  not  six 
of  his  years  above  him; — perhaps  not  one. 
Though  he  may  not  know  any  thing  perfectly, 
the  general  mass  of  knowledge  that  he  has  ac¬ 
quired  is  considerable.  Time  will  do  for  him  all 
that  is  >vanting.” 

The  conversation  then  took  a  philosophical 
turn.  Johnson.  “Human  experience,  which  is 
constantly  contradicting  theory,  is  the  great  test 
of  truth.  A  system,  built  upon  the  discoveries  of 
a  great  many  minds,  is  always  of  more  strength, 
than  what  is  produced  by  the  mere  workings  of 
any  one  mind,  which,  of  itself,  can  do  little. 
There  is  not  so  poor  a  book  in  the  world  that 
would  not  be  a  prodigious  effort  were  it  wrought 
out  entirely  by  a  single  mind,  without  the  aid  of 
prior  investigators.  The  French  writers  are  su¬ 
perficial;  because  they  are  not  scholars,  and  so 
proceed  upon  the  mere  power  of  their  own 
minds;  and  we  see  how  very  little  power  they 
have.” 

“As  to  the  Christian  religion,  Sir,  besides  the 
strong  evidence  which  we  have  for  it,  there  is  a 
balance  in  its  favour  from  the  number  of  great 
men  who  have  been  convinced  of  its  truth,  after 
a  serious  consideration  of  the  question.  Grotius 
was  an  acute  man,  a  lawyer,  a  man  accustomed 
to  examine  evidence,  and  he  was  convinced. 
Grotius  was  not  a  recluse,  but  a  man  of  the 
world,  who  certainly  had  no  bias  to  the  side  of 
religion.  Sir  Isaac  Newton  set  out  an  infidel, 
and  came  to  be  a  very  firm  believer.” 

He  this  evening  again  recommended  to  me  to 
perambulate  Spain.1  I  said  it  would  amuse  him 
to  get  a  letter  from  me  dated  at  Salamancha. 
Johnson.  “I  love  the  University  of  Salamancha; 
for  when  the  Spaniards  were  in  doubt  as  to  the 
lawfulness  of  their  conquering  America,  the 
University  of  Salamancha  gave  it  as  their  opin¬ 
ion  that  it  was  not  lawful.”  He  spoke  this  with 
great  emotion,  and  with  that  generous  warmth 
which  dictated  the  lines  in  his  London ,  against 
Spanish  encroachment. 

1 1  fully  intended  to  have  followed  advice  of  such 
weight;  but  having  staid  much  longer  both  in  Ger¬ 
many  and  Italy  than  I  proposed  to  do,  and  having 
also  visited  Corsica,  I  found  that  I  had  exceeded 
the  time  allowed  me  by  my  father,  and  hastened 
to  France  in  my  way  homewards. 


I  expressed  my  opinion  of  my  friend  Derrick 
as  but  a  poor  writer.  Johnson.  “To  be  sure,  Sir, 
he  is;  but  you  are  to  consider  that  his  being  a 
literary  man  has  got  for  him  all  that  he  has.  It 
has  made  him  King  of  Bath.  Sir,  he  has  nothing 
to  say  for  himself  but  that  he  is  a  writer.  Had  he 
not  been  a  writer,  he  must  have  been  sweeping 
the  crossings  in  the  streets,  and  asking  halfpence 
from  every  body  that  past.” 

In  justice,  however,  to  the  memory  of  Mr. 
Derrick,  who  was  my  first  tutor  in  the  ways  of 
London,  and  shewed  me  the  town  in  all  its  vari¬ 
ety  of  departments,  both  literary  and  sportive, 
the  particulars  of  which  Dr.  Johnson  advised  me 
to  put  in  writing,  it  is  proper  to  mention  what 
Johnson,  at  a  subsequent  period,  said  of  him 
both  as  a  writer  and  an  editor:  “Sir,  I  have 
often  said,  that  if  Derrick’s  letters  had  been 
written  by  one  of  a  more  established  name,  they 
would  have  been  thought  very  pretty  letters.”2 
And,  “I  sent  Derrick  to  Dryden’s  relations  to 
gather  materials  for  his  life;  and  I  believe  he  got 
all  that  I  myself  should  have  got.”3 

Poor  Derrick !  I  remember  him  with  kindness. 
Yet  I  cannot  with-hold  from  my  readers  a  pleas¬ 
ant  humourous  sally  which  could  not  have  hurt 
him  had  he  been  alive,  and  now  is  perfectly 
harmless.  In  his  collection  of  poems,  there  is  one 
upon  entering  the  harbour  of  Dublin,  his  native 
city,  after  a  long  absence.  It  begins  thus: 

Eblana!  much  lov'd  city ,  hail! 

Where  first  1  saw  the  light  of  day. 

And  after  a  solemn  reflection  on  his  being 
“numbered  with  forgotten  dead,”  there  is  the 
following  stanza: 

Unless  my  lines  protract  my fame , 

And  those ,  who  chance  to  read  them ,  cry , 

I  knew  him!  Derrick  was  his  namey 
In  yonder  tomb  his  ashes  lie. 

Which  was  thus  happily  parodied  by  Mr.  John 
Home,  to  whom  we  owe  the  beautiful  and  pa- 
thetick  tragedy  of  Douglas: 

Unless  my  deeds  protract  my  fame , 

And  he  who  passes  sadly  sings, 

I  knew  him!  Derrick  was  his  name , 

On  yonder  tree  his  carcase  swings ! 

1  doubt  much  whether  the  amiable  and  in¬ 
genious  authour  of  these  burlesque  lines  will  rec¬ 
ollect  them,  for  they  were  produced  extempore 
one  evening  while  he  and  I  were  walking  to- 

2  Journal  of  a  Tour  to  the  Hebrides ,  3rd  edit.,  p.  104 
[Aug.  27,  1773]. 

3 Ibid.,  p.  142  [242,  Sept.  22,  1773J. 


BOSWELL 


I3° 

gether  in  the  dining-room  at  Eglintoune  Castle, 
in  1760,  and  I  have  never  mentioned  them  to 
him  since. 

Johnson  said  once  to  me,  “Sir,  I  honour  Der¬ 
rick  for  his  presence  of  mind.  One  night,  when 
Floyd,1  another  poor  authour,  was  wandering 
about  the  streets  in  the  night,  he  found  Derrick 
fast  asleep  upon  a  bulk;  upon  being  suddenly 
waked,  Derrick  started  up,  ‘My  dear  Floyd,  I 
am  sorry  to  see  you  in  this  destitute  state;  will 
you  go  home  with  me  to  my  lodgingsV  ” 

I  again  begged  his  advice  as  to  my  method  of 
study  at  Utrecht.  “Come,  (said  he)  let  us  make 
a  day  of  it.  Let  us  go  down  to  Greenwich  and 
dine,  and  talk  of  it  there.”  The  following  Satur¬ 
day  was  fixed  for  this  excursion. 

As  we  walked  along  the  Strand  to-night,  arm 
in  arm,  a  woman  of  the  town  accosted  us,  in  the 
usual  enticing  manner.  “No,  no,  my  girl,  (said 
Johnson)  it  won’t  do.”  He,  however,  did  not 
treat  her  with  harshness,  and  we  talked  of  the 
wretched  life  of  such  women;  and  agreed,  that 
much  more  misery  than  happiness,  upon  the 
whole,  is  produced  by  illicit  commerce  between 
the  sexes. 

On  Saturday,  July  30,  Dr.  Johnson  and  I 
took  a  sculler  at  the  Temple -stairs,  and  set  out 
for  Greenwich.  I  asked  him  if  he  really  thought 
a  knowledge  of  the  Greek  and  Latin  languages 
an  essential  requisite  to  a  good  education.  John¬ 
son.  “Most  certainly,  Sir;  for  those  who  know 
them  have  a  very  great  advantage  over  those 
who  do  not.  Nay,  Sir,  it  is  wonderful  what  a 
difference  learning  makes  upon  people  even  in 
the  common  intercourse  of  life,  which  does  not 
appear  to  be  much  connected  with  it.”  “And 
yet,  (said  I)  people  go  through  the  world  very 
well,  and  carry  on  the  business  of  life  to  good 
advantage,  without  learning.”  Johnson.  “Why, 
Sir,  that  may  be  true  in  cases  where  learning 
cannot  possibly  be  of  any  use;  for  instance,  this 
boy  rows  us  as  well  without  learning,  as  if  he 
could  sing  the  song  of  Orpheus  to  the  Argo¬ 
nauts,  who  were  the  first  sailors.”  He  then  called 
to  the  boy,  “What  would  you  give,  my  lad,  to 
know  about  the  Argonauts?”  “Sir,  (said  the 
boy,)  I  would  give  what  I  have.”  Johnson  was 
much  pleased  with  his  answer,  and  we  gave  him 
a  double  fare.  Dr.  Johnson  then  turning  to  me, 
“Sir,  (said  he)  a  desire  of  knowledge  is  the  natu¬ 
ral  feeling  of  mankind;  and  every  human  being, 
whose  mind  is  not  debauched,  will  be  willing  to 
give  all  that  he  has  to  get  knowledge.” 

We  landed  at  the  Old  Swan,  and  walked  to 

xHe  published  a  biographical  work,  containing 
an  account  of  eminent  writers,  in  three  vols.,  8vo. 


[  1763 

Billingsgate,  where  we  took  oars,  and  moved 
smoothly  along  the  silver  Thames.  It  was  a  very 
fine  day.  We  were  entertained  with  the  immense 
number  and  variety  of  ships  that  were  lying  at 
anchor,  and  with  the  beautiful  country  on  each 
side  of  the  river. 

1  talked  of  preaching,  and  of  the  great  success 
which  those  called  Methodists2  have.  Johnson. 
“Sir,  it  is  owing  to  their  expressing  themselves 
in  a  plain  and  familiar  manner,  which  is  the 
only  way  to  do  good  to  the  common  people,  and 
which  clergymen  of  genius  and  learning  ought 
to  do  from  a  principle  of  duty,  when  it  is  suited 
to  their  congregations;  a  practice,  for  which 
they  will  be  praised  by  men  of  sense.  To  insist 
against  drunkenness  as  a  crime,  because  it  de¬ 
bases  reason,  the  noblest  faculty  of  man,  would 
be  of  no  service  to  the  common  people:  but  to 
tell  them  that  they  may  die  in  a  fit  of  drunken- 

2  All  who  are  acquainted  with  the  history  of  re¬ 
ligion,  (the  most  important,  surely,  that  concerns 
the  human  mind,)  know  that  the  appellation  of 
Methodists  was  first  given  to  a  society  of  students  in 
the  University  of  Oxford,  who  about  the  year  1730 
were  distinguished  by  an  earnest  and  methodical  at¬ 
tention  to  devout  exercises.  This  disposition  of  mind 
is  not  a  novelty,  or  peculiar  to  any  sect,  but  has 
been,  and  still  may  be  found,  in  many  Christians 
of  every  denomination.  Johnson  himself  was,  in  a 
dignified  manner,  a  Methodist.  In  his  Rambler ,  No. 
no,  he  mentions  with  respect  “the  whole  disci¬ 
pline  of  regulated  piety”;  and  in  his  Prayers  and 
Meditations ,  many  instances  occur  of  his  anxious 
examination  into  his  spiritual  state.  That  this  re¬ 
ligious  earnestness,  and  in  particular  an  observa¬ 
tion  of  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  has  some¬ 
times  degenerated  into  folly,  and  sometimes  been 
counterfeited  for  base  purposes,  cannot  be  denied. 
But  it  is  not,  therefore,  fair  to  decry  it  when  genu¬ 
ine.  The  principal  argument  in  reason  and  good 
sense  against  methodism  is,  that  it  tends  to  debase 
human  nature,  and  prevent  the  generous  exertions 
of  goodness,  by  an  unworthy  supposition  that  God 
will  pay  no  regard  to  them;  although  it  is  positive¬ 
ly  said  in  the  Scriptures  that  He  “will  reward  every 
man  according  to  his  works.”  But  I  am  happy  to 
have  it  [in]  my  power  to  do  justice  to  those  whom 
it  is  the  fashion  to  ridicule,  without  any  knowledge 
of  their  tenets;  and  this  I  can  do  by  quoting  a  pas¬ 
sage  from  one  of  their  best  apologists,  Mr.  Milner, 
who  thus  expresses  their  doctrine  upon  this  sub¬ 
ject.  “Justified  by  faith,  renewed  in  his  faculties, 
and  constrained  by  the  love  of  Christ,  their  be¬ 
liever  moves  in  the  sphere  of  love  and  gratitude, 
and  all  his  duties  flow  more  or  less  from  this  prin¬ 
ciple.  And  though  they  are  accumulating  Jor  him  in 
heaven  a  treasure  of  bliss  proportioned  to  his  faithfulness 
and  activity ,  and  it  is  by  no  means  inconsistent  with  his 
principles  to  feel  the  force  of  this  consideration ,  yet  love 
itself  sweetens  every  duty  to  his  mind;  and  he 
thinks  there  is  no  absurdity  in  his  feeling  the  love  of 
God  as  the  grand  commanding  principle  of  his 
life.”  Essays  on  several  Religious  Subjects,  &c.,  by  Jos¬ 
eph  Milner,  A.M.,  Master  of  the  Grammar  School 
of  Kingston-upon-Hull,  1 789,  p.  1 1. 


1763]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


ness,  and  shew  them  how  dreadful  that  would 
be,  cannot  fail  to  make  a  deep  impression.  Sir, 
when  your  Scotch  clergy  give  up  their  homely 
manner,  religion  will  soon  decay  in  that  coun¬ 
try.”  Let  this  observation,  as  Johnson  meant  it, 
be  ever  remembered. 

I  was  much  pleased  to  find  myself  with  John¬ 
son  at  Greenwich,  which  he  celebrates  in  his 
London  as  a  favourite  scene.  I  had  the  poem  in 
my  pocket,  and  read  the  lines  aloud  with  en¬ 
thusiasm: 

On  Thames's  banks  in  silent  thought  we  stood: 

Where  Greenwich  smiles  upon  the  silver flood: 

Pleas'd  with  the  seat  which  gave  Eliza  birth , 

We  kneel ,  and  kiss  the  consecrated  earth . 

He  remarked  that  the  structure  of  Greenwich 
hospital  was  too  magnificent  for  a  place  of  char¬ 
ity,  and  that  its  parts  were  too  much  detached 
to  make  one  great  whole. 

Buchanan,  he  said,  was  a  very  fine  poet;  and 
observed,  that  he  was  the  first  who  complimented 
a  lady,  by  ascribing  to  her  the  different  per¬ 
fections  of  the  heathen  goddesses;1  but  that 
Johnston  improved  upon  this,  by  making  his 
lady,  at  the  same  time,  free  from  their  defects. 

He  dwelt  upon  Buchanan’s  elegant  verses  to 
Mary  Queen  of  Scots,  Nympha  Caledonia ,  &c., 
and  spoke  with  enthusiasm  of  the  beauty  of 
Latin  verse.  “All  the  modern  languages  (said 
he)  cannot  furnish  so  melodious  a  line  as 

Formosam  resonare  doces  Amarillida  silvas” 

Afterwards  he  entered  upon  the  business  of 
the  day,  which  was  to  give  me  his  advice  as  to  a 
course  of  study.  And  here  I  am  to  mention  with 
much  regret,  that  my  record  of  what  he  said  is 
miserably  scanty.  I  recollect  with  admiration  an 
animating  blaze  of  eloquence,  which  rouzed 
every  intellectual  power  in  me  to  the  highest 
pitch,  but  must  have  dazzled  me  so  much,  that 
my  memory  could  not  preserve  the  substance  of 
his  discourse;  for  the  note  which  I  find  of  it  is  no 
more  than  this: — “He  ran  over  the  grand  scale 
of  human  knowledge;  advised  me  to  select  some 
particular  branch  to  excel  in,  but  to  acquire  a 
little  of  every  kind.”  The  defect  of  my  minutes 
will  be  fully  supplied  by  a  long  letter  upon  the 
subject  which  he  favoured  me  with,  after  I  had 
been  some  time  at  Utrecht,  and  which  my 
readers  will  have  the  pleasure  to  peruse  in  its 
proper  place. 

We  walked  in  the  evening  in  Greenwich  Park. 
He  asked  me,  I  suppose,  by  way  of  trying  my 
disposition,  “Is  not  this  very  fine?”  Having  no 

1  Epigram ,  Book  ii,  “In  Elizabeth.  Angliae  Reg.” 
[M.j 


exquisite  relish  of  the  beauties  of  Nature,  and 
being  more  delighted  with  “the  busy  hum  of 
men,”  I  answered,  “Yes,  Sir;  but  not  equal  to 
Fleet-street.”  Johnson.  “You  are  right,  Sir.” 

1  am  aware  that  many  of  my  readers  may 
censure  my  want  of  taste.  Let  me,  however, 
shelter  myself  under  the  authority  of  a  very 
fashionable  Baronet2  in  the  brilliant  world,  who, 
on  his  attention  being  called  to  the  fragrance  of 
a  May  evening  in  the  country,  observed,  “This 
may  be  very  well;  but,  for  my  part,  I  prefer  the 
smell  of  a  flambeau  at  the  playhouse.” 

We  staid  so  long  at  Greenwich,  that  our  sail 
up  the  river,  in  our  return  to  London,  was  by  no 
means  so  pleasant  as  in  the  morning;  for  the 
night  air  was  so  cold  that  it  made  me  shiver.  I 
was  the  more  sensible  of  it  from  having  sat  up 
all  the  night  before,  recollecting  and  writing  in 
my  journal  what  I  thought  worthy  of  preserva¬ 
tion;  an  exertion,  which,  during  the  first  part 
of  my  acquaintance  with  Johnson,  I  frequently 
made.  I  remember  having  sat  up  four  nights  in 
one  week,  without  being  much  incommoded  in 
the  day  time. 

Johnson,  whose  robust  frame  was  not  in  the 
least  affected  by  the  cold,  scolded  me,  as  if  my 
shivering  had  been  a  paltry  effeminacy,  saying, 
“Why  do  you  shiver?”  Sir  William  Scott,  of  the 
Commons,  told  me,  that  when  he  complained 
of  a  head-ache  in  the  post-chaise,  as  they  were 
travelling  together  to  Scotland,  Johnson  treated 
him  in  the  same  manner:  “At  your  age,  Sir,  I 
had  no  headache.”  It  is  not  easy  to  make  allow¬ 
ance  for  sensations  in  others,  which  we  ourselves 
have  not  at  the  time.  We  must  all  have  experi¬ 
enced  how  very  differently  we  are  affected  by 
the  complaints  of  our  neighbours,  when  we  are 
well  and  when  we  are  ill.  In  full  health,  we  can 
scarcely  believe  that  they  suffer  much;  so  faint 
is  the  image  of  pain  upon  our  imagination:  when 
softened  by  sickness,  we  readily  sympathize  with 
the  sufferings  of  others. 

We  concluded  the  day  at  the  Turk’s  Head 
coffee-house  very  socially.  He  was  pleased  to 
listen  to  a  particular  account  which  I  gave  him 
of  my  family,  and  of  its  hereditary  estate,  as  to 
the  extent  and  population  of  which  he  asked 
questions,  and  made  calculations;  recommend- 

2  My  friend  Sir  Michael  Le  Fleming.  This  gen¬ 
tleman,  with  all  his  experience  of  sprightly  and  ele¬ 
gant  life,  inherits,  with  the  beautiful  family  Do¬ 
main,  no  inconsiderable  share  of  that  love  of  liter¬ 
ature,  which  distinguished  his  venerable  grand¬ 
father,  the  Bishop  of  Carlisle.  He  one  day  observed 
to  me,  of  Dr.  Johnson,  in  a  felicity  of  phrase, 
“There  is  a  blunt  dignity  about  him  on  every  oc¬ 
casion.” 


BOSWELL 


132 

ing,  at  the  same  time,  a  liberal  kindness  to  the 
tenantry,  as  people  over  whom  the  proprietor 
was  placed  by  Providence.  He  took  delight  in 
hearing  my  description  of  the  romantick  seat  of 
my  ancestors.  “I  must  be  there,  Sir,  (said  he) 
and  we  will  live  in  the  old  castle;  and  if  there  is 
not  a  room  in  it  remaining,  we  will  build  one.35 
I  was  highly  flattered,  but  could  scarcely  in¬ 
dulge  a  hope  that  Auchinleck  would  indeed  be 
honoured  by  his  presence,  and  celebrated  by  a 
description,  as  it  afterwards  was,  in  his  Journey 
to  the  I  Vestern  Islands . 

After  we  had  again  talked  of  my  setting  out 
for  Holland,  he  said,  C£I  must  see  thee  out  of 
England;  I  will  accompany  you  to  Harwich.35 
I  could  not  find  words  to  express  what  1  felt 
upon  this  unexpected  and  very  great  mark  of 
his  affectionate  regard. 

Next  day,  Sunday,  July  31,1  told  him  I  had 
been  that  morning  at  a  meeting  of  the  people 
called  Quakers,  where  I  had  heard  a  woman 
preach.  Johnson.  “Sir,  a  woman’s  preaching 
is  like  a  dog’s  walking  on  his  hinder  legs.  It  is 
not  done  well;  but  you  are  surprized  to  find  it 
done  at  all.55 

On  Tuesday,  August  2  (the  day  of  my  depar¬ 
ture  from  London  having  been  fixed  for  the 
5th,)  Dr.  Johnson  did  me  the  honour  to  pass  a 
part  of  the  morning  with  me  at  my  Chambers. 
He  said,  that  “he  always  felt  an  inclination  to 
do  nothing.”  I  observed,  that  it  was  strange  to 
think  that  the  most  indolent  man  in  Britain  had 
written  the  most  laborious  work,  The  English 
Dictionary . 

I  mentioned  an  imprudent  publication,  by  a 
certain  friend  of  his,  at  an  early  period  of  life, 
and  asked  him  if  he  thought  it  would  hurt  him. 
Johnson.  “No,  Sir;  not  much.  It  may,  perhaps, 
be  mentioned  at  an  election.55 

I  had  now  made  good  my  title  to  be  a  privi¬ 
leged  man,  and  was  carried  by  him  in  the  eve¬ 
ning  to  drink  tea  with  Miss  Williams,  whom, 
though  under  the  misfortune  of  having  lost  her 
sight,  I  found  to  be  agreeable  in  conversation; 
for  she  had  a  variety  of  literature,  and  expressed 
herself  well;  but  her  peculiar  value  was  the  in¬ 
timacy  in  which  she  had  long  lived  with  John¬ 
son,  by  which  she  was  well  acquainted  with  his 
habits,  and  knew  how  to  lead  him  on  to  talk. 

After  tea  he  carried  me  to  what  he  called  his 
walk,  which  was  a  long  narrow  paved  court  in 
the  neighbourhood,  over-shadowed  by  some 
trees.  There  we  sauntered  a  considerable  time; 
and  I  complained  to  him  that  my  love  of  Lon¬ 
don  and  of  his  company  was  such,  that  I  shrunk 
almost  from  the  thought  of  going  away,  even  to 


1 1763 

travel,  which  is  generally  so  much  desired  by 
young  men.  He  roused  me  by  manly  and  spirited 
conversation.  He  advised  me,  when  settled  in 
any  place  abroad,  to  study  with  an  eagerness 
after  knowledge,  and  to  apply  to  Greek  an  hour 
every  day;  and  when  I  was  moving  about,  to 
read  diligently  the  great  book  of  mankind. 

On  Wednesday,  August  3,  we  had  our  last 
social  evening  at  the  Turk’s  Head  coffee-house, 
before  my  setting  out  for  foreign  parts.  I  had  the 
misfortune,  before  we  parted,  to  irritate  him 
unintentionally.  I  mentioned  to  him  how  com¬ 
mon  it  was  in  the  world  to  tell  absurd  stories  of 
him,  and  to  ascribe  to  him  very  strange  sayings. 
Johnson.  “What  do  they  make  me  say,  Sir?” 
Boswell.  “ Why,  Sir,  as  an  instance  very  strange 
indeed,  (laughing  heartily  as  I  spoke,)  David 
Hume  told  me,  you  said  that  you  would  stand 
before  a  battery  of  cannon,  to  restore  the  Con¬ 
vocation  to  its  full  powers.”  Little  did  I  appre¬ 
hend  that  he  had  actually  said  this:  but  I  was 
soon  convinced  of  my  errour;  for,  with  a  deter¬ 
mined  look,  he  thundered  out  “And  would  I 
not,  Sir?  Shall  the  Presbyterian  Kirk  of  Scotland 
have  its  General  Assembly,  and  the  Church  of 
England  be  denied  its  Convocation?”  He  was 
walking  up  and  down  the  room  while  I  told  him 
the  anecdote;  but  when  he  uttered  this  explo¬ 
sion  of  high-church  zeal,  he  had  come  close  to 
my  chair,  and  his  eyes  flashed  with  indignation. 
I  bowed  to  the  storm,  and  diverted  the  force  of 
it,  by  leading  him  to  expatiate  on  the  influence 
which  religion  derived  from  maintaining  the 
church  with  great  external  respectability. 

I  must  not  omit  to  mention  that  he  this  year 
wrote  The  Lije  oj  Ascham,^  and  the  Dedication 
to  the  Earl  of  Shaftesbury,  f  prefixed  to  the  edi¬ 
tion  of  that  writer’s  English  works,  published  by 
Mr.  Bennet. 

On  Friday,  August  5,  we  set  out  early  in  the 
morning  in  the  Harwich  stage  coach.  A  fat  el¬ 
derly  gentlewoman,  and  a  young  Dutchman, 
seemed  the  most  inclined  among  us  to  conversa¬ 
tion.  At  the  inn  where  we  dined,  the  gentle¬ 
woman  said  that  she  had  done  her  best  to  edu¬ 
cate  her  children;  and  particularly,  that  she  had 
never  suffered  them  to  be  a  moment  idle.  John¬ 
son.  “I  wish,  madam,  you  would  educate  me 
too;  for  I  have  been  an  idle  fellow  all  my  life.” 
“I  am  sure,  Sir,  (said  she)  you  have  not  been 
idle.”  Johnson.  “Nay,  Madam,  it  is  very  true; 
and  that  gentleman  there  (pointing  to  me,)  has 
been  idle.  He  was  idle  at  Edinburgh.  His  father 
sent  him  to  Glasgow,  where  he  continued  to  be 
idle.  He  then  came  to  London,  where  he  has 
been  very  idle;  and  now  he  is  going  to  Utrecht, 


1763  ] 

where  he  will  be  as  idle  as  ever.”  I  asked  him 
privately  how  he  could  expose  me  so.  Johnson. 
“Poh,  poh!  (said  he)  they  knew  nothing  about 
you,  and  will  think  of  it  no  more.”  In  the  after¬ 
noon  the  gentlewoman  talked  violently  against 
the  Roman  Catholicks,  and  of  the  horrours  of  the 
Inquisition.  To  the  utter  astonishment  of  all  the 
passengers  but  myself,  who  knew  that  he  could 
talk  upon  any  side  of  a  question,  he  defended 
the  Inquisition,  and  maintained,  that  “false 
doctrine  should  be  checked  on  its  first  appear¬ 
ance;  that  the  civil  power  should  unite  with  the 
church  in  punishing  those  who  dared  to  attack 
the  established  religion,  and  that  such  only  were 
punished  by  the  Inquisition.”  He  had  in  his 
pocket  Pomponius  Mela  de  situ  Or  bis,  in  which  he 
read  occasionally,  and  seemed  very  intent  upon 
ancient  geography.  Though  by  no  means  nig¬ 
gardly,  his  attention  to  what  was  generally  right 
was  so  minute,  that  having  observed  at  one  of 
the  stages  that  I  ostentatiously  gave  a  shilling  to 
the  coachman,  when  the  custom  was  for  each 
passenger  to  give  only  six-pence,  he  took  me 
aside  and  scolded  me,  saying  that  what  I  had 
done  would  make  the  coachman  dissatisfied 
with  all  the  rest  of  the  passengers,  who  gave  him 
no  more  than  his  due.  This  was  a  just  reprimand; 
for  in  whatever  way  a  man  may  indulge  his 
generosity  or  his  vanity  in  spending  his  money, 
for  the  sake  of  others  he  ought  not  to  raise  the 
price  of  any  article  for  which  there  is  a  constant 
demand. 

He  talked  of  Mr.  Blacklock’s  poetry,  so  far  as 
it  was  descriptive  of  visible  objects;  and  ob¬ 
served,  that  “as  its  authour  had  the  misfortune 
to  be  blind,  we  may  be  absolutely  sure  that  such 
passages  are  combinations  of  what  he  has  re¬ 
membered  of  the  works  of  other  writers  who 
could  see.  That  foolish  fellow,  Spence,  has  la¬ 
boured  to  explain  philosophically  how  Blacklock 
may  have  done,  by  means  of  his  own  faculties, 
what  it  is  impossible  he  should  do.  The  solution, 
as  I  have  given  it,  is  plain.  Suppose,  I  know  a 
man  to  be  so  lame  that  he  is  absolutely  incapa¬ 
ble  to  move  himself,  and  I  find  him  in  a  differ¬ 
ent  room  from  that  in  which  I  left  him;  shall  I 
puzzle  myself  with  idle  conjectures,  that,  per¬ 
haps,  his  nerves  have  by  some  unknown  change 
all  at  once  become  effective?  No,  Sir;  it  is  clear 
how  he  got  into  a  different  room:  he  was  car¬ 
ried.” 

Having  stopped  a  night  at  Colchester,  John¬ 
son  talked  of  that  town  with  veneration,  for  hav¬ 
ing  stood  a  siege  for  Charles  the  First.  The  Dutch¬ 
man  alone  now  remained  with  us.  He  spoke 
English  tolerably  well;  and  thinking  to  recom- 


133 

mend  himself  to  us  by  expatiating  on  the  supe¬ 
riority  of  the  criminal  jurisprudence  of  this  coun¬ 
try  over  that  of  Holland,  he  inveighed  against 
the  barbarity  of  putting  an  accused  person  to 
the  torture,  in  order  to  force  a  confession.  But 
Johnson  was  as  ready  for  this,  as  for  the  Inquisi¬ 
tion.  “Why,  Sir,  you  do  not,  I  find,  understand 
the  law  of  your  own  country.  The  torture  in 
Holland  is  considered  as  a  favour  to  an  accused 
person;  for  no  man  is  put  to  the  torture  there, 
unless  there  is  as  much  evidence  against  him  as 
would  amount  to  conviction  in  England.  An 
accused  person  among  you,  therefore,  has  one 
chance  more  to  escape  punishment,  than  those 
who  are  tried  among  us.” 

At  supper  this  night  he  talked  of  good  eating 
with  uncommon  satisfaction.  “Some  people  (said 
he,)  have  a  foolish  way  of  not  minding,  or  pre¬ 
tending  not  to  mind,  what  they  eat.  For  my 
part,  I  mind  my  belly  very  studiously,  and  very 
carefully;  for  I  look  upon  it,  that  he  who  does 
not  mind  his  belly  will  hardly  mind  anything 
else.”  He  now  appeared  to  me  Jean  Bull philoso- 
phe,  and  he  was,  for  the  moment,  not  only  seri¬ 
ous  but  vehement.  Yet  I  have  heard  him,  upon 
other  occasions,  talk  with  great  contempt  of 
people  who  were  anxious  to  gratify  their  palates; 
and  the  206th  number  of  his  Rambler  is  a  mas¬ 
terly  essay  against  gulosity.  His  practice,  indeed, 
I  must  acknowledge,  may  be  considered  as  cast¬ 
ing  the  balance  of  his  different  opinions  upon 
this  subject;  for  I  never  knew  any  man  who  rel¬ 
ished  good  eating  more  than  he  did.  When  at 
table,  he  was  totally  absorbed  in  the  business  of 
the  moment;  his  looks  seemed  rivetted  to  his 
plate;  nor  would  he,  unless  when  in  very  high 
company,  say  one  word,  or  even  pay  the  least 
attention  to  what  was  said  by  others,  till  he  had 
satisfied  his  appetite,  which  was  so  fierce,  and 
indulged  with  such  intenseness,  that  while  in 
the  act  of  eating,  the  veins  of  his  forehead 
swelled,  and  generally  a  strong  perspiration  was 
visible.  To  those  whose  sensations  were  delicate, 
this  could  not  but  be  disgusting;  and  it  was 
doubtless  not  very  suitable  to  the  character  of  a 
philosopher,  who  should  be  distinguished  by 
self-command.  But  it  must  be  owned,  that  John¬ 
son,  though  he  could  be  rigidly  abstemious,  was  not 
a  temperate  man  either  in  eating  or  drinking.  He 
could  refrain,  but  he  could  not  use  moderately. 
He  told  me,  that  he  had  fasted  two  days  without 
inconvenience,  and  that  he  had  never  been  hun¬ 
gry  but  once.  They  who  beheld  with  wonder 
how  much  he  eat  upon  all  occasions  when  his 
dinner  was  to  his  taste,  could  not  easily  con¬ 
ceive  what  he  must  have  meant  by  hunger;  and 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


i34 

not  only  was  he  remarkable  for  the  extraordi¬ 
nary  quantity  which  he  eat,  but  he  was,  or  af¬ 
fected  to  be,  a  man  of  very  nice  discernment  in 
the  science  of  cookery.  He  used  to  descant  cri¬ 
tically  on  the  dishes  which  had  been  at  table 
where  he  had  dined  or  supped,  and  to  recollect 
very  minutely  what  he  had  liked.  I  remember, 
when  he  was  in  Scotland,  his  praising  “ Gordon's 
palates ,”  (a  dish  of  palates  at  the  Honourable 
Alexander  Gordon’s)  with  a  warmth  of  expres¬ 
sion  which  might  have  done  honour  to  more 
important  subjects.  “As  for  Maclaurin’s  imita¬ 
tion  of  a  made  dish ,  it  was  a  wretched  attempt.” 
He  about  the  same  time  was  so  much  displeased 
with  the  performances  of  a  nobleman’s  French 
cook,  that  he  exclaimed  with  vehemence,  “I’d 
throw  such  a  rascal  into  the  river”;  and  he  then 
proceeded  to  alarm  a  lady  at  whose  house  he 
was  to  sup,  by  the  following  manifesto  of  his 
skill:  “I,  Madam,  who  live  at  a  variety  of  good 
tables,  am  a  much  better  judge  of  cookery,  than 
any  person  who  has  a  very  tolerable  cook,  but 
lives  much  at  home;  for  his  palate  is  gradually 
adapted  to  the  taste  of  his  cook;  whereas,  Mad¬ 
am,  in  trying  by  a  wider  range,  I  can  more  ex¬ 
quisitely  judge.”  When  invited  to  dine,  even 
with  an  intimate  friend,  he  was  not  pleased  if 
something  better  than  a  plain  dinner  was  not 
prepared  for  him.  I  have  heard  him  say  on  such 
an  occasion,  “This  was  a  good  dinner  enough, 
to  be  sure;  but  it  was  not  a  dinner  to  ask  a  man 
to.”  On  the  other  hand,  he  was  wont  to  express, 
with  great  glee,  his  satisfaction  when  he  had 
been  entertained  quite  to  his  mind.  One  day 
when  we  had  dined  with  his  neighbour  and 
landlord  in  Bolt-court,  Mr.  Allen,  the  printer, 
whose  old  housekeeper  had  studied  his  taste  in 
every  thing,  he  pronounced  this  eulogy:  “Sir,  we 
could  not  have  had  a  better  dinner  had  there 
been  a  Synod  of  Cooks” 

While  we  were  left  by  ourselves,  after  the 
Dutchman  had  gone  to  bed,  Dr.  Johnson  talked 
of  that  studied  behaviour  which  many  have  rec¬ 
ommended  and  practised.  He  disapproved  of  it; 
and  said,  “I  never  considered  whether  I  should 
be  a  grave  man,  or  a  merry  man,  but  just  let 
inclination,  for  the  time,  have  its  course.” 

He  flattered  me  with  some  hopes  that  he 
would,  in  the  course  of  the  following  summer, 
come  over  to  Holland,  and  accompany  me  in  a 
tour  through  the  Netherlands. 

I  teized  him  with  fanciful  apprehensions  of 
unhappiness.  A  moth  having  fluttered  round 
the  candle,  and  burnt  itself,  he  laid  hold  of  this 
little  incident  to  admonish  me;  saying,  with  a 
sly  look,  and  in  a  solemn  but  quiet  tone,  “That 


[  1763 

creature  was  its  own  tormentor,  and  I  believe 
its  name  was  Boswell.” 

Next  day  we  got  to  Harwich  to  dinner;  and 
my  passage  in  the  packet-boat  to  Hclvoetsluys 
being  secured,  and  my  baggage  put  011  board, 
we  dined  at  our  inn  by  ourselves.  I  happened  to 
say  it  would  be  terrible  if  he  should  not  And  a 
speedy  opportunity  of  returning  to  London,  and 
be  confined  to  so  dull  a  place.  Johnson.  “Don’t, 
Sir,  accustom  yourself  to  use  big  words  for  little 
matters.  It  would  not  be  terrible ,  though  I  were  to 
be  detained  some  time  here.”  The  practice  of 
using  words  of  disproportionate  magnitude,  is, 
no  doubt,  too  frequent  every  where;  but,  I  think, 
most  remarkable  among  the  French,  of  which, 
all  who  have  travelled  in  France  must  have 
been  stuck  with  innumerable  instances. 

We  went  and  looked  at  the  church,  and  hav¬ 
ing  gone  into  it  and  walked  up  to  the  altar, 
Johnson,  whose  piety  was  constant  and  fervent, 
sent  me  to  my  knees,  saying,  “Now  that  you  are 
going  to  leave  your  native  country,  recommend 
yourself  to  the  protection  of  your  Creator  and 
Redeemer.” 

After  we  came  out  of  the  church,  we  stood 
talking  for  some  time  together  of  Bishop  Berke¬ 
ley’s  ingenious  sophistry  to  prove  the  non-exist¬ 
ence  of  matter,  and  that  every  thing  in  the  uni¬ 
verse  is  merely  ideal.  I  observed,  that  though 
we  are  satisfied  his  doctrine  is  not  true,  it  is  im¬ 
possible  to  refute  it.  I  never  shall  forget  the 
alacrity  with  which  Johnson  answered,  striking 
his  foot  with  mighty  force  against  a  large  stone, 
till  he  rebounded  from  it,  “I  refute  it  thus”  This 
was  a  stout  exemplification  of  the  first  truths  of 
Pere  Bouffier ,  or  the  original  principles  of  Reid  and 
of  Beattie;  without  admitting  which,  we  can  no 
more  argue  in  metaphysicks,  than  we  can  argue 
in  mathematicks  without  axioms.  To  me  it  is 
not  conceivable  how  Berkeley  can  be  answered 
by  pure  reasoning;  but  I  know  that  the  nice  and 
difficult  task  was  to  have  been  undertaken  by 
one  of  the  most  luminous  minds  of  the  present 
age,  had  not  politicks  “turned  him  from  calm 
philosophy  aside.”  What  an  admirable  display 
of  subtilty,  united  with  brilliance,  might  his 
contending  with  Berkeley  have  afforded  us! 
How  must  we,  when  we  reflect  on  the  loss  of 
such  an  intellectual  feast,  regret  that  he  should 
be  characterised  as  the  man, 

Who  born  for  the  universe  narrow'd  his  mind , 

And  to  party  gave  up  what  was  meant  for  mankind? 

My  revered  friend  walked  down  with  me  to 
the  beach,  where  we  embraced  and  parted  with 
tenderness,  and  engaged  to  correspond  by  let- 


BOSWELL 


i763  1 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


!35 


ters.  I  said,  “I  hope,  Sir,  you  will  not  forget  me 
in  my  absence.55  Johnson.  “Nay,  Sir,  it  is  more 
likely  you  should  forget  me,  than  that  I  should 
forget  you.55  As  the  vessel  put  out  to  sea,  I  kept 
my  eyes  upon  him  for  a  considerable  time, 
while  he  remained  rolling  his  majestick  frame 
in  his  usual  manner:  and  at  last  I  perceived  him 
walk  back  into  the  town,  and  he  disappeared. 

Utrecht  seeming  at  first  very  dull  to  me,  after 
the  animated  scenes  of  London,  my  spirits  were 
grievously  affected;  and  I  wrote  to  Johnson  a 
plaintive  and  desponding  letter,  to  which  he 
paid  no  regard.  Afterwards,  when  I  had  ac¬ 
quired  a  firmer  tone  of  mind,  I  wrote  him  a 
second  letter,  expressing  much  anxiety  to  hear 
from  him.  At  length  I  received  the  following 
epistle,  which  was  of  important  service  to  me, 
and,  I  trust,  will  be  so  to  many  others. 

A  Mr.  Mr.  Boswell,  a  la  Cour  de 
l’Empereur,  Utrecht 

Dear.  Sir,  You  are  not  to  think  yourself  for¬ 
gotten,  or  criminally  neglected,  that  you  have 
had  yet  no  letter  from  me.  I  love  to  see  my 
friends,  to  hear  from  them,  to  talk  to  them,  and 
to  talk  of  them;  but  it  is  not  without  a  consider¬ 
able  effort  of  resolution  that  I  prevail  upon  my¬ 
self  to  write.  I  would  not,  however,  gratify  my 
own  indolence  by  the  omission  of  any  important 
duty,  or  any  office  of  real  kindness. 

To  tell  you  that  I  am  or  am  not  well,  that  I 
have  or  have  not  been  in  the  country,  that  I 
drank  your  health  in  the  room  in  which  we  sat 
last  together,  and  that  your  acquaintance  con¬ 
tinue  to  speak  of  you  with  their  former  kindness, 
topicks  with  which  those  letters  are  commonly 
filled  which  are  written  only  for  the  sake  of  writ¬ 
ing,  I  seldom  shall  think  worth  communicating; 
but  if  I  can  have  it  in  my  power  to  calm  any 
harassing  disquiet,  to  excite  any  virtuous  desire, 
to  rectify  any  important  opinion,  or  fortify  any 
generous  resolution,  you  need  not  doubt  but  I 
shall  at  least  wish  to  prefer  the  pleasure  of  grati¬ 
fying  a  friend  much  less  esteemed  than  yourself, 
before  the  gloomy  calm  of  idle  vacancy.  Wheth¬ 
er  I  shall  easily  arrive  at  an  exact  punctuality  of 
correspondence,  I  cannot  tell.  I  shall,  at  pres¬ 
ent,  expect  that  you  will  receive  this  in  return 
for  two  which  I  have  had  from  you.  The  first, 
indeed,  gave  me  an  account  so  hopeless  of  the 
state  of  your  mind,  that  it  hardly  admitted  or 
deserved  an  answer;  by  the  second  I  was  much 
better  pleased:  and  the  pleasure  will  still  be  in¬ 
creased  by  such  a  narrative  of  the  progress  of 
your  studies,  as  may  evince  the  continuance  of 
an  equal  and  rational  application  of  your  mind 
to  some  useful  enquiry. 

You  will,  perhaps,  wish  to  ask,  what  study  I 
would  recommend.  I  shall  not  speak  of  theolo¬ 
gy,  because  it  ought  not  to  be  considered  as  a 


question  whether  you  shall  endeavour  to  know 
the  will  of  God. 

I  shall  therefore,  consider  only  such  studies  as 
we  are  at  liberty  to  pursue  or  to  neglect;  and  of 
these  I  know  not  how  you  will  make  a  better 
choice,  than  by  studying  the  civil  law,  as  your 
father  advises,  and  the  ancient  languages, as  you 
had  determined  for  yourself;  at  least  resolve, 
while  you  remain  in  any  settled  residence,  to 
spend  a  certain  number  of  hours  every  day 
amongst  your  books.  The  dissipation  of  thought, 
of  which  you  complain,  is  nothing  more  than 
the  vacillation  of  a  mind  suspended  between 
different  motives,  and  changing  its  direction  as 
any  motive  gains  or  loses  strength.  If  you  can 
but  kindle  in  your  mind  any  strong  desire,  if  you 
can  but  keep  predominant  any  wish  for  some 
particular  excellence  or  attainment,  the  gusts  of 
imagination  will  break  away,  without  any  ef¬ 
fect  upon  your  conduct,  and  commonly  without 
any  traces  left  upon  the  memory. 

There  lurks,  perhaps,  in  every  human  heart  a 
desire  of  distinction,  which  inclines  every  man 
first  to  hope,  and  then  to  believe,  that  Nature 
has  given  him  something  peculiar  to  himself. 
This  vanity  makes  one  mind  nurse  aversion, 
and  another  actuate  desires,  till  they  rise  by  art 
much  above  their  original  state  of  power;  and  as 
affectation,  in  time,  improves  to  habit,  they  at 
last  tyrannise  over  him  who  at  first  encouraged 
them  only  for  show.  Every  desire  is  a  viper  in 
the  bosom,  who,  while  he  was  chill,  was  harm¬ 
less;  but  when  warmth  gave  him  strength,  ex¬ 
erted  it  in  poison.  You  know  a  gentleman,  who, 
when  first  he  set  his  foot  in  the  gay  world,  as  he 
prepared  himself  to  whirl  in  the  vortex  of  pleas¬ 
ure,  imagined  a  total  indifference  and  universal 
negligence  to  be  the  most  agreeable  concomi¬ 
tants  of  youth,  and  the  strongest  indication  of 
an  airy  temper  and  a  quick  apprehension.  Va¬ 
cant  to  every  object,  and  sensible  of  every  im¬ 
pulse,  he  thought  that  all  appearance  of  dili¬ 
gence  would  deduct  something  from  the  reputa¬ 
tion  of  genius;  and  hoped  that  he  should  appear 
to  attain,  amidst  all  the  ease  of  carelessness,  and 
all  the  tumult  of  diversion,  that  knowledge  and 
those  accomplishments  which  mortals  of  the 
common  fabrick  obtain  only  by  mute  abstrac¬ 
tion  and  solitary  drudgery.  He  tried  this  scheme 
of  life  awhile,  was  made  weary  of  it  by  his  sense 
and  his  virtue;  he  then  wished  to  return  to  his 
studies;  and  finding  long  habits  of  idleness  and 
pleasure  harder  to  be  cured  than  he  expected, 
still  willing  to  retain  his  claim  to  some  extraor¬ 
dinary  prerogatives,  resolved  the  common  con¬ 
sequences  of  irregularity  into  an  unalterable  de¬ 
cree  of  destiny,  and  concluded  that  Nature  had 
originally  formed  him  incapable  of  rational  em¬ 
ployment. 

Let  all  such  fancies,  illusive  and  destructive, 
be  banished  henceforward  from  your  thoughts 
for  ever.  Resolve,  and  keep  your  resolution; 


136 

choose,  and  pursue  your  choice.  If  you  spend 
this  day  in  study,  you  will  find  yourself  still  more 
able  to  study  to-morrow;  not  that  you  are  to  ex¬ 
pect  that  you  shall  at  once  obtain  a  complete 
victory.  Depravity  is  not  very  easily  overcome. 
Resolution  will  sometimes  relax,  and  diligence 
will  sometimes  be  interrupted;  but  let  no  acci¬ 
dental  surprize  or  deviation,  whether  short  or 
long,  dispose  you  to  despondency.  Consider  these 
failings  as  incident  to  all  mankind.  Begin  again 
where  you  left  off,  and  endeavour  to  avoid  the 
seducements  that  prevailed  over  you  before. 

This,  my  dear  Boswell,  is  advice  which,  per¬ 
haps,  has  been  often  given  you,  and  given  you 
without  effect.  But  this  advice,  if  you  will  not 
take  from  others,  you  must  take  from  your  own 
reflections,  if  you  purpose  to  do  the  duties  of  the 
station  to  which  the  bounty  of  Providence  has 
called  you. 

Let  me  have  a  long  letter  from  you  as  soon  as 
you  can.  I  hope  you  continue  your  journal,  and 
enrich  it  with  many  observations  upon  the  coun¬ 
try  in  which  you  reside.  It  will  be  a  favour  if  you 
can  get  me  any  books  in  the  Frisick  language, 
and  can  enquire  how  the  poor  are  maintained 
in  the  Seven  Provinces.  1  am,  dear  Sir,  your 
most  affectionate  servant, 

London,  Dec.  8,  1763  Sam.  Johnson 

I  am  sorry  to  observe,  that  neither  in  my  own 
minutes,  nor  in  my  letters  to  Johnson,  which 
have  been  preserved  by  him,  can  I  find  any  in¬ 
formation  how  the  poor  are  maintained  in  the 
Seven  Provinces.  But  I  shall  extract  from  one  of 
my  letters  what  I  learnt  concerning  the  other 
subject  of  his  curiosity. 

“I  have  made  all  possible  enquiry  with  re¬ 
spect  to  the  Frisick  language,  and  find  that  it 
has  been  less  cultivated  than  any  other  of  the 
northern  dialects;  a  certain  proof  of  which  is 
their  deficiency  of  books.  Of  the  old  Frisick  there 
are  no  remains,  except  some  ancient  laws  pre¬ 
served  by  Schotanus  in  his  Beschryvinge  van  die 
Heerlykheid  van  Friesland^  and  his  Historia  Frisica. 
I  have  not  yet  been  able  to  find  these  books. 
Professor  Trotz,  who  formerly  was  of  the  Uni¬ 
versity  of  Vranyken  in  Friesland,  and  is  at  pres¬ 
ent  preparing  an  edition  of  all  the  Frisick  laws, 
gave  me  this  information.  Of  the  modern  Fris¬ 
ick,  or  what  is  spoken  by  the  boors  at  this  day, 
I  have  procured  a  specimen.  It  is  Gisbert  Japix's 
Rymelerie ,  which  is  the  only  book  that  they  have. 
It  is  amazing,  that  they  have  no  translation  of 
the  Bible,  no  treatises  of  devotion,  nor  even  any 
of  the  ballads  and  storybooks  which  are  so  agree¬ 
able  to  country  people.  You  shall  have  Japix  by 
the  first  convenient  opportunity.  I  doubt  not  to 
pick  up  Schotanus.  Mynheer  Trotz  has  promised 
me  his  assistance.55 


[  1764 

1764:  ,etat.  55.] — Early  in  1764  Johnson 
paid  a  visit  to  the  Langton  family,  at  their  seat 
of  Langton,  in  Lincolnshire,  where  he  passed 
some  time,  much  to  his  satisfaction.  His  friend 
Bennet  Langton,  it  will  not  be  doubted,  did 
every  thing  in  his  power  to  make  the  place  agree¬ 
able  to  so  illustrious  a  guest;  and  the  elder  Mr. 
Langton  and  his  lady,  being  fully  capable  of  un¬ 
derstanding  his  value,  were  not  wanting  in  at¬ 
tention.  He,  however,  told  me,  that  old  Mr. 
Langton,  though  a  man  of  considerable  learn¬ 
ing,  had  so  little  allowance  to  make  for  his  occa¬ 
sional  “laxity  of  talk,55  that  because  in  the  course 
of  discussion  he  sometimes  mentioned  what 
might  be  said  in  favour  of  the  peculiar  tenets  of 
the  Romish  church,  he  went  to  his  grave  believ¬ 
ing  him  to  be  of  that  communion. 

Johnson,  during  his  stay  at  Langton,  had  the 
advantage  of  a  good  library,  and  saw  several 
gentlemen  of  the  neighbourhood.  I  have  ob¬ 
tained  from  Mr.  Langton  the  following  particu¬ 
lars  of  this  period. 

He  was  now  fully  convinced  that  he  could  not 
have  been  satisfied  with  a  country  living;  for, 
talking  of  a  respectable  clergyman  in  Lincoln¬ 
shire,  he  observed,  “This  man,  Sir,  fills  up  the 
duties  of  his  life  well.  I  approve  of  him,  but 
could  not  imitate  him.55 

To  a  lady  who  endeavoured  to  vindicate  her¬ 
self  from  blame  for  neglecting  social  attention 
to  worthy  neighbours,  by  saying,  “I  would  go 
to  them  if  it  would  do  them  any  good,55  he  said, 
“What  good,  Madam,  do  you  expect  to  have  in 
your  power  to  do  them?  It  is  shewing  them  re¬ 
spect,  and  that  is  doing  them  good.55 

So  socially  accommodating  was  he,  that  once 
when  Mr.  Langton  and  he  were  driving  together 
in  a  coach,  and  Mr.  Langton  complained  of  be¬ 
ing  sick,  he  insisted  that  they  should  go  out  and 
sit  on  the  back  of  it  in  the  open  air,  which  they 
did.  And  being  sensible  how  strange  the  appear¬ 
ance  must  be,  observed,  that  a  countryman 
whom  they  saw  in  a  field,  would  probably  be 
thinking,  “If  these  two  madmen  should  come 
down,  what  would  become  of  me?55 

Soon  after  his  return  to  London,  which  was 
in  February,  was  founded  that  Club  which  ex¬ 
isted  long  without  a  name,  but  at  Mr.  Garrick’s 
funeral  became  distinguished  by  the  title  of  The 
Literary  Club.  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  had  the 
merit  of  being  the  first  proposer  of  it,  to  which 
Johnson  acceded,  and  the  original  members 
were,  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  Dr.  Johnson,  Mr. 
Edmund  Burke,  Dr.  Nugent,  Mr.  Beauclerk, 
Mr.  Langton,  Dr.  Goldsmith,  Mr.  Chamier, 
and  Sir  John  Hawkins.  They  met  at  the  Turks5 


BOSWELL 


1764]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  137 


Head,  in  Gerrard-street,  Soho,  one  evening  in 
every  week,  at  seven,  and  generally  continued 
their  conversation  till  a  pretty  late  hour.  This 
club  has  been  gradually  increased  to  its  present 
number,  thirty-five.  After  about  ten  years,  in¬ 
stead  of  supping  weekly,  it  was  resolved  to  dine 
together  once  a  fortnight  during  the  meeting  of 
Parliament.  Their  original  tavern  having  been 
converted  into  a  private  house,  they  moved  first 
to  Prince’s  in  Sackville-street,  then  to  Le  Telier’s 
in  Dover-street,  and  now  meet  at  Parsloe’s,  St. 
James’s-street.  Between  the  time  of  its  forma¬ 
tion,  and  the  time  at  which  this  work  is  passing 
through  the  press,  (June  1792,)1  the  following 
persons,  now  dead,  were  members  of  it:  Mr. 
Dunning;  (afterwards  Lord  Ashburton);  Mr. 
Samuel  Dyer;  Mr.  Garrick;  Dr.  Shipley,  Bishop 
of  St.  Asaph;  Mr.  Vesey;  Mr.  Thomas  Warton 
and  Dr.  Adam  Smith.  The  present  members 
are:  Mr.  Burke;  Mr.  Langton;  Lord  Charle- 
mont;  Sir  Robert  Chambers;  Dr.  Percy,  Bishop 
of  Dromore;  Dr.  Barnard,  Bishop  of  Killaloe; 
Dr.  Marlay,  Bishop  of  Clonfert;  Mr.  Fox;  Dr. 
George  Fordyce;  Sir  William  Scott;  Sir  Joseph 
Banks;  Sir  Charles  Bunbury;  Mr.  Windham  of 
Norfolk;  Mr.  Sheridan;  Mr.  Gibbon;  Sir  Wil¬ 
liam  Jones;  Mr.  Golman;  Mr.  Steevens;  Dr. 
Burney;  Dr.  Joseph  Warton;  Mr.  Malone;  Lord 
Ossory;  Lord  Spencer;  Lord  Lucan;  Lord  Pal¬ 
merston;  Lord  Eliot;  Lord  Macartney;  Mr. 
Richard  Burke,  junior;  Sir  William  Hamilton; 
Dr.  Warren;  Mr.  Courtenay;  Dr.  Hinchcliffe, 
Bishop  of  Peterborough;  the  Duke  of  Leeds;  Dr. 
Douglas,  Bishop  of  Salisbury;  and  the  writer  of 
this  account. 

Sir  John  Hawkins2  represents  himself  as  a 
ee seceder ”  from  this  society,  and  assigns  as  the 
reason  of  his  “withdrawing”  himself  from  it,  that 
its  late  hours  were  inconsistent  with  his  domes- 
tick  arrangements.  In  this  he  is  not  accurate; 
for  the  fact  was,  that  he  one  evening  attacked 
Mr.  Burke,  in  so  rude  a  manner,  that  all  the 
company  testified  their  displeasure;  and  at  their 
next  meeting  his  reception  was  such,  that  he 
never  came  again.3 

He  is  equally  inaccurate  with  respect  to  Mr. 
Garrick,  of  whom  he  says,  “he  trusted  that  the 
least  intimation  of  a  desire  to  come  among  us, 
would  procure  him  a  ready  admission;  but  in 
this  he  was  mistaken.  Johnson  consulted  me  up¬ 
on  it;  and  when  I  could  find  no  objection  to 
receiving  him,  exclaimed, — £He  will  disturb  us 
by  his  buffoonery’; — and  afterwards  so  man- 

xThe  second  edition  is  here  spoken  of.  [M.] 

2  Life  of  Johnson,  p.  425. 

3  From  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds. 


aged  matters  that  he  was  never  formally  pro¬ 
posed,  and,  by  consequence,  never  admitted.”4 

Injustice  both  to  Mr.  Garrick  and  Dr.  John¬ 
son,  I  think  it  necessary  to  rectify  this  mis-state¬ 
ment.  The  truth  is,  that  not  very  long  after  the 
institution  of  our  club,  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  was 
speaking  of  it  to  Garrick.  “I  like  it  much,  (said 
he,)  I  think  I  shall  be  of  you.”  When  Sir  Joshua 
mentioned  this  to  Dr.  Johnson,  he  was  much 
displeased  with  the  actor’s  conceit.  “He’ll  be  of 
us ,  (said  Johnson)  how  does  he  know  we  will 
permit  him?  The  first  Duke  in  England  has  no 
right  to  hold  such  language.”  However,  when 
Garrick  was  regularly  proposed  some  time  af¬ 
terwards,  Johnson,  though  he  had  taken  a  mo¬ 
mentary  offence  at  his  arrogance,  warmly  and 
kindly  supported  him,  and  he  was  accordingly 
elected,  was  a  most  agreeable  member,  and  con¬ 
tinued  to  attend  our  meetings  to  the  time  of  his 
death. 

Mrs.  Piozzi5  has  also  given  a  similar  misrep¬ 
resentation  of  Johnson’s  treatment  of  Garrick  in 
this  particular,  as  if  he  had  used  these  contemp¬ 
tuous  expressions:  “If  Garrick  does  apply,  I’ll 
black-ball  him.  Surely,  one  ought  to  sit  in  a 
society  like  ours, 

Unelbow’d  by  a  gamester,  pimp,  or  player” 

I  am  happy  to  be  enabled  by  such  unquestion¬ 
able  authority  as  that  of  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds, 
as  well  as  from  my  own  knowledge,  to  vindicate 
at  once  the  heart  of  Johnson  and  the  social  mer¬ 
it  of  Garrick. 

In  this  year,  except  what  he  may  have  done 
in  revising  Shakspeare ,  we  do  not  find  that  he 
laboured  much  in  literature.  He  wrote  a  review 
of  Grainger’s  Sugar  Cane,  a  Poem ,  in  the  London 
Chronicle.  He  told  me,  that  Dr.  Percy  wrote  the 
greatest  part  of  this  review;  but,  I  imagine,  he 
did  not  recollect  it  distinctly,  for  it  appears  to  be 
mostly,  if  not  altogether,  his  own.  He  also  wrote 
in  The  Critical  Review ,  an  account  f  of  Gold¬ 
smith’s  excellent  poem,  The  Traveller. 

The  ease  and  independence  to  which  he  had 
at  last  attained  by  royal  munificence,  increased 
his  natural  indolence.  In  his  Meditations  he  thus 
accuses  himself: — “Good  Friday,  April  20, 
1764. — I  have  made  no  reformation;  I  have 
lived  totally  useless,  more  sensual  in  thought, 
and  more  addicted  to  wine  and  meat.”6  And 
next  morning  he  thus  feelingly  complains: — 
“My  indolence,  since  my  last  reception  of  the 

ALife  of  Johnson,  p.  425. 

5  Letters  to  and  from  Dr.  Johnson.  Vol.  ii,  p.  278 

E387]- 

6  Prayers  and  Meditations,  p.  50. 


13B  BOSWELL  [1764 


sacrament,  has  sunk  into  grosser  sluggishness, 
and  my  dissipation  spread  into  wilder  negli¬ 
gence.  My  thoughts  have  been  clouded  with 
sensuality;  and,  except  that  from  the  beginning 
of  this  year  I  have,  in  some  measure,  forborne 
excess  of  strong  drink,  my  appetites  have  pre¬ 
dominated  over  my  reason.  A  kind  of  strange 
oblivion  has  overspread  me,  so  that  I  know  not 
what  has  become  of  the  last  year;  and  perceive 
that  incidents  and  intelligence  pass  over  me, 
without  leaving  any  impression.”  He  then  sol¬ 
emnly  says,  “This  is  not  the  life  to  which  heaven 
is  promised”;1  and  he  earnestly  resolves  an 
amendment. 

It  was  his  custom  to  observe  certain  days  with 
a  pious  abstraction;  viz.  New-year’s-day,  the 
day  of  his  wife’s  death,  Good  Friday,  Easter-day, 
and  his  own  birth-day.  He  this  year  says:-“I 
have  now  spent  fifty-five  years  in  resolving;  hav¬ 
ing,  from  the  earliest  time  almost  that  I  can 
remember,  been  forming  schemes  of  a  better 
life.  I  have  done  nothing.  The  need  of  doing, 
therefore,  is  pressing,  since  the  time  of  doing  is 
short.  O  God,  grant  me  to  resolve  aright,  and 
to  keep  my  resolutions,  for  Jesus  Christ’s  sake. 
Amen.”2 

Such  a  tenderness  of  conscience,  such  a  fervent 
desire  of  improvement,  will  rarely  be  found.  It 
is,  surely,  not  decent  in  those  who  are  hardened 
in  indifference  to  spiritual  improvement,  to  treat 
this  pious  anxiety  of  Johnson  with  contempt. 

About  this  time  he  was  afflicted  with  a  very 
severe  return  of  the  hypochondriack  disorder, 
which  was  ever  lurking  about  him.  He  was  so 
ill,  as,  notwithstanding  his  remarkable  love  of 
company,  to  be  entirely  averse  to  society,  the 
most  fatal  symptom  of  that  malady.  Dr.  Adams 
told  me,  that  as  an  old  friend  he  was  admitted 
to  visit  him,  and  that  he  found  him  in  a  deplor¬ 
able  state,  sighing,  groaning,  talking  to  himself, 
and  restlessly  walking  from  room  to  room.  He 
then  used  this  emphatical  expression  of  the  mis¬ 
ery  which  he  felt:  “I  would  consent  to  have  a 
limb  amputated  to  recover  my  spirits.” 

Talking  to  himself  was,  indeed,  one  of  his  sin¬ 
gularities  ever  since  I  knew  him.  I  was  certain 
that  he  was  frequently  uttering  pious  ejacula¬ 
tions;  for  fragments  of  the  Lord’s  Prayer  have 
been  distinctly  overheard.  His  friend  Mr.  Thom¬ 
as  Davies,  of  whom  Churchill  says, 

That  Davies  hath  a  very  pretty  wife, 

when  Dr.  Johnson  muttered  “lead  us  not  into 
temptation,”  used  with  waggish  and  gallant  hu- 

1  Prayers  and  Meditations ,  p.  51. 

2  Ibid.,  p.  58. 


mour  to  whisper  Mrs.  Davies,  “You,  my  dear, 
are  the  cause  of  this.” 

He  had  another  particularity,  of  which  none 
of  his  friends  ever  ventured  to  ask  an  explana¬ 
tion.  It  appeared  to  me  some  superstitious  habit, 
which  he  had  contracted  early,  and  from  which 
he  had  never  called  upon  his  reason  to  disen¬ 
tangle  him.  This  was  his  anxious  care  to  go  out 
or  in  at  a  door  or  passage  by  a  certain  number 
of  steps  from  a  certain  point,  or  at  least  so  as 
that  either  his  right  or  his  left  foot,  (I  am  not 
certain  which,)  should  constantly  make  the  first 
actual  movement  when  he  came  close  to  the  door 
or  passage.  Thus  I  conjecture:  for  I  have,  upon 
innumerable  occasions,  observed  him  suddenly 
stop,  and  then  seem  to  count  his  steps  with  a 
deep  earnestness;  and  when  he  had  neglected  or 
gone  wrong  in  this  sort  of  magical  movement,  I 
have  seen  him  go  back  again,  put  himself  in  a 
proper  posture  to  begin  the  ceremony,  and,  hav¬ 
ing  gone  through  it,  break  from  his  abstraction, 
walk  briskly  on,  and  join  his  companion.  A 
strange  instance  of  something  of  this  nature,  even 
when  on  horseback,  happened  when  he  was  in 
the  isle  of  Sky.3  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  has  observed 
him  to  go  a  good  way  about,  rather  than  cross  a 
particular  alley  in  Leicester-fields;  but  this  Sir 
Joshua  imputed  to  his  having  had  some  disagree¬ 
able  recollection  associated  with  it. 

That  the  most  minute  singularities  which  be¬ 
longed  to  him,  and  made  very  observable  parts 
of  his  appearance  and  manner,  may  not  be  omit¬ 
ted,  it  is  requisite  to  mention,  that  while  talking 
or  even  musing  as  he  sat  in  his  chair,  he  com¬ 
monly  held  his  head  to  one  side  towards  his  right 
shoulder,  and  shook  it  in  a  tremulous  manner, 
moving  his  body  backwards  and  forwards,  and 
rubbing  his  left  knee  in  the  same  direction,  with 
the  palm  of  his  hand.  In  the  intervals  of  articu¬ 
lating  he  made  various  sounds  with  his  mouth, 
sometimes  as  if  ruminating,  or  what  is  called 
chewing  the  cud,  sometimes  giving  a  half  whistle, 
sometimes  making  his  tongue  play  backwards 
from  the  roof  of  his  mouth,  as  if  clucking  like  a 
hen,  and  sometimes  protruding  it  against  his  up¬ 
per  gums  in  front,  as  if  pronouncing  quickly  un¬ 
der  his  breath,  too,  too,  too:  all  this  accompanied 
sometimes  with  a  thoughtful  look,  but  more  fre¬ 
quently  with  a  smile.  Generally  when  he  had 
concluded  a  period,  in  the  course  of  a  dispute, 
by  which  time  he  was  a  good  deal  exhausted  by 
violence  and  vociferation,  he  used  to  blow  out 
his  breath  like  a  Whale.  This  I  supposed  was  a 
relief  to  his  lungs;  and  seemed  in  him  to  be  a 
contemptuous  mode  of  expression,  as  if  he  had 

3 Journal  of  a  Tour  to  the  Hebrides,  3rd  edit.,  p.  316. 


1765]  LIFE  OF 

made  the  arguments  of  his  opponent  fly  like 
chaff  before  the  wind. 

I  am  fully  aware  how  very  obvious  an  occa¬ 
sion  I  here  give  for  the  sneering  jocularity  of  such 
as  have  no  relish  of  an  exact  likeness;  which  to 
render  complete,  he  who  draws  it  must  not  dis¬ 
dain  the  slightest  strokes.  But  if  witlings  should 
be  inclined  to  attack  this  account,  let  them  have 
the  candour  to  quote  what  I  have  offered  in  my 
defence. 

He  was  for  some  time  in  the  summer  at  Eas¬ 
ton  Maudit,  Northamptonshire,  on  a  visit  to 
the  Reverend  Dr.  Percy,  now  Bishop  of  Dro- 
more.  Whatever  dissatisfaction  he  felt  at  what 
he  considered  as  a  slow  progress  in  intellectual 
improvement,  we  find  that  his  heart  was  tender, 
and  his  affections  warm,  as  appears  from  the 
following  very  kind  letter: 

To  Joshua  Reynolds,  Esq.,  in 
Leicester-fields,  London 

Dear  Sir,  I  did  not  hear  of  your  sickness  till  I 
heard  likewise  of  your  recovery,  and  therefore 
escaped  that  part  of  your  pain,  which  every  man 
must  feel,  to  whom  you  are  known  as  you  are 
known  to  me. 

Having  had  no  particular  account  of  your 
disorder,  I  know  not  in  what  state  it  has  left  you. 
If  the  amusement  of  my  company  can  exhilar¬ 
ate  the  languor  of  a  slow  recovery,  I  will  not  de¬ 
lay  a  day  to  come  to  you;  for  I  know  not  how  I 
can  so  effectually  promote  my  own  pleasure  as 
by  pleasing  you,  or  my  own  interest  as  by  pre¬ 
serving  you,  in  whom,  if  I  should  lose  you,  I 
should  lose  almost  the  only  man  whom  I  call  a 
friend. 

Pray  let  me  hear  of  you  from  yourself,  or  from 
dear  Miss  Reynolds.1  Make  my  compliments  to 
Mr.  Mudge.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  most  affec¬ 
tionate  and  most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

At  the  Rev.  Mr.  Percy’s,  at  Easton 

Maudit,  Northamptonshire,  (by 

Castle  Ashby,)  Aug.  19,  1764 

1 765:  .etat.  56.] — Early  in  the  year  1 765  he 
paid  a  short  visit  to  the  University  of  Cambridge, 
with  his  friend  Mr.  Beauclerk.  There  is  a  lively 
picturesque  account  of  his  behaviour  on  this 
visit,  in  The  Gentleman's  Magazine  for  March, 
1 785,  being  an  extract  of  a  letter  from  the  late 
Dr.  John  Sharp.  The  two  following  sentences 
are  very  characteristical: 

“He  drank  his  large  potations  of  tea  with  me, 
interrupted  by  many  an  indignant  contradic- 

1  Sir  Joshua’s  sister,  for  whom  Johnson  had  a  par¬ 
ticular  affection,  and  to  whom  he  wrote  many  let¬ 
ters  which  I  have  seen,  and  which  I  am  sorry  her 
too  nice  delicacy  will  not  permit  to  be  published. 


JOHNSON  139 

tion,  and  many  a  noble  sentiment.” - “Sev¬ 

eral  persons  got  into  his  company  the  last  eve¬ 
ning  at  Trinity,  where,  about  twelve,  he  began 
to  be  very  great;  stripped  poor  Mrs.  Macaulay 
to  the  very  skin,  then  gave  her  for  his  toast,  and 
drank  her  in  two  bumpers.” 

The  strictness  of  his  self-examination  and  scru¬ 
pulous  Christian  humility  appear  in  his  pious 
meditation  on  Easter-day  this  year. 

“I  purpose  again  to  partake  of  the  blessed  sac¬ 
rament;  yet  when  I  consider  how  vainly  I  have 
hitherto  resolved  at  this  annual  commemora¬ 
tion  of  my  Saviour’s  death,  to  regulate  my  life 
by  his  laws,  I  am  almost  afraid  to  renew  my 
resolutions.” 

The  concluding  words  are  very  remarkable, 
and  shew  that  he  laboured  under  a  severe  de¬ 
pression  of  spirits. 

“Since  the  last  Easter  I  have  reformed  no  evil 
habit,  my  time  has  been  unprofitably  spent,  and 
seems  as  a  dream  that  has  left  nothing  behind. 
My  memory  grows  confused ,  and  1  know  not  how  the 
days  pass  over  me.  Good  Lord  deliver  me  !”2 

No  man  was  more  gratefully  sensible  of  any 
kindness  done  to  him  than  Johnson.  There  is  a 
little  circumstance  in  his  diary  this  year,  which 
shews  him  in  a  very  amiable  light. 

“July  2. — I  paid  Mr.  Simpson  ten  guineas, 
which  he  had  formerly  lent  me  in  my  necessity 
and  for  which  Tetty  expressed  her  gratitude.” 

“July  8. — I  lent  Mr.  Simpson  ten  guineas 
more.” 

Here  he  had  a  pleasing  opportunity  of  doing 
the  same  kindness  to  an  old  friend,  which  he  had 
formerly  received  from  him.  Indeed  his  liberal¬ 
ity  as  to  money  was  very  remarkable.  The  next 
article  in  his  diary  is, 

“July  16. — I  received  seventy-five  pounds. 
Lent  Mr.  Davies  twenty-five.” 

Trinity  College,  Dublin,  at  this  time  surprised 
Johnson  with  a  spontaneous  compliment  of  the 
highest  academical  honours,  by  creating  him 
Doctor  of  Laws.  The  diploma,  which  is  in  my 
possession,  is  as  follows: 

“ OMNIBUS  ad  quos  prasentes  litem  pervener - 
int,  salutem.  Nos  Pmpositus  et  Socii  seniores  Collegii 
sacrosanct  a  et  individua  Trinitiatis  Regina  Eliza¬ 
beth a  juxta  Dublin ,  testamur ,  Samueli  Johnson, 
Armigero ,  ob  egregiam  scriptorum  elegantiam  et  utili - 
tatem ,  gratiam  concessam  fuisse  pro  gradu  Doctoratus 
in  utroque  Jure ,  octavo  die  Julii ,  Anno  Domini  mil - 
lesimo  septingentesimo  sexagesimo-quinto.  In  cujus  rei 
testimonium  singulorum  manus  et  sigillum  quo  in 
hisce  utimur  apposuimus;  vicesimo  tertio  die  Julii , 

2  Prayers  and  Meditations ,  p.  61. 


BOSWELL 


140 

Anno  Domini  millesimo  septingentesimo  sexagesimo - 
quinto . 

Fran.  Andrews 
Proeps. 

R.  Murray  Gul.  Clement 

RoBtus  Law  Tiio.  Wilson 

Migil  Kearney  Tho.  Leland 

This  unsolicited  mark  of  distinction,  conferred 
on  so  great  a  literary  character,  did  much  hon¬ 
our  to  the  judgement  and  liberal  spirit  of  that 
learned  body.  Johnson  acknowledged  the  favour 
in  a  letter  to  Dr.  Leland,  one  of  their  number; 
but  I  have  not  been  able  to  obtain  a  copy  of  it. 

He  appears  this  year  to  have  been  seized  with 
a  temporary  fit  of  ambition,  for  he  had  thoughts 
both  of  studying  law  and  of  engaging  in  politics. 
His  “Prayer  before  the  Study  of  Law”  is  truly 
admirable: 

Sept.  26,  1765 

Almighty  God,  the  giver  of  wisdom,  without 
whose  help  resolutions  are  vain,  without  whose 
blessing  study  is  ineffectual;  enable  me,  if  it  be 
thy  will,  to  attain  such  knowledge  as  may  qual¬ 
ify  me  to  direct  the  doubtful,  and  instruct  the 
ignorant;  to  prevent  wrongs  and  terminate  con¬ 
tentions;  and  grant  that  that  I  may  use  that 
knowledge  which  I  shall  attain,  to  thy  glory  and 
my  own  salvation,  for  Jesus  Christ’s  sake. 
Amen.1 

His  prayer  in  the  view  of  becoming  a  poli¬ 
tician  is  entitled,  “Engaging  in  Politicks  with 
H - n,”  no  doubt  his  friend,  the  Right  Hon¬ 

ourable  William  Gerard  Hamilton,  for  whom, 
during  a  long  acquaintance,  he  had  a  great  es¬ 
teem,  and  to  whose  conversation  he  once  paid 
this  high  compliment:  “I  am  very  unwilling  to 
be  left  alone,  Sir,  and  therefore  I  go  with  my 
company  down  the  first  pair  of  stairs,  in  some 
hopes  that  they  may,  perhaps,  return  again.  I 
go  with  you,  Sir,  as  far  as  the  street-door.”  In 
what  particular  department  he  intended  to  en¬ 
gage  does  not  appear,  nor  can  Mr.  Hamilton 
explain.  His  prayer  is  in  general  terms: — 

“Enlighten  my  understanding  with  knowl¬ 
edge  of  right,  and  govern  my  will  by  thy  laws, 
that  no  deceit  may  mislead  me,  nor  temptation 
corrupt  me;  that  I  may  always  endeavour  to  do 
good,  and  hinder  evil.”2  There  is  nothing  upon 
the  subject  in  his  diary. 

This  year  was  distinguished  by  his  being  in¬ 
troduced  into  the  family  of  Mr.  Thrale,  one  of 
the  most  eminent  brewers  in  England,  and  Mem¬ 
ber  of  Parliament  for  the  borough  of  Southwark. 
Foreigners  are  not  a  little  amazed  when  they 

1  Prayers  and  Meditations ,  p.  66. 

2 Ibid .,  p.  67. 


[  1765 

hear  of  brewers,  distillers,  and  men  in  similar 
departments  of  trade,  held  forth  as  persons  of 
considerable  consequence.  In  this  great  com¬ 
mercial  country  it  is  natural  that  a  situation 
which  produces  much  wealth  should  be  consid¬ 
ered  as  very  respectable;  and,  no  doubt,  honest 
industry  is  entitled  to  esteem.  But,  perhaps,  the 
too  rapid  advance  of  men  of  low  extraction  tends 
to  lessen  the  value  of  that  distinction  by  birth 
and  gentility,  which  has  ever  been  found  bene¬ 
ficial  to  the  grand  scheme  of  subordination. 
Johnson  used  to  give  this  account  of  the  rise  of 
Mr.  Thrale’s  father:  “He  worked  at  six  shillings 
a  week  for  twenty  years  in  the  great  brewery, 
which  afterwards  was  his  own.  The  proprietor 
of  it  had  an  only  daughter,  who  was  married  to 
a  nobleman.  It  was  not  fit  that  a  peer  should 
continue  the  business.  On  the  old  man’s  death, 
therefore,  the  brewery  was  to  be  sold.  To  find 
a  purchaser  for  so  large  a  property  was  a  diffi¬ 
cult  matter;  and,  after  some  time,  it  was  sug¬ 
gested,  that  it  would  be  adviseable  to  treat  with 
Thrale,  a  sensible,  active,  honest  man,  who  had 
been  employed  in  the  house,  and  to  transfer  the 
whole  to  him  for  thirty  thousand  pounds,  secur¬ 
ity  being  taken  upon  the  property.  This  was  ac¬ 
cordingly  settled.  In  eleven  years  Thrale  paid 
the  purchase-money.  He  acquired  a  large  for¬ 
tune,  and  lived  to  be  Member  of  Parliament  for 
Southwark.  But  what  was  most  remarkable  was 
the  liberality  with  which  he  used  his  riches.  He 
gave  his  son  and  daughters  the  best  education. 
The  esteem  which  his  good  conduct  procured 
him  from  the  nobleman  who  had  married  his 
master’s  daughter,  made  him  be  treated  with 
much  attention;  and  his  son,  both  at  school  and 
at  the  University  of  Oxford,  associated  with 
young  men  of  the  first  rank.  His  allowance  from 
his  father,  after  he  left  college,  was  splendid;  no 
less  than  a  thousand  a  year.  This,  in  a  man  who 
had  risen  as  old  Thrale  did,  was  a  very  extra¬ 
ordinary  instance  of  generosity.  He  used  to  say, 
‘If  this  young  dog  does  not  find  so  much  after  I 
am  gone  as  he  expects,  let  him  remember  that 
he  has  had  a  great  deal  in  my  own  time.’  ” 

The  son,  though  in  affluent  circumstances, 
had  good  sense  enough  to  carry  on  his  father’s 
trade,  which  was  of  such  extent,  that  I  remem¬ 
ber  he  once  told  me,  he  would  not  quit  it  for  an 
annuity  of  ten  thousand  a  year;  “Not  (said  he,) 
that  I  get  ten  thousand  a  year  by  it,  but  it  is  an 
estate  to  a  family.”  Having  left  daughters  only, 
the  property  was  sold  for  the  immense  sum  of 
one  hundred  and  thirty-five  thousand  pounds; 
a  magnificent  proof  of  what  may  be  done  by  fair 
trade  in  no  long  period  of  time. 


1765  ]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  141 


There  may  be  some  who  think  that  a  new  sys¬ 
tem  of  gentility1  might  be  established,  upon  prin¬ 
ciples  totally  different  from  what  have  hitherto 
prevailed.  Our  present  heraldry,  it  may  be  said, 
is  suited  to  the  barbarous  times  in  which  it  had 
its  origin.  It  is  chiefly  founded  upon  ferocious 
merit,  upon  military  excellence.  Why,  in  civil¬ 
ised  times,  we  may  be  asked,  should  there  not  be 
rank  and  honours,  upon  principles,  which,  in¬ 
dependent  of  long  custom,  are  certainly  not  less 
worthy,  and  which,  when  once  allowed  to  be 
connected  with  elevation  and  precedency,  would 
obtain  the  same  dignity  in  our  imagination? 
Why  should  not  the  knowledge,  the  skill,  the  ex¬ 
pertness,  the  assiduity,  and  the  spirited  hazards 
of  trade  and  commerce,  when  crowned  with 
success,  be  entitled  to  give  those  flattering  dis¬ 
tinctions  by  which  mankind  are  so  universally 
captivated? 

Such  are  the  specious,  but  false  arguments  for 
a  proposition  which  always  will  find  numerous 
advocates,  in  a  nation  where  men  are  every  day 
starting  up  from  obscurity  to  wealth.  To  refute 
them  is  needless.  The  general  sense  of  mankind 
cries  out,  with  irresistible  force,  “Un  gentilhomme 
est  toujours  gentilhomme .” 

Mr.  Thrale  had  married  Miss  Hesther  Lynch 
Salusbury,  of  good  Welsh  extraction,  a  lady  of 
lively  talents,  improved  by  education.  That 
Johnson’s  introduction  into  Mr.  Thrale’s  family, 
which  contributed  so  much  to  the  happiness  of 
his  life,  was  owing  to  her  desire  for  his  conversa¬ 
tion,  is  very  probable  and  a  general  supposition: 
but  it  is  not  the  truth.  Mr.  Murphy,  who  was 
intimate  with  Mr.  Thrale,  having  spoken  very 
highly  of  Dr.  Johnson,  he  was  requested  to  make 
them  acquainted.  This  being  mentioned  to  John¬ 
son,  he  accepted  of  an  invitation  to  dinner  at 
Thrale’s,  and  was  so  much  pleased  with  his  re¬ 
ception,  both  by  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Thrale,  and 
they  so  much  pleased  with  him,  that  his  invita¬ 
tions  to  their  house  were  more  and  more  fre¬ 
quent,  till  at  last  he  became  one  of  the  family, 

1Mrs.  Burney  informs  me  that  she  heard  Dr. 
Johnson  say,  “An  English  Merchant  is  a  new  spe¬ 
cies  of  Gentleman.”  He,  perhaps,  had  in  his  mind 
the  following  ingenious  passage  in  The  Conscious 
Lovers ,  act  iv,  scene  ii,  where  Mr.  Sealand  thus  ad¬ 
dresses  Sir  John  Bevil:  “Give  me  leave  to  say,  that 
we  merchants  are  a  species  of  gentry  that  have 
grown  into  the  world  this  last  century,  and  are  as 
honourable,  and  almost  as  useful  as  you  landed- 
folks,  that  have  always  thought  yourselves  so  much 
above  us;  for  your  trading  forsooth  is  extended  no 
farther  than  a  load  of  hay,  or  a  fat  ox. — You  are 
pleasant  people  indeed !  because  you  are  generally 
bred  up  to  be  lazy,  therefore,  I  warrant  your  in¬ 
dustry  is  dishonourable.” 


and  an  apartment  was  appropriated  to  him, 
both  in  their  house  in  Southwark,  and  in  their 
villa  at  Streatham. 

Johnson  had  a  very  sincere  esteem  for  Mr. 
Thrale,  as  a  man  of  excellent  principles,  a  good 
scholar,  well  skilled  in  trade,  of  a  sound  under¬ 
standing,  and  of  manners  such  as  presented  the 
character  of  a  plain  independent  English  ’Squire. 
As  this  family  will  frequently  be  mentioned  in 
the  course  of  the  following  pages,  and  as  a  false 
notion  has  prevailed  that  Mr.  Thrale  was  infer- 
iour,  and  in  some  degree  insignificant,  compared 
with  Mrs.  Thrale,  it  may  be  proper  to  give  a 
true  state  of  the  case  from  the  authority  of  John¬ 
son  himself  in  his  own  words. 

“X  know  no  man,  (said  he,)  who  is  more  mas¬ 
ter  of  his  wife  and  family  than  Thrale.  If  he  but 
holds  up  a  finger,  he  is  obeyed.  It  is  a  great  mis¬ 
take  to  suppose  that  she  is  above  him  in  literary 
attainments.  She  is  more  flippant;  but  he  has 
ten  times  her  learning:  he  is  a  regular  scholar; 
but  her  learning  is  that  of  a  school-boy  in  one  of 
the  lower  forms.”  My  readers  may  naturally 
wish  for  some  representation  of  the  figures  of  this 
couple.  Mr.  Thrale  was  tall,  well  proportioned, 
and  stately.  As  for  Madam ,  or  my  Mistress ,  by 
which  epithets  Johnson  used  to  mention  Mrs. 
Thrale,  she  was  short,  plump,  and  brisk.  She  has 
herself  given  us  a  lively  view  of  the  idea  which 
Johnson  had  of  her  person,  on  her  appearing 
before  him  in  a  dark-coloured  gown;  “You  little 
creatures  should  never  wear  those  sort  of  clothes, 
however;  they  are  unsuitable  in  every  way. 
What!  have  not  all  insects  gay  colours?”2  Mr. 
Thrale  gave  his  wife  a  liberal  indulgence,  both 
in  the  choice  of  their  company,  and  in  the  mode 
of  entertaining  them.  He  understood  and  valued 
Johnson,  without  remission,  from  their  first  ac¬ 
quaintance  to  the  day  of  his  death.  Mrs.  Thrale 
was  enchanted  with  Johnson’s  conversation,  for 
its  own  sake,  and  had  also  a  very  allowable  van¬ 
ity  in  appearing  to  be  honoured  with  the  atten¬ 
tion  of  so  celebrated  a  man. 

Nothing  could  be  more  fortunate  for  Johnson 
than  this  connection.  He  had  at  Mr.  Thrale’s 
all  the  comforts  and  even  luxuries  of  life;  his 
melancholy  was  diverted,  and  his  irregular  hab¬ 
its  lessened  by  association  with  an  agreeable  and 
well-ordered  family.  He  was  treated  with  the  ut¬ 
most  respect,  and  even  affection.  The  vivacity 
of  Mrs.  Thrale’s  literary  talk  roused  him  to 
cheerfulness  and  exertion,  even  when  they  were 
alone.  But  this  was  not  often  the  case;  for  he 
found  here  a  constant  succession  of  what  gave 
him  the  highest  enjoyment:  the  society  of  the 

2Mrs.  Piozzi’s  Anecdotes,  p.  279. 


142 

learned,  the  witty,  and  the  eminent  in  every 
way,  who  w7ere  assembled  in  numerous  com¬ 
panies,  called  forth  his  wonderful  powers,  and 
gratified  him  with  admiration,  to  which  no  man 
could  be  insensible. 

In  the  October  of  this  year  he  at  length  gave 
to  the  world  his  edition  of  Shakspeare ,  which,  if  it 
had  no  other  merit  but  that  of  producing  his 
Preface,  in  which  the  excellencies  and  defects  of 
that  immortal  bard  are  displayed  with  a  mas¬ 
terly  hand,  the  nation  w  ould  have  had  no  reason 
to  complain.  A  blind  indiscriminate  admiration 
of  Shakspeare  had  exposed  the  British  nation  to 
the  ridicule  of  foreigners.  Johnson,  by  candidly 
admitting  the  faults  of  his  poet,  had  the  more 
credit  in  bestowing  on  him  deserved  and  indis¬ 
putable  praise;  and  doubtless  none  of  all  his 
panegyrists  have  done  him  half  so  much  honour. 
Their  praise  was,  like  that  of  a  counsel,  upon  his 
own  side  of  the  cause:  Johnson’s  was  like  the 
grave,  well-considered,  and  impartial  opinion 
of  the  judge,  which  falls  from  his  lips  with  weight, 
and  is  received  with  reverence.  What  he  did  as 
a  commentator  has  no  small  share  of  merit, 
though  his  researches  were  not  so  ample,  and 
his  investigations  so  acute  as  they  might  have 
been,  which  we  now  certainly  know  from  the 
labours  of  other  able  and  ingenious  criticks  who 
have  followed  him.  He  has  enriched  his  edition 
with  a  concise  account  of  each  play,  and  of  its 
characteristick  excellence.  Many  of  his  notes 
have  illustrated  obscurities  in  the  text,  and  placed 
passages  eminent  for  beauty  in  a  more  conspicu¬ 
ous  light;  and  he  has  in  general  exhibited  such  a 
mode  of  annotation,  as  may  be  beneficial  to  all 
subsequent  editors. 

His  Shakspeare  was  virulently  attacked  by  Mr. 
William  Kenrick,  who  obtained  the  degree  of 
LL.D.  from  a  Scotch  University,  and  wrote  for 
the  booksellers  in  a  great  variety  of  branches. 
Though  he  certainly  was  not  without  consider¬ 
able  merit,  he  wrote  with  so  little  regard  to  de¬ 
cency  and  principles,  and  decorum,  and  in  so 
hasty  a  manner,  that  his  reputation  was  neither 
extensive  nor  lasting.  I  remember  one  evening, 
when  some  of  his  works  were  mentioned,  Dr. 
Goldsmith  said,  he  had  never  heard  of  them; 
upon  which  Dr.  Johnson  observed,  “Sir,  he  is 
one  of  the  many  who  have  made  themselves 
publick ,  without  making  themselves  known” 

A  young  student  of  Oxford,  of  the  name  of 
Barclay,  wrote  an  answer  to  Kenrick’s  review  of 
Johnson’s  Shakspeare.  Johnson  was  at  first  angry 
that  Kenrick’s  attack  should  have  the  credit  of 
an  answer.  But  afterwards,  considering  the  young 
man’s  good  intention,  he  kindly  noticed  him, 


[  1765 

and  probably  would  have  done  more,  had  not 
the  young  man  died. 

In  his  Preface  to  Shakspeare ,  Johnson  treated 
Voltaire  very  contemptuously,  observing,  upon 
some  of  his  remarks,  “These  are  the  petty  criti¬ 
cisms  of  petty  wits.”  Voltaire,  in  revenge,  made 
an  attack  upon  Johnson,  in  one  of  his  numerous 
literary  sallies,  which  I  remember  to  have  read; 
but  there  being  no  general  index  to  his  volumi¬ 
nous  works,  have  searched  in  vain,  and  there¬ 
fore  cannot  quote  it. 

Voltaire  was  an  antagonist  with  whom  I 
thought  Johnson  should  not  disdain  to  contend. 
I  pressed  him  to  answer.  He  said,  he  perhaps 
might;  but  he  never  did. 

Mr.  Burney  having  occasion  to  write  to  John¬ 
son  for  some  receipts  for  subscriptions  to  his 
Shakspeare ,  which  Johnson  had  omitted  to  de¬ 
liver  when  the  money  was  paid,  he  availed  him¬ 
self  of  that  opportunity  of  thanking  Johnson  for 
the  great  pleasure  which  he  had  received  from 
the  perusal  of  his  Preface  to  Shakspeare ;  which, 
although  it  excited  much  clamour  against  him 
at  first,  is  now  justly  ranked  among  the  most  ex¬ 
cellent  of  his  writings.  To  this  letter  Johnson 
returned  the  following  answer: 

To  Charles  Burney,  Esq,.,  in  Poland-street 

Sir,  I  am  sorry  that  your  kindness  to  me  has 
brought  upon  you  so  much  trouble,  though  you 
have  taken  care  to  abate  that  sorrow,  by  the 
pleasure  which  I  receive  from  your  approba¬ 
tion.  I  defend  my  criticism  in  the  same  manner 
with  you.  We  must  confess  the  faults  of  our  fa¬ 
vourite,  to  gain  credit  to  our  praise  of  his  excel¬ 
lencies.  He  that  claims,  either  in  himself  or  for 
another,  the  honours  of  perfection,  will  surely 
injure  the  reputation  which  he  designs  to  assist. 

Be  pleased  to  make  my  compliments  to  your 
family.  I  am,  Sir,  your  most  obliged  and  most 
humble  servant, 

Oct .  16,  1765  Sam.  Johnson 

From  one  of  his  journals  I  transcribed  what 
follows: 

“At  church,  Oct. — 65. 

“To  avoid  all  singularity;  Bonaventura} 

“To  come  in  before  service,  and  compose  my 
mind  by  meditation,  or  by  reading  some  por¬ 
tions  of  scriptures.  Tetty. 

“If  I  can  hear  the  sermon,  to  attend  it,  unless 
attention  be  more  troublesome  than  useful. 

“To  consider  the  act  of  prayer  as  a  reposal  of 
myself  upon  God,  and  a  resignation  of  all  into 
his  holy  hand.” 

xHe  was  probably  proposing  to  himself  the  mod¬ 
el  of  this  excellent  person,  who  for  his  piety  was 
named  the  Seraphic  Doctor . 


BOSWELL 


1 766]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  143 


In  1764  and  1765  it  should  seem  that  Dr. 
Johnson  was  so  busily  employed  with  his  edition 
of  Shakspeare ,  as  to  have  had  little  leisure  for  any 
other  literary  exertion,  or,  indeed,  even  for  pri¬ 
vate  correspondence.  He  did  not  favour  me  with 
a  single  letter  for  more  than  two  years,  for  which 
it  will  appear  that  he  afterwards  apologised. 

He  was,  however,  at  all  times  ready  to  give 
assistance  to  his  friends,  and  others,  in  revising 
their  works,  and  in  writing  for  them,  or  greatly 
improving  their  Dedications.  In  that  courtly 
species  of  composition  no  man  excelled  Dr.  John¬ 
son.  Though  the  loftiness  of  his  mind  prevented 
him  from  ever  dedicating  in  his  own  person,  he 
wrote  a  very  great  number  of  Dedications  for 
others.  Some  of  these,  the  persons  who  were  fa¬ 
voured  with  them  are  unwilling  should  be  men¬ 
tioned,  from  a  too  anxious  apprehension,  as  I 
think,  that  they  might  be  suspected  of  having 
received  larger  assistance;  and  some,  after  all 
the  diligence  I  have  bestowed,  have  escaped  my 
enquiries.  He  told  me,  a  great  many  years  ago, 
“he  believed  he  had  dedicated  to  all  the  Royal 
Family  round”;  and  it  was  indifferent  to  him 
what  was  the  subject  of  the  work  dedicated,  pro¬ 
vided  it  were  innocent.  He  once  dedicated  some 
Musick  for  the  German  Flute  to  Edward,  Duke 
of  York.  In  writing  Dedications  for  others,  he 
considered  himself  as  by  no  means  speaking  his 
own  sentiments. 

Notwithstanding  his  long  silence,  I  never 
omitted  to  write  to  him  when  I  had  any  thing 
worthy  of  communicating.  I  generally  kept  cop¬ 
ies  of  my  letters  to  him,  that  I  might  have  a  full 
view  of  our  correspondence,  and  never  be  at  a 
loss  to  understand  any  reference  in  his  letters. 
He  kept  the  greater  part  of  mine  very  carefully; 
and  a  short  time  before  his  death  was  attentive 
enough  to  seal  them  up  in  bundles,  and  order 
them  to  be  delivered  to  me,  which  was  accord¬ 
ingly  done.  Amongst  them  I  found  one,  of  which 
I  had  not  made  a  copy,  and  which  I  own  I  read 
with  pleasure  at  the  distance  of  almost  twenty 
years.  It  is  dated  November,  1765,  at  the  palace 
of  Pascal  Paoli,  in  Corte,  the  capital  of  Corsica, 
and  is  full  of  generous  enthusiasm.  After  giving  a 
sketch  of  what  I  had  seen  and  heard  in  that  is¬ 
land,  it  proceeded  thus:  “I  dare  to  call  this  a  spir¬ 
ited  tour.  I  dare  to  challenge  your  approbation.” 

This  letter  produced  the  following  answer, 
which  I  found  on  my  arrival  at  Paris. 

A  Mr.  Mr.  Boswell,  chez  Mr.  Waters, 
Banquier ,  a  Paris 

Dear  Sir, — Apologies  are  seldom  of  any  use. 
We  will  delay  till  your  arrival  the  reasons  good 


or  bad,  which  have  made  me  such  a  sparing 
and  ungrateful  correspondent.  Be  assured,  for 
the  present,  that  nothing  has  lessened  either  the 
esteem  or  love  with  which  I  dismissed  you  at 
Harwich.  Both  have  been  increased  by  all  that  I 
have  been  told  of  you  by  yourself  or  others;  and 
when  you  return,  you  will  return  to  an  unal¬ 
tered,  and,  I  hope,  unalterable  friend. 

All  that  you  have  to  fear  from  me  is  the  vexa¬ 
tion  of  disappointing  me.  No  man  loves  to  frus¬ 
trate  expectations  which  have  been  formed  in 
his  favour;  and  the  pleasure  which  I  promise 
myself  from  your  journals  and  remarks  is  so 
great,  that  perhaps  no  degree  of  attention  or  dis¬ 
cernment  will  be  sufficient  to  afford  it. 

Come  home,  however,  and  take  your  chance. 
I  long  to  see  you,  and  to  hear  you;  and  hope 
that  we  shall  not  be  so  long  separated  again. 
Come  home,  and  expect  such  a  welcome  as  is 
due  to  him  whom  a  wise  and  noble  curiosity  has 
led,  where  perhaps  no  native  of  this  country 
ever  was  before. 

I  have  no  news  to  tell  you  that  can  deserve 
your  notice;  nor  would  I  willingly  lessen  the 
pleasure  that  any  novelty  may  give  you  at  your 
return.  I  am  afraid  we  shall  find  it  difficult  to 
keep  among  us  a  mind  which  has  been  so  long 
feasted  with  variety.  But  let  us  try  what  esteem 
and  kindness  can  effect. 

As  your  father’s  liberality  has  indulged  you 
with  so  long  a  ramble,  I  doubt  not  but  you  will 
think  his  sickness,  or  even  his  desire  to  see  you,  a 
sufficient  reason  for  hastening  your  return.  The 
longer  we  live,  and  the  more  we  think,  the  high¬ 
er  value  we  learn  to  put  on  the  friendship  and 
tenderness  of  parents  and  of  friends.  Parents  we 
can  have  but  once;  and  he  promises  himself  too 
much,  who  enters  life  with  the  expectation  of 
finding  many  friends.  Upon  some  motive,  I  hope, 
that  you  will  be  here  soon;  and  am  willing  to 
think  that  it  will  be  an  inducement  to  your  re¬ 
turn,  that  it  is  sincerely  desired  by,  dear  Sir, 
your  affectionate  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

Johnson’s  Court,  Fleet-street 

January  14,  1766 

I  returned  to  London  in  February,  and  found 
Dr.  Johnson  in  a  good  house  in  Johnson’s  Court, 
Fleet-street,  in  which  he  had  accommodated 
Miss  Williams  with  an  apartment  on  the  ground 
floor,  while  Mr.  Levet  occupied  his  post  in  the 
garret:  his  faithful  Francis  was  still  attending 
upon  him.  He  received  me  with  much  kindness. 
The  fragments  of  our  first  conversation,  which  I 
have  preserved,  are  these:  I  told  him  that  Vol¬ 
taire,  in  a  conversation  with  me,  had  distin¬ 
guished  Pope  and  Dryden  thus: — “Pope  drives  a 
handsome  chariot,  with  a  couple  of  neat  trim 
nags;  Dryden  a  coach,  and  six  stately  horses.” 
Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  the  truth  is,  they  both  drive 


BOSWELL 


144 

coaches  and  six;  but  Dryden’s  horses  are  either 
galloping  or  stumbling:  Pope’s  go  at  a  steady 
even  trot.”1  He  said  of  Goldsmith’s  Traveller , 
which  had  been  published  in  my  absence,  “There 
has  not  been  so  fine  a  poem  since  Pope’s  time.” 

And  here  it  is  proper  to  settle,  with  authen- 
tick  precision  what  has  long  floated  in  publick 
report,  as  to  Johnson’s  being  himself  the  au- 
thour  of  a  considerable  part  of  that  poem.  Much, 
no  doubt,  both  of  the  sentiments  and  expression, 
were  derived  from  conversation  with  him;  and 
it  was  certainly  submitted  to  his  friendly  revi¬ 
sion:  but  in  the  year  1783,  he,  at  my  request, 
marked  with  a  pencil  the  lines  which  he  had 
furnished,  which  are  only  line  420th, 

To  stop  too  fearful ,  and  too  faint  to  go; 

and  the  concluding  ten  lines,  except  the  last 
couplet  but  one,  which  I  distinguish  by  the 
Italick  character: 

How  small  of  all  that  human  hearts  endure , 

That  part  which  kings  or  laws  can  cause  or  cure . 

Still  to  ourselves  in  every  place  consign'd , 

Our  own  felicity  we  make  or  find; 

With  secret  course ,  which  no  loud  storms  annoy , 
Glides  the  smooth  current  of  domestickjoy: 

The  lifted  axe,  the  agonizing  wheel, 

Luke’s  iron  crown,  and  Damien’s  bed  of  steel, 
To  men  remote from  power,  but  rarely  known , 

Leave  reason,  faith,  and  conscience,  all  our  own. 

He  added,  “These  are  all  of  which  I  can  be  sure.” 
They  bear  a  small  proportion  to  the  whole,  which 
consists  of  four  hundred  and  thirty-eight  verses. 
Goldsmith,  in  the  couplet  which  he  inserted, 
mentions  Luke  as  a  person  well  known,  and  super¬ 
ficial  readers  have  passed  it  over  quite  smoothly; 
while  those  of  more  attention  have  been  as  much 
perplexed  by  Luke ,  as  by  Lydiat,  in  The  Vanity  of 
Human  Wishes.  The  truth  is,  that  Goldsmith  him¬ 
self  was  in  a  mistake.  In  the  Respublica  Hungarica , 
there  is  an  account  of  a  desperate  rebellion  in 
the  year  1514,  headed  by  two  brothers,  of  the 
name  of  ^eck,  George  and  Luke.  When  it  was 
quelled,  George,  not  Luke,  was  punished  by  his 
head  being  encircled  with  a  red-hot  iron  crown: 
corona  candescente f erred  coronatur. The  same  severity 
of  torture  was  exercised  on  the  Earl  of  Athol,  one 
of  the  murderers  of  King  James  I  of  Scotland. 

Tt  is  remarkable,  that  Mr.  Gray  has  employed 
somewhat  the  same  image  to  characterise  Dryden. 
He,  indeed,  furnishes  his  car  with  but  two  horses, 
but  they  are  of  “ethereal  race”: 

Behold  where  Dryden' s  less  presumptuous  car , 

Wide  o'er  the  fields  of  glory  bear 
Two  coursers  of  ethereal  race. 

With  necks  in  thunder  cloath'd,  and  long  resounding  pace . 

Ode  on  the  Progress  of  Poesy 


[  1766 

Dr.  Johnson  at  the  same  time  favoured  me  by 
marking  the  lines  which  he  furnished  to  Gold¬ 
smith’s  Deserted  Village,  which  are  only  the  last 
four: 

That  trade's  proud  empire  hastes  to  swift  decay. 

As  ocean  sweeps  the  labour'd  mole  away: 

While  self-dependent  power  can  time  defy, 

As  rocks  resist  the  billows  and  the  sky. 

Talking  of  education,  “People  have  now 
adays,  (said  he,)  got  a  strange  opinion  that  every 
thing  should  be  taught  by  lectures.  Now,  I  can¬ 
not  see  that  lectures  can  do  so  much  good  as 
reading  the  books  from  which  the  lectures  are 
taken.  I  know  nothing  that  can  be  best  taught 
by  lectures,  except  where  experiments  are  to  be 
shewn.  You  may  teach  chymistry  by  lectures. — 
You  might  teach  making  of  shoes  by  lectures!” 

At  night  I  supped  with  him  at  the  Mitre  tav¬ 
ern,  that  we  might  renew  our  social  intimacy  at 
the  original  place  of  meeting.  But  there  was  now 
a  considerable  difference  in  his  way  of  living. 
Having  had  an  illness,  in  which  he  was  advised 
to  leave  off  wine,  he  had,  from  that  period,  con¬ 
tinued  to  abstain  from  it,  and  drank  only  water, 
or  lemonade. 

I  told  him  that  a  foreign  friend  of  his,  whom 
I  had  met  with  abroad,  was  so  wretchedly  per¬ 
verted  to  infidelity,  that  he  treated  the  hopes  of 
immortality  with  brutal  levity;  and  said,  “As 
man  dies  like  a  dog,  let  him  lie  like  a  dog.” 
Johnson.  “If  he  dies  like  a  dog,  let  him  lie  like  a 
dog.”  I  added,  that  this  man  said  to  me,  “I  hate 
mankind,  for  I  think  myself  one  of  the  best  of 
them,  and  I  know  how  bad  I  am.”  Johnson. 
“Sir,  he  must  be  very  singular  in  his  opinion,  if 
he  thinks  himself  one  of  the  best  of  men;  for  none 
of  his  friends  think  him  so.” — He  said,  “no  hon¬ 
est  man  could  be  a  Deist;  for  no  man  could  be 
so  after  a  fair  examination  of  the  proofs  of  Chris¬ 
tianity.”  I  named  Hume.  Johnson.  “No,  Sir; 
Hume  owned  to  a  clergyman  in  the  bishoprick 
of  Durham,  that  he  had  never  read  the  New 
Testament  with  attention.”  I  mentioned  Hume’s 
notion,  that  all  who  are  happy  are  equally  happy; 
a  little  miss  with  a  new  gown  at  a  dancing  school 
ball,  a  general  at  the  head  of  a  victorious  army, 
and  an  orator,  after  having  made  an  eloquent 
speech  in  a  great  assembly.  Johnson.  “Sir,  that 
all  who  are  happy,  are  equally  happy,  is  not 
true.  A  peasant  and  a  philosopher  may  be  equally 
satisfied,  but  not  equally  happy.  Happiness  con¬ 
sists  in  the  multiplicity  of  agreeable  conscious¬ 
ness.  A  peasant  has  not  capacity  for  having  equal 
happiness  with  a  philosopher.”  I  remember  this 
very  question  very  happily  illustrated  in  opposi¬ 
tion  to  Hume,  by  the  Reverend  Mr.  Robert 


1766  ] 

Brown,  at  Utrecht.  “A  small  drinking-glass  and 
a  large  one,  (said  he,)  may  be  equally  full;  but 
the  large  one  holds  more  than  the  small.” 

Dr.  Johnson  was  very  kind  this  evening,  and 
said  to  me,  “You  have  now  lived  five-and- 
twenty  years,  and  you  have  employed  them 
well,55  “Alas,  Sir,  (said  I,)  I  fear  not.  Do  I  know 
history?  Do  I  know  mathematicks?  Do  I  know 
law?55  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  though  you  may 
know  no  science  so  well  as  to  be  able  to  teach  it, 
and  no  profession  so  well  as  to  be  able  to  follow 
it,  your  general  mass  of  knowledge  of  books  and 
men  renders  you  very  capable  to  make  yourself 
master  of  any  science,  or  fit  yourself  for  any  pro¬ 
fession.55  I  mentioned  that  a  gay  friend  had  ad¬ 
vised  me  against  being  a  lawyer,  because  I  should 
be  excelled  by  plodding  block-heads.  Johnson. 
“Why,  Sir,  in  the  formulary  and  statutory  part 
of  law,  a  plodding  block-head  may  excel;  but  in 
the  ingenious  and  rational  part  of  it  a  plodding 
block-head  can  never  excel.55 

I  talked  of  the  mode  adopted  by  some  to  rise 
in  the  world,  by  courting  great  men,  and  asked 
him  whether  he  had  ever  submitted  to  it.  John¬ 
son.  “Why,  Sir,  I  never  was  near  enough  to 
great  men,  to  court  them.  You  may  be  prudently 
attached  to  great  men  and  yet  independent.  You 
are  not  to  do  what  you  think  wrong;  and,  Sir, 
you  are  to  calculate,  and  not  pay  too  dear  for 
what  you  get.  You  must  not  give  a  shilling’s 
worth  of  court  for  six-pence  worth  of  good.  But 
if  you  can  get  a  shilling’s  worth  of  good  for  six¬ 
pence  worth  of  court,  you  are  a  fool  if  you  do 
not  pay  court.55 

He  said,  “If  convents  should  be  allowed  at 
all,  they  should  only  be  retreats  for  persons  un¬ 
able  to  serve  the  publick,  or  who  have  served  it. 
It  is  our  first  duty  to  serve  society,  and,  after  we 
have  done  that,  we  may  attend  wholly  to  the  sal¬ 
vation  of  our  own  souls.  A  youthful  passion  for 
abstracted  devotion  should  not  be  encouraged.55 

I  introduced  the  subject  of  second  sight,  and 
other  mysterious  manifestations;  the  fulfilment 
of  which,  I  suggested,  might  happen  by  chance. 
Johnson.  “Yes,  Sir;  but  they  have  happened  so 
often,  that  mankind  have  agreed  to  think  them 
not  fortuitous.55 

I  talked  to  him  a  great  deal  of  what  I  had 
seen  in  Corsica,  and  of  my  intention  to  publish 
an  account  of  it.  He  encouraged  me  by  saying, 
“You  cannot  go  to  the  bottom  of  the  subject;  but 
all  that  you  tell  us  will  be  new  to  us.  Give  us  as 
many  anecdotes  as  you  can.55 

Our  next  meeting  at  the  Mitre  was  on  Satur¬ 
day  the  15th  of  February,  when  I  presented  to 
him  my  old  and  most  intimate  friend,  the  Rev- 


145 

erend  Mr.  Temple,  then  of  Cambridge.  I  hav¬ 
ing  mentioned  that  I  had  passed  some  time  with 
Rousseau  in  his  wild  retreat,  and  having  quoted 
some  remark  made  by  Mr.  Wilkes,  with  whom 
I  had  spent  many  pleasant  hours  in  Italy,  John¬ 
son  said  (sarcastically,)  “It  seems,  Sir,  you  have 
kept  very  good  company  abroad,  Rousseau  and 
Wilkes!55  Thinking  it  enough  to  defend  one  at  a 
a  time,  I  said  nothing  as  to  my  gay  friend,  but 
answered  with  a  smile,  “My  dear  Sir,  you  don’t 
call  Rousseau  bad  company.  Do  you  really  think 
him  a  bad  man?55  Johnson.  “Sir,  if  you  are  talk¬ 
ing  jestingly  of  this,  I  don’t  talk  with  you.  If  you 
mean  to  be  serious,  I  think  him  one  of  the  worst 
of  men;  a  rascal  who  ought  to  be  hunted  out  of 
society,  as  he  has  been.  Three  or  four  nations 
have  expelled  him;  and  it  is  a  shame  that  he  is 
protected  in  this  country.”  Boswell.  “I  don’t 
deny,  Sir,  but  that  his  novel  may,  perhaps,  do 
harm;  but  I  cannot  think  his  intention  was  bad.” 
Johnson.  “Sir,  that  will  not  do.  We  cannot 
prove  any  man’s  intention  to  be  bad.  You  may 
shoot  a  man  through  the  head,  and  say  you  in¬ 
tended  to  miss  him;  but  the  Judge  will  order  you 
to  be  hanged.  An  alleged  want  of  intention, 
when  evil  is  committed,  will  not  be  allowed  in 
a  court  of  justice.  Rousseau,  Sir,  is  a  very  bad 
man.  I  would  sooner  sign  a  sentence  for  his 
transportation,  than  that  of  any  felon  who  has 
gone  from  the  Old  Bailey  these  many  years.  Yes, 
I  should  like  to  have  him  work  in  the  planta¬ 
tions.”  Boswell.  “Sir,  do  you  think  him  as  bad 
a  man  as  Voltaire?”  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  it  is 
difficult  to  settle  the  proportion  of  iniquity  be¬ 
tween  them.” 

This  violence  seemed  very  strange  to  me,  who 
had  read  many  of  Rousseau’s  animated  writings 
with  great  pleasure,  and  even  edification;  had 
been  much  pleased  with  his  society,  and  was 
just  come  from  the  Continent,  where  he  was 
very  generally  admired.  Nor  can  I  yet  allow 
that  he  deserves  the  very  severe  censure  which 
Johnson  pronounced  upon  him.  His  absurd  pref¬ 
erence  of  savage  to  civilised  life,  and  other  sin¬ 
gularities,  are  proofs  rather  of  a  defect  in  his  un¬ 
derstanding,  than  of  any  depravity  in  his  heart. 
And  notwithstanding  the  unfortunate  opinion 
which  many  worthy  men  have  expressed  of  his 
Profession  de  Foi  du  Vicaire  Savoyard ,  I  cannot 
help  admiring  it  as  the  performance  of  a  man 
full  of  sincere  reverential  submission  to  Divine 
Mystery,  though  beset  with  perplexing  doubts; 
a  state  of  mind  to  be  viewed  with  pity  rather 
than  with  anger. 

On  his  favourite  subject  of  subordination, 
Johnson  said,  “So  far  is  it  from  being  true  that 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


BOSWELL 


146 

men  are  naturally  equal,  that  no  two  people  can 
be  half  an  hour  together,  but  one  shall  acquire 
an  evident  superiority  over  the  other.” 

I  mentioned  the  advice  given  us  by  philoso¬ 
phers,  to  console  ourselves,  when  distressed  or 
embarrassed,  by  thinking  of  those  who  are  in  a 
worse  situation  than  ourselves.  This,  I  observed, 
could  not  apply  to  all,  for  there  must  be  some 
who  have  nobody  worse  than  they  are.  Johnson. 
“Why,  to  be  sure,  Sir,  there  are;  but  they  don’t 
know  it.  There  is  no  being  so  poor  and  so  con¬ 
temptible,  who  does  not  think  there  is  somebody 
still  poorer,  and  still  more  contemptible.” 

As  my  stay  in  London  at  this  time  was  very 
short,  I  had  not  many  opportunities  of  being 
with  Dr.  Johnson;  but  I  felt  my  veneration  for 
him  in  no  degree  lessened,  by  my  having  seen 
multorum  hominum  mores  et  urbes.  On  the  contrary, 
by  having  it  in  my  power  to  compare  him  with 
many  of  the  most  celebrated  persons  of  other 
countries,  my  admiration  of  his  extraordinary 
mind  was  increased  and  confirmed. 

The  roughness,  indeed,  which  sometimes  ap¬ 
peared  in  his  manners,  was  more  striking  to  me 
now,  from  my  having  been  accustomed  to  the 
studied  smooth  complying  habits  of  the  Con¬ 
tinent;  and  I  clearly  recognised  in  him,  not  with¬ 
out  respect  for  his  honest  conscientious  zeal,  the 
same  indignant  and  sarcastical  mode  of  treating 
every  attempt  to  unhinge  or  weaken  good  prin¬ 
ciples. 

One  evening  when  a  young  gentleman  teized 
him  with  an  account  of  the  infidelity  of  his  ser¬ 
vant,  who,  he  said,  would  not  believe  the  scrip¬ 
tures,  because  he  could  not  read  them  in  the 
original  tongues,  and  be  sure  that  they  were  not 
invented,  “Why,  foolish  fellow,  (said  Johnson,) 
has  he  any  better  authority  for  almost  every 
thing  that  he  believes?”  Boswell.  “Then  the 
vulgar,  Sir,  never  can  know  they  are  right,  but 
must  submit  themselves  to  the  learned.”  John¬ 
son.  “To  be  sure,  Sir.  The  vulgar  are  the  chil¬ 
dren  of  the  State,  and  must  be  taught  like  chil¬ 
dren.”  Boswell.  “Then,  Sir,  a  poor  Turk  must 
be  a  Mahometan,  just  as  a  poor  Englishman 
must  be  a  Christian?”  Johnson.  “Why,  yes,  Sir; 
and  what  then?  This  now  is  such  stuff  as  I  used 
to  talk  to  my  mother,  when  I  first  began  to  think 
myself  a  clever  fellow;  and  she  ought  to  have 
whipt  me  for  it.” 

Another  evening  Dr.  Goldsmith  and  I  called 
on  him,  with  the  hope  of  prevailing  on  him  to 
sup  with  us  at  the  Mitre.  We  found  him  indis¬ 
posed,  and  resolved  not  to  go  abroad.  “Come 
then,  (said  Goldsmith,)  we  will  not  go  to  the 
Mitre  to-night,  since  we  cannot  have  the  big 


[  1766 

man  with  us.”  Johnson  then  called  for  a  bottle 
of  port,  of  which  Goldsmith  and  I  partook, 
while  our  friend,  now  a  water-drinker,  sat  by  us. 
Goldsmith.  “I  think,  Mr.  Johnson,  you  don’t 
go  near  the  theatres  now.  You  give  yourself  no 
more  concern  about  a  new  play,  than  if  you  had 
never  had  any  thing  to  do  with  the  stage.” 
Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  our  tastes  greatly  alter. 
The  lad  does  not  care  for  the  child’s  rattle,  and 
the  old  man  does  not  care  for  the  young  man’s 
whore.”  Goldsmith.  “Nay,  Sir,  but  your  Muse 
was  not  a  whore.”  Johnson.  “Sir,  I  do  not  think 
she  was.  But  as  we  advance  in  the  journey  of  life, 
we  drop  some  of  the  things  which  have  pleased 
us;  whether  it  be  that  we  are  fatigued  and  don’t 
choose  to  carry  so  many  things  any  farther,  or 
that  we  find  other  things  which  we  like  better.” 
Boswell.  “But,  Sir,  why  don’t  you  give  us  some¬ 
thing  in  some  other  way?”  Goldsmith.  “Ay, 
Sir,  we  have  a  claim  upon  you.”  Johnson.  “No, 
Sir,  I  am  not  obliged  to  do  any  more.  No  man  is 
obliged  to  do  as  much  as  he  can  do.  A  man  is  to 
have  part  of  his  life  to  himself.  If  a  soldier  has 
fought  a  good  many  campaigns,  he  is  not  to  be 
blamed  if  he  retires  to  ease  and  tranquillity.  A 
physician,  who  has  practised  long  in  a  great  city, 
may  be  excused  if  he  retires  to  a  small  town,  and 
takes  less  practice.  Now,  Sir,  the  good  I  can  do 
by  my  conversation  bears  the  same  proportion 
to  the  good  I  can  do  by  my  writings,  that  the 
practice  of  a  physician,  retired  to  a  small  town, 
does  to  his  practice  in  a  great  city.”  Boswell. 
“But  I  wonder,  Sir,  you  have  not  more  pleasure 
in  writing  than  in  not  writing.”  Johnson.  “Sir, 
you  may  wonder.” 

He  talked  of  making  verses,  and  observed, 
“The  great  difficulty  is  to  know  when  you  have 
made  good  ones.  When  composing,  I  have  gen¬ 
erally  had  them  in  my  mind,  perhaps  fifty  at  a 
time,  walking  up  and  down  in  my  room;  and 
then  I  have  written  them  down,  and  often,  from 
laziness,  have  written  only  half  lines.  I  have  writ¬ 
ten  a  hundred  lines  in  a  day.  I  remember  I  wrote 
a  hundred  lines  of  The  Vanity  of  Human  Wishes  in 
a  day.  Doctor,  (turning  to  Goldsmith,)  I  am  not 
quite  idle;  I  made  one  line  t’other  day;  but  I 
made  no  more.”  Goldsmith.  “Let  us  hear  it; 
we’ll  put  a  bad  one  to  it.”  Johnson.  “No,  Sir,  I 
have  forgot  it.” 

Such  specimens  of  the  easy  and  playful  con¬ 
versation  of  the  great  Dr.  Samuel  Johnson  are,  I 
think,  to  be  prized;  as  exhibiting  the  little  vari¬ 
eties  of  a  mind  so  enlarged  and  so  powerful  when 
objects  of  consequence  required  its  exertions, 
and  as  giving  us  a  minute  knowledge  of  his  char¬ 
acter  and  modes  of  thinking. 


1766]  LIFE  OF 

To  Bennet  Langton,  Esq.,  at  Lang- 

TON,  NEAR  SpILSBY,  LINCOLNSHIRE 

Dear  Sir,  What  your  friends  have  done,  that 
from  your  departure  till  now  nothing  has  been 
heard  of  you,  none  of  us  are  able  to  inform  the 
rest;  but  as  we  are  all  neglected  alike,  no  one 
thinks  himself  entitled  to  the  privilege  of  com¬ 
plaint. 

I  should  have  known  nothing  of  you  or  of 
Langton,  from  the  time  that  dear  Miss  Langton 
left  us,  had  not  I  met  Mr.  Simpson,  of  Lincoln, 
one  day  in  the  street,  by  whom  I  was  informed 
that  Mr.  Langton,  your  Mamma,  and  yourself, 
had  been  all  ill,  but  that  you  were  all  recovered. 

That  sickness  should  suspend  your  correspond¬ 
ence,  I  did  not  wonder;  but  hoped  that  it  would 
be  renewed  at  your  recovery. 

Since  you  will  not  inform  us  where  you  are, 
or  how  you  live,  I  know  not  whether  you  desire 
to  know  any  thing  of  us.  However,  I  will  tell 
you  that  the  club  subsists;  but  we  have  the  loss 
of  Burke’s  company  since  he  has  been  engaged 
in  publick  business,  in  which  he  has  gained  more 
reputation  than  perhaps  any  man  at  his  [first] 
appearance  ever  gained  before.  He  made  two 
speeches  in  the  House  for  repealing  the  Stamp- 
act,  which  were  publickly  commended  by  Mr. 
Pitt,  and  have  filled  the  town  with  wonder. 

Burke  is  a  great  man  by  nature,  and  is  ex¬ 
pected  soon  to  attain  civil  greatness.  I  am  grown 
greater  too,  for  I  have  maintained  the  news-pa¬ 
pers  these  many  weeks;  and  what  is  greater  still, 
I  have  risen  every  morning  since  New-year’s 
day,  at  about  eight;  when  I  was  up,  I  have  in¬ 
deed  done  but  little;  yet  it  is  no  slight  advance¬ 
ment  to  obtain  for  so  many  hours  more,  the  con¬ 
sciousness  of  being. 

I  wish  you  were  in  my  new  study;  I  am  now 
writing  the  first  letter  in  it.  I  think  it  looks  very 
pretty  about  me. 

Dyer  is  constant  at  the  club;  Hawkins  is  re¬ 
miss;  I  am  not  over  diligent.  Dr.  Nugent,  Dr. 
Goldsmith,  and  Mr.  Reynolds,  are  very  con¬ 
stant.  Mr.  Lye  is  printing  his  Saxon  and  Goth- 
ick  Dictionary;  all  the  club  subscribes. 

You  will  pay  my  respects  to  all  my  Lincoln¬ 
shire  friends.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  most  affectionately 
your’s, 

Sam.  Johnson 

Johnson’s-court,  Fleet-street 

March  9,  1766 

To  Bennet  Langton,  Esq.,  at  Lang¬ 
ton,  NEAR  SpILSBY,  LINCOLNSHIRE 

Dear  Sir,  In  supposing  that  I  should  be  more 
than  commonly  affected  by  the  death  of  Pere¬ 
grine  Langton,1  you  were  not  mistaken;  he  was 
one  of  those  whom  I  loved  at  once  by  instinct 
and  by  reason.  I  have  seldom  indulged  more 
hope  of  any  tiling  than  of  being  able  to  improve 
our  acquaintance  to  friendship.  Many  a  time 

*Mr.  Langton’s  uncle. 


JOHNSON  147 

have  I  placed  myself  again  at  Langton,  and 
imagined  the  pleasure  with  which  I  should  walk 
to  Partney2  in  a  summer  morning;  but  this  is  no 
longer  possible.  We  must  now  endeavour  to  pre¬ 
serve  what  is  left  us, — his  example  of  piety  and 
oeconomy.  I  hope  you  make  what  enquiries  you 
can,  and  write  down  what  is  told  you.  The  little 
things  which  distinguish  domestick  characters 
are  soon  forgotten:  if  you  delay  to  enquire,  you 
will  have  no  information ;  if  you  neglect  to  write, 
information  will  be  vain.3 

2The  place  of  residence  of  Mr.  Peregrine  Langton. 

3Mr.  Langton  did  not  disregard  this  counsel,  but 
wrote  the  following  account,  which  he  has  been 
pleased  to  communicate  to  me: 

“The  circumstances  of  Mr.  Peregrine  Langton 
were  these.  He  had  an  annuity  for  life  of  two  hun¬ 
dred  pounds  per  annum.  He  resided  in  a  village  in 
Lincolnshire;  the  rent  of  his  house,  with  two  or 
three  small  fields,  was  twenty-eight  pounds;  the 
county  he  lived  in  was  not  more  than  moderately 
cheap;  his  family  consisted  of  a  sister,  who  paid  him 
eighteen  pounds  annually  for  her  board,  and  a 
niece.  The  servants  were  two  maids,  and  two  men 
in  livery.  His  common  way  of  living,  at  his  table, 
was  three  or  four  dishes;  the  appurtenances  to  his 
table  were  neat  and  handsome;  he  frequently  en¬ 
tertained  company  at  dinner,  and  then  his  table 
was  well  served  with  as  many  dishes  as  were  usual 
at  the  tables  of  the  other  gentlemen  in  the  neigh¬ 
bourhood.  His  own  appearance,  as  to  clothes,  was 
genteelly  neat  and  plain.  He  had  always  a  post- 
chaise,  and  kept  three  horses. 

“Such,  with  the  resources  I  have  mentioned, 
was  his  way  of  living,  which  he  did  not  suffer  to 
employ  his  whole  income:  for  he  had  always  a  sum 
of  money  lying  by  him  for  any  extraordinary  ex- 
pences  that  might  arise.  Some  money  he  put  into 
the  stocks;  at  his  death,  the  sum  he  had  there 
amounted  to  one  hundred  and  fifty  pounds.  He 
purchased  out  of  his  income  his  household-furni¬ 
ture  and  linen,  of  which  latter  he  had  a  very  ample 
store;  and,  as  I  am  assured  by  those  that  had  very 
good  means  of  knowing,  not  less  than  the  tenth 
part  of  his  income  was  set  apart  for  charity:  at  the 
time  of  his  death,  the  sum  of  twenty-five  pounds 
was  found,  with  a  direction  to  be  employed  in  such 
uses. 

“He  had  laid  down  a  plan  of  living  proportioned 
to  his  income,  and  did  not  practise  any  extraordi¬ 
nary  degree  of  parsimony,  but  endeavoured  that  in 
his  family  there  should  be  plenty  without  waste;  as 
an  instance  that  this  was  his  endeavour,  it  may  be 
worth  while  to  mention  a  method  he  took  in  regu¬ 
lating  a  proper  allowance  of  malt  liquor  to  be 
drunk  in  his  family,  that  there  might  not  be  a  de¬ 
ficiency,  or  any  intemperate  profusion :  On  a  com¬ 
plaint  made  that  his  allowance  of  a  hogshead  in  a 
month,  was  not  enough  for  his  own  family,  he  or¬ 
dered  the  quantity  of  a  hogshead  to  be  put  into 
bottles,  had  it  locked  up  from  the  servants,  and 
distributed  out,  every  day,  eight  quarts,  which  is 
the  quantity  each  day  at  one  hogshead  in  a  month; 
and  told  his  servants,  that  if  that  did  not  suffice,  he 
would  allow  them  more;  but,  by  this  method,  it 
appeared  at  once  that  the  allowance  was  much 
more  than  sufficient  for  his  small  family;  and  this 
proved  a  clear  conviction,  that  could  not  be  an- 


148 

His  art  of  life  certainly  deserves  to  be  known 
and  studied.  He  lived  in  plenty  and  elegance 

swered,  and  saved  all  future  dispute.  He  was,  in 
general,  very  diligently  and  punctually  attended 
and  obeyed  by  his  servants;  he  was  very  consider¬ 
ate  as  to  the  injunctions  he  gave,  and  explained 
them  distinctly;  and,  at  their  first  coming  to  his 
service,  steadily  exacted  a  close  compliance  with 
them,  without  any  remission;  and  the  servants  find¬ 
ing  this  to  be  the  case,  soon  grew  habitually  accus¬ 
tomed  to  the  practice  of  their  business,  and  then 
very  little  further  attention  was  necessary.  On  ex¬ 
traordinary  instances  of  good  behaviour,  or  dili¬ 
gent  service,  he  was  not  wanting  in  particular  en¬ 
couragements  and  presents  above  their  wages;  it  is 
remarkable  that  he  would  permit  their  relations  to 
visit  them,  and  stay  at  his  house  two  or  three  days 
at  a  time. 

“The  wonder,  with  most  that  hear  an  account 
of  his  oeconomy,  will  be,  how  he  was  able,  with 
such  an  income,  to  do  so  much,  especially  when  it 
is  considered  that  he  paid  for  everything  he  had; 
he  had  no  land,  except  the  two  or  three  small  fields 
which  I  have  said  he  rented;  and,  instead  of  gain¬ 
ing  any  thing  by  their  produce,  I  have  reason  to 
think  he  lost  by  them;  however,  they  furnished 
him  with  no  further  assistance  towards  his  house¬ 
keeping,  than  grass  for  his  horses,  (not  hay,  for 
that  I  know  he  bought,)  and  for  two  cows.  Every 
Monday  morning  he  settled  his  family  accounts, 
and  so  kept  up  a  constant  attention  to  the  confin¬ 
ing  his  expences  within  his  income;  and  to  do  it 
more  exactly,  compared  those  expences  with  a 
computation  he  had  made,  how  much  that  income 
would  afford  him  every  week  and  day  of  the  year. 
One  of  his  (Economical  practices  was,  as  soon  as 
any  repair  was  wanting  in  or  about  his  house,  to 
have  it  immediately  performed.  When  he  had 
money  to  spare,  he  chose  to  lay  in  a  provision  of 
linen  or  clothes,  or  any  other  necessaries;  as  then, 
he  said,  he  could  afford  it,  which  he  might  not  be 
so  well  able  to  do  when  the  actual  want  came;  in 
consequence  of  which  method,  he  had  a  consider¬ 
able  supply  of  necessary  articles  lying  by  him,  be¬ 
side  what  was  in  use. 

“But  the  main  particular  that  seems  to  have  en¬ 
abled  him  to  do  so  much  with  his  income,  was, 
that  he  paid  for  every  thing  as  soon  as  he  had  it, 
except,  alone,  what  were  current  accounts,  such  as 
rent  for  his  house  and  servants’  wages;  and  these 
he  paid  at  the  stated  times  with  the  utmost  exact¬ 
ness.  He  gave  notice  to  the  tradesmen  of  the  neigh¬ 
bouring  market-towns  that  they  should  no  longer 
have  his  custom,  if  they  let  any  of  his  servants  have 
anything  without  their  paying  for  it.  Thus  he  put 
it  out  of  his  power  to  commit  those  imprudences  to 
which  those  are  liable  that  defer  their  payments  by 
using  their  money  some  other  way  than  where  it 
ought  to  go.  And  whatever  money  he  had  by  him, 
he  knew  that  it  was  not  demanded  elsewhere,  but 
that  he  might  safely  employ  it  as  he  pleased. 

“His  example  was  confined,  by  the  sequestered 
place  of  his  abode,  to  the  observation  of  few,  though 
his  prudence  and  virtue  would  have  made  it  valu¬ 
able  to  all  who  could  have  known  it. — These  few 
particulars,  which  I  knew  myself,  or  have  obtained 
from  those  who  lived  with  him,  may  afford  instruc¬ 
tion,  and  be  an  incentive  to  that  wise  art  of  living, 
which  he  so  successfully  practised.” 


[  1786 

upon  an  income  which,  to  many  would  appear 
indigent,  and  to  most,  scanty.  How  he  lived, 
therefore,  every  man  has  an  interest  in  knowing. 
His  death,  I  hope,  was  peaceful;  it  was  surely 
happy. 

I  wish  I  had  written  sooner,  lest,  writing  now, 
I  should  renew  your  grief;  but  I  would  not  for¬ 
bear  saying  what  I  have  now  said. 

This  loss  is,  I  hope,  the  only  misfortune  of  a 
family  to  whom  no  misfortune  at  all  should  hap¬ 
pen,  if  my  wishes  could  avert  it.  Let  me  know 
how  you  all  go  on.  Has  Mr.  Langton  got  him 
the  little  horse  that  I  recommended?  It  would 
do  him  good  to  ride  about  his  estate  in  fine 
weather. 

Be  pleased  to  make  my  compliments  to  Mrs. 
Langton,  and  to  dear  Miss  Langton,  and  Miss 
Di,  and  Miss  Juliet,  and  to  every  body  else. 

The  club  holds  very  well  together.  Monday 
is  my  night.1  I  continue  to  rise  tolerably  well, 
and  read  more  than  I  did.  I  hope  something 
will  yet  come  on  it.  I  am,  Sir,  your  most  affec¬ 
tionate  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

Johnson’s-court,  Fleet-street 

May  10,  1766 

After  I  had  been  some  time  in  Scotland,  I 
mentioned  to  him  in  a  letter  that  “On  my  first 
return  to  my  native  country,  after  some  years 
of  absence,  I  was  told  of  a  vast  number  of  my 
acquaintance  who  were  all  gone  to  the  land  of 
forgetfulness,  and  I  found  myself  like  a  man 
stalking  over  a  field  of  battle,  who  every  mo¬ 
ment  perceives  some  one  lying  dead.”  I  com¬ 
plained  of  irresolution,  and  mentioned  my  hav¬ 
ing  made  a  vow  as  a  security  for  good  conduct. 
I  wrote  to  him  again,  without  being  able  to  move 
his  indolence;  nor  did  I  hear  from  him  till  he 
had  received  a  copy  of  my  inaugural  Exercise, 
or  Thesis  in  Civil  Law,  which  I  published  at  my 
admission  as  an  Advocate,  as  is  the  custom  in 
Scotland.  He  then  wrote  to  me  as  follows: 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  The  reception  of  your  Thesis  put 
me  in  mind  of  my  debt  to  you.  Why  did  you 
************  *  2  1  win  pUnish  you  for 
it,  by  telling  you  that  your  Latin  wants  correc¬ 
tion.3  In  the  beginning,  Spei  altera ,  not  to  urge 

JOf  his  being  in  the  chair  of  The  Literary  Club, 
which  at  this  time  met  once  a  week  in  the  evening. 

2The  passage  omitted  alluded  to  a  private  trans¬ 
action. 

3This  censure  of  my  Latin  relates  to  the  Dedica¬ 
tion,  which  was  as  follows: 

VIRO  NOBIL1SS1MO,  ORNATISSIMO, 

JOANNI, 

VICECOMITI  MOUNTSTUART, 

ATAVIS  EDITO  REGIBUS 
EXCELS  AL  FAMILIAL  DE  BUTE  SPEI  ALTERALI 


BOSWELL 


1766]  LIFE  OF 

that  it  should  be  prima ,  is  not  grammatical:  al¬ 
tera  should  be  alteri.  In  the  next  line  you  seem 
to  use  genus  absolutely,  for  what  we  call  family , 
that  is,  for  illustrious  extraction ,  I  doubt  without 
authority.  Homines  nullius  originis ,  for  JVullis  orti 
majoribus,  or,  Nullo  loco  nati ,  is,  I  am  afraid,  bar¬ 
barous. — Ruddiman  is  dead. 

I  have  now  vexed  you  enough,  and  will  try  to 
please  you.  Your  resolution  to  obey  your  father 
I  sincerely  approve;  but  do  not  accustom  your¬ 
self  to  enchain  your  volatility  by  vows:  they  will 
sometime  leave  a  thorn  in  your  mind,  which 
you  will,  perhaps,  never  be  able  to  extract  or 
eject.  Take  this  warning,  it  is  of  great  impor¬ 
tance. 

The  study  of  the  law  is  what  you  very  justly 
term  it,  copious  and  generous;1  and  in  adding 
your  name  to  its  professors,  you  have  done  ex¬ 
actly  what  I  always  wished,  when  I  wished  you 
best.  I  hope  that  you  will  continue  to  pursue  it 
vigorously  and  constantly.  You  gain,  at  least, 
what  is  no  small  advantage,  security  from  those 
troublesome  and  wearisome  discontents,  which 
are  always  obtruding  themselves  upon  a  mind 
vacant,  unemployed,  and  undetermined. 

You  ought  to  think  it  no  small  inducement  to 
diligence  and  perseverance,  that  they  will  please 
your  father.  We  all  live  upon  the  hope  of  pleas¬ 
ing  somebody;  and  the  pleasure  of  pleasing  ought 
to  be  greatest,  and  at  last  always  will  be  great¬ 
est,  when  our  endeavours  are  exerted  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  our  duty. 

Life  is  not  long,  and  too  much  of  it  must  not 
pass  in  idle  deliberation  how  it  shall  be  spent; 
deliberation,  which  those  who  begin  it  by  pru- 

LABENTE  SECULO, 
qUUM  HOMINES  NULLIUS  ORIGINIS 
GENUS  /EQUARE  OPIBUS  AGGRED1UNTUR, 
SANGUINIS  ANTIQU1  ET  1LLUSTRIS 
SEMPER  MEMORI, 

NATALIUM  SPLENDOREM  VIRTUTIBUS  AUGENTi: 

AD  PUBLIGA  POPULI  COMITIA 
JAM  legato; 

IN  OPTIMATIUM  VERO  MAGNE  BRITANNIA  SENATU, 
JURE  HEREDITARIO, 

OLIM  CONSESSURO: 

VIM  INSITAM  VARIA  DOCTRINA  PROMOVENTE, 

NEC  TAMEN  SE  VENDITANTE, 

PREDITO : 

PRISCA  FIDE,  ANIMO  LIBERRIMO, 

ET  MORUM  ELEGANTIA 

insigni: 

IN  1TALLE  VISITANDE  ITINERE, 

SOCIO  SUO  HONOR ATISSIMO, 

HASCE  JURISPRUDENT! .E  PRIMITIAS 
DEVTNCTISSIME  AMICITLE  ET  OBSERVANTLE 
MONUMENTUM, 

D.  D.  C  Q>. 

JACOBUS  BOSWELL 

^his  alludes  to  the  first  sentence  of  the  Proami - 
um  of  my  Thesis:  Jurisprudents  studio  nullum 
uberius ,  nullum  generosius:  in  legibus  enim  agitandisy 
populorum  mores ,  variasque  fortune  vices  ex  quibus  leges 
oriuntur ,  contemplari  simul  solemus . 


JOHNSON  149 

dence,  and  continue  it  with  subtilty,  must,  after 
long  expence  of  thought,  conclude  by  chance. 
To  prefer  one  future  mode  of  life  to  another, 
upon  just  reasons,  requires  faculties  which  it  has 
not  pleased  our  Creator  to  give  us. 

If,  therefore,  the  profession  you  have  chosen 
has  some  unexpected  inconveniencies,  console 
yourself  by  reflecting  that  no  profession  is  with¬ 
out  them;  and  that  all  the  importunities  and 
perplexities  of  business  are  softness  and  luxury, 
compared  with  the  incessant  cravings  of  vacan¬ 
cy,  and  the  unsatisfactory  expedients  of  idleness. 

I  lac  sunt  quce  nostra  potui  te  voce  monere ; 

Vade,  age. 

As  to  your  History  of  Corsica ,  you  have  no  ma¬ 
terials  which  others  have  not,  or  may  not  have. 
You  have,  somehow,  or  other,  warmed  your 
imagination.  I  wish  there  were  some  cure,  like 
the  lover’s  leap,  for  all  heads  of  which  some  sin¬ 
gle  idea  has  obtained  an  unreasonable  and  ir¬ 
regular  possession.  Mind  your  own  affairs,  and 
leave  the  Corsicans  to  theirs.  I  am,  dear  Sir, 
your  most  humble  servant, 

London,  Aug.  21,  1766  Sam.  Johnson 

To  Dr.  Samuel  Johnson 

Auchinleck,  Nov.  6,  1766 

Much  Esteemed  and  Dear  Sir,  I  plead  not 
guilty  to********************  2 

Having  thus,  I  hope,  cleared  myself  of  the 
charge  brought  against  me,  I  presume  you  will 
not  be  displeased  if  I  escape  the  punishment 
which  you  have  decreed  for  me  unheard.  If  you 
have  discharged  the  arrows  of  criticism  against 
an  innocent  man,  you  must  rejoice  to  find  they 
have  missed  him,  or  have  not  been  pointed  so  as 
to  wound  him. 

To  talk  no  longer  in  allegory,  I  am,  with  all 
deference,  going  to  offer  a  few  observations  in 
defence  of  my  Latin,  which  you  have  found  fault 
with. 

You  think  I  should  have  used  spei  prima ,  in¬ 
stead  of  spei  altera.  Spes  is,  indeed,  often  used  to 
express  something  on  which  we  have  a  future 
dependence,  as  in  Virg.  Eclog.  i.  1.  14, 

- modo  namque  gemellos 

Spem  gregis  ah  silice  in  nuda  connixa  reliquit. 
and  in  Georg,  iii.  1.  473, 

Spemque  gregemque  simul , 

for  the  lambs  and  the  sheep.  Yet  it  is  also  used 
to  express  any  thing  on  which  we  have  a  present 
dependence,  and  is  well  applied  to  a  man  of  dis¬ 
tinguished  influence,  our  support,  our  refuge, 
our  prasidium ,  as  Horace  calls  Maecenas.  So, 
in  Mneid  xii.  1.  57,  Queen  Amata  addresses  her 
son-in-law  Turnus:  “Spes  tu  nunc  una”\  and  he 
was  then  no  future  hope,  for  she  adds, 

- decus  imperiumque  Latini 

Te  penes; 

2The  passage  omitted  explained  the  transaction 
to  which  the  preceding  letter  had  alluded. 


15° 

which  might  have  been  said  of  my  Lord  Bute 
some  years  ago.  Now  I  consider  the  present  Earl 
of  Bute  to  be  “Excels#  familia  de  Bute  spes  prima” ; 
and  my  Lord  Mountstuart,  as  his  eldest  son,  to 
be  “ spes  altera”  So  in  /Eneid  xii.  1.  168,  after  hav¬ 
ing  mentioned  Pater  ^Eneas,  who  was  the  pres¬ 
ent  spes,  the  reigning  spes,  as  my  German  friends 
would  say,  the  spes  prima,  the  poet  adds, 

Etjuxta  Ascanius,  magnce  spes  altera  Roma. 

Y ou  think  alter a  ungrammatical,  and  you  tell 
me  it  should  have  been  alteri.  You  must  recol¬ 
lect,  that  in  old  times  alter  was  declined  regular¬ 
ly;  and  when  the  ancient  fragments  preserved  in 
the  Juris  Civilis  Fontes  were  written,  it  was  cer¬ 
tainly  declined  in  the  way  that  I  use  it.  This,  I 
should  think,  may  protect  a  lawyer  who  writes 
altera  in  a  dissertation  upon  part  of  his  own  sci¬ 
ence.  But  as  I  could  hardly  venture  to  quote 
fragments  of  old  law  to  so  classical  a  man  as  Mr. 
Johnson,  I  have  not  made  an  accurate  search 
into  these  remains,  to  find  examples  of  what  I 
am  able  to  produce  in  poetical  composition.  We 
find  in  Plaut.  Rudens ,  act  iii  scene  4, 

Nam  huic  alteras  patria  qua  sit profecto  nescio . 

Plautus  is,  to  be  sure,  an  old  comick  writer;  but 
in  the  days  of  Scipio  and  Lelius,  we  find,  Terent. 
Heautontim.  act  ii.  scene  3, 

- hoc  ipsa  in  itinere  alterae 

Dum  narrat, forte  audivi. 

You  doubt  my  having  authority  for  using  ge¬ 
nus  absolutely,  for  what  we  call  family ,  that  is, 
for  illustrious  extraction.  Now  I  take  genus  in  Lat¬ 
in,  to  have  much  the  same  signification  with 
birth  in  English;  both  in  their  primary  meaning 
expressing  simply  descent,  but  both  made  to 
stand  ko.t  kfyxvvt  for  noble  descent.  Genus  is 
thus  used  in  Hor.  lib.  ii.  Sat.  v.  1.  8, 

Et  genus  et  virtus ,  nisi  cum  re,  vilior  alga  est. 

And  in  lib.  i.  Epist.  vi.  1.  37, 

Et  genus  et  formam  Regina  pecunia  donat. 

And  in  the  celebrated  contest  between  Ajax 
and  Ulysses,  Ovid’s  Metamorph.  lib.  xiii.  1.  140, 

Nam  genus  et proavos,  et  qua  non fecimus  ipsi, 

Vix  ea  nostra  voco. 

Homines  nullius  originis ,  for  nullis  orti  majoribus , 
or  nullo  loco  nati,  is,  you  are  “afraid,  barbarous.” 

Origo  is  used  to  signify  extraction,  as  in  Virg. 
/Eneid  i.  1.  286, 

Nascetur pulchra  Trojanus  origine  Casar. 

And  in  /Eneid  x.  1.  618, 

llle  tamen  nostrd  deducit  origine  nomen. 

And  as  nullus  is  used  for  obscure,  is  it  not  in  the 
genius  of  the  Latin  language  to  write  nullius  ori¬ 
ginis,  for  obscure  extraction? 


[  1766 

I  have  defended  myself  as  well  as  I  could. 

Might  I  venture  to  differ  from  you  with  re¬ 
gard  to  the  utility  of  vows?  I  am  sensible  that  it 
would  be  very  dangerous  to  make  vows  rashly, 
and  without  a  due  consideration.  But  I  cannot 
help  thinking  that  they  may  often  be  of  great 
advantage  to  one  of  a  variable  judgement  and 
irregular  inclinations.  I  always  remember  a  pas¬ 
sage  in  one  of  your  letters  to  our  Italian  friend 
Baretti;  where  talking  of  the  monastick  life,  you 
say  you  do  not  wonder  that  serious  men  should 
put  themselves  under  the  protection  of  a  reli¬ 
gious  order,  when  they  have  found  how  unable 
they  are  to  take  care  of  themselves.  For  my  own 
part,  without  affecting  to  be  a  Socrates,  I  am 
sure  I  have  a  more  than  ordinary  struggle  to 
maintain  with  the  Evil  Principle;  and  all  the  meth¬ 
ods  I  can  devise  are  little  enough  to  keep  me 
tolerably  steady  in  the  paths  of  rectitude.  ...  I 
am  ever,  with  the  highest  veneration,  your  af¬ 
fectionate  humble  servant, 

James  Boswell 

It  appears  from  Johnson’s  diary,  that  he  was 
this  year  at  Mr.  Thrale’s,  from  before  Midsum¬ 
mer  till  after  Michaelmas,  and  that  he  after¬ 
wards  passed  a  month  at  Oxford.  He  had  then 
contracted  a  great  intimacy  with  Mr.  Chambers 
of  that  University,  afterwards  Sir  Robert  Cham¬ 
bers,  one  of  the  Judges  in  India. 

He  published  nothing  this  year  in  his  own 
name;  but  the  noble  dedication*  to  the  King,  of 
Gwyn’s  London  and  Westminster  Improved,  was  writ¬ 
ten  by  him;  and  he  furnished  the  Preface,  f  and 
several  of  the  pieces,  which  compose  a  volume 
of  Miscellanies  by  Mrs.  Anna  Williams,  the  blind 
lady  who  had  an  asylum  in  his  house.  Of  these, 
there  are  his  “Epitaph  on  Philips,”*  “Transla¬ 
tion  of  a  Latin  Epitaph  on  Sir  Thomas  Han- 
mer,”f  “Friendship,  an  Ode,”*  and,  “The 
Ant,”  *  a  paraphrase  from  the  Proverbs,  of  which 
I  have  a  copy  in  his  own  hand-writing;  and, 
from  internal  evidence,  I  ascribe  to  him,  “To 

Miss - ,  on  her  giving  the  Authour  a  gold  and 

silk  net-work  Purse  of  her  own  weaving”;  f  and, 
“The  happy  Life  ”f 

Most  of  the  pieces  in  this  volume  have  evi¬ 
dently  received  additions  from  his  superiour  pen, 
particularly  “Verses  to  Mr.  Richardson,  on  his 
Sir  Charles  Grandison”;  “The  Excursion”;  “Re¬ 
flections  on  a  Grave  digging  in  Westminster 
Abbey.”  There  is  in  this  collection  a  poem  “On 
the  Death  of  Stephen  Grey,  the  Electrician”;* 
which,  on  reading  it,  appeared  to  me  to  be  un¬ 
doubtedly  Johnson’s.  I  asked  Mrs.  Williams 
whether  it  was  not  his.  “Sir,  (said  she,  with  some 
warmth,)  I  wrote  that  poem  before  I  had  the 
honour  of  Dr.  Johnson’s  acquaintance.”  I,  how¬ 
ever,  was  so  much  impressed  with  my  first  no- 


BOSWELL 


1766]  LIFE  OF 

tion,  that  I  mentioned  it  to  Johnson,  repeating, 
at  the  same  time,  what  Mrs.  Williams  had  said. 
His  answer  was,  “It  is  true,  Sir,  that  she  wrote 
it  before  she  was  acquainted  with  me;  but  she 
has  not  told  you  that  I  wrote  it  all  over  again, 
except  two  lines. ”  “The  Fountains,”!  a  beauti¬ 
ful  little  Fairy  tale  in  prose,  written  with  exqui¬ 
site  simplicity,  is  one  of  Johnson’s  productions; 
and  I  cannot  with-hold  from  Mrs.  Thrale  the 
praise  of  being  the  authour  of  that  admirable 
poem,  “The  Three  Warnings.” 

He  wrote  this  year  a  letter,  not  intended  for 
publication,  which  has,  perhaps,  as  strong  marks 
of  his  sentiment  and  style,  as  any  of  his  composi¬ 
tions.  The  original  is  in  my  possession.  It  is  ad¬ 
dressed  to  the  late  Mr.  William  Drummond, 
bookseller  in  Edinburgh,  a  gentleman  of  good 
family,  but  small  estate,  who  took  arms  for  the 
house  of  Stuart  in  1 745;  and  during  his  conceal¬ 
ment  in  London  till  the  act  of  general  pardon 
came  out  obtained  the  acquaintance  of  Dr.  John¬ 
son,  who  justly  esteemed  him  as  a  very  worthy 
man.  It  seems,  some  of  the  members  of  the  soci¬ 
ety  in  Scotland  for  propagating  Christian  knowl¬ 
edge,  had  opposed  the  scheme  of  translating  the 
holy  scriptures  into  the  Erse  or  Gaelick  lan¬ 
guage,  from  political  considerations  of  the  dis¬ 
advantage  of  keeping  up  the  distinction  between 
the  Highlanders  and  the  other  inhabitants  of 
North-Britain.  Dr.  Johnson  being  informed  of 
this,  I  suppose  by  Mr.  Drummond,  wrote  with 
a  generous  indignation  as  follows: 

To  Mr.  William  Drummond 

Sir,  I  did  not  expect  to  hear  that  it  could  be, 
in  an  assembly  convened  for  the  propagation  of 
Christian  knowledge,  a  question  whether  any 
nation  uninstructed  in  religion  should  receive 
instruction;  or  whether  that  instruction  should 
be  imparted  to  them  by  a  translation  of  the  holy 
books  into  their  own  language.  If  obedience  to 
the  will  of  God  be  necessary  to  happiness,  and 
knowledge  of  his  will  be  necessary  to  obedience, 
I  know  not  how  he  that  with-holds  this  knowl¬ 
edge,  or  delays  it,  can  be  said  to  love  his  neigh¬ 
bour  as  himself.  He  that  voluntarily  continues 
ignorance,  is  guilty  of  all  the  crimes  which  ignor¬ 
ance  produces;  as  to  him  that  should  extinguish 
the  tapers  of  a  light-house,  might  justly  be  im¬ 
puted  the  calamities  of  shipwrecks.  Christianity 
is  the  highest  perfection  of  humanity;  and  as  no 
man  is  good  but  as  he  wishes  the  good  of  others, 
no  man  can  be  good  in  the  highest  degree  who 
wishes  not  to  others  the  largest  measures  of  the 
greatest  good.  To  omit  for  a  year,  or  for  a  day, 
the  most  efficacious  method  of  advancing  Chris¬ 
tianity,  in  compliance  with  any  purposes  that 
terminate  on  this  side  of  the  grave,  is  a  crime  of 


JOHNSON  i5i 

which  I  know  not  that  the  world  has  yet  had  an 
example,  except  in  the  practice  of  the  planters 
of  America,  a  race  of  mortals  whom,  I  suppose, 
no  other  man  wishes  to  resemble. 

The  Papists  have,  indeed,  denied  to  the  laity 
the  use  of  the  Bible;  but  this  prohibition,  in  few 
places  now  very  rigorously  enforced,  is  defended 
by  arguments,  which  have  for  their  foundation 
the  care  of  souls.  To  obscure,  upon  motives 
merely  political,  the  light  of  revelation,  is  a  prac¬ 
tice  reserved  for  the  reformed;  and,  surely,  the 
blackest  midnight  of  popery  is  meridian  sun¬ 
shine  to  such  a  reformation.  I  am  not  very  will¬ 
ing  that  any  language  should  be  totally  extin¬ 
guished.  The  similitude  and  derivation  of  lan¬ 
guages  afford  the  most  indubitable  proof  of  the 
traduction  of  nations,  and  the  genealogy  of  man¬ 
kind.  They  add  often  physical  certainty  to  his¬ 
torical  evidence;  and  often  supply  the  only  evi¬ 
dence  of  ancient  migrations,  and  of  the  revolu¬ 
tions  of  ages  which  left  no  written  monuments 
behind  them. 

Every  man’s  opinions,  at  least  his  desires,  are 
a  little  influenced  by  his  favourite  studies.  My 
zeal  for  languages  may  seem,  perhaps,  rather 
over-heated,  even  to  those  by  whom  I  desire  to 
be  well-esteemed.  To  those  who  have  nothing  in 
their  thoughts  but  trade  or  policy,  present  pow¬ 
er,  or  present  money,  I  should  not  think  it  nec¬ 
essary  to  defend  my  opinions;  but  with  men  of 
letters  I  would  not  unwillingly  compound,  by 
wishing  the  continuance  of  every  language,  how¬ 
ever  narrow  in  its  extent,  or  however  incommo¬ 
dious  for  common  purposes,  till  it  is  reposited  in 
some  version  of  a  known  book,  that  it  may  be 
always  hereafter  examined  and  compared  with 
other  languages,  and  then  permitting  its  disuse. 
For  this  purpose,  the  translation  of  the  Bible  is 
most  to  be  desired.  It  is  not  certain  that  the 
same  method  will  not  preserve  the  Highland 
language,  for  the  purposes  of  learning,  and  abol¬ 
ish  it  from  daily  use.  When  the  Highlanders 
read  the  Bible,  they  will  naturally  wish  to  have 
its  obscurities  cleared,  and  to  know  the  history, 
collateral  or  appendant.  Knowledge  always  de¬ 
sires  increase:  it  is  like  fire,  which  must  first  be 
kindled  by  some  external  agent,  but  which  will 
afterwards  propagate  itself.  When  they  once  de¬ 
sire  to  learn,  they  will  naturally  have  recourse 
to  the  nearest  language  by  which  that  desire 
can  be  gratified;  and  one  will  tell  another  that 
if  he  would  attain  knowledge,  he  must  learn 
English. 

This  speculation  may,  perhaps,  be  thought 
more  subtle  than  the  grossness  of  real  life  will 
easily  admit.  Let  it,  however,  be  remembered, 
that  the  efficacy  of  ignorance  has  been  long 
tried,  and  has  not  produced  the  consequence 
expected.  Let  knowledge,  therefore,  take  its  turn; 
and  let  the  patrons  of  privation  stand  awhile 
aside,  and  admit  the  operation  of  positive  prin¬ 
ciples. 


152 

You  will  be  pleased,  Sir,  to  assure  the  worthy 
man  who  is  employed  in  the  new  translation,1 
that  he  has  my  wishes  for  his  success;  and  if  here 
or  at  Oxford  I  can  be  of  any  use,  that  I  shall 
think  it  more  than  honour  to  promote  his  under¬ 
taking. 

I  am  sorry  that  I  delayed  so  long  to  write.  I 
am,  Sir  your  most  humble  servant, 

Johnson’s-court,  Fleet-street  Sam.  Johnson 

Aug.  13,  1766 

The  opponents  of  this  pious  scheme  being 
made  ashamed  of  their  conduct,  the  benevolent 
undertaking  was  allowed  to  go  on. 

The  following  letters,  though  not  written  till 
the  year  after,  being  chiefly  upon  the  same  sub¬ 
ject,  are  here  inserted. 

To  Mr.  William  Drummond 

Dear  Sir,  That  my  letter  should  have  had 
such  effects  as  you  mention,  gives  me  great  pleas¬ 
ure.  I  hope  you  do  not  flatter  me  by  imputing 
to  me  more  good  than  I  have  really  done.  Those 
whom  my  arguments  have  persuaded  to  change 
their  opinion,  shew  such  modesty  and  candour 
as  deserve  great  praise. 

I  hope  the  worthy  translator  goes  diligently 
forward.  He  has  a  higher  reward  in  prospect 
than  any  honours  which  this  world  can  bestow. 
I  wish  I  could  be  useful  to  him. 

The  publication  of  my  letter,  if  it  could  be  of 
use  in  a  cause  to  which  all  other  causes  are 
nothing,  I  should  not  prohibit.  But  first,  I  would 
have  you  consider  whether  the  publication  will 
really  do  any  good;  next,  whether  by  printing 
and  distributing  a  very  small  number,  you  may 
not  attain  all  that  you  propose;  and,  what  per¬ 
haps  I  should  have  said  first,  whether  the  letter, 
which  I  do  not  now  perfectly  remember,  be  fit 
to  be  printed. 

If  you  can  consult  Dr.  Robertson,  to  whom  I 
am  a  little  known,  I  shall  be  satisfied  about  the 
propriety  of  whatever  he  shall  direct.  If  he  thinks 
that  it  should  be  printed,  I  entreat  him  to  revise 
it;  there  may,  perhaps,  be  some  negligent  lines 

Hlie  Rev.  Mr.  John  Campbell,  Minister  of  the 
Parish  of  Kippen,  near  Stirling,  who  has  lately 
favoured  me  with  a  long,  intelligent,  and  very 
obliging  letter  upon  this  work,  makes  the  following 
remark: — “Dr.  Johnson  has  alluded  to  the  worthy 
man  employed  in  the  translation  of  the  New  Tes¬ 
tament.  Might  not  this  have  afforded  you  an  op¬ 
portunity  of  paying  a  proper  tribute  of  respect  to 
the  memory  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  James  Stuart,  late 
Minister  of  Killin,  distinguished  by  his  eminent 
Piety,  Learning  and  Taste?  The  amiable  simplicity 
of  his  life,  his  warm  benevolence,  his  indefatigable 
and  successful  exertions  for  civilizing  and  improv¬ 
ing  the  Parish  of  which  he  was  Minister  for  up¬ 
wards  of  fifty  years,  entitle  him  to  the  gratitude  of 
his  country,  and  the  veneration  of  all  good  men.  It 
certainly  would  be  a  pity,  if  such  a  character 
should  be  permitted  to  sink  into  oblivion.” 


[  1767 

written,  and  whatever  is  amiss,  he  knows  very 
well  how  to  rectify.2 

Be  pleased  to  let  me  know,  from  time  to  time, 
how  this  excellent  design  goes  forward. 

Make  my  compliments  to  young  Mr.  Drum¬ 
mond,  whom  I  hope  you  will  live  to  see  such  as 
you  desire  him. 

I  have  not  lately  seen  Mr.  Elphinston,  but  be¬ 
lieve  him  to  be  prosperous.  I  shall  be  glad  to 
hear  the  same  of  you,  for  I  am,  Sir,  your  affec¬ 
tionate  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

Johnson’s-court,  Fleet-street 
April  21,  1767 

To  the  Same 

Sir,  I  returned  this  week  from  the  country, 
after  an  absence  of  near  six  months,  and  found 
your  letter  with  many  others,  which  I  should 
have  answered  sooner,  if  I  had  sooner  seen  them. 

Dr.  Robertson’s  opinion  was  surely  right.  Men 
should  not  be  told  of  the  faults  which  they  have 
mended.  I  am  glad  the  old  language  is  taught, 
and  honour  the  translator  as  a  man  whom  God 
has  distinguished  by  the  high  office  of  propagat¬ 
ing  his  word. 

I  must  take  the  liberty  of  engaging  you  in  an 
office  of  charity.  Mrs.  Heely,  the  wife  of  Mr. 
Heely,  who  had  lately  some  office  in  your  thea¬ 
tre,  is  my  near  relation,  and  now  in  great  dis¬ 
tress.  They  wrote  me  word  of  their  situation 
some  time  ago,  to  which  I  returned  them  an  an¬ 
swer  which  raised  hopes  of  more  than  it  is  proper 
for  me  to  give  them.  Their  representation  of 
their  affairs  I  have  discovered  to  be  such  as  can¬ 
not  be  trusted;  and  at  this  distance,  though  their 
case  requires  haste,  I  know  not  how  to  act.  She, 
or  her  daughters,  may  be  heard  of  at  Canon- 
gate  Head.  I  must  beg,  Sir,  that  you  will  en¬ 
quire  after  them,  and  let  me  know  what  is  to  be 
done.  I  am  willing  to  go  to  ten  pounds,  and  will 
transmit  you  such  a  sum,  if  upon  examination 
you  find  it  likely  to  be  of  use.  If  they  are  in  im¬ 
mediate  want,  advance  them  what  you  think 
proper.  What  I  could  do,  I  would  do  for  the 
women,  having  no  great  reason  to  pay  much  re¬ 
gard  to  Heely  himself.3 

I  believe  you  may  receive  some  intelligence 
from  Mrs.  Baker,  of  the  theatre,  whose  letter  I 
received  at  the  same  time  with  yours;  and  to 
whom,  if  you  see  her,  you  will  make  my  excuse 
for  the  seeming  neglect  of  answering  her. 

Whatever  you  advance  within  ten  pounds  shall 
be  immediately  returned  to  you,  or  paid  as  you 

2This  paragraph  shews  Johnson’s  real  estimation 
of  the  character  and  abilities  of  the  celebrated 
Scottish  Historian,  however  lightly,  in  a  moment 
of  caprice,  he  may  have  spoken  of  his  works. 

3This  is  the  person  concerning  whom  Sir  John 
Hawkins  has  thrown  out  very  unwarrantable  re¬ 
flections  both  against  Dr.  Johnson  and  Mr.  Francis 
Barber. 


BOSWELL 


1767]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  153 


shall  order.  I  trust  wholly  to  your  judgement.  I 
am,  Sir,  & c. 

Sam.  Johnson 

London,  Johnson’s-court,  Fleet-street 

Oct.  24,  1767 

Mr.  Cuthbert  Shaw,1  alike  distinguished  by 
his  genius,  misfortunes,  and  misconduct,  pub¬ 
lished  this  year  a  poem,  called  “ The  Race ,  by 
Mercurius  Spur,  Esq.,’5  in  which  he  whimsically 
made  the  living  poets  of  England  contend  for 
pre-eminence  of  fame  by  running: 

Prove  by  their  heels  the  prowess  of  the  head. 

In  this  poem  there  was  the  following  portrait  of 
Johnson: 

Here  Johnson  comes ,  unblest  with  outward  grace , 

His  rigid  morals  stamp'd  upon  his  face. 

While  strong  conceptions  struggle  in  his  brain; 

(For  even  wit  is  brought  to-bed  with  pain:) 

To  view  him ,  porters  with  their  loads  would  rest , 

And  babes  clingfrighted  to  the  nurse's  breast. 

With  looks  convuls'd  he  roars  in  pompous  strain , 

And,  like  an  angry  lion ,  shakes  his  mane. 

The  Nine ,  with  terrour  struck ,  who  ne'er  had  seeny 
Aught  human  ivith  so  horrible  a  mien , 

Debating  whether  they  should  stay  or  run , 

Virtue  steps  forth,  and  claims  him  for  her  son: 

With  gentle  speech  she  warns  him  now  to  yield. 

Nor  stain  his  glories  in  the  doubtful field; 

But  wrapt  in  conscious  worth ,  content  sit  down. 

Since  Fame,  resolv'd  his  various  pleas  to  crown , 
Though  forc'd  his  present  claim  to  disavow. 

Had  long  reserv'd  a  chaplet  for  his  brow. 

He  bows,  obeys;  for  time  shall  first  expire. 

Ere  Johnson  stay ,  when  Virtue  bids  retire. 

The  Honourable  Thomas  Hervey2  and  his 
lady  having  unhappily  disagreed,  and  being 
about  to  separate,  Johnson  interfered  as  their 
friend,  and  wrote  him  a  letter  of  expostulation, 
which  I  have  not  been  able  to  find;  but  the  sub¬ 
stance  of  it  is  ascertained  by  a  letter  to  Johnson 
in  answer  to  it,  which  Mr.  Hervey  printed.  The 
occasion  of  this  correspondence  between  Dr. 
Johnson  and  Mr.  Hervey,  was  thus  related  to 
me  by  Mr.  Beauclerk.  “Tom  Hervey  had  a  great 
liking  for  Johnson,  and  in  his  will  had  left  him  a 
legacy  of  fifty  pounds.  One  day  he  said  to  me, 
‘Johnson  may  want  this  money  now,  more  than 
afterwards.  I  have  a  mind  to  give  it  him  direct¬ 
ly.  Will  you  be  so  good  as  to  carry  a  fifty  pound 
note  from  me  to  him?5  This  I  positively  refused 

1See  an  account  of  him  in  The  European  Maga¬ 
zine,  Jan.,  1786. 

2The  Hon.  Thomas  Hervey,  whose  Letter  to  Sir 
Thomas  Hanmer  in  1742  was  much  read  at  that 
time.  He  was  the  second  son  of  John,  first  Earl  of 
Bristol,  and  one  of  the  brothers  of  Johnson’s  early 
friend,  Henry  Hervey.  He  died  Jan.  20,  1 775*  [M.] 


to  do,  as  he  might,  perhaps,  have  knocked  me 
down  for  insulting  him,  and  have  afterwards 
put  the  note  in  his  pocket.  But  I  said,  if  Hervey 
would  write  him  a  letter,  and  enclose  a  fifty 
pound  note,  I  should  take  care  to  deliver  it.  He 
accordingly  did  write  him  a  letter,  mentioning 
that  he  was  only  paying  a  legacy  a  little  sooner. 
To  his  letter  he  added,  ‘P.S.  I  am  going  to  part 
with  my  wife.'  Johnson  then  wrote  to  him,  saying 
nothing  of  the  note,  but  remonstrating  with  him 
against  parting  with  his  wife.” 

When  I  mentioned  to  Johnson  this  story,  in  as 
delicate  terms  as  I  could,  he  told  me  that  the 
fifty  pound  note  was  given  to  him  by  Mr.  Her¬ 
vey  in  consideration  of  his  having  written  for 
him  a  pamphlet  against  Sir  Charles  Hanbury 
Williams,  who,  Mr.  Hervey  imagined,  was  the 
authour  of  an  attack  upon  him;  but  that  it  was 
afterwards  discovered  to  be  the  work  of  a  gar¬ 
reteer  who  wrote  The  Fool:  the  pamphlet  there¬ 
fore  against  Sir  Charles  was  not  printed. 

In  February,  1 767,  there  happened  one  of  the 
most  remarkable  incidents  of  Johnson’s  life, 
which  gratified  his  monarchical  enthusiasm,  and 
which  he  loved  to  relate  with  all  its  circum¬ 
stances,  when  requested  by  his  friends.  This  was 
his  being  honoured  by  a  private  conversation 
with  his  Majesty,  in  the  library  at  the  Queen’s 
house.  He  had  frequently  visited  those  splendid 
rooms  and  noble  collection  of  books,3  which  he 
used  to  say  was  more  numerous  and  curious 
than  he  supposed  any  person  could  have  made 
in  the  time  which  the  King  had  employed.  Mr. 
Barnard,  the  librarian,  took  care  that  he  should 
have  every  accommodation  that  could  contrib¬ 
ute  to  his  ease  and  convenience,  while  indulg¬ 
ing  his  literary  taste  in  that  place;  so  that  he 
had  here  a  very  agreeable  resource  at  leisure 
hours. 

His  Majesty  having  been  informed  of  his  occa¬ 
sional  visits,  was  pleased  to  signify  a  desire  that 
he  should  be  told  when  Dr.  Johnson  came  next 
to  the  library.  Accordingly,  the  next  time  that 
Johnson  did  come,  as  soon  as  he  was  fairly  en¬ 
gaged  with  a  book,  on  which,  while  he  sat  by 
the  fire,  he  seemed  quite  intent,  Mr.  Barnard 
stole  round  to  the  apartment  where  the  King 

3Dr.  Johnson  had  the  honour  of  contributing  his 
assistance  towards  the  formation  of  this  library; 
for  I  have  read  a  long  letter  from  him  to  Mr.  Bar¬ 
nard,  giving  the  most  masterly  instructions  on  the 
subject.  I  wished  much  to  have  gratified  my  read¬ 
ers  with  the  perusal  of  this  letter,  and  have  reason 
to  think  that  his  Majesty  would  have  been  gra¬ 
ciously  pleased  to  permit  its  publication;  but  Mr. 
Barnard,  to  whom  I  applied,  declined  it  “on  his 
own  account.” 


154 

was,  and,  in  obedience  to  his  Majesty’s  com¬ 
mands,  mentioned  that  Dr.  Johnson  was  then 
in  the  library.  His  Majesty  said  he  was  at  leis¬ 
ure,  and  would  go  to  him;  upon  which  Mr.  Bar¬ 
nard  took  one  of  the  candles  that  stood  on  the 
King’s  table,  and  lighted  his  Majesty  through  a 
suite  of  rooms,  till  they  came  to  a  private  door 
into  the  library,  of  which  his  Majesty  had  the 
key.  Being  entered,  Mr.  Barnard  stepped  for¬ 
ward  hastily  to  Dr.  Johnson,  who  was  still  in  a 
profound  study,  and  whispered  him,  “Sir,  here 
is  the  King.”  Johnson  started  up,  and  stood 
still.  His  Majesty  approached  him,  and  at  once 
was  courteously  easy.1 

His  Majesty  began  by  observing,  that  he  un¬ 
derstood  he  came  sometimes  to  the  library;  and 
then  mentioning  his  having  heard  that  the  Doc¬ 
tor  had  been  lately  at  Oxford,  asked  him  if  he 
was  not  fond  of  going  thither.  To  which  John¬ 
son  answered,  that  he  was  indeed  fond  of  going 
to  Oxford  sometimes,  but  was  likewise  glad  to 
come  back  again.  The  King  then  asked  him 
what  they  were  doing  at  Oxford.  Johnson  an¬ 
swered,  he  could  not  much  commend  their  dili¬ 
gence,  but  that  in  some  respects  they  were 
mended,  for  they  had  put  their  press  under  bet¬ 
ter  regulations,  and  were  at  that  time  printing 
Polybius.  He  was  then  asked  whether  there  were 
better  libraries  at  Oxford  or  Cambridge.  He  an¬ 
swered,  he  believed  the  Bodleian  was  larger  than 
any  they  had  at  Cambridge;  at  the  same  time 
adding,  “I  hope,  whether  we  have  more  books 
or  not  than  they  have  at  Cambridge,  we  shall 

JThe  particulars  of  this  conversation  I  have  been 
at  great  pains  to  collect  with  the  utmost  authen¬ 
ticity  from  Dr.  Johnson’s  own  detail  to  myself;  from 
Mr.  Langton  who  was  present  when  he  gave  an  ac¬ 
count  of  it  to  Dr.  Joseph  Warton,  and  several  other 
friends,  at  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds’s;  from  Mr.  Bar¬ 
nard;  from  the  copy  of  a  letter  written  by  the  late 
Mr.  Strahan  the  printer,  to  Bishop  Warburton; 
and  from  a  minute,  the  original  of  which  is  among 
the  papers  of  the  late  Sir  James  Caldwell,  and  a 
copy  of  which  was  most  obligingly  obtained  for  me 
from  his  son  Sir  John  Caldwell,  by  Sir  Francis 
Lumm.  To  all  these  gentlemen  I  beg  leave  to  make 
my  grateful  acknowledgements,  and  particularly 
to  Sir  Francis  Lumm,  who  was  pleased  to  take  a 
great  deal  of  trouble,  and  even  had  the  minute  laid 
before  the  King  by  Lord  Caermarthen,  now  Duke 
of  Leeds,  then  one  of  his  Majesty’s  Principal  Secre¬ 
taries  of  State,  who  announced  to  Sir  Francis  the 
Royal  pleasure  concerning  it  by  a  letter,  in  these 
words:  “I  have  the  King’s  commands  to  assure 
you,  Sir,  how  sensible  his  Majesty  is  of  your  atten¬ 
tion  in  communicating  the  minute  of  the  conversa¬ 
tion  previous  to  its  publication.  As  there  appears  no 
objection  to  your  complying  with  Mr.  Boswell’s 
wishes  on  the  subject,  you  are  at  full  liberty  to  de¬ 
liver  it  to  that  gentleman,  to  make  such  use  of  in 
his  Life  of  Dr.  Johnson ,  as  he  may  think  proper.” 


[  1767 

make  as  good  use  of  them  as  they  do.”  Being 
asked  whether  All-Souls  or  Christ-Church  li¬ 
brary  was  the  largest,  he  answered,  “All-Souls 
library  is  the  largest  we  have,  except  the  Bod¬ 
leian.”  “Aye,  (said  the  King.)  that  is  the  pub- 
lick  library.” 

His  Majesty  enquired  if  he  was  then  writing 
any  thing.  He  answered,  he  was  not,  for  he  had 
pretty  well  told  the  world  what  he  knew,  and 
must  now  read  to  acquire  more  knowledge.  The 
King,  as  it  should  seem  with  a  view  to  urge  him 
to  rely  on  his  own  stores  as  an  original  writer, 
and  to  continue  his  labours,  then  said  “I  do  not 
think  you  borrow  much  from  any  body.”  John¬ 
son  said,  he  thought  he  had  already  done  his 
part  as  a  writer.  “I  should  have  thought  so  too, 
(said  the  King,)  if  you  had  not  written  so  well.” 
— Johnson  observed  to  me,  upon  this,  that  “No 
man  could  have  paid  a  handsomer  compliment; 
and  it  was  fit  for  a  King  to  pay.  It  was  decisive.” 
When  asked  by  another  friend,  at  Sir  Joshua 
Reynolds’s,  whether  he  made  any  reply  to  this 
high  compliment,  he  answered,  “No,  Sir.  When 
the  King  had  said  it,  it  was  to  be  so.  It  was  not 
for  me  to  bandy  civilities  with  my  Sovereign.” 
Perhaps  no  man  who  had  spent  his  whole  life  in 
courts  could  have  shewn  a  more  nice  and  dig¬ 
nified  sense  of  true  politeness,  than  Johnson  did 
in  this  instance. 

His  Majesty  having  observed  to  him  that  he 
supposed  he  must  have  read  a  great  deal;  John¬ 
son  answered,  that  he  thought  more  than  he 
read;  that  he  had  read  a  great  deal  in  the  early 
part  of  his  life,  but  having  fallen  into  ill  health, 
he  had  not  been  able  to  read  much,  compared 
with  others:  for  instance,  he  said  he  had  not 
read  much,  compared  with  Dr.  Warburton. 
Upon  which  the  King  said,  that  he  heard  Dr. 
Warburton  was  a  man  of  such  general  knowl¬ 
edge,  that  you  could  scarce  talk  with  him  on 
any  subject  on  which  he  was  not  qualified  to 
speak;  and  that  his  learning  resembled  Gar¬ 
rick’s  acting,  in  its  universality.2  His  Majesty 
then  talked  of  the  controversy  between  War¬ 
burton  and  Lowth,  which  he  seemed  to  have 
read,  and  asked  Johnson  what  he  thought  of  it. 
Johnson  answered,  “Warburton  has  most  gen¬ 
eral,  most  scholastick  learning;  Lowth  is  the 
more  correct  scholar.  I  do  not  know  which  of 
them  calls  names  best.”  The  King  was  pleased 
to  say  he  was  of  the  same  opinion;  adding,  “You 

2The  Rev.  Mr.  Strahan  clearly  recollects  having 
been  told  by  Johnson  that  the  King  observed  that 
Pope  made  Warburton  a  Bishop.  “True,  Sir,  (said 
Johnson,)  but  Warburton  did  more  for  Pope;  he 
made  him  a  Christian”:  alluding,  no  doubt,  to  his 
ingenious  Comments  on  the  Essay  on  Man. 


BOSWELL 


1767  ] 

do  not  think,  then,  Dr.  Johnson,  that  there  was 
much  argument  in  the  case.”  Johnson  said,  he 
did  not  think  there  was.  “Why  truly,  (said  the 
King,)  when  once  it  comes  to  calling  names, 
argument  is  pretty  well  at  an  end.” 

His  Majesty  then  asked  him  what  he  thought 
of  Lord  Lyttelton’s  History .  which  was  then  just 
published.  Johnson  said,  he  thought  his  style 
pretty  good,  but  that  he  had  blamed  Henry  the 
Second  rather  too  much.  “Why,  (said  the  King,) 
they  seldom  do  these  things  by  halves.”  “No, 
Sir,  (answered  Johnson,)  not  to  Kings.”  But 
fearing  to  be  misunderstood,  he  proceeded  to 
explain  himself;  and  immediately  subjoined, 
“That  for  those  who  spoke  worse  of  Kings  than 
they  deserved,  he  could  find  no  excuse;  but  that 
he  could  more  easily  conceive  how  some  might 
speak  better  of  them  than  they  deserved,  with¬ 
out  any  ill  intention;  for,  as  Kings  had  much  in 
their  power  to  give,  those  who  were  favoured  by 
them  would  frequently,  from  gratitude,  exag¬ 
gerate  their  praises;  and  as  this  proceeded  from 
a  good  motive,  it  was  certainly  excusable,  as  far 
as  errour  could  be  excusable.” 

The  King  then  asked  him  what  he  thought  of 
Dr.  Hill.  Johnson  answered,  that  he  was  an  in¬ 
genious  man,  but  had  no  veracity;  and  imme¬ 
diately  mentioned,  as  an  instance  of  it,  an  as¬ 
sertion  of  that  writer,  that  he  had  seen  objects 
magnified  to  a  much  greater  degree  by  using 
three  or  four  microscopes  at  a  time,  than  by 
using  one.  “Now,  (added  Johnson,)  every  one 
acquainted  with  microscopes  knows,  that  the 
more  of  them  he  looks  through,  the  less  the  ob¬ 
ject  will  appear.”  “Why,  (replied  the  King,) 
this  is  not  only  telling  an  untruth,  but  telling  it 
clumsily;  for,  if  that  be  the  case,  every  one  who 
can  look  through  a  microscope  will  be  able  to 
detect  him.” 

“I  now,  (said  Johnson  to  his  friends,  when 
relating  what  had  passed)  began  to  consider 
that  I  was  depreciating  this  man  in  the  estima¬ 
tion  of  his  Sovereign,  and  thought  it  was  time 
for  me  to  say  something  that  might  be  more  fa¬ 
vourable.”  He  added,  therefore,  that  Dr.  Hill 
was,  notwithstanding,  a  very  curious  observer; 
and  if  he  would  have  been  contented  to  tell  the 
world  no  more  than  he  knew,  he  might  have 
been  a  very  considerable  man,  and  needed  not 
to  have  recourse  to  such  mean  expedients  to 
raise  his  reputation. 

The  King  then  talked  of  literary  journals, 
mentioned  particularly  the  Journal  des  Savans , 
and  asked  Johnson  if  it  was  well  done.  Johnson 
said,  it  was  formerly  very  well  done,  and  gave 
some  account  of  the  persons  who  began  it,  and 


*55 

carried  it  on  for  some  years;  enlarging,  at  the 
same  time,  on  the  nature  and  use  of  such  works. 
The  King  asked  him  if  it  was  well  done  now. 
Johnson  answered,  he  had  no  reason  to  think 
that  it  was.  The  King  then  asked  him  if  there 
were  any  other  literary  journals  published  in 
this  kingdom,  except  the  Monthly  and  Critical 
Reviews ;  and  on  being  answered  there  were  no 
other,  his  Majesty  asked  which  of  them  was  the 
best:  Johnson  answered,  that  The  Monthly  Re¬ 
view  was  done  with  most  care,  the  Critical  upon 
the  best  principles;  adding  that  the  authours  of 
The  Monthly  Review  were  enemies  to  the  Church. 
This  the  King  said  he  was  sorry  to  hear. 

The  conversation  next  turned  on  the  Philo¬ 
sophical  Transactions,  when  Johnson  observed, 
that  they  had  now  a  better  method  of  arranging 
their  materials  than  formerly.  “Aye,  (said  the 
King,)  they  are  obliged  to  Dr.  Johnson  for 
that”;  for  his  Majesty  had  heard  and  remem¬ 
bered  the  circumstance,  which  Johnson  himself 
had  forgot. 

His  Majesty  expressed  a  desire  to  have  the 
literary  biography  of  this  country  ably  executed, 
and  proposed  to  Dr.  Johnson  to  undertake  it. 
Johnson  signified  his  readiness  to  comply  with 
his  Majesty’s  wishes. 

During  the  whole  of  this  interview,  Johnson 
talked  to  his  Majesty  with  profound  respect,  but 
still  in  his  firm  manly  manner,  with  a  sonorous 
voice,  and  never  in  that  subdued  tone  which  is 
commonly  used  at  the  levee  and  in  the  drawing¬ 
room.  After  the  King  withdrew,  Johnson  shewed 
himself  highly  pleased  with  his  Majesty’s  con¬ 
versation,  and  gracious  behaviour.  He  said  to 
Mr.  Barnard,  “Sir,  they  may  talk  of  the  King  as 
they  will;  but  he  is  the  finest  gentleman  I  have 
ever  seen.”  And  he  afterwards  observed  to  Mr. 
Langton,  “Sir,  his  manners  are  those  of  as  fine 
a  gentleman  as  we  may  suppose  Lewis  the  Four¬ 
teenth  or  Charles  the  Second.” 

At  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds’s,  where  a  circle  of 
Johnson’s  friends  was  collected  round  him  to 
hear  his  account  of  this  memorable  conver¬ 
sation,  Dr.  Joseph  Warton,  in  his  frank  and 
lively  manner,  was  very  active  in  pressing  him 
to  mention  the  particulars.  “Come  now,  Sir, 
this  is  an  interesting  matter;  do  favour  us  with 
it.”  Johnson,  with  great  good  humour,  com¬ 
plied. 

He  told  them,  “I  found  his  Majesty  wished  I 
should  talk,  and  I  made  it  my  business  to  talk.  I 
find  it  does  a  man  good  to  be  talked  to  by  his 
Sovereign.  In  the  first  place,  a  man  cannot  be 
in  a  passion — .”  Here  some  question  interrupted 
him,  which  is  to  be  regretted,  as  he  certainly 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


BOSWELL 


156 

would  have  pointed  out  and  illustrated  many 
circumstances  of  advantage,  from  being  in  a  sit¬ 
uation,  where  the  powers  of  the  mind  are  at 
once  excited  to  vigorous  exertion,  and  tem¬ 
pered  by  reverential  awe. 

During  all  the  time  in  which  Dr.  Johnson  was 
employed  in  relating  to  the  circle  at  Sir  Joshua 
Reynolds’s  the  particulars  of  what  passed  be¬ 
tween  the  King  and  him,  Dr.  Goldsmith  re¬ 
mained  unmoved  upon  a  sopha  at  some  distance, 
affecting  not  to  join  in  the  least  in  the  eager  cu¬ 
riosity  of  the  company.  He  assigned  as  a  reason 
for  his  gloom  and  seeming  inattention,  that  he 
apprehended  Johnson  had  relinquished  his  pur¬ 
pose  of  furnishing  him  with  a  Prologue  to  his 
play,  with  the  hopes  of  which  he  had  been  flat¬ 
tered;  but  it  was  strongly  suspected  that  he  was 
fretting  with  chagrin  and  envy  at  the  singular 
honour  Dr.  Johnson  had  lately  enjoyed.  At 
length,  the  frankness  and  simplicity  of  his  natu¬ 
ral  character  prevailed.  He  sprung  from  the 
sopha,  advanced  to  Johnson,  and  in  a  kind  of 
flutter,  from  imagining  himself  in  the  situation 
which  he  had  just  been  hearing  described,  ex¬ 
claimed,  “Well,  you  acquitted  yourself  in  this 
conversation  better  than  I  should  have  done; 
for  I  should  have  bowed  and  stammered  through 
the  whole  of  it.55 

I  received  no  letter  from  Johnson  this  year; 
nor  have  I  discovered  any  of  the  correspond¬ 
ence1  he  had,  except  the  two  letters  to  Mr. 
Drummond,  which  have  been  inserted,  for  the 
sake  of  connection  with  that  to  the  same  gentle¬ 
man  in  1766.  His  diary  affords  no  light  as  to  his 
employment  at  this  time.  He  passed  three  months 
at  Lichfield;  and  I  cannot  omit  an  affecting  and 
solemn  scene  there,  as  related  by  himself: 

“Sunday,  Oct.  18.  1767.  Yesterday,  Oct.  17, 
at  about  ten  in  the  morning,  I  took  my  leave  for 
ever  of  my  dear  old  friend,  Catharine  Cham¬ 
bers,  who  came  to  live  with  my  mother  about 
1724,  and  has  been  but  little  parted  from  us 
since.  She  buried  my  father,  my  brother,  and 
my  mother.  She  is  now  fifty-eight  years  old. 

“I  desired  all  to  withdraw,  then  told  her  that 
we  were  to  part  for  ever;  that  as  Christians,  we 
should  part  with  prayer;  and  that  1  would,  if 
she  was  willing,  say  a  short  prayer  beside  her. 
She  expressed  great  desire  to  hear  me;  and  held 

*It  is  proper  here  to  mention,  that  when  I  speak 
of  his  correspondence,  I  consider  it  independent  of 
the  voluminous  collection  of  letters  which,  in  the 
course  of  many  years,  he  wrote  to  Mrs.  Thrale, 
which  forms  a  separate  part  of  his  works;  and  as  a 
proof  of  the  high  estimation  set  on  any  thing  which 
came  from  his  pen,  was  sold  by  that  lady  for  the 
sum  of  five  hundred  pounds. 


[  1767 

up  her  poor  hands,  as  she  lay  in  bed,  with  great 
fervour,  while  I  prayed,  kneeling  by  her,  nearly 
in  the  following  words: 

“Almighty  and  most  merciful  Father,  whose 
loving  kindness  is  over  all  thy  works,  behold, 
visit,  and  relieve  this  thy  servant,  who  is  grieved 
with  sickness.  Grant  that  the  sense  of  her  weak¬ 
ness  may  add  strength  to  her  faith,  and  serious¬ 
ness  to  her  repentance.  And  grant  that  by  the 
help  of  thy  Holy  Spirit,  after  the  pains  and  la¬ 
bours  of  this  short  life,  we  may  all  obtain  ever¬ 
lasting  happiness,  through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord;  for  whose  sake  hear  our  prayers.  Amen. 
Our  Father,  &c. 

“I  then  kissed  her.  She  told  me,  that  to  part 
was  the  greatest  pain  that  she  had  ever  felt,  and 
that  she  hoped  we  should  meet  again  in  a  better 
place.  I  expressed,  with  swelled  eyes,  and  great 
emotion  of  tenderness,  the  same  hopes.  We 
kissed,  and  parted.  I  humbly  hope  to  meet 
again,  and  to  part  no  more.5’2 

By  those  who  have  been  taught  to  look  upon 
Johnson  as  a  man  of  a  harsh  and  stern  charac¬ 
ter,  let  this  tender  and  affectionate  scene  be  can¬ 
didly  read;  and  let  them  then  judge  whether 
more  warmth  of  heart,  and  grateful  kindness,  is 
often  found  in  human  nature. 

We  have  the  following  notice  in  his  devotion¬ 
al  record: — “August  2,  1767.  I  have  been  dis¬ 
turbed  and  unsettled  for  a  long  time,  and  have 
been  without  resolution  to  apply  to  study  or  to 
business,  being  hindered  by  sudden  snatches.”3 

He,  however,  furnished  Mr.  Adams  with  a 
Dedication  *  to  the  King  of  that  ingenious  gen¬ 
tleman’s  Treatise  on  the  Globes ,  conceived  and 
expressed  in  such  a  manner  as  could  not  fail  to 
be  very  grateful  to  a  Monarch,  distinguished 
for  his  love  of  the  sciences. 

This  year  was  published  a  ridicule  of  his  style, 
under  the  title  of  Lexiphanes.  Sir  John  Hawkins 
ascribes  it  to  Dr.  Kenrick;  but  its  authour  was 
one  Campbell,  a  Scotch  purser  in  the  navy.  The 
ridicule  consisted  in  applying  Johnson’s  “words 
of  large  meaning”  to  insignificant  matters,  as  if 
one  should  put  the  armour  of  Goliath  upon  a 
dwarf.  The  contrast  might  be  laughable;  but 
the  dignity  of  the  armour  must  remain  the  same 
in  all  considerate  minds.  This  malicious  drollery, 
therefore,  it  may  easily  be  supposed,  could  do 
no  harm  to  its  illustrious  object. 

2 Prayers  and  Meditations ,  pp.  77  and  78. 

Hbid .,  p.  73.  On  Aug.  17,  he  recorded: — “By 
abstinence  from  wine  and  suppers  I  obtained  sud¬ 
den  and  great  relief,  and  had  freedom  of  mind  re¬ 
stored  to  me,  which  I  have  wanted  for  all  this  year, 
without  being  able  to  find  any  means  of  obtaining 
it.”  Ibid.,  p.  74. 


1768] 

To  Bennet  Langton,  Esq.,  at  Mr. 

Rothwell’s,  perfumer,  in  New 
Bond -street,  London 
Dear  Sir,  That  you  have  been  all  summer  in 
London,  is  one  more  reason  for  which  I  regret 
my  long  stay  in  the  country.  I  hope  that  you 
will  not  leave  the  town  before  my  return.  We 
have  here  only  the  chance  of  vacancies  in  the 
passing  carriages,  and  I  have  bespoken  one  that 
may,  if  it  happens,  bring  me  to  town  on  the 
fourteenth  of  this  month;  but  this  is  not  certain. 

It  will  be  a  favour  if  you  communicate  this  to 
Mrs.  Williams:  I  long  to  see  all  my  friends.  I  am, 
dear  Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

Lichfield,  Oct.  10,  1767 

1768:  alt  at.  59.] — It  appears  from  his  notes 
of  the  state  of  his  mind,1  that  he  suffered  great 
perturbation  and  distraction  in  1768.  Nothing 
of  his  writing  was  given  to  the  publick  this  year, 
except  the  Prologue*  to  his  friend  Goldsmith’s 
comedy  of  The  Good-natured  Man.  The  first  lines 
of  this  Prologue  are  strongly  characteristical  of 
the  dismal  gloom  of  his  mind;  which  in  his  case, 
as  in  the  case  of  all  who  are  distressed  with  the 
same  malady  of  imagination,  transfers  to  others 
its  own  feelings.  Who  could  suppose  it  was  to 
introduce  a  comedy,  when  Mr.  Bensley  solemn¬ 
ly  began, 

Press'd  with  the  load  of  life,  the  weary  mind 

Surveys  the  general  toil  of  human  kind. 

But  this  dark  ground  might  make  Goldsmith’s 
humour  shine  the  more. 

In  the  spring  of  this  year,  having  published 
my  Account  of  Corsica ,  with  the  Journal  of  a  Tour 
to  that  Island,  I  returned  to  London,  very  de¬ 
sirous  to  see  Dr.  Johnson,  and  hear  him  upon 
the  subject.  I  found  he  was  at  Oxford,  with  his 
friend  Mr.  Chambers,  who  was  now  Vinerian 
Professor,  and  lived  in  New  Inn  Hall.  Having 
had  no  letter  from  him  since  that  in  which  he 
criticised  the  Latinity  of  my  Thesis,  and  having 
been  told  by  somebody  that  he  was  offended  at 
my  having  put  into  my  Book  an  extract  of  his 
letter  to  me  at  Paris,  I  was  impatient  to  be  with 
him,  and  therefore  followed  him  to  Oxford, 
where  I  was  entertained  by  Mr.  Chambers,  with 
a  civility  which  I  shall  ever  gratefully  remember. 
I  found  that  Dr.  Johnson  had  sent  a  letter  to  me 
to  Scotland,  and  that  I  had  nothing  to  com¬ 
plain  of  but  his  being  more  indifferent  to  my 
anxiety  than  I  wished  him  to  be.  Instead  of  giv¬ 
ing,  with  the  circumstances  of  time  and  place, 
such  fragments  of  his  conversation  as  I  preserved 
lIbid.,  p.  81. 


157 

during  this  visit  to  Oxford,  I  shall  throw  them 
together  in  continuation. 

I  asked  him  whether,  as  a  moralist,  he  did  not 
think  that  the  practice  of  the  law,  in  some  de¬ 
gree,  hurt  the  nice  feeling  of  honesty.  Johnson. 
“Why  no,  Sir,  if  you  act  properly.  You  are  not 
to  deceive  your  clients  with  false  representations 
of  your  opinion:  you  are  not  to  tell  lies  to  a 
judge.”  Boswell.  “But  what  do  you  think  of 
supporting  a  cause  which  you  know  to  be  bad?” 
Johnson.  “Sir,  you  do  not  know  it  to  be  good  or 
bad  till  the  Judge  determines  it.  I  have  said  that 
you  are  to  state  facts  fairly;  so  that  your  think¬ 
ing,  or  what  you  call  knowing,  a  cause  to  be  bad, 
must  be  from  reasoning,  must  be  from  your  sup¬ 
posing  your  arguments  to  be  weak  and  incon¬ 
clusive.  But,  Sir,  that  is  not  enough.  An  argu¬ 
ment  which  does  not  convince  yourself,  may  con¬ 
vince  the  Judge  to  whom  you  urge  it:  and  if  it 
does  convince  him,  why,  then,  Sir,  you  are  wrong, 
and  he  is  right.  It  is  his  business  to  judge;  and 
you  are  not  to  be  confident  in  your  own  opinion 
that  a  cause  is  bad,  but  to  say  all  you  can  for 
your  client,  and  then  hear  the  Judge’s  opinion.” 
Boswell.  “But,  Sir,  does  not  affecting  a  warmth 
when  you  have  no  warmth,  and  appearing  to  be 
clearly  of  one  opinion  when  you  are  in  reality  of 
another  opinion,  does  not  such  dissimulation  im¬ 
pair  one’s  honesty?  Is  there  not  some  danger  that 
a  lawyer  may  put  on  the  same  mask  in  common 
life,  in  the  intercourse  with  his  friends?”  John¬ 
son.  “Why  no,  Sir.  Everybody  knows  you  are 
paid  for  affecting  warmth  for  your  client;  and 
it  is,  therefore,  properly  no  dissimulation:  the 
moment  you  come  from  the  bar  you  resume  your 
usual  behaviour.  Sir,  a  man  will  no  more  carry 
the  artifice  of  the  bar  into  the  common  inter¬ 
course  of  society,  than  a  man  who  is  paid  for 
tumbling  upon  his  hands  will  continue  to  tumble 
upon  his  hands  when  he  should  walk  on  his  feet.” 

Talking  of  some  of  the  modern  plays,  he  said 
False  Delicacy  was  totally  void  of  character.  He 
praised  Goldsmith’s  Good-natured  Man;  said,  it 
was  the  best  comedy  that  had  appeared  since  The 
Provoked  Husband,  and  that  there  had  not  been 
of  late  any  such  character  exhibited  on  the  stage 
as  that  of  Croaker.  I  observed  it  was  the  Suspir- 
ius  of  his  Rambler.  He  said,  Goldsmith  had 
owned  he  had  borrowed  it  from  thence.  “Sir, 
(continued  he,)  there  is  all  the  difference  in  the 
world  between  characters  of  nature  and  char¬ 
acters  of  manners;  and  there  is  the  difference  be¬ 
tween  the  characters  of  Fielding  and  those  of 
Richardson.  Characters  of  manners  are  very  en¬ 
tertaining;  but  they  are  to  be  understood  by  a 
more  superficial  observer  than  characters  of  na- 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


BOSWELL 


158 

ture,  where  a  man  must  dive  into  the  recesses  of 
the  human  heart.” 

It  always  appeared  to  me  that  he  estimated 
the  compositions  of  Richardson  too  highly,  and 
that  he  had  an  unreasonable  prejudice  against 
Fielding.  In  comparing  those  two  writers,  he 
used  this  expression:  “that  there  was  as  great  a 
difference  between  them  as  between  a  man  who 
knew  how  a  watch  was  made,  and  a  man  who 
could  tell  the  hour  by  looking  on  the  dial-plate.” 
This  was  a  short  and  figurative  state  of  his  dis¬ 
tinction  between  drawing  characters  of  nature 
and  characters  only  of  manners.  But  I  cannot 
help  being  of  opinion,  that  the  neat  watches  of 
Fielding  are  as  well  constructed  as  the  large 
clocks  of  Richardson,  and  that  his  dial-plates  are 
brighter.  Fielding’s  characters,  though  they  do 
not  expand  themselves  so  widely  in  dissertation, 
are  as  just  pictures  of  human  nature,  and  I  will 
venture  to  say,  have  more  striking  features,  and 
nicer  touches  of  the  pencil;  and  though  Johnson 
used  to  quote  with  approbation  a  saying  of  Rich¬ 
ardson’s,  “that  the  virtues  of  Fielding’s  heroes 
were  the  vices  of  a  truly  good  man,”  I  will  ven¬ 
ture  to  add,  that  the  moral  tendency  of  Field¬ 
ing’s  writings,  though  it  does  not  encourage  a 
strained  and  rarely  possible  virtue,  is  ever  fa¬ 
vourable  to  honour  and  honesty,  and  cherishes 
the  benevolent  and  generous  affections.  He  who 
is  as  good  as  Fielding  would  make  him,  is  an 
amiable  member  of  society,  and  may  be  led  on 
by  more  regulated  instructors,  to  a  higher  state 
of  ethical  perfection. 

Johnson  proceeded :  “Even  Sir  Francis  Wrong- 
head  is  a  character  of  manners,  though  drawn 
with  great  humour.”  He  then  repeated,  very 
happily,  all  Sir  Francis’s  credulous  account  to 
Manly  of  his  being  with  “the  great  man,”  and 
securing  a  place.  I  asked  him,  if  The  Suspicious 
Husband  did  not  furnish  a  well-drawn  character, 
that  of  Ranger.  Johnson.  “No,  Sir;  Ranger  is 
just  a  rake,  a  mere  rake,  and  a  lively  young  fel¬ 
low,  but  no  character .” 

The  great  Douglas  Cause  was  at  this  time  a 
very  general  subject  of  discussion.  I  found  he 
had  not  studied  it  with  much  attention,  but  had 
only  heard  parts  of  it  occasionally.  He,  how¬ 
ever,  talked  of  it,  and  said,  “I  am  of  opinion 
that  positive  proof  of  fraud  should  not  be  re¬ 
quired  of  the  plaintiff,  but  that  the  Judges  should 
decide  according  as  probability  shall  appear  to 
preponderate,  granting  to  the  defendant  the  pre¬ 
sumption  of  filiation  to  be  strong  in  his  favour. 
And  I  think  too,  that  a  good  deal  of  weight  should 
be  allowed  to  the  dying  declarations,  because 
they  were  spontaneous.  There  is  a  great  differ¬ 


[1768 

ence  between  what  is  said  without  our  being 
urged  to  it,  and  what  is  said  from  a  kind  of  com¬ 
pulsion.  If  I  praise  a  man’s  book  without  being 
asked  my  opinion  of  it,  that  is  honest  praise,  to 
which  one  may  trust.  But  if  an  authour  asks  me 
if  I  like  his  book,  and  I  give  him  something  like 
praise,  it  must  not  be  taken  as  my  real  opinion.” 

“I  have  not  been  troubled  for  a  long  time  with 
authours  desiring  my  opinion  of  their  works.  I 
used  once  to  be  sadly  plagued  with  a  man  who 
wrote  verses,  but  who  literally  had  no  other  no¬ 
tion  of  a  verse,  but  that  it  consisted  of  ten  sylla¬ 
bles.  Lay  your  knife  and  your  fork,  across  your  plate , 
was  to  him  a  verse: 

Lay  your  knife  and  your  fork ,  across  your  plate . 

As  he  wrote  a  great  number  of  verses,  he  some¬ 
times  by  chance  made  good  ones,  though  he  did 
not  know  it.” 

He  renewed  his  promise  of  coming  to  Scot¬ 
land,  and  going  with  me  to  the  Hebrides,  but 
said  he  would  now  content  himself  with  seeing 
one  or  two  of  the  most  curious  of  them.  He  said, 
“Macaulay,  who  writes  the  account  of  St.  Kilda, 
set  out  with  a  prejudice  against  prejudices,  and 
wanted  to  be  a  smart  modern  thinker;  and  yet 
he  affirms  for  a  truth,  that  when  a  ship  arrives 
there,  all  the  inhabitants  are  seized  with  a  cold.” 

Dr.  John  Campbell,  the  celebrated  writer, 
took  a  great  deal  of  pains  to  ascertain  this  fact, 
and  attempted  to  account  for  it  on  physical  prin¬ 
ciples,  from  the  effect  of  effluvia  from  human 
bodies.  Johnson,  at  another  time,  praised  Ma¬ 
caulay  for  his  “ magnanimity ,”  in  asserting  this 
wonderful  story,  because  it  was  well  attested.  A 
Lady  of  Norfolk,  by  a  letter  to  my  friend  Dr. 
Burney,  has  favoured  me  with  the  following  so¬ 
lution:  “Now  for  the  explication  of  this  seeming 
mystery,  which  is  so  very  obvious  as,  for  that 
reason,  to  have  escaped  the  penetration  of  Dr. 
Johnson  and  his  friend,  as  well  as  that  of  the 
authour.  Reading  the  book  with  my  ingenious 
friend,  the  late  Reverend  Mr.  Christian,  of  Dock¬ 
ing — after  ruminating  a  little,  ‘The  cause,  (says 
he,)  is  a  natural  one.  The  situation  of  St.  Kilda 
renders  a  North-East  Wind  indispensably  nec¬ 
essary  before  a  stranger  can  land.  The  wind,  not 
the  stranger,  causes  an  epidemic  cold.’  If  I  am 
not  mistaken,  Mr.  Macaulay  is  dead;  if  living, 
this  solution  might  please  him,  as  I  hope  it  will 
Mr.  Boswell,  in  return  for  the  many  agreeable 
hours  his  works  have  afforded  us.” 

Johnson  expatiated  on  the  advantages  of  Ox¬ 
ford  for  learning.  “There  is  here,  Sir,  (said  he,) 
such  a  progressive  emulation.  The  students  are 
anxious  to  appear  well  to  their  tutors;  the  tutors 


1768]  LIFE  OF 

are  anxious  to  have  their  pupils  appear  well  in 
the  college;  the  colleges  are  anxious  to  have  their 
students  appear  well  in  the  University;  and  there 
are  excellent  rules  of  discipline  in  every  college. 
That  the  rules  are  sometimes  ill  observed,  may 
be  true;  but  is  nothing  against  the  system.  The 
members  of  an  University  may,  for  a  season,  be 
unmindful  of  their  duty.  I  am  arguing  for  the 
excellency  of  the  institution.” 

Of  Guthrie,  he  said,  “Sir,  he  is  a  man  of  parts. 
He  has  no  great  regular  fund  of  knowledge;  but 
by  reading  so  long,  and  writing  so  long,  he  no 
doubt  has  picked  up  a  good  deal.” 

He  said  he  had  lately  been  a  long  while  at 
Lichfield,  but  had  grown  very  weary  before  he 
left  it.  Boswell.  “I  wonder  at  that,  Sir;  it  is  your 
native  place.”  Johnson.  “Why,  so  is  Scotland 
your  native  place.” 

His  prejudice  against  Scotland  appeared  re¬ 
markably  strong  at  this  time.  When  I  talked  of 
our  advancement  in  literature,  “Sir,  (said  he,) 
you  have  learnt  a  little  from  us,  and  you  think 
yourselves  very  great  men.  Hume  would  never 
have  written  History,  had  not  Voltaire  written 
it  before  him.  He  is  an  echo  of  Voltaire.”  Bos¬ 
well.  “But,  Sir,  we  have  Lord  Karnes.”  John¬ 
son.  “You  have  Lord  Kames.  Keep  him;  ha,  ha, 
ha!  We  don’t  envy  you  him.  Do  you  ever  see 
Dr.  Robertson?”  Boswell.  “Yes,  Sir.”  John¬ 
son.  “Does  the  dog  talk  of  me?”  Boswell.  “In¬ 
deed,  Sir,  he  does,  and  loves  you.”  Thinking 
that  I  now  had  him  in  a  corner,  and  being  solic¬ 
itous  for  the  literary  fame  of  my  country,  I 
pressed  him  for  his  opinion  on  the  merit  of  Dr. 
Robertson’s  History  of  Scotland.  But,  to  my  sur¬ 
prize,  he  escaped. — “Sir,  I  love  Robertson,  and 
I  won’t  talk  of  his  book.” 

It  is  but  justice  both  to  him  and  Dr.  Robert¬ 
son  to  add,  that  though  he  indulged  himself  in 
this  sally  of  wit,  he  had  too  good  taste  not  to  be 
fully  sensible  of  the  merits  of  that  admirable 
work. 

An  essay,  written  by  Mr.  Deane,  a  divine  of 
the  Church  of  England,  maintaining  the  future 
life  of  brutes,  by  an  explication  of  certain  parts 
of  the  scriptures,  was  mentioned,  and  the  doc¬ 
trine  insisted  on  by  a  gentleman  who  seemed 
fond  of  curious  speculation.  Johnson,  who  did 
not  like  to  hear  of  any  thing  concerning  a  future 
state  which  was  not  authorised  by  the  regular 
canons  of  orthodoxy,  discouraged  this  talk;  and 
being  offended  at  its  continuation,  he  watched 
an  opportunity  to  give  the  gentleman  a  blow  of 
reprehension.  So,  when  the  poor  speculatist,  with 
a  serious  metaphysical  pensive  face,  addressed 
him,  “But  really,  Sir,  when  we  see  a  very  sensi- 


JOHNSON  1 59 

ble  dog,  we  don’t  know  what  to  think  of  him”; 
Johnson,  rolling  with  joy  at  the  thought  which 
beamed  in  his  eye,  turned  quickly  round,  and  re¬ 
plied,  “True,  Sir:  and  when  we  see  a  very  fool¬ 
ish  fellow ,  we  don’t  know  what  to  think  of  him” 
He  then  rose  up,  strided  to  the  fire,  and  stood 
for  some  time  laughing  and  exulting. 

I  told  him  that  I  had  several  times,  when  in 
Italy,  seen  the  experiment  of  placing  a  scorpion 
within  a  circle  of  burning  coals ;  that  it  ran  round 
and  round  in  extreme  pain;  and  finding  no  way 
to  escape,  retired  to  the  centre,  and  like  a  true 
Stoick  philosopher,  darted  its  sting  into  its  head, 
and  thus  at  once  freed  itself  from  its  woes.  “  This 
must  end  'em.”  I  said,  this  was  a  curious  fact,  as  it 
shewed  deliberate  suicide  in  a  reptile.  Johnson 
would  not  admit  the  fact.  He  said,  Maupertuis1 
was  of  opinion  that  it  does  not  kill  itself,  but  dies 
of  the  heat;  that  it  gets  to  the  centre  of  the  circle, 
as  the  coolest  place;  that  its  turning  its  tail  in 
upon  its  head  is  merely  a  convulsion,  and  that  it 
does  not  sting  itself.  He  said  he  would  be  satis¬ 
fied  if  the  great  anatomist  Morgagni,  after  dis¬ 
secting  a  scorpion  on  which  the  experiment  had 
been  tried,  should  certify  that  its  sting  had  pene¬ 
trated  into  its  head. 

He  seemed  pleased  to  talk  of  natural  philos¬ 
ophy.  “That  woodcocks,  (said  he,)  fly  over  to 
the  northern  countries  is  proved,  because  they 
have  been  observed  at  sea.  Swallows  certainly 
sleep  all  the  winter.  A  number  of  them  conglob- 
ulate  together,  by  flying  round  and  round,  and 
then  all  in  a  heap  throw  themselves  under  wa¬ 
ter,  and  lye  in  the  bed  of  a  river.”  He  told  us, 
one  of  his  first  essays  was  a  Latin  poem  upon 
the  glow-worm.  I  am  sorry  I  did  not  ask  where 
it  was  to  be  found. 

Talking  of  the  Russians  and  the  Chinese,  he 
advised  me  to  read  Bell’s  travels.  I  asked  him 
whether  I  should  read  Du  Halde’s  account  of 
China.  “Why  yes,  (said  he,)  as  one  reads  such  a 
book;  that  is  to  say,  consult  it.” 

JI  should  think  it  impossible  not  to  wonder  at 
the  variety  of  Johnson’s  reading,  however  desul¬ 
tory  it  may  have  been.  Who  could  have  imagined 
that  the  High  Church  of  England-man  would  be 
so  prompt  in  quoting  Maupertuis ,  who,  lam  sorry 
to  think,  stands  in  the  list  of  those  unfortunate  mis¬ 
taken  men,  who  call  themselves  esprits forts.  I  have, 
however,  a  high  respect  for  that  Philosopher  whom 
the  Great  Frederick  of  Prussia  loved  and  honoured, 
and  addressed  pathetically  in  one  of  his  Poems, 
Maupertuis ,  cher  Maupertuis , 

Que  notre  vie  est  peu  de  chose! 

There  was  in  Maupertuis  a  vigour  and  yet  a  ten¬ 
derness  of  sentiment,  united  with  strong  intellec¬ 
tual  powers,  and  uncommon  ardour  of  soul.  Would 
he  had  been  a  Christian!  I  cannot  help  earnestly 
venturing  to  hope  that  he  is  one  now. 


i6o  BOSWELL  [1768 


He  talked  of  the  heinousness  of  the  crime  of 
adultery,  by  which  the  peace  of  families  was  de¬ 
stroyed.  He  said,  “Confusion  of  progeny  consti¬ 
tutes  the  essence  of  the  crime;  and  therefore  a 
woman  who  breaks  her  marriage  vows  is  much 
more  criminal  than  a  man  who  does  it.  A  man, 
to  be  sure,  is  criminal  in  the  sight  of  God:  but 
he  does  not  do  his  wife  a  very  material  injury,  if 
he  does  not  insult  her;  if,  for  instance,  from  mere 
wantonness  of  appetite,  he  steals  privately  to 
her  chambermaid.  Sir,  a  wife  ought  not  greatly 
to  resent  this.  I  would  not  receive  home  a  daugh¬ 
ter  who  had  run  away  from  her  husband  on  that 
account.  A  wife  should  study  to  reclaim  her  hus¬ 
band  by  more  attention  to  please  him.  Sir,  a 
man  will  not,  once  in  a  hundred  instances,  leave 
his  wife  and  go  to  a  harlot,  if  his  wife  has  not 
been  negligent  of  pleasing.” 

Here  he  discovered  that  acute  discrimination, 
that  solid  judgement,  and  that  knowledge  of 
human  nature,  for  which  he  was  upon  all  occa¬ 
sions  remarkable.  Taking  care  to  keep  in  view 
the  moral  and  religious  duty,  as  understood  in 
our  nation,  he  shewed  clearly  from  reason  and 
good  sense,  the  greater  degree  of  culpability  in 
the  one  sex  deviating  from  it  than  the  other;  and, 
at  the  same  time,  inculcated  a  very  useful  lesson 
as  to  the  way  to  keep  him. 

I  asked  him  if  it  was  not  hard  that  one  devia¬ 
tion  from  chastity  should  so  absolutely  ruin  a 
young  woman.  Johnson.  “Why,  no,  Sir;  it  is  the 
great  principle  which  she  is  taught.  When  she 
has  given  up  that  principle,  she  has  given  up 
every  notion  of  female  honour  and  virtue,  which 
are  all  included  in  chastity.” 

A  gentleman  talked  to  him  of  a  lady  whom  he 
greatly  admired  and  wished  to  marry,  but  was 
afraid  of  her  superiority  of  talents.  “Sir,  (said 
he,)  you  need  not  be  afraid;  marry  her.  Before  a 
year  goes  about,  you’ll  find  that  reason  much 
weaker,  and  that  wit  not  so  bright.”  Yet  the 
gentleman  may  be  justified  in  his  apprehension 
by  one  of  Dr.  Johnson’s  admirable  sentences  in 
his  life  of  Waller:  “He  doubtless  praised  many 
whom  he  would  have  been  afraid  to  marry;  and, 
perhaps,  married  one  whom  he  would  have  been 
ashamed  to  praise.  Many  qualities  contribute 
to  domestic  happiness,  upon  which  poetry  has 
no  colours  to  bestow;  and  many  airs  and  sallies 
may  delight  imagination,  which  he  who  flatters 
them  never  can  approve.” 

He  praised  Signor  Baretti.  “His  account  of 
Italy  is  a  very  entertaining  book;  and,  Sir,  I 
know  no  man  who  carries  his  head  higher  in 
conversation  than  Baretti.  There  are  strong  pow¬ 
ers  in  his  mind.  He  has  not,  indeed,  many  hooks; 


but  with  what  hooks  he  has,  he  grapples  very 
forcibly.” 

At  this  time  I  observed  upon  the  dial-plate  of 
his  watch  a  short  Greek  inscription,  taken  from 
the  New  Testament,  Nu£  yap  epxtrat.,  being 
the  first  words  of  our  Saviour’s  solemn  admoni¬ 
tion  to  the  improvement  of  that  time  which  is 
allowed  us  to  prepare  for  eternity:  “the  night 
cometh,  when  no  man  can  work.”  He  some¬ 
time  afterwards  laid  aside  this  dial-plate;  and 
when  I  asked  him  the  reason,  he  said,  “It  might 
do  very  well  upon  a  clock  which  a  man  keeps  in 
his  closet;  but  to  have  it  upon  his  watch  which 
he  carries  about  with  him,  and  which  is  often 
looked  at  by  others,  might  be  censured  as  osten¬ 
tatious.”  Mr.  Steevens  is  now  possessed  of  the 
dial-plate  inscribed  as  above. 

He  remained  at  Oxford  a  considerable  time; 
I  was  obliged  to  go  to  London,  where  I  received 
his  letter,  which  had  been  returned  from  Scot¬ 
land. 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

My  Dear  Boswell,  I  have  omitted  a  long 
time  to  write  to  you,  without  knowing  very  well 
why.  I  could  now  tell  why  I  should  not  write; 
for  who  would  write  to  men  who  publish  the 
letters  of  their  friends,  without  their  leave?  Yet 
I  write  to  you  in  spite  of  my  caution,  to  tell  you 
that  I  shall  be  glad  to  see  you,  and  that  I  wish 
you  would  empty  your  head  of  Corsica,  which  I 
think  has  filled  it  rather  too  long.  But,  at  all 
events,  I  shall  be  glad,  very  glad  to  see  you.  I 
am,  Sir,  yours  affectionately 

Sam.  Johnson 

Oxford,  March  23,  1768 

I  answered  thus: 

To  Mr.  Samuel  Johnson. 

London,  26th  April ,  1 768 

My  Dear  Sir,  I  have  received  your  last  let¬ 
ter,  which,  though  very  short,  and  by  no  means 
complimentary,  yet  gave  me  real  pleasure,  be¬ 
cause  it  contains  these  words,  “I  shall  be  glad, 
very  glad  to  see  you.”  Surely  you  have  no  reason 
to  complain  of  my  publishing  a  single  paragraph 
of  one  of  your  letters;  the  temptation  to  it  was  so 
strong.  An  irrevocable  grant  of  your  friendship, 
and  your  dignifying  my  desire  of  visiting  Cor¬ 
sica  with  the  epithet  of  “a  wise  and  noble  curios¬ 
ity,”  are  to  me  more  valuable  than  many  of  the 
grants  of  kings. 

But  how  can  you  bid  me  “empty  my  head  of 
Corsica?”  My  noble-minded  friend,  do  you  not 
feel  for  an  oppressed  nation  bravely  struggling 
to  be  free?  Considei  fairly  what  is  the  case.  The 
Corsicans  never  received  any  kindness  from  the 
Genoese.  They  never  agreed  to  be  subject  to 
them.  They  owe  them  nothing;  and  when  re¬ 
duced  to  an  abject  state  of  slavery,  by  force, 


i768  ]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  161 


shall  they  not  rise  in  the  great  cause  of  liberty, 
and  break  the  galling  yoke?  And  shall  not  every 
liberal  soul  be  warm  for  them?  Empty  my  head 
of  Corsica !  Empty  it  of  honour,  empty  it  of  hu¬ 
manity,  empty  it  of  friendship,  empty  it  of  piety. 
No!  while  I  live,  Corsica  and  the  cause  of  the 
brave  islanders  shall  ever  employ  much  of  my 
attention,  shall  ever  interest  me  in  the  sincerest 
manner.  ...  I  am,  &c. 

James  Boswell 

Upon  his  arrival  in  London  in  May,  he  sur¬ 
prized  me  one  morning  with  a  visit  at  my  lodg¬ 
ings  in  Half-moon-street,  was  quite  satisfied  with 
my  explanation,  and  was  in  the  kindest  and 
most  agreeable  frame  of  mind.  As  he  had  ob¬ 
jected  to  a  part  of  one  of  his  letters  being  pub¬ 
lished,  I  thought  it  right  to  take  this  opportun¬ 
ity  of  asking  him  explicitly  whether  it  would  be 
improper  to  publish  his  letters  after  his  death. 
His  answer  was,  "Nay,  Sir,  when  I  am  dead, 
you  may  do  as  you  will.” 

He  talked  in  his  usual  style  with  a  rough  con¬ 
tempt  of  popular  liberty.  "They  make  a  rout 
about  universal  liberty,  without  considering  that 
all  that  is  to  be  valued,  or  indeed  can  be  enjoyed 
by  individuals,  is  private  liberty.  Political  liberty 
is  good  only  so  far  as  it  produces  private  liberty. 
Now,  Sir,  there  is  the  liberty  of  the  press,  which 
you  know  is  a  constant  topick.  Suppose  you  and 
I  and  two  hundred  more  were  restrained  from 
printing  our  thoughts:  what  then?  What  pro¬ 
portion  would  that  restraint  upon  us  bear  to  the 
private  happiness  of  the  nation?” 

This  mode  of  representing  the  inconveniences 
of  restraint  as  light  and  insignificant,  was  a  kind 
of  sophistry  in  which  he  delighted  to  indulge 
himself,  in  opposition  to  the  extreme  laxity  for 
which  it  has  been  fashionable  for  too  many  to 
argue,  when  it  is  evident,  upon  reflection,  that 
the  very  essence  of  government  is  restraint;  and 
certain  it  is,  that  as  government  produces  ra¬ 
tional  happiness,  too  much  restraint  is  better 
than  too  little.  But  when  restraint  is  unneces¬ 
sary,  and  so  close  as  to  gall  those  who  are  sub¬ 
ject  to  it,  the  people  may  and  ought  to  remon¬ 
strate;  and,  if  relief  is  not  granted,  to  resist.  Of 
this  manly  and  spirited  principle,  no  man  was 
more  convinced  than  Johnson  himself. 

About  this  time  Dr.  Kenrick  attacked  him, 
through  my  sides,  in  a  pamphlet,  entitled  An 
Epistle  to  James  Boswell ,  Esq.,  occasioned  by  his  hav¬ 
ing  transmitted  the  moral  Writings  of  Dr.  Samuel 
Johnson  to  Pascal  Paoli,  General  of  the  Corsicans .  I 
was  at  first  inclined  to  answer  this  pamphlet; 
but  Johnson,  who  knew  that  my  doing  so  would 
only  gratify  Kenrick,  by  keeping  alive  what 


would  soon  die  away  of  itself,  would  not  suffer 
me  to  take  any  notice  of  it. 

His  sincere  regard  for  Francis  Barber,  his 
faithful  negro  servant,  made  him  so  desirous  of 
his  further  improvement,  that  he  now  placed 
him  at  a  school  at  Bishop  Stortford,  in  Hertford¬ 
shire.  This  humane  attention  does  Johnson’s 
heart  much  honour.  Out  of  many  letters  which 
Mr.  Barber  received  from  his  master,  he  has 
preserved  three,  which  he  kindly  gave  me,  and 
which  I  shall  insert  according  to  their  dates. 

To  Mr.  Francis  Barber 

Dear  Francis,  I  have  been  very  much  out  of 
order.  I  am  glad  to  hear  that  you  are  well,  and 
design  to  come  soon  to  see  you.  I  would  have 
you  stay  at  Mrs.  Clapp’s  for  the  present,  till  I 
can  determine  what  we  shall  do.  Be  a  good  boy. 

My  compliments  to  Mrs.  Clapp  and  to  Mr. 
Fowler.  I  am,  your’s  affectionately, 

Sam.  Johnson 

May  28,  1 768 

Soon  afterwards,  he  supped  at  the  Crown  and 
Anchor  tavern,  in  the  Strand,  with  a  company 
whom  I  collected  to  meet  him.  They  were  Dr. 
Percy,  now  Bishop  of  Dromore,  Dr.  Douglas, 
now  Bishop  of  Salisbury,  Mr.  Langton,  Dr. 
Robertson  the  Historian,  Dr.  Hugh  Blair,  and 
Mr.  Thomas  Davies,  who  wished  much  to  be 
introduced  to  these  eminent  Scotch  literati;  but 
on  the  present  occasion  he  had  very  little  oppor¬ 
tunity  of  hearing  them  talk,  for  with  an  excess 
of  prudence,  for  which  Johnson  afterwards  found 
fault  with  them,  they  hardly  opened  their  lips, 
and  that  only  to  say  something  which  they  were 
certain  would  not  expose  them  to  the  sword  of 
Goliath;  such  was  their  anxiety  for  their  fame 
when  in  the  presence  of  Johnson.  He  was  this 
evening  in  remarkable  vigour  of  mind,  and  ea¬ 
ger  to  exert  himself  in  conversation,  which  he 
did  with  great  readiness  and  fluency;  but  I  am 
sorry  to  find  that  I  have  preserved  but  a  small 
part  of  what  passed. 

He  allowed  high  praise  to  Thomson  as  a  poet; 
but  when  one  of  the  company  said  he  was  also  a 
very  good  man,  our  moralist  contested  this  with 
great  warmth,  accusing  him  of  gross  sensuality 
and  licentiousness  of  manners.  I  was  very  much 
afraid  that  in  writing  Thomson’s  Life ,  Dr.  John¬ 
son  would  have  treated  his  private  character 
with  a  stern  severity,  but  I  was  agreeably  dis¬ 
appointed;  and  I  may  claim  a  little  merit  in  it, 
from  my  having  been  at  pains  to  send  him  au- 
thentick  accounts  of  the  affectionate  and  gen¬ 
erous  conduct  of  that  poet  to  his  sisters,  one  of 
whom,  the  wife  of  Mr.  Thomson,  schoolmaster 
at  Lanark,  I  knew,  and  was  presented  by  her 


162 


BOSWELL 


with  three  of  his  letters,  one  of  which  Dr.  John¬ 
son  has  inserted  in  his  Life. 

He  was  vehement  against  old  Dr.  Mounsey, 
of  Chelsea  College,  as  “a  fellow  who  swore  and 
talked  bawdy.”  “I  have  been  often  in  his  com¬ 
pany,  (said  Dr.  Percy,)  and  never  heard  him 
swear  or  talk  bawdy.”  Mr.  Davies,  who  sat  next 
to  Dr.  Percy,  having  after  this  had  some  conver¬ 
sation  aside  with  him,  made  a  discovery  which, 
in  his  zeal  to  pay  court  to  Dr.  Johnson,  he  eagerly 
proclaimed  aloud  from  the  foot  of  the  table:  “O, 
Sir,  I  have  found  out  a  very  good  reason  why 
Dr.  Percy  never  heard  Mounsey  swear  or  talk 
bawdy;  for  he  tells  me,  he  never  saw  him  but  at 
the  Duke  of  Northumberland’s  table.”  “And  so, 
Sir,  (said  Johnson  loudly,  to  Dr.  Percy,)  you 
would  shield  this  man  from  the  charge  of  swear¬ 
ing  and  talking  bawdy,  because  he  did  not  do  so 
at  the  Duke  of  Northumberland’s  table.  Sir,  you 
might  as  well  tell  us  that  you  had  seen  him  hold 
up  his  hand  at  the  Old  Bailey,  and  he  neither 
swore  nor  talked  bawdy;  or  that  you  had  seen 
him  in  the  cart  at  Tyburn,  and  he  neither  swore 
nor  talked  bawdy.  And  is  it  thus,  Sir,  that  you 
presume  to  controvert  what  I  have  related?”  Dr. 
Johnson’s  animadversion  was  uttered  in  such  a 
manner,  that  Dr.  Percy  seemed  to  be  displeased, 
and  soon  afterwards  left  the  company,  of  which 
Johnson  did  not  at  that  time  take  any  notice. 

Swift  having  been  mentioned,  Johnson,  as 
usual,  treated  him  with  little  respect  as  an  au- 
thour.  Some  of  us  endeavoured  to  support  the 
Dean  of  St.  Patrick’s  by  various  arguments.  One 
in  particular  praised  his  Conduct  of  the  Allies. 
Johnson.  “Sir,  his  Conduct  of  the  Allies  is  a  per¬ 
formance  of  very  little  ability.”  “Surely,  Sir, 
(said  Dr.  Douglas,)  you  must  allow  it  has  strong 
facts.”1  Johnson.  “Why  yes,  Sir;  but  what  is 
that  to  the  merit  of  the  composition?  In  the  Ses- 
sions-paper  of  the  Old  Bailey  there  are  strong 
facts.  Housebreaking  is  a  strong  fact;  robbery  is 
a  strong  fact;  and  murder  is  a  mighty  strong  fact; 
but  is  great  praise  due  to  the  historian  of  those 
strong  facts?  No,  Sir.  Swift  has  told  what  he  had 
to  tell  distinctly  enough,  but  that  is  all.  He  had 

*My  respectable  friend,  upon  reading  this  pas¬ 
sage,  observed,  that  he  probably  must  have  said 
not  simply,  “strong  facts,”  but  “strong  facts  well  ar¬ 
ranged.  ”  His  Lordship,  however,  knows  too  well  the 
value  of  written  documents  to  insist  on  setting  his 
recollection  against  my  notes  taken  at  the  time.  He 
does  not  attempt  to  traverse  the  record.  The  fact,  per¬ 
haps,  may  have  been,  either  that  the  additional 
words  escaped  me  in  the  noise  of  a  numerous  com¬ 
pany,  or  that  Dr.  Johnson,  from  his  impetuosity, 
and  eagerness  to  seize  an  opportunity  to  make  a 
lively  retort,  did  not  allow  Dr.  Douglas  to  finish 
his  sentence. 


[  1769 

to  count  ten,  and  he  has  counted  it  right.”  Then 
recollecting  that  Mr.  Davies,  by  acting  as  an 
informer ,  had  been  the  occasion  of  his  talking 
somewhat  too  harshly  to  his  friend  Dr.  Percy, 
for  which,  probably,  when  the  first  ebullition 
was  over,  he  felt  some  compunction,  he  took  an 
opportunity  to  give  him  a  hit;  so  added,  with  a 
preparatory  laugh,  “Why,  Sir,  Tom  Davies 
might  have  written  The  Conduct  of  the  Allies .” 
Poor  Tom  being  thus  suddenly  dragged  into 
ludicrous  notice  in  presence  of  the  Scottish  Doc¬ 
tors,  to  whom  he  was  ambitious  of  appearing 
to  advantage,  was  grievously  mortified.  Nor 
did  his  punishment  rest  here;  for  upon  sub¬ 
sequent  occasions,  whenever  he,  “statesman  all 
over,”2  assumed  a  strutting  importance,  I  used 
to  hail  him — “the  Authour  of  The  Conduct  of  the 
Allies .” 

When  I  called  upon  Dr.  Johnson  next  morn¬ 
ing,  I  found  him  highly  satisfied  with  his  collo¬ 
quial  prowess  the  preceding  evening.  “Well, 
(said  he,)  we  had  good  talk.”  Boswell.  “Yes, 
Sir;  you  tossed  and  gored  several  persons.” 

The  late  Alexander,  Earl  of  Eglintoune,  who 
loved  wit  more  than  wine,  and  men  of  genius  more 
than  sycophants,  had  a  great  admiration  of  John¬ 
son  ;  but  from  the  remarkable  elegance  of  his  own 
manners,  was,  perhaps,  too  delicately  sensible  of 
the  roughness  which  sometimes  appeared  in 
Johnson’s  behaviour.  One  evening  about  this 
time,  when  his  Lordship  did  me  the  honour  to 
sup  at  my  lodgings  with  Dr.  Robertson  and  sever¬ 
al  other  men  of  literary  distinction,  he  regretted 
that  Johnson  had  not  been  educated  with  more 
refinement,  and  lived  more  in  polished  society. 
“No,  no,  my  Lord,  (said  Signor  Baretti,)  do 
with  him  what  you  would,  he  would  always  have 
been  a  bear.”  “True,  (answered  the  Earl,  with  a 
smile,)  but  he  would  have  been  a  dancing  bear.” 

To  obviate  all  the  reflections  which  have  gone 
round  the  world  to  Johnson’s  prejudice,  by  ap¬ 
plying  to  him  the  epithet  of  a  bear ,  let  me  im¬ 
press  upon  my  readers  a  just  and  happy  saying 
of  my  friend  Goldsmith,  who  knew  him  well: 
“Johnson,  to  be  sure,  has  a  roughness  in  his 
manner;  but  no  man  alive  has  a  more  tender 
heart.  He  has  nothing  of  the  bear  but  his  skin.” 

1769:  je tat.  60.] — In  1769,  so  far  as  I  can  dis¬ 
cover,  the  publick  was  favoured  with  nothing  of 
Johnson’s  composition,  either  for  himself  or  any 
of  his  friends.  His  Meditations  too  strongly  prove 
that  he  suffered  much  both  in  body  and  mind; 
yet  was  he  perpetually  striving  against  evil ,  and 

2Sec  the  hard  drawing  of  him  in  ChurchilPs  Ros - 
ciad. 


1769] 

nobly  endeavouring  to  advance  his  intellectual 
and  devotional  improvement.  Every  generous 
and  grateful  heart  must  feel  for  the  distresses  of 
so  eminent  a  benefactor  to  mankind;  and  now 
that  his  unhappiness  is  certainly  known,  must 
respect  that  dignity  of  character  which  pre¬ 
vented  him  from  complaining. 

His  Majesty  having  the  preceding  year  insti¬ 
tuted  the  Royal  Academy  of  Arts  in  London, 
Johnson  had  now  the  honour  of  being  appointed 
Professor  in  Ancient  Literature.1  In  the  course 
of  the  year  he  wrote  some  letters  to  Mrs.  Thrale, 
passed  some  part  of  the  summer  at  Oxford  and 
at  Lichfield,  and  when  at  Oxford  wrote  the 
following  letter: 

To  the  Reverend  Mr.  Thomas  Warton 

Dear  Sir,  Many  years  ago,  when  I  used  to 
read  in  the  library  of  your  College,  I  promised 
to  recompence  the  College  for  that  permission, 
by  adding  to  their  books  a  Baskerville’s  Virgil.  I 
have  now  sent  it,  and  desire  you  to  reposit  it  on 
the  shelves  in  my  name.2 

If  you  will  be  pleased  to  let  me  know  when 
you  have  an  hour  of  leisure,  I  will  drink  tea  with 
you.  I  am  engaged  for  the  afternoon,  to-mor¬ 
row  and  on  Friday:  all  my  mornings  are  my 
own.3  I  am,  &c. 

Sam.  Johnson 

May  31,  1769 

I  came  to  London  in  the  autumn,  and  having 
informed  him  that  I  was  going  to  be  married  in 
a  few  months,  I  wished  to  have  as  much  of  his 
conversation  as  I  could  before  engaging  in  a 
state  of  life  which  would  probably  keep  me  more 
in  Scotland,  and  prevent  me  seeing  him  so  often 
as  when  I  was  a  single  man;  but  I  found  he  was 

xIn  which  place  he  has  been  succeeded  by  Ben- 
net  Langton,  Esq.  When  that  truly  religious  gen¬ 
tleman  was  elected  to  this  honorary  Professorship, 
at  the  same  time  that  Edward  Gibbon,  Esq.,  noted 
for  introducing  a  kind  of  sneering  infidelity  into  his 
Historical  Writings,  was  elected  Professor  in  An¬ 
cient  History,  in  the  room  of  Dr.  Goldsmith,  I  ob¬ 
served  that  it  brought  to  my  mind,  “Wicked  Will 
Whiston  and  good  Mr.  Ditton.”  I  am  now  also  of 
that  admirable  institution  as  Secretary  for  Foreign 
Correspondence,  by  the  favour  of  the  Academi¬ 
cians,  and  the  approbation  of  the  Sovereign. 

2It  has  this  inscription  in  a  blank  leaf: — “ Hunc 
librum  D.  D.  Samuel  Johnson ,  eo  quod  hie  loci  studiis 
inter dum  vacaret .”  Of  this  library,  which  is  an  old 
Gothick  room,  he  was  very  fond.  On  my  observing 
to  him  that  some  of  the  modern  libraries  of  the  Uni¬ 
versity  were  more  commodious  and  pleasant  for 
study,  as  being  more  spacious  and  airy,  he  replied, 
“Sir,  if  a  man  has  a  mind  to  prance ,  he  must  study 
at  Christ-Church  and  All-Souls.” 

3During  this  visit  he  seldom  or  never  dined  out. 
He  appeared  to  be  deeply  engaged  in  some  literary 
work.  Miss  Williams  was  now  with  him  at  Oxford. 


163 

at  Brighthelmstone  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Thrale. 
I  was  very  sorry  that  I  had  not  his  company  with 
me  at  the  Jubilee,  in  honour  of  Shakspeare,  at 
Stratford-upon-Avon,  the  great  poet’s  native 
town.  Johnson’s  connection  both  with  Shak¬ 
speare  and  Garrick  founded  a  double  claim  to 
his  presence;  and  it  would  have  been  highly 
gratifying  to  Mr.  Garrick.  Upon  this  occasion  I 
particularly  lamented  that  he  had  not  that 
warmth  of  friendship  for  his  brilliant  pupil, 
which  we  may  suppose  would  have  had  a  be¬ 
nignant  effect  on  both.  When  almost  every  man 
of  eminence  in  the  literary  world  was  happy  to 
partake  in  this  festival  of  genius,  the  absence  of 
Johnson  could  not  but  be  wondered  at  and 
regretted.  The  only  trace  of  him  there,  was 
in  the  whimsical  advertisement  of  a  haber¬ 
dasher,  who  sold  Shakspearian  ribbands  of  various 
dyes;  and,  by  way  of  illustrating  their  appro¬ 
priation  to  the  bard,  introduced  a  line  from  the 
celebrated  Prologue  at  the  opening  of  Drury- 
lane  theatre: 

Each  change  of  many-colour ’d  life  he  drew. 

From  Brighthelmstone  Dr.  Johnson  wrote  me 
the  following  letter,  which  they  who  may  think 
that  I  ought  to  have  suppressed  it,  must  have  less 
ardent  feelings  than  I  have  always  avowed.4 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq,. 

Dear  Sir,  Why  do  you  charge  me  with  un¬ 
kindness?  I  have  omitted  nothing  that  could  do 

4In  the  Preface  to  my  Account  of  Corsica,  published 
in  1 768,  I  thus  express  myself: 

“He  who  publishes  a  book  affecting  not  to  be  an 
authour,  and  professing  an  indifference  for  literary 
fame,  may  possibly  impose  upon  many  people  such 
an  idea  of  his  consequence  as  he  wishes  may  be  re¬ 
ceived.  For  my  part,  I  should  be  proud  to  be 
known  as  an  authour,  and  I  have  an  ardent  ambi¬ 
tion  for  literary  fame;  for,  of  all  possessions,  I 
should  imagine  literary  fame  to  be  the  most  valu¬ 
able.  A  man  who  has  been  able  to  furnish  a  book, 
which  has  been  approved  by  the  world,  has  estab¬ 
lished  himself  as  a  respectable  character  in  distant 
society,  without  any  danger  of  having  that  char¬ 
acter  lessened  by  the  observation  of  his  weaknesses. 
To  preserve  an  uniform  dignity  among  those  who 
see  us  every  day,  is  hardly  possible;  and  to  aim  at 
it,  must  put  us  under  the  fetters  of  perpetual  re¬ 
straint.  The  authour  of  an  approved  book  may  al¬ 
low  his  natural  disposition  an  easy  play,  and  yet 
indulge  the  pride  of  superior  genius,  when  he  con¬ 
siders  that  by  those  who  know  him  only  as  an  au¬ 
thour,  he  never  ceases  to  be  respected.  Such  an  au¬ 
thour,  when  in  his  hours  of  gloom  and  discontent, 
may  have  the  consolation  to  think,  that  his  writ¬ 
ings  are,  at  that  very  time,  giving  pleasure  to 
numbers;  and  such  an  authour  may  cherish  the 
hope  of  being  remembered  after  death,  which 
has  been  a  great  object  to  the  noblest  minds  in  all 
ages.” 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


164  BOSWELL  [1769 


you  good,  or  give  you  pleasure,  unless  it  be  that 
I  have  forborne  to  tell  you  my  opinion  of  your 
Account  of  Corsica.  I  believe  my  opinion,  if  you 
think  well  of  my  judgement,  might  have  given 
you  pleasure;  but  when  it  is  considered  how 
much  vanity  is  excited  by  praise,  I  am  not  sure 
that  it  would  have  done  you  good.  Your  History 
is  like  other  histories,  but  your  Journal  is  in  a 
very  high  degree  curious  and  delightful.  There 
is  between  the  History  and  the  Journal  that  dif¬ 
ference  which  there  will  always  be  found  be¬ 
tween  notions  borrowed  from  without,  and  no¬ 
tions  generated  within.  Your  History  was  cop¬ 
ied  from  books;  your  Journal  rose  out  of  your 
own  experience  and  observation.  You  express 
images  which  operated  strongly  upon  yourself, 
and  you  have  impressed  them  with  great  force 
upon  your  readers.  I  know  not  whether  I  could 
name  any  narrative  by  which  curiosity  is  better 
excited,  or  better  gratified. 

I  am  glad  that  you  are  going  to  be  married; 
and  as  I  wish  you  well  in  things  of  less  impor¬ 
tance,  wish  you  well  with  proportionate  ardour 
in  this  crisis  of  your  life.  What  I  can  contribute 
to  your  happiness,  I  should  be  very  unwilling  to 
with-hold;  for  I  have  always  loved  and  valued 
you,  and  shall  love  you  and  value  you  still  more, 
as  you  become  more  regular  and  useful:  effects 
which  a  happy  marriage  will  hardly  fail  to  pro¬ 
duce. 

I  do  not  find  that  I  am  likely  to  come  back 
very  soon  from  this  place.  I  shall,  perhaps,  stay 
a  fortnight  longer;  and  a  fortnight  is  a  long  time 
to  a  lover  absent  from  his  mistress.  Would  a 
fortnight  ever  have  an  end?  I  am,  dear  Sir,  your 
most  affectionate  humble  servant. 

Sam.  Johnson 

Brighthelmstone, 

Sept.  9,  1769 

After  his  return  to  town,  we  met  frequently, 
and  I  continued  the  practice  of  making  notes  of 
his  conversation,  though  not  with  so  much  assi¬ 
duity  as  I  wish  I  had  done.  At  this  time,  indeed, 
I  had  a  sufficient  excuse  for  not  being  able  to 
appropriate  so  much  time  to  my  Journal;  for 
General  Paoli,  after  Corsica  had  been  overpow¬ 
ered  by  the  monarchy  of  France,  was  now  no 
longer  at  the  head  of  his  brave  countrymen,  but 
having  with  difficulty  escaped  from  his  native 
island,  had  sought  an  asylum  in  Great-Britain; 
and  it  was  my  duty,  as  well  as  my  pleasure,  to 
attend  much  upon  him.  Such  particulars  of 
Johnson’s  conversation  at  this  period  as  I  have 
committed  to  writing,  I  shall  here  introduce, 
without  any  strict  attention  to  methodical  ar¬ 
rangement.  Sometimes  short  notes  of  different 
days  shall  be  blended  together,  and  sometimes  a 
day  may  seem  important  enough  to  be  sepa¬ 
rately  distinguished. 


He  said,  he  would  not  have  Sunday  kept  with 
rigid  severity  and  gloom,  but  with  a  gravity  and 
simplicity  of  behaviour. 

I  told  him  that  David  Hume  had  made  a 
short  collection  of  Scotticisms.1  “I  wonder,  (said 
Johnson,)  that  he  should  find  them.” 

He  would  not  admit  the  importance  of  the 
question  concerning  the  legality  of  general  war¬ 
rants.  “Such  a  power  (he  observed,)  must  be 
vested  in  every  government,  to  answer  particu¬ 
lar  cases  of  necessity;  and  there  can  be  no  just 
complaint  but  when  it  is  abused,  for  which  those 
who  administer  government  must  be  answer- 
able.  It  is  a  matter  of  such  indifference,  a  matter 
about  which  the  people  care  so  very  little,  that 
were  a  man  to  be  sent  over  Britain  to  offer  them 
an  exemption  from  it  at  a  halfpenny  apiece, 
very  few  would  purchase  it.”  This  was  a  speci¬ 
men  of  that  laxity  of  talking,  which  I  have  heard 
him  fairly  acknowledge;  for,  surely,  while  the 
power  of  granting  general  warrants  was  sup¬ 
posed  to  be  legal,  and  the  apprehension  of  them 
hung  over  our  heads,  we  did  not  possess  that 
security  of  freedom,  congenial  to  our  happy  con¬ 
stitution,  and  which,  by  the  intrepid  exertions 
of  Mr.  Wilkes,  has  been  happily  established. 

He  said, “The  duration  of  Parliament,  whether 
for  seven  years  or  the  life  of  the  King,  appears 
to  me  so  immaterial,  that  I  would  not  give  half  a 
crown  to  turn  the  scale  one  way  or  the  other. The 
habeas  corpus  is  the  single  advantage  which  our 
government  has  over  that  of  other  countries.” 

On  the  30th  of  September  we  dined  together 
at  the  Mitre.  I  attempted  to  argue  for  the  supe¬ 
rior  happiness  of  the  savage  life,  upon  the  usual 
fanciful  topicks.  Johnson.  “Sir,  there  can  be 
nothing  more  false.  The  savages  have  no  bodily 
advantages  beyond  those  of  civilised  men.  They 
have  not  better  health;  and  as  to  care  or  mental 
uneasiness,  they  are  not  above  it,  but  below  it, 
like  bears.  No,  Sir;  you  are  not  to  talk  such  par¬ 
adox:  let  me  have  no  more  on’t.  It  cannot  en¬ 
tertain,  far  less  can  it  instruct.  Lord  Monboddo, 
one  of  your  Scotch  Judges,  talked  a  great  deal  of 
such  nonsense.  I  suffered  him ;  but  I  will  not  suf¬ 
fer  you”  Boswell.  “But,  Sir,  does  not  Rous¬ 
seau  talk  such  nonsense?”  Johnson.  “True,  Sir, 
but  Rousseau  knows  he  is  talking  nonsense,  and 
laughs  at  the  world  for  staring  at  him.”  Boswell. 
“How  so,  Sir?”  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  a  man  who 
talks  nonsense  so  well,  must  know  that  he  is 
talking  nonsense.  But  I  am  afraid ,  (chuckling 
and  laughing,)  Monboddo  does  not  know  that 

rThe  first  edition  of  Hume’s  History  of  England 
was  full  of  Scotticisms,  many  of  which  he  corrected 
in  subsequent  editions.  [M.] 


1769]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  165 


he  is  talking  nonsense.”1  Boswell.  “Is  it  wrong 
then,  Sir,  to  affect  singularity,  in  order  to  make 
people  stare?”  Johnson.  “Yes,  if  you  do  it  by 
propagating  errour:  and,  indeed,  it  is  wrong  in 
any  way.  There  is  in  human  nature  a  general 
inclination  to  make  people  stare;  and  every  wise 
man  has  himself  to  cure  of  it,  and  does  cure  him¬ 
self.  If  you  wish  to  make  people  stare  by  doing 
better  than  others,  why,  make  them  stare  till 
they  stare  their  eyes  out.  But  consider  how  easy 
it  is  to  make  people  stare  by  being  absurd.  I  may 
do  it  by  going  into  a  drawing-room  without  my 
shoes.  You  remember  the  gentleman  in  The 
Spectator ,  who  had  a  commission  of  lunacy  taken 
out  against  him  for  his  extreme  singularity,  such 
as  never  wearing  a  wig,  but  a  night-cap.  Now, 
Sir,  abstractly,  the  night-cap  was  best;  but,  re¬ 
latively,  the  advantage  was  overbalanced  by 
his  making  the  boys  run  after  him.” 

Talking  of  a  London  life,  he  said,  “The  hap¬ 
piness  of  London  is  not  to  be  conceived  but  by 
those  who  have  been  in  it.  I  will  venture  to  say, 
there  is  more  learning  and  science  within  the 
circumference  of  ten  miles  from  where  we  now 
sit,  than  in  all  the  rest  of  the  kingdom.”  Bos¬ 
well.  “The  only  disadvantage  is  the  great  dis¬ 
tance  at  which  people  live  from  one  another.” 
Johnson.  “Yes,  Sir;  but  that  is  occasioned  by 
the  largeness  of  it,  which  is  the  cause  of  all  the 
other  advantages.”  Boswell.  “Sometimes  I 
have  been  in  the  humour  of  wishing  to  retire  to 
a  desart.”  Johnson. “Sir,  you  have  desart  enough 
in  Scotland.” 

Although  I  had  promised  myself  a  great  deal 
of  instructive  conversation  with  him  on  the  con¬ 
duct  of  the  married  state,  of  which  I  had  then  a 
near  prospect,  he  did  not  say  much  upon  that 
topick.  Mr.  Seward  heard  him  once  say,  that  “a 
man  has  a  very  bad  chance  for  happiness  in  that 
state,  unless  he  marries  a  woman  of  very  strong 
and  fixed  principles  of  religion.”  He  maintained 
to  me,  contrary  to  the  common  notion,  that  a 
woman  would  not  be  the  worse  wife  for  being 
learned;  in  which,  from  all  that  I  have  observed 
of  Artemisias ,  I  humbly  differed  from  him.  That 
a  woman  should  be  sensible  and  well  informed, 
I  allow  to  be  a  great  advantage;  and  think  that 

1His  Lordship  having  frequently  spoken  in  an 
abusive  manner  of  Dr.  Johnson,  in  my  company,  I 
on  one  occasion  during  the  life-time  of  my  illus¬ 
trious  friend  could  not  refrain  from  retaliation,  and 
repeated  to  him  this  saying.  He  has  since  pub¬ 
lished  I  don’t  know  how  many  pages  in  one  of  his 
curious  books,  attempting,  in  much  anger,  but  with 
pitiful  effect,  to  persuade  mankind  that  my  illus¬ 
trious  friend  was  not  the  great  and  good  man  which 
they  esteemed  and  ever  will  esteem  him  to  be. 


Sir  Thomas  Overbury,2  in  his  rude  versification, 
has  very  judiciously  pointed  out  that  degree  of 
intelligence  which  is  to  be  desired  in  a  female 
companion: 

Give  me,  next  good,  an  understanding  wife, 

By  Nature  wise,  not  learned  by  much  art; 

Some  knowledge  on  her  side  will  all  my  life 
More  scope  of  conversation  impart ; 

Besides,  her  inborne  virtue  fortifie; 

They  are  most  firmly  good,  who  best  know  why. 

When  I  censured  a  gentleman  of  my  acquaint¬ 
ance  for  marrying  a  second  time,  as  it  shewed  a 
disregard  of  his  first  wife,  he  said,  “Not  at  all, 
Sir.  On  the  contrary,  were  he  not  to  marry 
again,  it  might  be  concluded  that  his  first  wife 
had  given  him  a  disgust  to  marriage;  but  by 
taking  a  second  wife  he  pays  the  highest  com¬ 
pliment  to  the  first,  by  shewing  that  she  made 
him  so  happy  as  a  married  man,  that  he  wishes 
to  be  so  a  second  time.”  So  ingenious  a  turn  did 
he  give  to  this  delicate  question.  And  yet,  on 
another  occasion,  he  owned  that  he  once  had 
almost  asked  a  promise  of  Mrs.  Johnson  that  she 
would  not  marry  again,  but  had  checked  him¬ 
self.  Indeed,  I  cannot  help  thinking,  that  in  his 
case  the  request  would  have  been  unreasonable; 
for  if  Mrs.  Johnson  forgot,  or  thought  it  no  in¬ 
jury  to  the  memory  of  her  first  love, — the  hus¬ 
band  of  her  youth  and  the  father  of  her  children, 
— to  make  a  second  marriage,  why  should  she 
be  precluded  from  a  third,  should  she  be  so  in¬ 
clined?  In  Johnson’s  persevering  fond  appropri¬ 
ation  of  his  Tetty ,  even  after  her  decease,  he 
seems  totally  to  have  overlooked  the  prior  claim 
of  the  honest  Birmingham  trader.  I  presume 
that  her  having  been  married  before  had,  at 
times,  given  him  some  uneasiness;  for  I  remem¬ 
ber  his  observing  upon  the  marriage  of  one  of 
our  common  friends,  “He  has  done  a  very  fool¬ 
ish  thing,  Sir;  he  has  married  a  widow,  when  he 
might  have  had  a  maid.” 

We  drank  tea  with  Mrs.  Williams.  I  had  last 
year  the  pleasure  of  seeing  Mrs.  Thrale  at  Dr. 
Johnson’s  one  morning,  and  had  conversation 
enough  with  her  to  admire  her  talents,  and  to 
shew  her  that  I  was  as  Johnsonian  as  herself.  Dr. 
Johnson  had  probably  been  kind  enough  to 
speak  well  of  me,  for  this  evening  he  delivered 
me  a  very  polite  card  from  Mr.  Thrale  and  her, 
inviting  me  to  Streatham. 

On  the  6th  of  October  I  complied  with  this 
obliging  invitation,  and  found,  at  an  elegant 
villa,  six  miles  from  town,  every  circumstance 
that  can  make  society  pleasing.  Johnson,  though 
quite  at  home,  was  yet  looked  up  to  with  an  awe, 

2 A  Wife,  a  poem,  1614. 


BOSWELL 


1 66 

tempered  by  affection,  and  seemed  to  be  equally 
the  care  of  his  host  and  hostess.  I  rejoiced  at 
seeing  him  so  happy. 

He  played  off  his  wit  against  Scotland  with  a 
good  humoured  pleasantry,  which  gave  me, 
though  no  bigot  to  national  prejudices,  an  op¬ 
portunity  for  a  little  contest  with  him.  I  having 
said  that  England  was  obliged  to  us  for  gar¬ 
deners,  almost  all  their  good  gardeners  being 
Scotchmen.  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  that  is  because 
gardening  is  much  more  necessary  amongst  you 
than  with  us,  which  makes  so  many  of  your  peo¬ 
ple  learn  it.  It  is  all  gardening  with  you.  Things 
which  grow  wild  here,  must  be  cultivated  with 
great  care  in  Scotland.  Pray  now  (throwing 
himself  back  in  his  chair,  and  laughing,)  are 
you  ever  able  to  bring  the  sloe  to  perfection?’5 

I  boasted  that  we  had  the  honour  of  being 
the  first  to  abolish  the  unhospitable,  trouble¬ 
some,  and  ungracious  custom  of  giving  vails  to 
servants.  Johnson.  “Sir,  you  abolished  vails, 
because  you  were  too  poor  to  be  able  to  give 
them.55 

Mrs.  Thrale  disputed  with  him  on  the  merit 
of  Prior.  He  attacked  him  powerfully;  said  he 
wrote  of  love  like  a  man  who  had  never  felt  it: 
his  love  verses  were  college  verses;  and  he  re¬ 
peated  the  song  “Alexis  shunn’d  his  fellow 
swains,55  &c.,  in  so  ludicrous  a  manner,  as  to 
make  us  all  wonder  how  any  one  could  have 
been  pleased  with  such  fantastical  stuff.  Mrs. 
Thrale  stood  to  her  gun  with  great  courage,  in 
defence  of  amorous  ditties,  which  Johnson  de¬ 
spised,  till  he  at  last  silenced  her  by  saying,  “My 
dear  Lady,  talk  no  more  of  this.  Nonsense  can 
be  defended  but  by  nonsense.55 

Mrs.  Thrale  then  praised  Garrick’s  talent  for 
light  gay  poetry;  and,  as  a  specimen,  repeated 
his  song  in  Florizel  and  Perdita ,  and  dwelt  with 
peculiar  pleasure  on  this  line: 

Pd  smile  with  the  simple ,  and feed  with  the  poor, 

Johnson.  “Nay,  my  dear  Lady,  this  will  never 
do.  Poor  David!  Smile  with  the  simple; — What 
folly  is  that?  And  who  would  feed  with  the  poor 
that  can  help  it?  No,  no;  let  me  smile  with  the 
wise,  and  feed  with  the  rich.55  I  repeated  this 
sally  to  Garrick,  and  wondered  to  find  his  sen¬ 
sibility  as  a  writer  not  a  little  irritated  by  it.  To 
sooth  him,  I  observed,  that  Johnson  spared  none 
of  us;  and  I  quoted  the  passage  in  Horace,  in 
which  he  compares  one  who  attacks  his  friends 
for  the  sake  of  a  laugh,  to  a  pushing  ox,  that  is 
marked  by  a  bunch  of  hay  put  upon  his  horns: 
foenum  habet  in  cornu.  “Ay,  (said  Garrick  vehe¬ 
mently,)  he  has  a  whole  mow  of  it.” 


[  1769 

Talking  of  history,  Johnson  said,  “We  may 
know  historical  facts  to  be  true,  as  we  may  know 
facts  in  common  life  to  be  true.  Motives  are 
generally  unknown.  We  cannot  trust  to  the 
characters  we  find  in  history,  unless  when  they 
are  drawn  by  those  who  knew  the  persons;  as 
those,  for  instance,  by  Sallust  and  by  Lord 
Clarendon.” 

He  would  not  allow  much  merit  to  White- 
field’s  oratory.  “His  popularity,  Sir,  (said  he,)  is 
chiefly  owing  to  the  peculiarity  of  his  manner. 
He  would  be  followed  by  crowds  were  he  to 
wear  a  night-cap  in  the  pulpit,  or  were  he  to 
preach  from  a  tree.” 

I  know  not  from  what  spirit  of  contradiction 
he  burst  out  into  a  violent  declamation  against 
the  Corsicans,  of  whose  heroism  I  talked  in  high 
terms.  “Sir,  (said  he,)  what  is  all  this  rout  about 
the  Corsicans?  They  have  been  at  war  with  the 
Genoese  for  upwards  of  twenty  years,  and  have 
never  yet  taken  their  fortified  towns.  They  might 
have  battered  down  their  walls,  and  reduced 
them  to  powder  in  twenty  years.  They  might 
have  pulled  the  walls  in  pieces,  and  cracked  the 
stones  with  their  teeth  in  twenty  years.”  It  was 
in  vain  to  argue  with  him  upon  the  want  of 
artillery:  he  was  not  to  be  resisted  for  the  mo¬ 
ment. 

On  the  evening  of  October  10,  I  presented 
Johnson  to  General  Paoli.  I  had  greatly  wished 
that  two  men,  for  whom  I  had  the  highest  es¬ 
teem,  should  meet.  They  met  with  a  manly  ease, 
mutually  conscious  of  their  own  abilities,  and  of 
the  abilities  of  each  other.  The  General  spoke 
Italian,  and  Dr.  Johnson  English,  and  under¬ 
stood  one  another  very  well,  with  a  little  aid  of 
interpretation  from  me,  in  which  I  compared 
myself  to  an  isthmus  which  joins  two  great  con¬ 
tinents.  Upon  Johnson’s  approach,  the  General 
said,  “From  what  I  have  read  of  your  works,  Sir, 
and  from  what  Mr.  Boswell  has  told  me  of  you, 
I  have  long  held  you  in  great  veneration.”  The 
General  talked  of  languages  being  formed  on 
the  particular  notions  and  manners  of  a  people, 
without  knowing  which,  we  cannot  know  the 
language.  We  may  know  the  direct  signification 
of  single  words;  but  by  these  no  beauty  of  ex¬ 
pression,  no  sally  of  genius,  no  wit  is  conveyed 
to  the  mind.  All  this  must  be  by  allusion  to  other 
ideas.  “Sir,  (said  Johnson,)  you  talk  of  lan¬ 
guage,  as  if  you  had  never  done  any  thing  else 
but  study  it,  instead  of  governing  a  nation.”  The 
General  said,  “ Questo  e  un  troppo  gran  complimen- 
to 55 ;  this  is  too  great  a  compliment.  Johnson  an¬ 
swered,  “I  should  have  thought  so,  Sir,  if  I  had 
not  heard  you  talk.”  The  General  asked  him, 


1769]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  167 


what  he  thought  of  the  spirit  of  infidelity  which 
was  so  prevalent.  Johnson.  “Sir,  this  gloom  of 
infidelity,  I  hope,  is  only  a  transient  cloud  pass¬ 
ing  through  the  hemisphere,  which  will  soon  be 
dissipated,  and  the  sun  break  forth  with  his  usual 
splendour.”  “You  think  then,  (said  the  General,) 
that  they  will  change  their  principles  like  their 
clothes.”  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  if  they  bestow  no 
more  thought  on  principles  than  on  dress,  it 
must  be  so.”  The  General  said,  that  “a  great 
part  of  the  fashionable  infidelity  was  owing  to  a 
desire  of  shewing  courage.  Men  who  have  no 
opportunities  of  shewing  it  as  to  things  in  this 
life,  take  death  and  futurity  as  objects  on  which 
to  display  it.”  Johnson.  “That  is  mighty  foolish 
affectation.  Fear  is  one  of  the  passions  of  human 
nature,  of  which  it  is  impossible  to  divest  it.  You 
remember  that  the  Emperour  Charles  V,  when 
he  read  upon  the  tomb-stone  of  a  Spanish  noble¬ 
man,  ‘Here  lies  one  who  never  knew  fear,5  wit¬ 
tily  said,  ‘Then  he  never  snuffed  a  candle  with 
his  fingers.5  55 

He  talked  a  few  words  of  French  to  the  Gen¬ 
eral;  but  finding  he  did  not  do  it  with  facility, 
he  asked  for  pen,  ink,  and  paper,  and  wrote  the 
following  note: 

“J'ai  lu  dans  la  geographie  de  Lucas  de  Linda  un 
Paternoster  ecrit  dans  une  langue  tout  a-fait  dijferente 
de  ritalienne ,  et  de  toutes  autres  lesquelles  se  derivent 
du  Latin .  V auteur  Pappelle  linguam  Corsicae  rusti- 
cam;  elle  a  peut-etre  passe  peu  a  peu ;  mais  elle  a  cer - 
tainement  prevalue  autrefois  dans  les  montagnes  et  dans 
la  campagne.  Le  meme  auteur  dit  la  meme  chose  en 
parlant  de  Sardaigne;  qu'il  y  a  deux  langues  dans 
PIsle ,  une  des  villes ,  P  autre  de  la  campagne .” 

The  General  immediately  informed  him  that 
the  lingua  rustica  was  only  in  Sardinia. 

Dr.  Johnson  went  home  with  me,  and  drank 
tea  till  late  in  the  night.  He  said,  “General  Paoli 
had  the  loftiest  port  of  any  man  he  had  ever 
seen.”  He  denied  that  military  men  were  al¬ 
ways  the  best  bred  men.  “Perfect  good  breeding,55 
he  observed,  “consists  in  having  no  particular 
mark  of  any  profession,  but  a  general  elegance 
of  manners;  whereas,  in  a  military  man,  you 
can  commonly  distinguish  the  brand  of  a  soldier, 
Phomrne  d' epee” 

Dr.  Johnson  shunned  to-night  any  discus¬ 
sion  of  the  perplexed  question  of  fate  and  free 
will,  which  I  attempted  to  agitate.  “Sir,  (said 
he,)  we  know  our  will  is  free,  and  there's  an  end 
on’t.” 

He  honoured  me  with  his  company  at  dinner 
on  the  1 6th  of  October,  at  my  lodgings  in  Old 
Bond-street,  with  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  Mr. 
Garrick,  Dr.  Goldsmith,  Mr.  Murphy,  Mr.  Bic- 


kerstaff,  and  Mr.  Thomas  Davies.  Garrick  played 
round  him  with  a  fond  vivacity,  taking  hold  of 
the  breasts  of  his  coat,  and,  looking  up  in  his 
face  with  a  lively  archness,  complimented  him 
on  the  good  health  which  he  seemed  then  to  en¬ 
joy;  while  the  sage,  shaking  his  head,  beheld 
him  with  a  gentle  complacency.  One  of  the  com¬ 
pany  not  being  come  at  the  appointed  hour,  I 
proposed,  as  usual  upon  such  occasions,  to  order 
dinner  to  be  served;  adding,  “Ought  six  people 
to  be  kept  waiting  for  one?55  “Why,  yes,  (an¬ 
swered  Johnson,  with  a  delicate  humanity,)  if 
the  one  will  suffer  more  by  your  sitting  down, 
than  the  six  will  do  by  waiting.”  Goldsmith,  to 
divert  the  tedious  minutes,  strutted  about,  brag¬ 
ging  of  his  dress,  and  I  believe  was  seriously  vain 
of  it,  for  his  mind  was  wonderfully  prone  to  such 
impressions.  “Come,  come,  (said  Garrick,)  talk 
no  more  of  that.  You  are,  perhaps,  the  worst — 
eh,  eh!” — Goldsmith  was  eagerly  attempting  to 
interrupt  him,  when  Garrick  went  on,  laughing 
ironically,  “Nay,  you  will  always  look  like  a  gen¬ 
tleman;  but  I  am  talking  of  being  well  or  ill 
drest .”  “Well,  let  me  tell  you,  (said  Goldsmith,) 
when  my  tailor  brought  home  my  bloom- 
coloured  coat,  he  said,  QSir,  I  have  a  favour 
to  beg  of  you.  When  any  body  asks  you  who 
made  your  clothes,  be  pleased  to  mention  John 
Filby,  at  the  Harrow,  in  Water-lane.5  55  John¬ 
son.  “Why,  Sir,  that  was  because  he  knew  the 
strange  colour  would  attract  crowds  to  gaze  at 
it,  and  thus  they  might  hear  of  him,  and  see 
how  well  he  could  make  a  coat  even  of  so  ab¬ 
surd  a  colour.55  • 

After  dinner  our  conversation  first  turned  up¬ 
on  Pope.  Johnson  said,  his  characters  of  men 
were  admirably  drawn,  those  of  women  not  so 
well.  He  repeated  to  us,  in  his  forcible  melodi¬ 
ous  manner,  the  concluding  lines  of  the  Dunciad . 
While  he  was  talking  loudly  in  praise  of  those 
lines,  one  of  the  company  ventured  to  say,  “Too 
fine  for  such  a  poem: — a  poem  on  what?55  John¬ 
son,  (with  a  disdainful  look,)  “Why,  on  dunces . 
It  was  worth  while  being  a  dunce  then.  Ah,  Sir, 
hadst  thou  lived  in  those  days!  It  is  not  worth 
while  being  a  dunce  now,  when  there  are  no 
wits.”  Bickerstaff  observed,  as  a  peculiar  circum¬ 
stance,  that  Pope’s  fame  was  higher  when  he  was 
alive  than  it  was  then.  Johnson  said,  his  Pastorals 
were  poor  things,  though  the  versification  was 
fine.  He  told  us,  with  high  satisfaction,  the  anec¬ 
dote  of  Pope’s  inquiring  who  was  the  authour 
of  his  London ,  and  saying,  he  will  be  soon  deterre . 
He  observed,  that  in  Dryden’s  poetry  there  were 
passages  drawn  from  a  profundity  which  Pope 
could  never  reach.  He  repeated  some  fine  lines 


BOSWELL 


1 68 

on  love,  by  the  former,  (which  I  have  now  for¬ 
gotten,)  and  gave  great  applause  to  the  charac¬ 
ter  of  Zimri.  Goldsmith  said,  that  Pope’s  char¬ 
acter  of  Addison  shewed  a  deep  knowledge  of 
the  human  heart.  Johnson  said,  that  the  descrip¬ 
tion  of  the  temple,  in  the  Mourning  Bride ,  was  the 
finest  poetical  passage  he  had  ever  read;  he  rec¬ 
ollected  none  in  Shakspeare  equal  to  it.  “But, 
(said  Garrick,  all  alarmed  for  the  cGod  of  his 
idolatry,’)  we  know  not  the  extent  and  variety 
of  his  powers.  We  are  to  suppose  there  are  such 
passages  in  his  works.  Shakspeare  must  not  suf¬ 
fer  from  the  badness  of  our  memories.”  Johnson, 
diverted  by  this  enthusiastick  jealousy,  went  on 
with  greater  ardour:  “No,  Sir;  Congreve  has 
nature (smiling  on  the  tragick  eagerness  of  Gar¬ 
rick;)  but  composing  himself,  he  added,  “Sir, 
this  is  not  comparing  Congreve  on  the  whole, 
with  Shakspeare  on  the  whole;  but  only  main¬ 
taining  that  Congreve  has  one  finer  passage  than 
any  that  can  be  found  in  Shakspeare.  Sir,  a  man 
may  have  no  more  than  ten  guineas  in  the  world, 
but  he  may  have  those  ten  guineas  in  one  piece; 
and  so  may  have  a  finer  piece  than  a  man  who 
has  ten  thousand  pounds:  but  then  he  has  only 
one  ten-guinea  piece.  What  I  mean  is,  that  you 
can  shew  me  no  passage  where  there  is  simply  a 
description  of  material  objects,  without  any  in¬ 
termixture  of  moral  notions,  which  produces  such 
an  effect.”  Mr.  Murphy  mentioned  Shakspeare’s 
description  of  the  night  before  the  battle  of  Ag- 
incourt;  but  it  was  observed,  it  had  men  in  it. 
Mr.  Davies  suggested  the  speech  of  Juliet,  in 
which  she  figures  herself  awaking  in  the  tomb  of 
her  ancestors.  Some  one  mentioned  the  descrip¬ 
tion  of  Dover  Cliff.  Johnson.  “No,  Sir;  it  should 
be  all  precipice, — all  vacuum.  The  crows  im¬ 
pede  your  fall.  The  diminished  appearance  of 
the  boats,  and  other  circumstances,  are  all  very 
good  description;  but  do  not  impress  the  mind 
at  once  with  the  horrible  idea  of  immense 
height.  The  impression  is  divided;  you  pass 
on  by  computation,  from  one  stage  of  the  tre¬ 
mendous  space  to  another.  Had  the  girl  in  The 
Mourning  Bride  said,  she  could  not  cast  her  shoe 
to  the  top  of  one  of  the  pillars  in  the  temple, 
it  would  not  have  aided  the  idea,  but  weak¬ 
ened  it.” 

Talking  of  a  Barrister  who  had  a  bad  utter¬ 
ance,  some  one,  (to  rouse  Johnson,)  wickedly 
said,  that  he  was  unfortunate  in  not  having  been 
taught  oratory  by  Sheridan.  Johnson.  “Nay,  Sir, 
if  he  had  been  taught  by  Sheridan,  he  would 
have  cleared  the  room.”  Garrick.  “Sheridan 
has  too  much  vanity  to  be  a  good  man.”  We 
shall  now  see  Johnson’s  mode  of  defending  a  man; 


[  1769 

taking  him  into  his  own  hands,  and  discrimi¬ 
nating.  Johnson.  “No,  Sir.  There  is,  to  be  sure, 
in  Sheridan,  something  to  reprehend,  and  every 
thing  to  laugh  at;  but,  Sir,  he  is  not  a  bad  man. 
No,  Sir;  were  mankind  to  be  divided  into  good 
and  bad,  he  would  stand  considerably  within 
the  ranks  of  good.  And,  Sir,  it  must  be  allowed 
that  Sheridan  excels  in  plain  declamation, 
though  he  can  exhibit  no  character.” 

I  should,  perhaps,  have  suppressed  this  dis¬ 
quisition  concerning  a  person  of  whose  merit 
and  worth  I  think  with  respect,  had  he  not  at¬ 
tacked  Johnson  so  outrageously  in  his  Life  of 
Swift ,  and,  at  the  same  time,  treated  us,  his  ad¬ 
mirers,  as  a  set  of  pigmies.  He  who  has  provoked 
the  lash  of  wit,  cannot  complain  that  he  smarts 
from  it. 

Mrs.  Montagu,  a  lady  distinguished  for  hav¬ 
ing  written  an  Essay  on  Shakspeare,  being  men¬ 
tioned;  Reynolds.  “I  think  that  essay  does  her 
honour.”  Johnson.  “Yes,  Sir;  it  does  her  honour, 
but  it  would  do  nobody  else  honour.  I  have,  in¬ 
deed,  not  read  it  all.  But  when  I  take  up  the  end 
of  a  web,  and  find  it  packthread,  I  do  not  ex¬ 
pect,  by  looking  further,  to  find  embroidery. 
Sir,  I  will  venture  to  say,  there  is  not  one  sen¬ 
tence  of  true  criticism  in  her  book.”  Garrick. 
“But,  Sir,  surely  it  shews  how  much  Voltaire 
has  mistaken  Shakspeare,  which  nobody  else  has 
done.”  Johnson.  “Sir,  nobody  else  has  thought 
it  worth  while.  And  what  merit  is  there  in  that? 
You  may  as  well  praise  a  schoolmaster  for  whip¬ 
ping  a  boy  who  has  construed  ill.  No,  Sir,  there 
is  no  real  criticism  in  it:  none  shewing  the  beauty 
of  thought,  as  formed  on  the  workings  of  the  hu¬ 
man  heart.” 

The  admirers  of  this  Essay1  may  be  offended 
at  the  slighting  manner  in  which  Johnson  spoke 
of  it;  but  let  it  be  remembered,  that  he  gave  his 
honest  opinion  unbiassed  by  any  prejudice,  or 
any  proud  jealousy  of  a  woman  intruding  herself 
into  the  chair  of  criticism;  for  Sir  Joshua  Rey¬ 
nolds  has  told  me,  that  when  the  Essay  first 

JOf  whom  I  acknowledge  myself  to  be  one,  con¬ 
sidering  it  as  a  piece  of  the  secondary  or  compara¬ 
tive  species  of  criticism;  and  not  of  that  profound 
species  which  alone  Dr.  Johnson  would  allow  to  be 
“real  criticism.”  It  is,  besides,  clearly  and  elegant¬ 
ly  expressed,  and  has  done  effectually  what  it  pro¬ 
fessed  to  do,  namely,  vindicated  Shakspeare  from 
the  misrepresentations  of  Voltaire;  and  consider¬ 
ing  how  many  young  people  were  misled  by  his 
witty,  though  false  observations,  Mrs.  Montagu’s 
Essay  was  of  service  to  Shakspeare  with  a  certain 
class  of  readers,  and  is,  therefore,  entitled  to  praise. 
Johnson,  I  am  assured,  allowed  the  merit  which  I 
have  stated,  saying,  (with  reference  to  Voltaire,) 
“it  is  conclusive  ad  hominem .” 


1769]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  169 


came  out,  and  it  was  not  known  who  had  writ¬ 
ten  it,  Johnson  wondered  how  Sir  Joshua  could 
like  it.  At  this  time  Sir  Joshua  himself  had  re¬ 
ceived  no  information  concerning  the  authour, 
except  being  assured  by  one  of  our  most  emi¬ 
nent  literati,  that  it  was  clear  its  authour  did 
not  know  the  Greek  tragedies  in  the  original. 
One  day  at  Sir  Joshua’s  table,  when  it  was  re¬ 
lated  that  Mrs.  Montagu,  in  an  excess  of  com¬ 
pliment  to  the  authour  of  a  modern  tragedy, 
had  exclaimed,  “I  tremble  for  Shakspeare”; 

Johnson  said,  “When  Shakspeare  has  got - 

for  his  rival,  and  Mrs.  Montagu  for  his  defend¬ 
er,  he  is  in  a  poor  state  indeed.” 

Johnson  proceeded:  “The  Scotchman  has  tak¬ 
en  the  right  method  in  his  Elements  of  Criticism. 
I  do  not  mean  that  he  has  taught  us  any  thing; 
but  he  has  told  us  old  things  in  a  new  way.” 
Murphy.  “He  seems  to  have  read  a  great  deal 
of  French  criticism,  and  wants  to  make  it  his 
own;  as  if  he  had  been  for  years  anatomising  the 
heart  of  man,  and  peeping  into  every  cranny  of 
it.”  Goldsmith.  “It  is  easier  to  write  that  book, 
than  to  read  it.”  Johnson.  “We  have  an  exam¬ 
ple  of  true  criticism  in  Burke’s  Essay  on  the  Sub¬ 
lime  and  Beautiful;  and,  if  I  recollect,  there  is  also 
Du  Bos;  and  Bouhours,  who  shews  all  beauty  to 
depend  on  truth.  There  is  no  great  merit  in  tell¬ 
ing  how  many  plays  have  ghosts  in  them,  and 
how  this  Ghost  is  better  than  that.  You  must 
shew  how  terrour  is  impressed  on  the  human 
heart.  In  the  description  of  night  in  Macbeth , 
the  beetle  and  the  bat  detract  from  the  general 
idea  of  darkness, — inspissated  gloom.” 

Politicks  being  mentioned,  he  said,  “This  pe¬ 
titioning  is  a  new  mode  of  distressing  govern¬ 
ment,  and  a  mighty  easy  one.  I  will  undertake 
to  get  petitions  either  against  quarter-guineas  or 
half-guineas,  with  the  help  of  a  little  hot  wine. 
There  must  be  no  yielding  to  encourage  this. 
The  object  is  not  important  enough.  We  are  not 
to  blow  up  half  a  dozen  palaces,  because  one 
cottage  is  burning.” 

The  conversation  then  took  another  turn. 
Johnson.  “It  is  amazing  what  ignorance  of  cer¬ 
tain  points  one  sometimes  finds  in  men  of  emi¬ 
nence.  A  wit  about  town,  who  wrote  Latin 
bawdy  verses,  asked  me,  how  it  happened  that 
England  and  Scotland,  which  were  once  two 
kingdoms,  were  now  one: — and  Sir  Fletcher  Nor¬ 
ton  did  not  seem  to  know  that  there  were  such 
publications  as  the  Reviews.” 

“The  ballad  of  Hardyknute  has  no  great  merit, 
if  it  be  really  ancient.  People  talk  of  nature.  But 
mere  obvious  nature  may  be  exhibited  with  very 
little  power  of  mind.” 


On  Thursday,  October  1 9,  I  passed  the  eve¬ 
ning  with  him  at  his  house.  He  advised  me  to 
complete  a  Dictionary  of  words  peculiar  to  Scot¬ 
land,  of  which  I  shewed  him  a  specimen.  “Sir, 
(said  he,)  Ray  has  made  a  collection  of  north- 
country  words.  By  collecting  those  of  your  coun¬ 
try,  you  will  do  a  useful  thing  towards  the  his¬ 
tory  of  the  language.”  He  bade  me  also  go  on 
with  collections  which  I  was  making  upon  the 
antiquities  of  Scotland.  “Make  a  large  book;  a 
folio.”  Boswell.  “But  of  what  use  will  it  be, 
Sir?”  Johnson.  “Never  mind  the  use;  do  it.” 

I  complained  that  he  had  not  mentioned  Gar¬ 
rick  in  his  Preface  to  Shakspeare;  and  asked  him 
if  he  did  not  admire  him.  Johnson.  “Yes,  as  ea 
poor  player,  who  frets  and  struts  his  hour  upon 
the  stage’; — as  a  shadow.”  Boswell.  “But  has 
he  not  brought  Shakspeare  into  notice?”  John¬ 
son.  “Sir,  to  allow  that,  would  be  to  lampoon 
the  age.  Many  of  Shakspeare’s  plays  are  the 
worse  for  being  acted:  Macbeth ,  for  instance.” 
Boswell.  “What,  Sir,  is  nothing  gained  by  dec¬ 
oration  and  action?  Indeed,  I  do  wish  that  you 
had  mentioned  Garrick.”  Johnson.  “My  dear 
Sir,  had  I  mentioned  him,  I  must  have  men¬ 
tioned  many  more:  Mrs.  Pritchard,  Mrs.  Cib¬ 
ber, — nay,  and  Mr.  Gibber  too;  he  too  altered 
Shakspeare.”  Boswell.  “You  have  read  his  apol¬ 
ogy,  Sir?”  Johnson.  “Yes,  it  is  very  entertain¬ 
ing.  But  as  for  Cibber  himself,  taking  from  his 
conversation  all  that  he  ought  not  to  have  said, 
he  was  a  poor  creature.  I  remember  when  he 
brought  me  one  of  his  Odes  to  have  my  opinion 
of  it;  I  could  not  bear  such  nonsense,  and  would 
not  let  him  read  it  to  the  end;  so  little  respect 
had  I  for  that  great  man!  (laughing.)  Yet  I  re¬ 
member  Richardson  wondering  that  I  could 
treat  him  with  familiarity.” 

I  mentioned  to  him  that  I  had  seen  the  exe¬ 
cution  of  several  convicts  at  Tyburn,  two  days 
before,  and  that  none  of  them  seemed  to  be  un¬ 
der  any  concern.  Johnson.  “Most  of  them,  Sir, 
have  never  thought  at  all.”  Boswell.  “But  is  not 
the  fear  of  death  natural  to  man?”  Johnson.  “So 
much  so,  Sir,  that  the  whole  of  life  is  but  keep¬ 
ing  away  the  thoughts  of  it.”  He  then,  in  a  low 
and  earnest  tone,  talked  of  his  meditating  upon 
the  aweful  hour  of  his  own  dissolution,  and  in 
what  manner  he  should  conduct  himself  upon 
that  occasion:  “I  know  not  (said  he,)  whether  I 
should  wish  to  have  a  friend  by  me,  or  have  it  all 
between  God  and  myself.” 

Talking  of  our  feeling  for  the  distresses  of  oth¬ 
ers; — Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  there  is  much  noise 
made  about  it,  but  it  is  greatly  exaggerated.  No, 
Sir,  we  have  a  certain  degree  of  feeling  to  prompt 


BOSWELL 


170 

us  to  do  good:  more  than  that,  Providence  does 
not  intend.  It  would  be  misery  to  no  purpose.” 
Boswell.  “But  suppose  now,  Sir,  that  one  of 
your  intimate  friends  were  apprehended  for  an 
offence  for  which  he  might  be  hanged.”  John¬ 
son.  “I  should  do  what  I  could  to  bail  him,  and 
give  him  any  other  assistance;  but  if  he  were 
once  fairly  hanged,  I  should  not  suffer.”  Bos¬ 
well.  “Would  you  eat  your  dinner  that  day, 
Sir?”  Johnson.  “Yes,  Sir;  and  eat  it  as  if  he  were 
eating  it  with  me.  Why,  there’s  Baretti,  who  is 
to  be  tried  for  his  life  to-morrow,  friends  have 
risen  up  for  him  on  every  side;  yet  if  he  should 
be  hanged,  none  of  them  will  eat  a  slice  of 
plum-pudding  the  less.  Sir,  that  sympathetic 
feeling  goes  a  very  little  way  in  depressing  the 
mind.” 

I  told  him  that  I  had  dined  lately  at  Foote’s, 
who  shewed  me  a  letter  which  he  had  received 
from  Tom  Davies,  telling  him  that  he  had  not 
been  able  to  sleep  from  the  concern  which  he 
felt  on  account  of  “  This  sad  affair  of  Baretti ,”  beg¬ 
ging  of  him  to  try  if  he  could  suggest  any  thing 
that  might  be  of  service;  and,  at  the  same  time, 
recommending  to  him  an  industrious  young 
man  who  kept  a  pickle-shop.  Johnson.  “Ay,  Sir, 
here  you  have  a  specimen  of  human  sympathy; 
a  friend  hanged,  and  a  cucumber  pickled.  We 
know  not  whether  Baretti  or  the  pickle-man  has 
kept  Davies  from  sleep;  nor  does  he  know  him¬ 
self.  And  as  to  his  not  sleeping,  Sir;  Tom  Davies 
is  a  very  great  man;  Tom  has  been  upon  the 
stage,  and  knows  how  to  do  those  things.  I  have 
not  been  upon  the  stage,  and  cannot  do  those 
things.”  Boswell.  “I  have  often  blamed  myself, 
Sir,  for  not  feeling  for  others  as  sensibly  as  many 
say  they  do.”  Johnson.  “Sir,  don’t  be  duped  by 
them  any  more.  You  will  find  these  very  feeling 
people  are  not  very  ready  to  do  you  good.  They 
pay  you  by  feeling .” 

Boswell.  “Foote  has  a  great  deal  of  humour?” 
Johnson.  “Yes,  Sir.”  Boswell.  “He  has  a  sing¬ 
ular  talent  of  exhibiting  character.”  Johnson. 
“Sir,  it  is  not  a  talent;  it  is  a  vice;  it  is  what  others 
abstain  from.  It  is  not  comedy,  which  exhibits 
the  character  of  a  species,  as  that  of  a  miser 
gathered  from  many  misers:  it  is  farce,  which  ex¬ 
hibits  individuals.”  Boswell.  “Did  not  he  think 
of  exhibiting  you,  Sir?”  Johnson.  “Sir,  fear  re¬ 
strained  him;  he  knew  I  would  have  broken  his 
bones.  I  would  have  saved  him  the  trouble  of 
cutting  off  a  leg;  I  would  not  have  left  him  a  leg 
to  cut  off.”  Boswell.  “Pray,  Sir,  is  not  Foote  an 
infidel?”  Johnson.  “I  do  not  know,  Sir,  that  the 
fellow  is  an  infidel;  but  if  he  be  an  infidel,  he  is 
an  infidel  as  a  dog  is  an  infidel;  that  is  to  say,  he 


[  1769 

has  never  thought  upon  the  subject.”1  Boswell. 
“I  suppose,  Sir,  he  has  thought  superficially, 
and  seized  the  first  notions  which  occurred  to 
his  mind.”  Johnson.  “Why  then,  Sir,  still  he  is 
like  a  dog,  that  snatches  the  piece  next  him.  Did 
you  never  observe  that  dogs  have  not  the  power 
of  comparing?  A  dog  will  take  a  small  bit  of  meat 
as  readily  as  a  large,  when  both  are  before  him.” 

“Buchanan  (he  observed,)  has  fewer  centos 
than  any  modern  Latin  poet.  He  not  only  had 
great  knowledge  of  the  Latin  language,  but  was 
a  great  poetical  genius.  Both  the  Scaligers  praise 
him.” 

He  again  talked  of  the  passage  in  Congreve 
with  high  commendation,  and  said,  “Shakspeare 
never  has  six  lines  together  without  a  fault.  Per¬ 
haps  you  may  find  seven,  but  this  does  not  refute 
my  general  assertion.  If  I  come  to  an  orchard, 
and  say  there’s  no  fruit  here,  and  then  comes  a 
poring  man,  who  finds  two  apples  and  three 
pears,  and  tells  me,  ‘Sir,  you  are  mistaken,  I  have 
found  both  apples  and  pears,’  I  should  laugh  at 
him:  what  would  that  be  to  the  purpose?” 

Boswell.  “What  do  you  think  of  Dr.  Young’s 
Night  Thoughts ,  Sir?”  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  there 
are  very  fine  things  in  them.”  Boswell.  “Is  there 
not  less  religion  in  the  nation  now,  Sir,  than 
there  was  formerly?”  Johnson.  “I  don’t  know, 
Sir,  that  there  is.”  Boswell.  “For  instance,  there 
used  to  be  a  chaplain  in  every  great  family, 
which  we  do  not  find  now.”  Johnson.  “Neither 
do  you  find  any  of  the  state  servants  which  great 
families  used  formerly  to  have.  There  is  a  change 
of  modes  in  the  whole  department  of  life.” 

Next  day,  October  20,  he  appeared,  for  the 
only  time  I  suppose  in  his  life,  as  a  witness  in  a 
Court  of  Justice,  being  called  to  give  evidence 
to  the  character  of  Mr.  Baretti,  who  having 
stabbed  a  man  in  the  street,  was  arraigned  at 

JWhen  Mr.  Foote  was  at  Edinburgh,  he  thought 
fit  to  entertain  a  numerous  Scotch  company,  with 
a  great  deal  of  coarse  jocularity,  at  the  expense  of 
Dr.  Johnson,  imagining  it  would  be  acceptable.  I 
felt  this  as  not  civil  to  me;  but  sat  very  patiently  till 
he  had  exhausted  his  merriment  on  that  subject 
and  then  observed,  that  surely  Johnson  must  be  al¬ 
lowed  to  have  some  sterling  wit,  and  that  I  had 
heard  him  say  a  very  good  thing  of  Mr.  Foote  him¬ 
self.  “Ah,  my  old  friend  Sam  (cried  Foote,)  no  man 
says  better  things;  do  let  us  have  it.”  Upon  which 
I  told  the  above  story,  which  produced  a  very  loud 
laugh  from  the  company.  But  I  never  saw  Foote  so 
disconcerted.  He  looked  grave  and  angry,  and  en¬ 
tered  into  a  serious  refutation  of  the  justice  of  the 
remark.  “What  Sir,  (said  he,)  talk  thus  of  a  man  of 
liberal  education; — a  man  who  for  years  was  at  the 
University  of  Oxford; — a  man  who  has  added  six¬ 
teen  new  characters  to  the  English  drama  of  his 
country!” 


1769]  LIFE  OF 

the  Old  Bailey  for  murder.  Never  did  such  a  con¬ 
stellation  of  genius  enlighten  the  aweful  Ses¬ 
sions-House,  emphatically  called  Justice  Hall; 
Mr.  Burke,  Mr.  Garrick,  Mr.  Beauclerk,  and 
Dr.  Johnson:  and  undoubtedly  their  favourable 
testimony  had  due  weight  with  the  Court  and 
Jury.  Johnson  gave  his  evidence  in  a  slow,  de¬ 
liberate,  and  distinct  manner,  which  was  un¬ 
commonly  impressive.  It  is  well  known  that  Mr. 
Baretti  was  acquitted. 

On  the  26th  of  October,  we  dined  together  at 
the  Mitre  tavern.  I  found  fault  with  Foote  for 
indulging  his  talent  of  ridicule  at  the  expence  of 
his  visitors,  which  I  colloquially  termed  making 
fools  of  his  company.  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  when 
you  go  to  see  Foote,  you  do  not  go  to  see  a  saint: 
you  go  to  see  a  man  who  will  be  entertained  at 
your  house,  and  then  bring  you  on  a  publick 
stage;  who  will  entertain  you  at  his  house,  for 
the  very  purpose  of  bringing  you  on  a  publick 
stage.  Sir,  he  does  not  make  fools  of  his  com¬ 
pany;  they  whom  he  exposes  are  fools  already: 
he  only  brings  them  into  action.” 

Talking  of  trade,  he  observed,  “It  is  a  mis¬ 
taken  notion  that  a  vast  deal  of  money  is  brought 
into  a  nation  by  trade.  It  is  not  so.  Commodi¬ 
ties  come  from  commodities;  but  trade  produces 
no  capital  accession  of  wealth.  However,  though 
there  should  be  little  profit  in  money,  there  is  a 
considerable  profit  in  pleasure,  as  it  gives  to  one 
nation  the  productions  of  another;  as  we  have 
wines  and  fruits,  and  many  other  foreign  arti¬ 
cles,  brought  to  us.”  Boswell.  “Yes,  Sir,  and 
there  is  a  profit  in  pleasure,  by  its  furnishing  oc¬ 
cupation  to  such  numbers  of  mankind.”  John¬ 
son.  “Why,  Sir,  you  cannot  call  that  pleasure  to 
which  all  are  averse,  and  which  none  begin  but 
with  the  hope  of  leaving  off;  a  thing  which  men 
dislike  before  they  have  tried  it,  and  when  they 
have  tried  it.”  Boswell.  “But,  Sir,  the  mind 
must  be  employed,  and  we  grow  weary  when 
idle.”  Johnson.  “That  is,  Sir,  because,  others 
being  busy,  we  want  company;  but  if  we  were 
all  idle,  there  would  be  no  growing  weary;  we 
should  all  entertain  one  another.  There  is,  in¬ 
deed,  this  in  trade: — it  gives  men  an  opportun¬ 
ity  of  improving  their  situation.  If  there  were  no 
trade,  many  who  are  poor  would  always  remain 
poor.  But  no  man  loves  labour  for  itself.”  Bos- 
well.“  Yes,  Sir,  I  know  a  person  who  does.  He  is 
a  very  laborious  Judge,  and  he  loves  the  labour.” 
Johnson.  “Sir,  that  is  because  he  loves  respect 
and  distinction.  Could  he  have  them  without  la¬ 
bour,  he  would  like  it  less.”  Boswell.  “He  tells 
me  he  likes  it  for  itself.” — “Why,  Sir,  he  fancies 
so,  because  he  is  not  accustomed  to  abstract.” 


JOHNSON  171 

We  went  home  to  his  house  to  tea.  Mrs.  Wil¬ 
liams  made  it  with  sufficient  dexterity,  notwith¬ 
standing  her  blindness,  though  her  manner  of 
satisfying  herself  that  the  cups  were  full  enough 
appeared  to  me  a  little  aukward;  for  I  fancied 
she  put  her  finger  down  a  certain  way,  till  she 
felt  the  tea  touch  it.1  In  my  first  elation  at  being 
allowed  the  privilege  of  attending  Dr.  Johnson 
at  his  late  visits  to  this  lady,  which  was  like  be¬ 
ing  e  secretioribus  consiliis ,  I  willingly  drank  cup 
after  cup,  as  if  it  had  been  the  Heliconian  spring. 
But  as  the  charm  of  novelty  went  off,  I  grew 
more  fastidious;  and  besides,  I  discovered  that 
she  was  of  a  peevish  temper. 

There  was  a  pretty  large  circle  this  evening. 
Dr.  Johnson  was  in  very  good  humour,  lively, 
and  ready  to  talk  upon  all  subjects.  Mr.  Fergus- 
son,  the  self-taught  philosopher,  told  him  of  a  new- 
invented  machine  which  went  without  horses:  a 
man  who  sat  in  it  turned  a  handle,  which  worked 
a  spring  that  drove  it  forward.  “Then,  Sir,  (said 
Johnson,)  what  is  gained  is,  the  man  has  his 
choice  whether  he  will  move  himself  alone,  or 
himself  and  the  machine  too.”  Dominicetti  be¬ 
ing  mentioned,  he  would  not  allow  him  any  mer¬ 
it.  “There  is  nothing  in  all  this  boasted  system. 
No,  Sir;  medicated  baths  can  be  no  better  than 
warm  water:  their  only  effect  can  be  that  of 
tepid  moisture.”  One  of  the  company  took  the 
other  side,  maintaining  that  medicines  of  var¬ 
ious  sorts,  and  some  too  of  most  powerful  effect, 
are  introduced  into  the  human  frame  by  the 
medium  of  the  pores;  and,  therefore,  when  warm 
water  is  impregnated  with  salutiferous  sub¬ 
stances,  it  may  produce  great  effects  as  a  bath. 
This  appeared  to  me  very  satisfactory.  Johnson 
did  not  answer  it;  but  talking  for  victory,  and 
determined  to  be  master  of  the  field,  he  had  re¬ 
course  to  the  device  which  Goldsmith  imputed 
to  him  in  the  witty  words  of  one  of  Cibber’s  com¬ 
edies:  “There  is  no  arguing  with  Johnson;  for 
when  his  pistol  misses  fire,  he  knocks  you  down 
with  the  butt  end  of  it.”  He  turned  to  the  gen¬ 
tleman,  “Well,  Sir,  go  to  Dominicetti,  and  get 
thyself  fumigated;  but  be  sure  that  the  steam  be 
directed  to  thy  head ,  for  that  is  the  peccant  part” 
This  produced  a  triumphant  roar  of  laughter 
from  the  motley  assembly  of  philosophers,  print¬ 
ers,  and  dependents,  male  and  female. 

I  know  not  how  so  whimsical  a  thought  came 

T  have  since  had  reason  to  think  that  I  was  mis¬ 
taken;  for  I  have  been  informed  by  a  lady,  who 
was  long  intimate  with  her,  and  likely  to  be  a  more 
accurate  observer  of  such  matters,  that  she  had  ac¬ 
quired  such  a  niceness  of  touch,  as  to  know,  by  the 
feeling  on  the  outside  of  the  cup,  how  near  it  was 
to  being  full. 


172 

into  my  mind,  but  I  asked,  “If,  Sir,  you  were 
shut  up  in  a  castle,  and  a  newborn  child  with 
you,  what  would  you  do?”  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir, 
I  should  not  much  like  my  company.”  Boswell. 
“But  would  you  take  the  trouble  of  rearing  it?” 
He  seemed,  as  may  well  be  supposed,  unwilling 
to  pursue  the  subject:  but  upon  my  persevering 
in  my  question,  replied,  “Why  yes,  Sir,  I  would; 
but  I  must  have  all  conveniencies.  If  I  had  no 
garden,  I  would  make  a  shed  on  the  roof,  and 
take  it  there  for  fresh  air.  I  should  feed  it,  and 
wash  it  much,  and  with  warm  water  to  please  it, 
not  with  cold  water  to  give  it  pain.”  Boswell. 
“But,  Sir,  does  not  heat  relax?”  Johnson.  “Sir, 
you  are  not  to  imagine  the  water  is  to  be  very 
hot.  I  would  not  coddle  the  child.  No,  Sir,  the 
hardy  method  of  treating  children  does  no  good. 
I’ll  take  you  five  children  from  London,  who 
shall  cull  five  Highland  children.  Sir,  a  man  bred 
in  London  will  carry  a  burthen,  or  run,  or  wres¬ 
tle,  as  well  as  a  man  brought  up  in  the  hardiest 
manner  in  the  country.”  Boswell.  “Good  liv¬ 
ing,  I  suppose,  makes  the  Londoners  strong.” 
Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  I  don’t  know  that  it  does. 
Our  Chairmen  from  Ireland,  who  are  as  strong 
men  as  any,  have  been  brought  up  upon  pota¬ 
toes.  Quantity  makes  up  for  quality.”  Bosweli  . 
“Would  you  teach  this  child  that  I  have  fur¬ 
nished  you  with,  any  thing?”  Johnson.  “No,  I 
should  not  be  apt  to  teach  it.”  Boswell.  “Would 
not  you  have  a  pleasure  in  teaching  it?”  John¬ 
son.  “No,  Sir,  I  should  not  have  a  pleasure  in 
teaching  it.”  Boswell.  “Have  you  not  a  pleas¬ 
ure  in  teaching  men? — There  I  have  you.  You 
have  the  same  pleasure  in  teaching  men,  that  I 
should  have  in  teaching  children.”  Johnson. 
“Why,  something  about  that.” 

Boswell.  “Do  you  think,  Sir,  that  what  is 
called  natural  affection  is  born  with  us?  It  seems 
to  me  to  be  the  effect  of  habit,  or  of  gratitude  for 
kindness.  No  child  has  it  for  a  parent  whom  it 
has  not  seen.”  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir  I  think  there 
is  an  instinctive  natural  affection  in  parents  to¬ 
wards  their  children.” 

Russia  being  mentioned  as  likely  to  become  a 
great  empire,  by  the  rapid  increase  of  popula¬ 
tion: — Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  I  see  no  prospect  of 
their  propagating  more.  They  can  have  no  more 
children  than  they  can  get.  I  know  of  no  way  to 
make  them  breed  more  than  they  do.  It  is  not 
from  reason  and  prudence  that  people  marry, 
but  from  inclination.  A  man  is  poor;  he  thinks 
T  cannot  be  worse,  and  so  I’ll  e’en  take  Peggy.’  ” 
Boswell.  “But  have  not  nations  been  more  pop¬ 
ulous  at  one  period  than  another?”  Johnson. 
“Yes,  Sir;  but  that  has  been  owing  to  the  people 


[  1769 

being  less  thinned  at  one  period  than  another, 
whether  by  emigrations,  war,  or  pestilence,  not 
by  their  being  more  or  less  prolifick.  Births  at  all 
times  bear  the  same  proportion  to  the  same  num¬ 
ber  of  people.”  Boswell.  “But,  to  consider  the 
state  of  our  own  country;— does  not  throwing  a 
number  of  farms  into  one  hand  hurt  popula¬ 
tion?”  Johnson.  “Why,  no,  Sir;  the  same  quan¬ 
tity  of  food  being  produced,  will  be  consumed 
by  the  same  number  of  mouths,  though  the  peo¬ 
ple  may  be  disposed  of  in  different  ways.  We 
see,  if  corn  be  dear,  and  butchers’  meat  cheap, 
the  farmers  all  apply  themselves  to  the  raising  of 
corn,  till  it  becomes  plentiful  and  cheap,  and 
then  butchers’  meat  becomes  dear;  so  that  an 
equality  is  always  preserved.  No,  Sir,  let  fanci¬ 
ful  men  do  as  they  will,  depend  upon  it,  it  is  dif¬ 
ficult  to  disturb  the  system  of  life.”  Boswell. 
“But,  Sir,  is  it  not  a  very  bad  thing  for  landlords 
to  oppress  their  tenants,  by  raising  their  rents?” 
Johnson.  “Very  bad.  But,  Sir,  it  never  can  have 
any  general  influence;  it  may  distress  some  indi¬ 
viduals.  For,  consider  this:  landlords  cannot  do 
without  tenants.  Now  tenants  will  not  give  more 
for  land,  than  land  is  worth.  If  they  can  make 
more  of  their  money  by  keeping  a  shop,  or  any 
other  way,  they’ll  do  it,  and  so  oblige  landlords 
to  let  land  come  back  to  a  reasonable  rent,  in 
order  that  they  may  get  tenants.  Land,  in  Eng¬ 
land,  is  an  article  of  commerce.  A  tenant  who 
pays  his  landlord  his  rent,  thinks  himself  no 
more  obliged  to  him  than  you  think  yourself 
obliged  to  a  man  in  whose  shop  you  buy  a  piece 
of  goods.  He  knows  the  landlord  does  not  let 
him  have  his  land  for  less  than  he  can  get  from 
others,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  shopkeeper 
sells  his  goods.  No  shopkeeper  sells  a  yard  of 
ribband  for  sixpence  when  seven-pence  is  the 
current  price.”  Boswell.  “But,  Sir,  is  it  not  bet¬ 
ter  that  tenants  should  be  dependant  on  land¬ 
lords?”  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  as  there  are  many 
more  tenants  than  landlords,  perhaps,  strictly 
speaking,  we  should  wish  not.  But  if  you  please 
you  may  let  your  lands  cheap,  and  so  get  the 
value,  part  in  money  and  part  in  homage.  1 
should  agree  with  you  in  that.”  Boswell.  “So, 
Sir,  you  laugh  at  schemes  of  political  improve¬ 
ment.”  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  most  schemes  of 
political  improvement  are  very  laughable 
things.” 

He  observed,  “Providence  has  wisely  ordered 
that  the  more  numerous  men  are,  the  more  dif¬ 
ficult  it  is  for  them  to  agree  in  any  thing,  and  so 
they  are  governed.  There  is  no  doubt,  that  if  the 
poor  should  reason,  ‘We’ll  be  the  poor  no  longer, 
we’ll  make  the  rich  take  their  turn,’  they  could 


BOSWELL 


1769]  LIFE  OF 

easily  do  it,  were  it  not  that  they  can’t  agree. 
So  the  common  soldiers,  though  so  much  more 
numerous  than  their  officers  are  governed  by 
them  for  the  same  reason.” 

He  said,  “Mankind  have  a  strong  attachment 
to  the  habitations  to  which  they  have  been  ac¬ 
customed.  You  see  the  inhabitants  of  Norway 
do  not  with  one  consent  quit  it,  and  go  to  some 
part  of  America,  where  there  is  a  mild  climate, 
and  where  they  may  have  the  same  produce 
from  land,  with  the  tenth  part  of  the  labour.  No, 
Sir;  their  affection  for  their  old  dwellings,  and 
the  terrour  of  a  general  change,  keep  them  at 
home.  Thus,  we  see  many  of  the  finest  spots  in 
the  world  thinly  inhabited,  and  many  rugged 
spots  well  inhabited.” 

The  London  Chronicle ,  which  was  the  only  news¬ 
paper  he  constantly  took  in,  being  brought,  the 
office  of  reading  it  aloud  was  assigned  to  me.  I 
was  diverted  by  his  impatience.  He  made  me 
pass  over  so  many  parts  of  it,  that  my  task  was 
very  easy.  He  would  not  suffer  one  of  the  peti¬ 
tions  to  the  King  about  the  Middlesex  election 
to  be  read. 

I  had  hired  a  Bohemian  as  my  servant  while 
I  remained  in  London,  and  being  much  pleased 
with  him,  I  asked  Dr.  Johnson  whether  his  being 
a  Reman  Catholick  should  prevent  my  taking 
him  with  me  to  Scotland.  Johnson.  “Why  no, 
Sir,  if  he  has  no  objection,  you  can  have  none.” 
Boswell.  “So,  Sir,  you  are  no  great  enemy  to 
the  Roman  Catholick  religion.”  Johnson.  “No 
more,  Sir,  than  to  the  Presbyterian  religion.” 
Boswell.  “You  are  joking.”  Johnson.  “No,  Sir, 

I  really  think  so.  Nay,  Sir,  of  the  two,  I  prefer 
the  Popish.”  Boswell.  “How  so,  Sir?’ Johnson. 
‘‘Why,  Sir,  the  Presbyterians  have  no  church, 
no  apostolical  ordination.”  Boswell.  “And  do 
you  think  that  absolutely  essential,  Sir?”  John¬ 
son.  “Why,  Sir,  as  it  was  an  apostolical  institu¬ 
tion,  I  think  it  is  dangerous  to  be  without  it. 
And,  Sir,  the  Presbyterians  have  no  public  wor¬ 
ship:  they  have  no  form  of  prayer  in  which  they 
know  they  are  to  join.  They  go  to  hear  a  man 
pray,  and  are  to  judge  whether  they  will  join 
with  him.”  Boswell.  “But,  Sir,  their  doctrine 
is  the  same  with  that  of  the  Church  of  England. 
Their  confession  of  faith,  and  the  thirty-nine 
articles,  contain  the  same  points,  even  the  doc¬ 
trine  of  predestination.”  Johnson.  “Why  yes, 
Sir,  predestination  was  a  part  of  the  clamour  of 
the  times,  so  it  is  mentioned  in  our  articles,  but 
with  as  little  positiveness  as  could  be.”  Boswell. 
“Is  it  necessary,  Sir,  to  believe  all  the  thirty- 
nine  articles?”  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  that  is  a 
question  which  has  been  much  agitated.  Some 


JOHNSON  173 

have  thought  it  necessary  that  they  should  all  be 
believed;  others  have  considered  them  to  be 
only  articles  of  peace,  that  is  to  say,  you  are  not 
to  preach  against  them.”  Boswell.  “It  appears 
to  me,  Sir,  that  predestination,  or  what  is  equiv¬ 
alent  to  it,  cannot  be  avoided,  if  we  hold  an  uni¬ 
versal  prescience  in  the  Deity.”  Johnson.  “Why, 
Sir,  does  not  God  every  day  see  things  going  on 
without  preventing  them?”  Boswell.  “True, 
Sir;  but  if  a  thing  be  certainly  foreseen,  it  must  be 
fixed,  and  cannot  happen  otherwise;  and  if  we 
apply  this  consideration  to  the  human  mind, 
there  is  no  free  will,  nor  do  I  see  how  prayer  can 
be  of  any  avail.”  He  mentioned  Dr.  Clarke,  and 
Bishop  Bramhall  on  Liberty  and  Necessity ,  and  bid 
me  read  South’s  Sermons  on  Prayer ;  but  avoided 
the  question  which  has  excruciated  philosophers 
and  divines,  beyond  any  other.  I  did  not  press  it 
further,  when  I  perceived  that  he  was  displeased, 
and  shrunk  from  any  abridgement  of  an  attri¬ 
bute  usually  ascribed  to  the  Divinity,  however 
irreconcileable  in  its  full  extent  with  the  grand 
system  of  moral  government.  His  supposed  ortho¬ 
doxy  here  cramped  the  vigorous  powers  of  his 
understanding.  He  was  confined  by  a  chain 
which  early  imagination  and  long  habit  made 
him  think  massy  and  strong,  but  which,  had  he 
ventured  to  try,  he  could  at  once  have  snapt 
asunder. 

I  proceeded:  “What  do  you  think,  Sir,  of  Pur¬ 
gatory,  as  believed  by  the  Roman  Catholicks?” 
Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  it  is  a  very  harmless  doc¬ 
trine.  They  are  of  opinion  that  the  generality  of 
mankind  are  neither  so  obstinately  wicked  as  to 
deserve  everlasting  punishment,  nor  so  good  as 
to  merit  being  admitted  into  the  society  of  blessed 
spirits;  and  therefore  that  God  is  graciously 
pleased  to  allow  of  a  middle  state,  where  they  may 
be  purified  by  certain  degrees  of  suffering.  You 
see,  Sir,  there  is  nothing  unreasonable  in  this.” 
Boswell.  “But  then,  Sir,  their  masses  for  the 
dead?”  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  if  it  be  once  estab¬ 
lished  that  there  are  souls  in  purgatory,  it  is  as 
proper  to  pray  for  them ,  as  for  our  brethren  of 
mankind  who  are  yet  in  this  life.”  Boswell.  “The 
idolatry  of  the  Mass?”  Johnson.  “Sir,  there  is 
no  idolatry  in  the  Mass.  They  believe  God  to 
be  there,  and  they  adore  him.”  Boswell.  “The 
worship  of  saints?”  Johnson.  “Sir,  they  do  not 
worship  saints;  they  invoke  them;  they  only  ask 
their  prayers.  I  am  talking  all  this  time  of  the 
doctrines  of  the  Church  of  Rome.  I  grant  you  that 
in  practice ,  Purgatory  is  made  a  lucrative  imposi¬ 
tion,  and  that  the  people  do  become  idolatrous 
as  they  recommend  themselves  to  the  tutelary 
protection  of  particular  saints.  I  think  their  giv- 


BOSWELL 


174 

ing  the  sacrament  only  in  one  kind  is  criminal, 
because  it  is  contrary  to  the  express  institution 
of  Christ,  and  I  wonder  how  the  Council  of 
Trent  admitted  it.”  Boswell.  “Confession?” 
Johnson.  “Why,  I  don’t  know  but  that  is  a  good 
thing.  The  scripture  says,  ‘Confess  your  faults 
one  to  another,’  and  the  priests  confess  as  well 
as  the  laity.  Then  it  must  be  considered  that 
their  absolution  is  only  upon  repentance,  and 
often  upon  penance  also.  You  think  your  sins 
may  be  forgiven  without  penance,  upon  repent¬ 
ance  alone.” 

I  thus  ventured  to  mention  all  the  common 
objections  against  the  Roman  Catholick  Church, 
that  I  might  hear  so  great  a  man  upon  them. 
What  he  said  is  here  accurately  recorded.  But  it 
is  not  improbable  that  if  one  had  taken  the  other 
side,  he  might  have  reasoned  differently. 

I  must  however  mention,  that  he  had  a  respect 
for  “ the  old  religion ,”  as  the  mild  Melancthon 
called  that  of  the  Roman  Catholick  Church, 
even  while  he  was  exerting  himself  for  its  refor¬ 
mation  in  some  particulars.  Sir  William  Scott 
informs  me,  that  he  heard  Johnson  say,  “A  man 
who  is  converted  from  Protestantism  to  Popery 
may  be  sincere:  he  parts  with  nothing:  he  is  only 
superadding  to  what  he  already  had.  But  a  con¬ 
vert  from  Popery  to  Protestantism  gives  up  so 
much  of  what  he  has  held  as  sacred  as  any  thing 
that  he  retains;  there  is  so  much  laceration  of 
mind  in  such  a  conversion,  that  it  can  hardly  be 
sincere  and  lasting.”  The  truth  of  this  reflection 
may  be  confirmed  by  many  and  eminent  in¬ 
stances,  some  of  which  will  occur  to  most  of  my 
readers. 

When  we  were  alone,  I  introduced  the  sub¬ 
ject  of  death,  and  endeavoured  to  maintain  that 
the  fear  of  it  might  be  got  over.  I  told  him  that 
David  Hume  said  to  me,  he  was  no  more  un¬ 
easy  to  think  he  should  not  be  after  this  life,  than 
that  he  had  not  been  before  he  began  to  exist. 
Johnson.  “Sir,  if  he  really  thinks  so,  his  percep¬ 
tions  are  disturbed;  he  is  mad:  if  he  does  not 
think  so,  he  lies.  He  may  tell  you,  he  holds  his 
finger  in  the  flame  of  a  candle,  without  feeling 
pain;  would  you  believe  him?  When  he  dies,  he 
at  least  gives  up  ail  he  has.”  Boswell.  “Foote, 
Sir,  told  me,  that  when  he  was  very  ill  he  was 
not  afraid  to  die.”  Johnson.  “It  is  not  true, 
Sir.  Hold  a  pistol  to  Foote’s  breast,  or  to  Flume’s 
breast,  and  threaten  to  kill  them,  and  you’ll  see 
how  they  behave.”  Boswell.  “But  may  we  not 
fortify  our  minds  for  the  approach  of  death?” 
Here  I  am  sensible  I  was  in  the  wrong,  to  bring 
before  his  view  what  he  ever  looked  upon  with 
horrour;  for  although  when  in  a  celestial  frame, 


[  1769 

in  his  Vanity  0/  Human  Wishes ,  he  has  supposed 
death  to  be  “kind  Nature’s  signal  for  retreat,” 
from  this  state  of  being  to  “a  happier  seat,”  his 
thoughts  upon  this  aweful  change  were  in  gen¬ 
eral  full  of  dismal  apprehensions.  His  mind  re¬ 
sembled  the  vast  amphitheatre,  the  Colisaeum 
at  Rome.  In  the  centre  stood  his  judgement, 
which,  like  a  mighty  gladiator,  combated  those 
apprehensions  that,  like  the  wild  beasts  of  the 
Arena ,  were  all  around  in  cells,  ready  to  be  let 
out  upon  him.  After  a  conflict,  he  drives  them 
back  into  their  dens;  but  not  killing  them,  they 
were  still  assailing  him.  To  my  question,  whether 
we  might  not  fortify  our  minds  for  the  approach 
of  death,  he  answered,  in  a  passion,  “No,  Sir, 
let  it  alone.  It  matters  not  how  a  man  dies,  but 
how  he  lives.  The  act  of  dying  is  not  of  import¬ 
ance,  it  lasts  so  short  a  time.”  He  added,  (with 
an  earnest  look,)  “A  man  knows  it  must  be  so, 
and  submits.  It  will  do  him  no  good  to  whine.” 

I  attempted  to  continue  the  conversation.  He 
was  so  provoked,  that  he  said,  “Give  us  no  more 
of  this”;  and  was  thrown  into  such  a  state  of 
agitation,  that  he  expressed  himself  in  a  way 
that  alarmed  and  distressed  me;  shewed  an  im¬ 
patience  that  I  should  leave  him,  and  when  I 
was  going  away,  called  to  me  sternly,  “Don’t 
let  us  meet  tomorrow.” 

I  went  home  exceedingly  uneasy.  All  the  harsh 
observations  which  I  had  ever  heard  made  upon 
his  character,  crowded  into  my  mind;  and  I 
seemed  to  myself  like  the  man  who  had  put  his 
head  into  the  lion’s  mouth  a  great  many  times 
with  perfect  safety,  but  at  last  had  it  bit  off. 

Next  morning  I  sent  him  a  note,  stating,  that 
I  might  have  been  in  the  wrong,  but  it  was  not 
intentionally;  he  was  therefore,  I  could  not  help 
thinking,  too  severe  upon  me.  That  notwith¬ 
standing  our  agreement  not  to  meet  that  day,  I 
would  call  on  him  in  my  way  to  the  city,  and 
stay  five  minutes  by  my  watch.  “You  are,  (said 
I,)  in  my  mind,  since  last  night,  surrounded 
with  cloud  and  storm.  Let  me  have  a  glimpse  of 
sunshine,  and  go  about  my  affairs  in  serenity 
and  chearfulness.” 

Upon  entering  his  study,  I  was  glad  that  he 
was  not  alone,  which  would  have  made  our 
meeting  more  awkward.  There  were  with  him, 
Mr.  Steevens  and  Mr.  Tyers,  both  of  whom  I 
now  saw  for  the  first  time.  My  note  had,  on  his 
own  reflection,  softened  him,  for  he  received  me 
very  complacently;  so  that  I  unexpectedly  found 
myself  at  ease,  and  joined  in  the  conversation. 

He  said,  the  criticks  had  done  too  much  hon¬ 
our  to  Sir  Richard  Blackmore,  by  writing  so 
much  against  him.  That  in  his  Creation  he  had 


1769]  LIFE  OF 

been  helped  by  various  wits,  a  line  by  Phillips 
and  a  line  by  Tickell;  so  that  by  their  aid,  and 
that  of  others,  the  poem  had  been  made  out. 

I  defended  Blackmore’s  supposed  lines,  which 
have  been  ridiculed  as  absolute  nonsense: 

A  painted  vest  Prince  Voltiger  had  on. 

Which  from  a  naked  Piet  his  grandsire  won.1 

I  maintained  it  to  be  a  poetical  conceit.  A  Piet 
being  painted,  if  he  is  slain  in  battle,  and  a  vest 
is  made  of  his  skin,  it  is  a  painted  vest  won  from 
him,  though  he  was  naked. 

Johnson  spoke  unfavourably  of  a  certain  pretty 
voluminous  authour,  saying,  “He  used  to  write 
anonymous  books,  and  then  other  books  com¬ 
mending  those  books,  in  which  there  was  some¬ 
thing  of  rascality.” 

I  whispered  to  him,  “Well,  Sir,  you  are  now  in 
good  humour.”  Johnson.  “Yes,  Sir.”  I  was  go¬ 
ing  to  leave  him,  and  had  got  as  far  as  the  stair¬ 
case.  He  stopped  me,  and  smiling,  said,  “Get 
you  gone  in”;  a  curious  mode  of  inviting  me  to 
stay,  which  I  accordingly  did  for  some  time 
longer. 

This  little  incidental  quarrel  and  reconcilia¬ 
tion,  which,  perhaps,  I  may  be  thought  to  have 
detailed  too  minutely,  must  be  esteemed  as  one 
of  many  proofs  which  his  friends  had,  that 
though  he  might  be  charged  with  bad  humour  at 
times,  he  was  always  a  good-natured  man;  and  I 
have  heard  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  a  nice  and  del¬ 
icate  observer  of  manners,  particularly  remark, 
that  when  upon  any  occasion  Johnson  had  been 
rough  to  any  person  in  company,  he  took  the 
first  opportunity  of  reconciliation,  by  drinking 
1An  acute  correspondent  of  The  European  Maga¬ 
zine ,  April,  1 792,  has  completely  exposed  a  mistake 
which  has  been  unaccountably  frequent  in  ascrib¬ 
ing  these  lines  to  Blackmore,  notwithstanding  that 
Sir  Richard  Steele,  in  that  very  popular  work,  The 
Spectator ,  mentions  them  as  written  by  the  Authour 
of  The  British  Princes ,  the  Honourable  Edward 
Howard.  The  correspondent  above  mentioned, 
shews  this  mistake  to  be  so  inveterate,  that  not  only 
I  defended  the  lines  as  Blackmore’s,  in  the  presence 
of  Dr.  Johnson,  without  any  contradiction  or  doubt 
of  their  authenticity,  but  that  the  Reverend  Mr. 
Whitaker  has  asserted  in  print,  that  he  understands 
they  were  suppressed  in  the  late  edition  or  editions  of 
Blackmore.  “After  all  (says  this  intelligent  writer) 
it  is  not  unworthy  of  particular  observation,  that 
these  lines  so  often  quoted  do  not  exist  either  in 
Blackmore  or  Howard.”  In  The  British  Princes ,  8vo., 
1669,  now  before  me,  p.  96,  they  stand  thus: 

A  vest  as  admired  Voltiger  had  on , 

Which ,  from  this  Island's  Joes ,  his  grandsire  won. 
Whose  artful  colour  pass'd  the  Tyrian  dye , 

Oblig'd  to  triumph  in  this  legacy. 

It  is  probable,  I  think,  that  some  wag,  in  order  to 
make  Howard  still  more  ridiculous  than  he  really 
was,  has  formed  the  couplet  as  it  now  circulates. 


JOHNSON  175 

to  him,  or  addressing  his  discourse  to  him;  but  if 
he  found  his  dignified  indirect  overtures  sullenly 
neglected,  he  was  quite  indifferent,  and  consid¬ 
ered  himself  as  having  done  all  that  he  ought  to 
do,  and  the  other  as  now  in  the  wrong. 

Being  to  set  out  for  Scotland  on  the  10th  of 
November,  I  wrote  to  him  at  Streatham,  begging 
that  he  would  meet  me  in  town  on  the  9th;  but 
if  this  should  be  very  inconvenient  to  him,  I 
would  go  thither.  His  answer  was  as  follows: 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  Upon  balancing  the  inconveni¬ 
ences  of  both  parties,  I  find  it  will  less  incom¬ 
mode  you  to  spend  your  night  here,  than  me  to 
come  to  town.  I  wish  to  see  you,  and  am  ordered 
by  the  lady  of  this  house  to  invite  you  hither. 
Whether  you  can  come  or  not,  I  shall  not  have 
any  occasion  of  writing  to  you  again  before 
your  marriage,  and  therefore  tell  you  now,  that 
with  great  sincerity  I  wish  you  happiness.  I  am, 
dear  Sir, your  most  affectionate  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

Nov.  9,  1769 

I  was  detained  in  town  till  it  was  too  late  on 
the  ninth,  so  went  to  him  early  on  the  morning 
of  the  tenth  of  November.  “Now  (said  he,)  that 
you  are  going  to  marry,  do  not  expect  more 
from  life,  than  life  will  afford.  You  may  often 
find  yourself  out  of  humour,  and  you  may  often 
think  your  wife  not  studious  enough  to  please 
you;  and  yet  you  may  have  reason  to  consider 
yourself  as  upon  the  whole  very  happily  mar¬ 
ried.” 

Talking  of  marriage  in  general,  he  observed, 
“Our  marriage  service  is  too  refined.  It  is  cal¬ 
culated  only  for  the  best  kind  of  marriages; 
whereas,  we  should  have  a  form  for  matches  of 
convenience,  of  which  there  are  many.”  He 
agreed  with  me  that  there  was  no  absolute  ne¬ 
cessity  for  having  the  marriage  ceremony  per¬ 
formed  by  a  regular  clergyman,  for  this  was  not 
commanded  in  scripture. 

I  was  volatile  enough  to  repeat  to  him  a  little 
epigrammatick  song  of  mine,  on  matrimony, 
which  Mr.  Garrick  had  a  few  days  before  pro¬ 
cured  to  be  set  to  musick  by  the  very  ingenious 
Mr.  Dibden. 

A  Matrimonial  Thought 
In  the  blithe  days  of  honey-moon , 

With  Kate's  allurements  smitten, 

I  lov'd  her  late ,  I  lov'd  her  soon , 

And  call'd  her  dearest  kitten. 

But  now  my  kitten's  grown  a  cat , 

And  cross  like  other  wives , 

Of  by  my  soul,  my  honest  Mat , 

I fear  she  has  nine  lives . 


176  BOSWELL  [1770 


My  illustrious  friend  said,  “It  is  very  well, 
Sir;  but  you  should  not  swear.”  Upon  which  I 
altered  “O !  by  my  soul,”  to  “Alas,  alas!” 

He  was  so  good  as  to  accompany  me  to  Lon¬ 
don,  and  see  me  into  the  post-chaise  which  was 
to  carry  me  on  my  road  to  Scotland.  And  sure  I 
am,  that,  however  inconsiderable  many  of  the 
particulars  recorded  at  this  time  may  appear  to 
some,  they  will  be  esteemed  by  the  best  part  of 
my  readers  as  genuine  traits  of  his  character, 
contributing  together  to  give  a  full,  fair,  and 
distinct  view  of  it. 

1770:  ,etat.  61.] — in  1770  he  published  a  po¬ 
litical  pamphlet,  entitled  The  False  Alarm ,  in¬ 
tended  to  justify  the  conduct  of  ministry  and 
their  majority  in  the  House  of  Commons,  for 
having  virtually  assumed  it  as  an  axiom,  that 
the  expulsion  of  a  Member  of  Parliament  was 
equivalent  to  exclusion,  and  thus  having  de¬ 
clared  Colonel  Lutterel  to  be  duly  elected  for 
the  county  of  Middlesex,  notwithstanding  Mr. 
Wilkes  had  a  great  majority  of  votes.  This  being 
justly  considered  as  a  gross  violation  of  the  right 
of  election,  an  alarm  for  the  constitution  ex¬ 
tended  itself  all  over  the  kingdom.  To  prove  this 
alarm  to  be  false,  was  the  purpose  of  Johnson’s 
pamphlet;  but  even  his  vast  powers  were  inade¬ 
quate  to  cope  with  constitutional  truth  and  rea¬ 
son,  and  his  argument  failed  of  effect;  and  the 
House  of  Commons  have  since  expunged  the 
offensive  resolution  from  their  Journals.  That 
the  House  of  Commons  might  have  expelled  Mr. 
Wilkes  repeatedly,  and  as  often  as  he  should  be 
re-chosen,  was  not  denied;  but  incapacitation 
cannot  be  but  by  an  act  of  the  whole  legislature. 
It  was  wonderful  to  see  how  a  prejudice  in  fa¬ 
vour  of  government  in  general,  and  an  aversion 
to  popular  clamour,  could  blind  and  contract 
such  an  understanding  as  Johnson’s,  in  this  par¬ 
ticular  case;  yet  the  wit,  the  sarcasm,  the  elo¬ 
quent  vivacity  which  this  pamphlet  displayed, 
made  it  be  read  with  great  avidity  at  the  time, 
and  it  will  ever  be  read  with  pleasure,  for  the 
sake  of  its  composition.  That  it  endeavoured  to 
infuse  a  narcotick  indifference,  as  to  publick 
concerns,  into  the  minds  of  the  people,  and  that 
it  broke  out  sometimes  into  an  extreme  coarse¬ 
ness  of  contemptuous  abuse,  is  but  too  evident. 

It  must  not,  however,  be  omitted,  that  when 
the  storm  of  his  violence  subsides,  he  takes  a  fair 
opportunity  to  pay  a  grateful  compliment  to  the 
King,  who  had  rewarded  his  merit:  “These  low¬ 
born  rulers  have  endeavoured,  surely  without 
effect,  to  alienate  the  affections  of  the  people 
from  the  only  King  who  for  almost  a  century 


has  much  appeared  to  desire,  or  much  endeav¬ 
oured  to  deserve  them.”  And,  “Every  honest 
man  must  lament,  that  the  faction  has  been  re¬ 
garded  with  frigid  neutrality  by  the  Tories,  who 
being  long  accustomed  to  signalise  their  princi¬ 
ples  by  opposition  to  the  Court,  do  not  yet  con¬ 
sider,  that  they  have  at  last  a  King  who  knows 
not  the  name  of  party,  and  who  wishes  to  be  the 
common  father  of  all  his  people.” 

To  this  pamphlet,  which  was  at  once  discov¬ 
ered  to  be  Johnson’s,  several  answers  came  out, 
in  which,  care  was  taken  to  remind  the  publick 
of  his  former  attacks  upon  government,  and  of 
his  now  being  a  pensioner,  without  allowing  for 
the  honourable  terms  upon  which  Johnson’s 
pension  was  granted  and  accepted,  or  the  change 
of  system  which  the  British  court  had  undergone 
upon  the  accession  of  his  present  Majesty.  He 
was,  however,  soothed  in  the  highest  strain  of 
panegyrick,  in  a  poem  called  The  Remonstrance , 
by  the  Rev.  Mr.  Stockdale,  to  whom  he  was, 
upon  many  occasions,  a  kind  protector. 

The  following  admirable  minute  made  by 
him  describes  so  well  his  own  state,  and  that  of 
numbers  to  whom  self-examination  is  habitual, 
that  I  cannot  omit  it: 

“June  1,  1770.  Every  man  naturally  per¬ 
suades  himself  that  he  can  keep  his  resolutions, 
nor  is  he  convinced  of  his  imbecility  but  by  length 
of  time  and  frequency  of  experiment.  This  opin¬ 
ion  of  our  own  constancy  is  so  prevalent,  that 
we  always  despise  him  who  suffers  his  general 
and  settled  purpose  to  be  overpowered  by  an 
occasional  desire.  They,  therefore,  whom  fre¬ 
quent  failures  have  made  desperate,  cease  to 
form  resolutions;  and  they  who  are  become  cun¬ 
ning,  do  not  tell  them.  Those  who  do  not  make 
them  are  very  few,  but  of  their  effect  little  is 
perceived;  for  scarcely  any  man  persists  in  a 
course  of  life  planned  by  choice,  but  as  he  is  re¬ 
strained  from  deviation  by  some  external  power. 
He  who  may  live  as  he  will,  seldom  lives  long  in 
the  observation  of  his  own  rules.”1 

Of  this  year  I  have  obtained  the  following 
letters: 

To  the  Reverend  Dr.  Farmer,  Cambridge 

Sir,  As  no  man  ought  to  keep  wholly  to  him¬ 
self  any  possession  that  may  be  useful  to  the 
publick,  I  hope  you  will  not  think  me  unreason¬ 
ably  intrusive,  if  I  have  recourse  to  you  for  such 
information  as  you  are  more  able  to  give  me 
than  any  other  man. 

In  support  of  an  opinion  which  you  have  al¬ 
ready  placed  above  the  need  of  any  more  sup¬ 
port,  Mr.  Steevens,  a  very  ingenious  gendeman, 

1 Prayers  and  Meditations ,  p.  95.  [p.  101]. 


1770  ]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  177 


lately  of  King’s  College,  has  collected  an  ac¬ 
count  of  all  the  translations  which  Shakspeare 
might  have  seen  and  used.  He  wishes  his  cata¬ 
logue  to  be  perfect,  and  therefore  intreats  that 
you  will  favour  him  by  the  insertion  of  such  ad¬ 
ditions  as  the  accuracy  of  your  inquiries  has  en¬ 
abled  you  to  make.  To  this  request,  I  take  the 
liberty  of  adding  my  own  solicitation. 

We  have  no  immediate  use  for  this  catalogue, 
and  therefore  do  not  desire  that  it  should  inter¬ 
rupt  or  hinder  your  more  important  employ¬ 
ments.  But  it  will  be  kind  to  let  us  know  that  you 
receive  it.  I  am,  Sir,  &c. 

Sam.  Johnson 

Johnson’s-court,  Fleet-street 

March  21,  1770 

To  the  Reverend  Mr.  Thomas  Warton 

Dear  Sir,  The  readiness  with  which  you  were 
pleased  to  promise  me  some  notes  on  Shaks¬ 
peare ,  was  a  new  instance  of  your  friendship.  I 
shall  not  hurry  you;  but  am  desired  by  Mr. 
Steevens,  who  helps  me  in  this  edition,  to  let 
you  know,  that  we  shall  print  the  tragedies  first, 
and  shall  therefore  want  first  the  notes  which 
belong  to  them.  We  think  not  to  incommode  the 
readers  with  a  supplement;  and  therefore,  what 
we  cannot  put  into  its  proper  place,  will  do  us 
no  good.  We  shall  not  begin  to  print  before  the 
end  of  six  weeks,  perhaps  not  so  soon.  I  am,  &c. 

Sam.  Johnson 

London,  June  23,  1770 

To  the  Rev.  Dr.  Joseph  Warton 

Dear  Sir,  I  am  revising  my  edition  of  Shaks¬ 
peare ,  and  remember  that  I  formerly  misrepre¬ 
sented  your  opinion  of  Lear.  Be  pleased  to  write 
the  paragraph  as  you  would  have  it,  and  send  it. 
If  you  have  any  remarks  of  your  own  upon  that 
or  any  other  play,  I  shall  gladly  receive  them. 

Make  my  compliments  to  Mrs.  Warton.  I 
sometimes  think  of  wandering  for  a  few  days  to 
Winchester,  but  am  apt  to  delay.  I  am,  Sir, 
your  most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

Sept.  27,  1770 

To  Mr.  Francis  Barber,  At  Mrs.  Clapp’s, 
Bishopstortford,  Hertfordshire 

Dear  Francis,  I  am  at  last  sat  down  to  write 
to  you,  and  should  very  much  blame  myself  for 
having  neglected  you  so  long,  if  I  did  not  im¬ 
pute  that  and  many  other  failings  to  want  of 
health.  I  hope  not  to  be  so  long  silent  again.  I 
am  very  well  satisfied  with  your  progress,  if  you 
can  really  perform  the  exercises  which  you  are 
set;  and  I  hope  Mr.  Ellis  does  not  suffer  you  to 
impose  on  him,  or  on  yourself. 

Make  my  compliments  to  Mr.  Ellis,  and  to 
Mrs.  Clapp,  and  Mr.  Smith. 

Let  me  know  what  English  books  you  read 
for  your  entertainment.  You  can  never  be  wise 
unless  you  love  reading. 


Do  not  imagine  that  I  shall  forget  or  forsake 
you;  for  if,  when  I  examine  you,  I  find  that  you 
have  not  lost  your  time,  you  shall  want  no  en¬ 
couragement  from  yours  affectionately, 

Sam.  Johnson 

London,  Sept.  25,  1770 

To  the  Same 

Dear  Francis,  I  hope  you  mind  your  busi¬ 
ness.  I  design  you  shall  stay  with  Mrs.  Clapp 
these  holidays.  If  you  are  invited  out  you  may 
go,  if  Mr.  Ellis  gives  leave.  I  have  ordered  you 
some  clothes,  which  you  will  receive,  I  believe, 
next  week.  My  compliments  to  Mrs.  Clapp  and 
to  Mr.  Ellis,  and  Mr.  Smith,  &c.  I  am  your  af¬ 
fectionate, 

Sam.  Johnson 

December  7,  1770 

During  this  year  there  was  a  total  cessation  of 
all  correspondence  between  Dr.  Johnson  and 
me,  without  any  coldness  on  either  side,  but 
merely  from  procrastination,  continued  from 
day  to  day;  and  as  I  was  not  in  London,  I  had 
no  opportunity  of  enjoying  his  company  and 
recording  his  conversation.  To  supply  this  blank, 
I  shall  present  my  readers  with  some  Collectanea , 
obligingly  furnished  to  me  by  the  Rev.  Dr.  Max¬ 
well,  of  Falkland,  in  Ireland,  some  time  assistant 
preacher  at  the  Temple,  and  for  many  years  the 
social  friend  of  Johnson,  who  spoke  of  him  with 
a  very  kind  regard. 

“My  acquaintance  with  that  great  and  vener¬ 
able  character  commenced  in  the  year  1 754.  I 
was  introduced  to  him  by  Mr.  Grierson,1  his  Ma¬ 
jesty’s  printer  at  Dublin,  a  gentleman  of  uncom¬ 
mon  learning,  and  great  wit  and  vivacity.  Mr. 
Grierson  died  in  Germany,  at  the  age  of  twenty- 
seven.  Dr.  Johnson  highly  respected  his  abili¬ 
ties,  and  often  observed,  that  he  possessed  more 
extensive  knowledge  than  any  man  of  his  years 
he  had  ever  known.  His  industry  was  equal  to 
his  talents;  and  he  particularly  excelled  in  every 
species  of  philological  learning,  and  was,  per¬ 
haps,  the  best  critick  of  the  age  he  lived  in. 

“I  must  always  remember  with  gratitude  my 
obligation  to  Mr.  Grierson,  for  the  honour  and 
happiness  of  Dr.  Johnson’s  acquaintance  and 
friendship,  which  continued  uninterrupted  and 
undiminished  to  his  death:  a  connection,  that 
was  at  once  the  pride  and  happiness  of  my  life. 

“What  pity  it  is,  that  so  much  wit  and  good 
sense  as  he  continually  exhibited  in  conversa¬ 
tion,  should  perish  unrecorded!  Few  persons 
quitted  his  company  without  perceiving  them- 

!Son  of  the  learned  Mrs.  Grierson,  who  was  pa¬ 
tronised  by  the  late  Lord  Granville,  and  was  the 
editor  of  several  of  the  Glassicks. 


1 78  BOSWELL  [1770 


selves  wiser  and  better  than  they  were  before. 
On  serious  subjects  he  flashed  the  most  interest¬ 
ing  conviction  upon  his  auditors;  and  upon 
lighter  topicks,  you  might  have  supposed — 
Albano  musas  de  monte  locutas . 

“Though  I  can  hope  to  add  but  little  to  the 
celebrity  of  so  exalted  a  character,  by  any  com¬ 
munications  I  can  furnish,  yet  out  of  pure  re¬ 
spect  to  his  memory,  I  will  venture  to  transmit 
to  you  some  anecdotes  concerning  him,  which 
fell  under  my  own  observation.  The  very  minutia 
of  such  a  character  must  be  interesting,  and 
may  be  compared  to  the  filings  of  diamonds. 

“In  politicks  he  was  deemed  a  Tory,  but  cer¬ 
tainly  was  not  so  in  the  obnoxious  or  party  sense 
of  the  term;  for  while  he  asserted  the  legal  and 
salutary  prerogatives  of  the  crown,  he  no  less 
respected  the  constitutional  liberties  of  the  peo¬ 
ple.  Whiggism,  at  the  time  of  the  Revolution, 
he  said,  was  accompanied  with  certain  princi¬ 
ples;  but  latterly,  as  a  mere  party  distinction 
under  Walpole  and  the  Pelhams,  was  no  better 
than  the  politicks  of  stock-jobbers,  and  the  reli¬ 
gion  of  infidels. 

“He  detested  the  idea  of  governing  by  par¬ 
liamentary  corruption,  and  asserted  most  stren¬ 
uously,  that  a  prince  steadily  and  conspicuously 
pursuing  the  interests  of  his  people,  could  not 
fail  of  parliamentary  concurrence.  A  prince  of 
ability,  he  contended,  might  and  should  be  the 
directing  soul  and  spirit  of  his  own  administra¬ 
tion;  in  short,  his  own  minister,  and  not  the 
mere  head  of  a  party:  and  then,  and  not  till 
then,  would  the  royal  dignity  be  sincerely  re¬ 
spected. 

“Johnson  seemed  to  think,  that  a  certain  de¬ 
gree  of  crown  influence  over  the  Houses  of  Par¬ 
liament,  (not  meaning  a  corrupt  and  shameful 
dependence,)  was  very  salutary,  nay,  even  nec¬ 
essary,  in  our  mixed  government.  ‘For,  (said 
he,)  if  the  members  were  under  no  crown  influ¬ 
ence,  and  disqualified  from  receiving  any  grati¬ 
fication  from  Court,  and  resembled,  as  they  pos¬ 
sibly  might,  Pym  and  Haslerig,  and  other  stub¬ 
born  and  sturdy  members  of  the  long  Parliament, 
the  wheels  of  government  would  be  totally  ob¬ 
structed.  Such  men  would  oppose,  merely  to 
shew  their  power,  from  envy,  jealousy,  and  per¬ 
versity  of  disposition ;  and  not  gaining  themselves, 
would  hate  and  oppose  all  who  did:  not  loving 
the  person  of  the  prince,  and  conceiving  they 
owed  him  little  gratitude,  from  the  mere  spirit 
of  insolence  and  contradiction,  they  would  op¬ 
pose  and  thwart  him  upon  all  occasions.’ 

“The  inseparable  imperfection  annexed  to  all 
human  governments  consisted,  he  said,  in  not 


being  able  to  create  a  sufficient  fund  of  virtue 
and  principle  to  carry  the  laws  into  due  and 
effectual  execution.  Wisdom  might  plan,  but 
virtue  alone  could  execute.  And  where  could 
sufficient  virtue  be  found?  A  variety  of  dele¬ 
gated,  and  often  discretionary,  powers  must  be 
entrusted  somewhere;  which,  if  not  governed  by 
integrity  and  conscience,  would  necessarily  be 
abused,  till  at  last  the  constable  would  sell  his 
for  a  shilling. 

“This  excellent  person  was  sometimes  charged 
with  abetting  slavish  and  arbitrary  principles  of 
government.  Nothing  in  my  opinion  could  be  a 
grosser  calumny  and  misrepresentation;  for  how 
can  it  be  rationally  supposed,  that  he  should 
adopt  such  pernicious  and  absurd  opinions, 
who  supported  his  philosophical  character  with 
so  much  dignity,  was  extremely  jealous  of  his 
personal  liberty  and  independence,  and  could 
not  brook  the  smallest  appearance  of  neglect  or 
insult,  even  from  the  highest  personages? 

“But  let  us  view  him  in  some  instances  of 
more  familiar  life. 

“His  general  mode  of  life,  during  my  acquaint¬ 
ance,  seemed  to  be  pretty  uniform.  About  twelve 
o’clock  I  commonly  visited  him,  and  frequently 
found  him  in  bed,  or  declaiming  over  his  tea, 
which  he  drank  very  plentifully.  He  generally 
had  a  levee  of  morning  visitors,  chiefly  men  of 
letters;  Hawkesworth,  Goldsmith,  Murphy, 
Langton,  Steevens,  Beauclerk,  &c.  &c.,  and 
sometimes  learned  ladies,  particularly  I  remem¬ 
ber  a  French  lady  of  wit  and  fashion  doing  him 
the  honour  of  a  visit.  He  seemed  to  me  to  be 
considered  as  a  Kind  of  publick  oracle,  whom 
every  body  thought  they  had  a  right  to  visit  and 
consult;  and  doubtless  they  were  well  rewarded. 
I  never  could  discover  how  he  found  time  for 
his  compositions.  He  declaimed  all  the  morning, 
then  went  to  dinner  at  a  tavern,  where  he  com¬ 
monly  staid  late,  and  then  drank  his  tea  at  some 
friend’s  house,  over  which  he  loitered  a  great 
while,  but  seldom  took  supper.  I  fancy  he  must 
have  read  and  wrote  chiefly  in  the  night,  for  I 
can  scarcely  recollect  that  he  ever  refused  going 
with  me  to  a  tavern,  and  he  often  went  to 
Ranelagh,  which  he  deemed  a  place  of  innocent 
recreation. 

“He  frequently  gave  all  the  silver  in  his  pock¬ 
et  to  the  poor,  who  watched  him,  between  his 
house  and  the  tavern  where  he  dined.  He  walked 
the  streets  at  all  hours,  and  said  he  was  never 
robbed,  for  the  rogues  knew  he  had  little  money, 
nor  had  the  appearance  of  having  much. 

“Though  the  most  accessible  and  communi¬ 
cative  man  alive;  yet  when  he  suspected  he  was 


1770  ] 

invited  to  be  exhibited,  he  constantly  spurned 
the  invitation. 

“Two  young  women  from  Staffordshire  visit¬ 
ed  him  when  I  was  present,  to  consult  him  on 
the  subject  of  Methodism,  to  which  they  were 
inclined.  ‘Come,  (said  he,)  you  pretty  fools,  dine 
with  Maxwell  and  me  at  the  Mitre,  and  we  will 
talk  over  that  subject5 ;  which  they  did,  and  after 
dinner  he  took  one  of  them  upon  his  knee,  and 
fondled  her  for  half  an  hour  together. 

“Upon  a  visit  to  me  at  a  country  lodging  near 
Twickenham,  he  asked  what  sort  of  society  I  had 
there.  I  told  him,  but  indifferent;  as  they  chiefly 
consisted  of  opulent  traders,  retired  from  busi¬ 
ness.  He  said,  he  never  much  liked  that  class  of 
people;  ‘For,  Sir,  (said  he,)  they  have  lost  the 
civility  of  tradesmen,  without  acquiring  the  man¬ 
ners  of  gentlemen.5 

“Johnson  was  much  attached  to  London:  he 
observed,  that  a  man  stored  his  mind  better 
there,  than  any  where  else;  and  that  in  remote 
situations  a  man’s  body  might  be  feasted,  but 
his  mind  was  starved,  and  his  faculties  apt  to 
degenerate,  from  want  of  exercise  and  com¬ 
petition.  No  place,  (he  said,)  cured  a  man’s  van¬ 
ity  or  arrogance  so  well  as  London;  for  as  no 
man  was  either  great  or  good  per  se,  but  as  com¬ 
pared  with  others  not  so  good  or  great,  he  was 
sure  to  find  in  the  metropolis  many  his  equals, 
and  some  his  superiours.  He  observed,  that  a 
man  in  London  was  in  less  danger  of  falling  in 
love  indiscreetly,  than  any  where  else;  for  there 
the  difficulty  of  deciding  between  the  conflict¬ 
ing  pretensions  of  a  vast  variety  of  objects,  kept 
him  safe.  He  told  me,  that  he  had  frequently 
been  offered  country  preferment,  if  he  would 
consent  to  take  orders;  but  he  could  not  leave 
the  improved  society  of  the  capital,  or  consent 
to  exchange  the  exhilarating  joys  and  splendid 
decorations  of  publick  life,  for  the  obscurity,  in¬ 
sipidity,  and  uniformity  of  remote  situations. 

“Speaking  of  Mr.  Harte,  Canon  of  Windsor, 
and  writer  of  The  History  of  Gustavus  Adolphus , 
he  much  commended  him  as  a  scholar,  and  a 
man  of  the  most  companionable  talents  he 
had  ever  known.  He  said,  the  defects  in  his  his¬ 
tory  proceeded  not  from  imbecility,  but  from 
foppery. 

“He  loved,  he  said,  the  old  black  letter  books; 
they  were  rich  in  matter,  though  their  style  was 
inelegant;  wonderfully  so,  considering  how  con¬ 
versant  the  writers  were  with  the  best  models  of 
antiquity. 

“Burton’s  Anatomy  of  Melancholy,  he  said,  was 
the  only  book  that  ever  took  him  out  of  bed  two 
hours  sooner  than  he  wished  to  rise. 


179 

“He  frequently  exhorted  me  to  set  about  writ¬ 
ing  a  History  of  Ireland,  and  archly  remarked, 
there  had  been  some  good  Irish  writers,  and  that 
one  Irishman  might  at  least  aspire  to  be  equal 
to  another.  He  had  great  compassion  for  the 
miseries  and  distresses  of  the  Irish  nation,  par¬ 
ticularly  the  Papists;  and  severely  reprobated  the 
barbarous  debilitating  policy  of  the  British  gov¬ 
ernment,  which,  he  said,  was  the  most  detest¬ 
able  mode  of  persecution.  To  a  gentleman,  who 
hinted  such  policy  might  be  necessary  to  sup¬ 
port  the  authority  of  the  English  government, 
he  replied  by  saying,  ‘Let  the  authority  of  the 
English  government  perish,  rather  than  be  main¬ 
tained  by  iniquity.  Better  would  it  be  to  restrain 
the  turbulence  of  the  natives  by  the  authority  of 
the  sword,  and  to  make  them  amenable  to  law 
and  justice  by  an  effectual  and  vigorous  police, 
than  to  grind  them  to  powder  by  all  manner  of 
disabilities  and  incapacities.  Better  (said  he,)  to 
hang  or  drown  people  at  once,  than  by  an  unre¬ 
lenting  persecution  to  beggar  and  starve  them.’ 
The  moderation  and  humanity  of  the  present 
times  have,  in  some  measure,  justified  the  wis¬ 
dom  of  his  observations. 

“Dr.  Johnson  was  often  accused  of  prejudices, 
nay,  antipathy,  with  regard  to  the  natives  of 
Scotland.  Surely,  so  illiberal  a  prejudice  never 
entered  his  mind:  and  it  is  well  known,  many 
natives  of  that  respectable  country  possessed  a 
large  share  in  his  esteem;  nor  were  any  of  them 
ever  excluded  from  his  good  offices,  as  far  as  op¬ 
portunity  permitted.  True  it  is,  he  considered 
the  Scotch,  nationally,  as  a  crafty,  designing 
people,  eagerly  attentive  to  their  own  interest, 
and  too  apt  to  overlook  the  claims  and  preten¬ 
sions  of  other  people.  ‘While  they  confine  their 
benevolence,  in  a  manner,  exclusively  to  those 
of  their  own  country,  they  expect  to  share  in  the 
good  offices  of  other  people.  Now  (said  Johnson.) 
this  principle  is  either  right  or  wrong;  if  right, 
we  should  do  well  to  imitate  such  conduct;  if 
wrong,  we  cannot  too  much  detest  it.5 

“Being  solicited  to  compose  a  funeral  sermon 
for  the  daughter  of  a  tradesman,  he  naturally 
enquired  into  the  character  of  the  deceased;  and 
being  told  she  was  remarkable  for  her  humility 
and  condescension  to  inferiours,  he  observed, 
that  those  were  very  laudable  qualities,  but  it 
might  not  be  so  easy  to  discover  who  the  lady’s 
inferiours  were. 

“Of  a  certain  player  he  remarked,  that  his 
conversation  usually  threatened  and  announced 
more  than  it  performed;  that  he  fed  you  with  a 
continual  renovation  of  hope,  to  end  in  a  con¬ 
stant  succession  of  disappointment. 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


BOSWELL 


180 

“When  exasperated  by  contradiction,  he  was 
apt  to  treat  his  opponents  with  too  much  acri¬ 
mony:  as,  cSir,  you  don’t  see  your  way  through 
that  question’: — ‘Sir,  you  talk  the  language  of 
ignorance.’  On  my  observing  to  him  that  a  cer¬ 
tain  gentleman  had  remained  silent  the  whole 
evening,  in  the  midst  of  a  very  brilliant  and 
learned  society,  ‘Sir,  (said  he,)  the  conversation 
overflowed,  and  drowned  him.’ 

“His  philosophy,  though  austere  and  solemn, 
was  by  no  means  morose  and  cynical,  and  never 
blunted  the  laudable  sensibilities  of  his  charac¬ 
ter,  or  exempted  him  from  the  influence  of  the 
tender  passions.  Want  of  tenderness,  he  always 
alledged,  was  want  of  parts,  and  was  no  less  a 
proof  of  stupidity  than  depravity. 

“Speaking  of  Mr.  Hanway,  who  published 
An  Eight  Days'  Journey  from  London  to  Portsmouth , 
‘Jonas,  (said  he,)  acquired  some  reputation  by 
travelling  abroad,  but  lost  it  all  by  travelling  at 
home.’ 

“Of  the  passion  of  love  he  remarked,  that  its  vi¬ 
olence  and  ill  effects  were  much  exaggerated;  for 
who  knows  any  real  sufferings  on  that  head,  more 
than  from  the  exorbitancy  of  any  other  passion? 

“He  much  commended  Law’s  Serious  Call , 
which  he  said  was  the  finest  piece  of  hortatory 
theology  in  any  language.  ‘Law,  (said  he,)  fell 
latterly  into  the  reveries  of  Jacob  Behmen,  whom 
Law  alledged  to  have  been  somewhat  in  the 
same  state  with  St.  Paul,  and  to  have  seen  unut¬ 
terable  things.  Were  it  even  so,  (said  Johnson,) 
Jacob  would  have  resembled  St.  Paul  still  more, 
by  not  attempting  to  utter  them.’ 

“He  observed,  that  the  established  clergy  in 
general  did  not  preach  plain  enough;  and  that 
polished  periods  and  glittering  sentences  flew 
over  the  heads  of  the  common  people,  without 
any  impression  upon  their  hearts.  Something 
might  be  necessary,  he  observed,  to  excite  the 
affections  of  the  common  people,  who  were  sunk 
in  languor  and  lethargy,  and  therefore  he  sup¬ 
posed  that  the  new  concomitants  of  methodism 
might  probably  produce  so  desirable  an  effect. 
The  mind,  like  the  body,  he  observed,  delighted 
in  change  and  novelty,  and  even  in  religion  itself, 
courted  new  appearances  and  modifications. 
Whatever  might  be  thought  of  some  methodist 
teachers,  he  said,  he  could  scarcely  doubt  the 
sincerity  of  that  man,  who  travelled  nine  hun¬ 
dred  miles  in  a  month,  and  preached  twelve  times 
a  week;  for  no  adequate  reward,  merely  tempor¬ 
al,  could  be  given  for  such  indefatigable  labour. 

“Of  Dr.  Priestley’s  theological  works,  he  re¬ 
marked,  that  they  tended  to  unsettle  every  thing, 
and  yet  settled  nothing. 


[  1770 

“He  was  much  affected  by  the  death  of  his 
mother,  and  wrote  to  me  to  come  and  assist  him 
to  compose  his  mind,  which  indeed  I  found  ex¬ 
tremely  agitated.  He  lamented  that  all  serious 
and  religious  conversation  was  banished  from 
the  society  of  men,  and  yet  great  advantages 
might  be  derived  from  it.  All  acknowledged,  he 
said,  what  hardly  any  body  practised,  the  obli¬ 
gation  we  were  under  of  making  the  concerns  of 
eternity  the  governing  principles  of  our  lives. 
Every  man,  he  observed,  at  last  wishes  for  re¬ 
treat:  he  sees  his  expectations  frustrated  in  the 
world,  and  begins  to  wean  himself  from  it,  and 
to  prepare  for  everlasting  separation. 

“He  observed,  that  the  influence  of  London 
now  extended  every  where,  and  that  from  all 
manner  of  communication  being  opened,  there 
shortly  would  be  no  remains  of  the  ancient  sim¬ 
plicity,  or  places  of  cheap  retreat  to  be  found. 

“He  was  no  admirer  of  blank-verse,  and  said 
it  always  failed,  unless  sustained  by  the  dignity 
of  the  subject.  In  blank-verse,  he  said,  the  lan¬ 
guage  suffered  more  distortion,  to  keep  it  out  of 
prose,  than  any  inconvenience  or  limitation  to 
be  apprehended  from  the  shackles  and  circum¬ 
spection  of  rhyme. 

“He  reproved  me  once  for  saying  grace  with¬ 
out  mention  of  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  and  hoped  in  future  I  would  be  more 
mindful  of  the  apostolical  injunction. 

“He  refused  to  go  out  of  a  room  before  me  at 
Mr.  Langton’s  house,  saying,  he  hoped  he  knew 
his  rank  better  than  to  presume  to  take  place  of 
a  Doctor  in  Divinity.  I  mention  such  little  anec¬ 
dotes,  merely  to  shew  the  peculiar  turn  and 
habit  of  his  mind. 

“He  used  frequently  to  observe,  that  there  was 
more  to  be  endured  than  enjoyed,  in  the  general 
condition  of  human  life;  and  frequently  quoted 
those  lines  of  Dryden: 

Strange  cozenage!  none  would  live  past  years  again , 

Tet  all  hope  pleasure  from  what  still  remain. 

For  his  part,  he  said,  he  never  passed  that  week 
in  his  life  which  he  would  wish  to  repeat,  were 
an  angel  to  make  the  proposal  to  him. 

“He  was  of  opinion,  that  the  English  nation 
cultivated  both  their  soil  and  their  reason  better 
than  any  other  people:  but  admitted  that  the 
French,  though  not  the  highest,  perhaps,  in  any 
department  of  literature,  yet  in  every  department 
were  very  high.  Intellectual  pre-eminence,  he 
observed,  was  the  highest  superiority;  and  that 
every  nation  derived  their  highest  reputation 
from  the  splendour  and  dignity  of  their  writers. 
Voltaire,  he  said,  was  a  good  narrator,  and  that 


1770  ]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  181 


his  principal  merit  consisted  in  a  happy  selec¬ 
tion  and  arrangement  of  circumstances. 

“Speaking  of  the  French  novels,  compared 
with  Richardson’s,  he  said,  they  might  be  pretty 
baubles,  but  a  wren  was  not  an  eagle. 

“In  a  Latin  conversation  with  the  Pere  Bos- 
covitch,  at  the  house  of  Mrs.  Gholmondeley,  I 
heard  him  maintain  the  superiority  of  Sir  Isaac 
Newton  over  all  foreign  philosophers,1  with  a  dig¬ 
nity  and  eloquence  that  surprized  that  learned 
foreigner.  It  being  observed  to  him,  that  a  rage 
for  every  thing  English  prevailed  much  in  France 
after  Lord  Chatham’s  glorious  war,  he  said,  he 
did  not  wonder  at  it,  for  that  we  had  drubbed 
those  fellows  into  a  proper  reverence  for  us,  and 
that  their  national  petulance  required  periodical 
chastisement. 

“Lord  Lyttelton’s  Dialogues  he  deemed  a  nu¬ 
gatory  performance.  ‘That  man,  (said  he,)  sat 
down  to  write  a  book,  to  tell  the  world  what  the 
world  had  all  his  life  been  telling  him.’ 

“Somebody  observing  that  the  Scotch  High¬ 
landers,  in  the  year  1 745,  had  made  surprizing 
efforts,  considering  their  numerous  wants  and 
disadvantages:  ‘Yes,  Sir,  (said  he,)  their  wants 
were  numerous;  but  you  have  not  mentioned 
the  greatest  of  them  all, — the  want  of  law.’ 

“Speaking  of  the  inward  light ,  to  which  some 
methodists  pretended,  he  said,  it  was  a  principle 
utterly  incompatible  with  social  or  civil  secur¬ 
ity.  ‘If  a  man  (said  he,)  pretends  to  a  principle 
of  action  of  which  I  can  know  nothing,  nay,  not 
so  much  as  that  he  has  it,  but  only  that  he  pre¬ 
tends  to  it;  how  can  I  tell  what  that  person  may 
be  prompted  to  do?  When  a  person  professes  to 
be  governed  by  a  written  ascertained  law,  I  can 
then  know  where  to  find  him.’ 

“The  poem  of  Fingal ,  he  said,  was  a  mere  un¬ 
connected  rhapsody,  a  tiresome  repetition  of  the 
same  images.  ‘In  vain  shall  we  look  for  the  lu- 
cidus  or  do ,  where  there  is  neither  end  or  object, 
design  or  moral,  nec  certa  recurrit  imago’ 

“Being  asked  by  a  young  nobleman,  what  was 
become  of  the  gallantry  and  military  spirit  of 
the  old  English  nobility,  he  replied,  ‘Why,  my 
Lord,  I’ll  tell  you  what  is  become  of  it;  it  is  gone 
into  the  city  to  look  for  a  fortune.’ 

“Speaking  of  a  dull  tiresome  fellow,  whom  he 
chanced  to  meet,  he  said,  ‘That  fellow  seems  to 

JIn  a  Discourse  by  Sir  William  Jones,  addressed 
to  the  Asiatick  Society  [in  Calcutta],  Feb.  24,  1785, 
is  the  following  passage: — “One  of  the  most  saga¬ 
cious  men  in  this  age  who  continues,  I  hope,  to  im¬ 
prove  and  adorn  it,  Samuel  Johnson  [he  had  been 
dead  ten  weeks],  remarked  in  my  hearing,  that  if 
Newton  had  flourished  in  ancient  Greece,  he  would 
have  been  worshipped  as  a  Divinity.”  [M.] 


me  to  possess  but  one  idea,  and  that  is  a  wrong 
one.’ 

“Much  enquiry  having  been  made  concern¬ 
ing  a  gentleman,  who  had  quitted  a  company 
where  Johnson  was,  and  no  information  being 
obtained;  at  last  Johnson  observed,  that  ‘he  did 
not  care  to  speak  ill  of  any  man  behind  his  back, 
but  he  believed  the  gentleman  was  an  attorney .’ 

“He  spoke  with  much  contempt  of  the  notice 
taken  of  Woodhouse,  the  poetical  shoemaker.  He 
said,  it  was  all  vanity  and  childishness:  and  that 
such  objects  were,  to  those  who  patronised  them, 
mere  mirrours  of  their  own  superiority.  ‘They 
had  better  (said  he,)  furnish  the  man  with  good 
implements  for  his  trade,  than  raise  subscrip¬ 
tions  for  his  poems.  He  may  make  an  excellent 
shoemaker,  but  can  never  make  a  good  poet.  A 
school-boy’s  exercise  may  be  a  pretty  thing  for  a 
school-boy;  but  it  is  no  treat  for  a  man.’ 

“Speaking  of  Boetius,  who  was  the  favourite 
writer  of  the  middle  ages,  he  said  it  was  very 
surprizing,  that  upon  such  a  subject,  and  in  such 
a  situation,  he  should  be  magis  philosophus  quam 
Christianus. 

“Speaking  of  Arthur  Murphy,  whom  he  very 
much  loved,  ‘I  don’t  know  (said  he,)  that  Ar¬ 
thur  can  be  classed  with  the  very  first  dramat- 
ick  writers;  yet  at  present  I  doubt  much  wheth¬ 
er  we  have  any  thing  superiour  to  Arthur.’ 

“Speaking  of  the  national  debt,  he  said,  it  was 
an  idle  dream  to  suppose  that  the  country  could 
sink  under  it.  Let  the  public  creditors  be  ever  so 
clamorous,  the  interest  of  millions  must  ever 
prevail  over  that  of  thousands. 

“Of  Dr.  Kennicott’s  Collations,  he  observed, 
that  though  the  text  should  not  be  much  mend¬ 
ed  thereby,  yet  it  was  no  small  advantage  to 
know,  that  we  had  as  good  a  text  as  the  most 
consummate  industry  and  diligence  could  pro¬ 
cure. 

“Johnson  observed,  that  so  many  objections 
might  be  made  to  every  thing,  that  nothing  could 
overcome  them  but  the  necessity  of  doing  some¬ 
thing.  No  man  would  be  of  any  profession,  as 
simply  opposed  to  not  being  of  it:  but  every  one 
must  do  something. 

“He  remarked,  that  a  London  parish  was  a 
very  comfortless  thing;  for  the  clergyman  sel¬ 
dom  knew  the  face  of  one  out  of  ten  of  his  par¬ 
ishioners. 

“Of  the  late  Mr.  Mallet  he  spoke  with  no  great 
respect:  said,  he  was  ready  for  any  dirty  job: 
that  he  had  wrote  against  Byng  at  the  instiga¬ 
tion  of  the  ministry,  and  was  equally  ready  to 
write  for  him,  provided  he  found  his  account  in 
it. 


182  BOSWELL  [1770 


“A  gentleman  who  had  been  very  unhappy  in 
marriage,  married  immediately  after  his  wife 
died:  Johnson  said,  it  was  the  triumph  of  hope 
over  experience. 

“He  observed,  that  a  man  of  sense  and  edu¬ 
cation  should  meet  a  suitable  companion  in  a 
wife.  It  was  a  miserable  thing  when  the  conver¬ 
sation  could  only  be  such  as,  whether  the  mut¬ 
ton  should  be  boiled  or  roasted,  and  probably  a 
dispute  about  that. 

“He  did  not  approve  of  late  marriages,  ob¬ 
serving  that  more  was  lost  in  point  of  time,  than 
compensated  for  by  any  possible  advantages. 
Even  ill  assorted  marriages  were  preferable  to 
cheerless  celibacy. 

“Of  old  Sheridan  he  remarked,  that  he  nei¬ 
ther  wanted  parts  nor  literature ;  but  that  his  van¬ 
ity  and  Quixotism  obscured  his  merits. 

“He  said,  foppery  was  never  cured;  it  was  the 
bad  stamina  of  the  mind,  which,  like  those  of 
the  body,  were  never  rectified:  once  a  coxcomb, 
and  always  a  coxcomb. 

“Being  told  that  Gilbert  Cowper  called  him 
the  Caliban  of  literature;  ‘Well,  (said  he,)  I  must 
dub  him  the  Punchinello.5 

“Speaking  of  the  old  Earl  of  Corke  and  Or¬ 
rery,  he  said,  ‘that  man  spent  his  life  in  catching 
at  an  object,  [literary  eminence,]  which  he  had 
not  power  to  grasp.’ 

“To  find  a  substitution  for  violated  morality, 
he  said,  was  the  leading  feature  in  all  perversions 
of  religion. 

“He  often  used  to  quote,  with  great  pathos, 
those  fine  lines  of  Virgil: 

Optima  quceque  dies  miseris  mortalibus  cevi 
Prima  fugit;  subeunt  morbi ,  tristisque  senectus, 

Et  labor ,  et  dura  rapit  inclementia  mortis. 

“Speaking  of  Homer,  whom  he  venerated  as 
the  prince  of  poets,  Johnson  remarked  that  the 
advice  given  to  Diomed  by  his  father,  when  he 
sent  him  to  the  Trojan  war,  was  the  noblest  ex¬ 
hortation  that  could  be  instanced  in  any  hea¬ 
then  writer,  and  comprised  in  a  single  line: 

A  lev  apLcrreveLV,  Kal  inreLpoxov  eppevcu  aWcov. 

which,  if  I  recollect  well,  is  translated  by  Dr. 
Clarke  thus:  semper  appetere  prastantissima ,  et  om¬ 
nibus  aliis  antecellere. 

“He  observed,  ‘it  was  a  most  mortifying  re¬ 
flexion  for  any  man  to  consider,  what  he  had  done , 
compared  with  what  he  might  have  done? 

“He  said  few  people  had  intellectual  resources 
sufficient  to  forego  the  pleasures  of  wine.  They 
could  not  otherwise  contrive  how  to  fill  the  in¬ 
terval  between  dinner  and  supper. 


“He  went  with  me,  one  Sunday,  to  hear  my 
old  Master,  Gregory  Sharpe,  preach  at  the  Tem¬ 
ple.  In  the  prefatory  prayer,  Sharpe  ranted  about 
Liberty ,  as  a  blessing  most  fervently  to  be  im¬ 
plored,  and  its  continuance  prayed  for.  Johnson 
observed,  that  our  liberty  was  in  no  sort  of  dan¬ 
ger: — he  would  have  done  much  better,  to  pray 
against  our  licentiousness. 

“One  evening  at  Mrs.  Montagu’s,  where  a 
splendid  company  was  assembled,  consisting  of 
the  most  eminent  literary  characters,  I  thought 
he  seemed  highly  pleased  with  the  respect  and 
attention  that  wrere  shewn  him,  and  asked  him 
on  our  return  home  if  he  was  not  highly  gratified 
by  his  visit:  ‘No,  Sir,  (said  he,)  not  highly  grat¬ 
ified;  yet  I  do  not  recollect  to  have  passed  many 
evenings  with  fewer  objections .’ 

“Though  of  no  high  extraction  himself,  he 
had  much  respect  for  birth  and  family,  especial¬ 
ly  among  ladies.  He  said,  ‘adventitious  accom¬ 
plishments  may  be  possessed  by  all  ranks;  but 
one  may  easily  distinguish  the  born  gentlewoman ? 

“He  said,  ‘the  poor  in  England  were  better 
provided  for,  than  in  any  other  country  of  the 
same  extent:  he  did  not  mean  little  Cantons,  or 
petty  Republicks.  Where  a  great  proportion  of 
the  people  (said  he,)  are  suffered  to  languish  in 
helpless  misery,  that  country  must  be  ill  policed, 
and  wretchedly  governed:  a  decent  provision  for 
the  poor  is  the  true  test  of  civilization. — Gentle¬ 
men  of  education,  he  observed,  were  pretty  much 
the  same  in  all  countries;  the  condition  of  the 
lower  orders,  the  poor  especially,  was  the  true 
mark  of  national  discrimination.5 

“When  the  corn  laws  were  in  agitation  in  Ire¬ 
land,  by  which  that  country  has  been  enabled 
not  only  to  feed  itself,  but  to  export  corn  to  a 
large  amount;  Sir  Thomas  Robinson  observed, 
that  those  laws  might  be  prejudicial  to  the  corn- 
trade  of  England.  ‘Sir  Thomas,  (said  he,)  you 
talk  the  language  of  a  savage:  wrhat,  Sir?  would 
you  prevent  any  people  from  feeding  themselves, 
if  by  any  honest  means  they  can  do  it?5 

“It  being  mentioned,  that  Garrick  assisted 
Dr.  Brown,  the  authour  of  the  Estimate ,  in  some 
dramatick  composition,  ‘No,  Sir,  (said  Johnson,) 
he  w'ould  no  more  suffer  Garrick  to  write  a  line 
in  his  play,  than  he  would  suffer  him  to  mount 
his  pulpit.5 

“Speaking  of  Burke,  he  said,  ‘It  was  commonly 
observed,  he  spoke  too  often  in  parliament;  but 
nobody  could  say  he  did  not  speak  well,  though 
too  frequently  and  too  familiarly.5 

“Speaking  of  economy,  he  remarked,  it  was 
hardly  wrorth  while  to  save  anxiously  twenty 
pounds  a  year.  If  a  man  could  save  to  that  de- 


1771  ]  LIFE  OF 

gree,  so  as  to  enable  him  to  assume  a  different 
rank  in  society,  then  indeed,  it  might  answer 
some  purpose. 

“He  observed,  a  principal  source  of  errone¬ 
ous  judgement  was,  viewing  things  partially  and 
only  on  one  side:  as  for  instance,  jortune-hunters , 
when  they  contemplated  the  fortunes  singly  and 
separately ,  it  was  a  dazzling  and  tempting  ob¬ 
ject;  but  when  they  came  to  possess  the  wives 
and  their  fortunes  together ,  they  began  to  sus¬ 
pect  that  they  had  not  made  quite  so  good  a 
bargain. 

“Speaking  of  the  late  Duke  of  Northumber¬ 
land  living  very  magnificently  when  Lord  Lieu¬ 
tenant  of  Ireland,  somebody  remarked  it  would 
be  difficult  to  find  a  suitable  successor  to  him: 
then  exclaimed  Johnson,  he  is  only  fit  to  succeed 
himself. 

“He  advised  me,  if  possible,  to  have  a  good 
orchard.  He  knew,  he  said,  a  clergyman  of  small 
income,  who  brought  up  a  family  very  repu¬ 
tably  which  he  chiefly  fed  with  apple  dumplins. 

“He  said,  he  had  known  several  good  scholars 
among  the  Irish  gentlemen;  but  scarcely  any  of 
them  correct  in  quantity.  He  extended  the  same 
observation  to  Scotland. 

“Speaking  of  a  certain  Prelate,  who  exerted 
himself  very  laudably  in  building  churches  and 
parsonage-houses;  ‘however,  said  he,  I  do  not 
find  that  he  is  esteemed  a  man  of  much  profes¬ 
sional  learning,  or  a  liberal  patron  of  it; — yet,  it 
is  well,  where  a  man  possesses  any  strong  posi¬ 
tive  excellence. — Few  have  all  kinds  of  merit 
belonging  to  their  character.  We  must  not  ex¬ 
amine  matters  too  deeply — No,  Sir,  a  fallible  be¬ 
ing  will  fail  some-where .’ 

“Talking  of  the  Irish  clergy,  he  said,  Swift 
was  a  man  of  great  parts,  and  the  instrument  of 
much  good  to  his  country.  Berkeley  was  a  pro¬ 
found  scholar,  as  well  as  a  man  of  fine  imagina¬ 
tion;  but  Usher,  he  said,  was  the  great  lumin¬ 
ary  of  the  Irish  church;  and  a  greater,  he  added, 
no  church  could  boast  of;  at  least  in  modern 
times. 

“We  dined  tete  a  tete  at  the  Mitre,  as  I  was  pre¬ 
paring  to  return  to  Ireland,  after  an  absence  of 
many  years.  I  regretted  much  leaving  London, 
where  I  had  formed  many  agreeable  connex¬ 
ions:  ‘Sir,  (said  he,)  I  don’t  wonder  at  it;  no  man, 
fond  of  letters,  leaves  London  without  regret. 
But  remember,  Sir,  you  have  seen  and  enjoyed 
a  great  deal; — you  have  seen  life  in  its  highest 
decorations,  and  the  world  has  nothing  new  to 
exhibit.  No  man  is  so  well  qualifyed  to  leave  pub- 
lick  life  as  he  who  has  long  tried  it  and  known  it 
well.  We  are  always  hankering  after  untried  sit- 


JOHNSON  183 

uations,  and  imagining  greater  felicity  from  them 
than  they  can  afford.  No,  Sir,  knowledge  and 
virtue  may  be  acquired  in  all  countries,  and  your 
local  consequence  will  make  you  some  amends 
for  the  intellectual  gratifications  you  relinquish.’ 
Then  he  quoted  the  following  lines  with  great 
pathos: 

He  who  has  early  known  the  pomps  of  state , 

{For  things  unkhown ,  'tis  ignorance  to  condemn ;) 

And  after  having  viewed  the  gaudy  bait , 

Can  boldly  say ,  the  trifle  I  contemn ; 

With  such  a  one  contented  could  I  live , 

Contented  could  I  die;1 

“He  then  took  a  most  affecting  leave  of  me; 
said,  he  knew,  it  was  point  of  duty  that  called  me 
away.  ‘We  shall  all  be  sorry  to  lose  you,’  said  he: 
‘ laudo  tamen .’  ” 

1771:  .Etat.  62.] — In  1771  he  published  an¬ 
other  political  pamphlet,  entitled  Thoughts  on  the 
late  Transactions  respecting  Falkland's  Islands ,  in 
which,  upon  materials  furnished  to  him  by  min¬ 
istry,  and  upon  general  topicks  expanded  in  his 
richest  style,  he  successfully  endeavoured  to  per¬ 
suade  the  nation  that  it  was  wise  and  laudable 
to  suffer  the  question  of  right  to  remain  unde¬ 
cided,  rather  than  involve  our  country  in  an¬ 
other  war.  It  has  been  suggested  by  some,  with 
what  truth  I  shall  not  take  upon  me  to  decide, 
that  he  rated  the  consequence  of  those  islands 
to  Great-Britain  too  low.  But  however  this  may 

^hese  lines  have  been  discovered  by  the  author’s 
second  son  in  The  London  Magazine  for  July,  1732; 
where  they  form  part  of  a  poem  on  Retirement ,  cop¬ 
ied,  with  some  slight  variations,  from  one  of  Walsh’s 
smaller  poems,  entitled  The  Retirement.  They  ex¬ 
hibit  another  proof  that  Johnson  retained  in  his 
memory  fragments  of  neglected  poetry.  In  quoting 
verses  of  that  description,  he  appears  by  a  slight 
variation  to  have  sometimes  given  them  a  moral 
turn,  and  to  have  dexterously  adapted  them  to  his 
own  sentiments,  where  the  original  had  a  very  dif¬ 
ferent  tendency.  In  1782,  when  he  was  at  Bright- 
helmstone,  he  repeated  to  Mr.  Metcalfe,  some  ver¬ 
ses,  as  very  characteristic  of  a  celebrated  historian 
[Gibbon].  They  are  found  among  some  anony¬ 
mous  poems  appended  to  the  second  volume  of  a 
collection  frequently  printed  by  Lintot,  under  the 
title  of  Pope's  Miscellanies: 

See  how  the  wand' ring  Danube  flows , 

Realms  and  religions  parting ; 

A  friend  to  all  true  Christian  foes , 

To  Peter ,  Jack ,  and  Martin. 

Now  Protestant ,  and  Papist  now. 

Not  constant  long  to  either , 

At  length  an  infidel  does  grow , 

And  ends  his  journey  neither. 

Thus  many  a  youth  I've  known  set  out , 

Half  Protestant,  half  Papist, 

And  rambling  long  the  world  about , 

Turn  infidel  or  atheist .  [M.] 


i84  BOSWELL  [1771 


be,  every  humane  mind  must  surely  applaud 
the  earnestness  with  which  he  averted  the  ca¬ 
lamity  of  war;  a  calamity  so  dreadful,  that  it  is 
astonishing  how  civilised,  nay,  Christian  na¬ 
tions,  can  deliberately  continue  to  renew  it.  His 
description  of  its  miseries  in  this  pamphlet,  is 
one  of  the  finest  pieces  of  eloquence  in  the  Eng¬ 
lish  language.  Upon  this  occasion,  too,  we  find 
Johnson  lashing  the  party  in  opposition  with 
unbounded  severity,  and  making  the  fullest  use 
of  what  he  ever  reckoned  a  most  effectual  argu¬ 
mentative  instrument, — contempt.  His  charac¬ 
ter  of  their  very  able  mysterious  champion,  Jun¬ 
ius,  is  executed  with  all  the  force  of  his  genius, 
and  finished  with  the  highest  care.  He  seems  to 
have  exulted  in  sallying  forth  to  single  combat 
against  the  boasted  and  formidable  hero,  who 
bade  defiance  to  “principalities  and  powers,  and 
the  rulers  of  this  world.” 

This  pamphlet,  it  is  observable,  was  softened 
in  one  particular,  after  the  first  edition;  for  the 
conclusion  of  Mr.  George  Grenville’s  character 
stood  thus:  “Let  him  not,  however,  be  depreci¬ 
ated  in  his  grave.  He  had  powers  not  universally 
possessed:  could  he  have  enforced  payment  of 
the  Manilla  ransom,  he  could  have  counted  it” 
Which,  instead  of  retaining  its  sly  sharp  point, 
was  reduced  to  a  mere  flat  unmeaning  expres¬ 
sion,  or,  if  I  may  use  the  word, — truism :  “He 
had  powers  not  universally  possessed:  and  if  he 
sometime  erred,  he  was  likewise  sometimes 
right.” 

To  Bennet  Langton,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  After  much  lingering  of  my  own, 
and  much  of  the  ministry,  I  have  at  length  got 
out  my  paper.1  But  delay  is  not  yet  at  an  end: 
Not  many  had  been  dispersed,  before  Lord  North 
ordered  the  sale  to  stop.  His  reasons  I  do  not 
distinctly  know.  You  may  try  to  find  them  in  the 
perusal.2  Before  his  order,  a  sufficient  number 
were  dispersed  to  do  all  the  mischief,  though, 
perhaps,  not  to  make  all  the  sport  that  might  be 
expected  from  it. 

Soon  after  your  departure,  I  had  the  pleasure 
of  finding  all  the  danger  past  with  which  your 
navigation  was  threatened.  I  hope  nothing  hap¬ 
pens  at  home  to  abate  your  satisfaction;  but 
that  Lady  Rothes,  and  Mrs.  Langton,  and  the 
young  ladies,  are  all  well. 

I  was  last  night  at  the  club.  Dr.  Percy  has 
written  a  long  ballad  in  many  fits;  it  is  pretty 
enough.  He  has  printed,  and  will  soon  publish 
it.  Goldsmith  is  at  Bath,  with  Lord  Clare.  At 

1  Thoughts  on  the  late  Transactions  respecting  Falk¬ 
land’s  Islands. 

2By  comparing  the  first  with  the  subsequent  edi¬ 
tions,  this  curious  circumstance  of  ministerial  au¬ 
thorship  may  be  discovered. 


Mr.  Thrale’s,  where  I  am  now  writing,  all  are 
well.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

March  20,  1771 

Mr.  Strahan,  the  printer,  who  had  been  long 
in  intimacy  with  Johnson,  in  the  course  of  his 
literary  labours,  who  was  at  once  his  friendly 
agent  in  receiving  his  pension  for  him,  and  his 
banker  in  supplying  him  with  money  when  he 
wanted  it;  who  was  himself  now  a  Member  of 
Parliament,  and  who  loved  much  to  be  employed 
in  political  negociation,  thought  he  should  do 
eminent  service  both  to  government  and  John¬ 
son,  if  he  could  be  the  means  of  his  getting  a 
seat  in  the  House  of  Commons.  With  this  view, 
he  wrote  a  letter  to  one  of  the  Secretaries  of  the 
Treasury,  of  which  he  gave  me  a  copy  in  his  own 
hand-writing,  which  is  as  follows: 

Sir,  You  will  easily  recollect,  when  I  had  the 
honour  of  waiting  upon  you  some  time  ago,  I 
took  the  liberty  to  observe  to  you,  that  Dr.  John¬ 
son  would  make  an  excellent  figure  in  the  House 
of  Commons,  and  heartily  wished  he  had  a  seat 
there.  My  reasons  are  briefly  these: 

I  know  his  perfect  good  affection  to  his  Maj¬ 
esty,  and  his  government,  which  I  am  certain  he 
wishes  to  support  by  every  means  in  his  power. 

He  possesses  a  great  share  of  manly,  nervous, 
and  ready  eloquence;  is  quick  in  discerning  the 
strength  and  weakness  of  an  argument;  can  ex¬ 
press  himself  with  clearness  and  precision,  and 
fears  the  face  of  no  man  alive. 

His  known  character,  as  a  man  of  extraordi¬ 
nary  sense  and  unimpeached  virtue,  would  se¬ 
cure  him  the  attention  of  the  House,  and  could 
not  fail  to  give  him  a  proper  weight  there. 

He  is  capable  of  the  greatest  application,  and 
can  undergo  any  degree  of  labour,  where  he  sees 
it  necessary,  and  where  his  heart  and  affections 
are  strongly  engaged.  His  Majesty’s  ministers 
might  therefore  securely  depend  on  his  doing, 
upon  every  proper  occasion,  the  utmost  that 
could  be  expected  from  him.  They  would  find 
him  ready  to  vindicate  such  measures  as  tended 
to  promote  the  stability  of  government,  and 
resolute  and  steady  in  carrying  them  into  execu¬ 
tion.  Nor  is  any  thing  to  be  apprehended  from 
the  supposed  impetuosity  of  his  temper.  To  the 
friends  of  the  King  you  will  find  him  a  lamb,  to 
his  enemies  a  lion. 

For  these  reasons,  I  humbly  apprehend  that 
he  would  be  a  very  able  and  useful  member. 
And  I  will  venture  to  say,  the  employment 
would  not  be  disagreeable  to  him;  and  knowing, 
as  I  do,  his  strong  affection  to  the  King,  his 
ability  to  serve  him  in  that  capacity,  and  the  ex¬ 
treme  ardour  with  which  I  am  convinced  he 
would  engage  in  that  service,  I  must  repeat, 
that  I  wish  most  heartily  to  see  him  in  the 
House. 


1771  ]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  185 


If  you  think  this  worthy  of  attention,  you  will 
be  pleased  to  take  a  convenient  opportunity  of 
mentioning  it  to  Lord  North.  If  his  Lordship 
should  happily  approve  of  it,  I  shall  have  the 
satisfaction  of  having  been,  in  some  degree,  the 
humble  instrument  of  doing  my  country,  in  my 
opinion,  a  very  essential  service.  I  know  your 
good-nature,  and  your  zeal  for  the  publick  wel¬ 
fare,  will  plead  my  excuse  for  giving  you  this 
trouble.  I  am,  with  the  greatest  respect,  Sir, 
your  most  obedient  and  humble  servant, 

William  Strahan 

New-street,  March  30,  1771 

This  recommendation,  we  know,  was  not  ef¬ 
fectual;  but  how,  or  for  what  reason,  can  only 
be  conjectured.  It  is  not  to  be  believed  that  Mr. 
Strahan  would  have  applied,  unless  Johnson 
had  approved  of  it.  I  never  heard  him  mention 
the  subject;  but  at  a  later  period  of  his  life,  when 
Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  told  him  that  Mr.  Edmund 
Burke  had  said,  that  if  he  had  come  early  into 
Parliament,  he  certainly  would  have  been  the 
greatest  speaker  that  ever  was  there,  Johnson 
exclaimed,  CT  should  like  to  try  my  hand 
now.” 

It  has  been  much  agitated  among  his  friends 
and  others,  whether  he  would  have  been  a  pow¬ 
erful  speaker  in  Parliament,  had  he  been  brought 
in  when  advanced  in  life.  I  am  inclined  to  think 
that  his  extensive  knowledge,  his  quickness  and 
force  of  mind,  his  vivacity  and  richness  of  ex¬ 
pression,  his  wit  and  humour,  and  above  all  his 
poignancy  of  sarcasm,  would  have  had  great 
effect  in  a  popular  assembly;  and  that  the  mag¬ 
nitude  of  his  figure,  and  striking  peculiarity  of 
his  manner,  would  have  aided  the  effect.  But  I 
remember  it  was  observed  by  Mr.  Flood,  that 
Johnson,  having  been  long  used  to  sententious 
brevity  and  the  short  flights  of  conversation, 
might  have  failed  in  that  continued  and  ex¬ 
panded  kind  of  argument,  which  is  requisite  in 
stating  complicated  matters  in  publick  speak¬ 
ing;  and  as  a  proof  of  this  he  mentioned  the  sup¬ 
posed  speeches  in  Parliament  written  by  him  for 
the  magazine,  none  of  which,  in  his  opinion, 
were  at  all  like  real  debates.  The  opinion  of  one 
who  was  himself  so  eminent  an  orator,  must  be 
allowed  to  have  great  weight.  It  was  confirmed 
by  Sir  William  Scott,  who  mentioned  that  John¬ 
son  had  told  him  that  he  had  several  times  tried 
to  speak  in  the  Society  of  Arts  and  Sciences,  but 
“had  found  he  could  not  get  on.’5  From  Mr. 
William  Gerrard  Hamilton  I  have  heard  that 
Johnson,  when  observing  to  him  that  it  was  pru¬ 
dent  for  a  man  who  had  not  been  accustomed  to 
speak  in  publick,  to  begin  his  speech  in  as  simple 
a  manner  as  possible,  acknowledged  that  he 


rose  in  that  society  to  deliver  a  speech  which  he 
had  prepared;  “but  (said  he,)  all  my  flowers  of 
oratory  forsook  me.”  I  however  cannot  help 
wishing,  that  he  had  ‘tried  his  hand5  in  Parlia¬ 
ment;  and  I  wonder  that  ministry  did  not  make 
the  experiment. 

I  at  length  renewed  a  correspondence  which 
had  been  too  long  discontinued: 

To  Dr.  Johnson 

Edinburgh,  April  18,  1771 

My  Dear  Sir,  I  can  now  fully  understand 
those  intervals  of  silence  in  your  correspondence 
with  me,  which  have  often  given  me  anxiety  and 
uneasiness;  for  although  I  am  conscious  that  my 
veneration  and  love  for  Mr.  Johnson  have  never 
in  the  least  abated,  yet  I  have  deferred  for  al¬ 
most  a  year  and  a  half  to  write  to  him  .  .  .  .  , 

In  the  subsequent  part  of  this  letter,  I  gave 
him  an  account  of  my  comfortable  life  as  a 
married  man,  and  a  lawyer  in  practice  at  the 
Scotch  bar;  invited  him  to  Scotland,  and  prom¬ 
ised  to  attend  him  to  the  Highlands,  and 
Hebrides. 

To  James  Boswell  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  If  you  are  now  able  to  comprehend 
that  I  might  neglect  to  write  without  diminu¬ 
tion  of  affection,  you  have  taught  me,  likewise, 
how  that  neglect  may  be  uneasily  felt  without 
resentment  I  wished  for  your  letter  a  long  time, 
and  when  it  came,  it  amply  recompensed  the 
delay.  I  never  was  so  much  pleased  as  now  with 
your  account  of  yourself;  and  sincerely  hope, 
that  between  publick  business,  improving  stud¬ 
ies,  and  domestick  pleasures,  neither  melan¬ 
choly  nor  caprice  will  find  any  place  for  en¬ 
trance.  Whatever  philosophy  may  determine  of 
material  nature,  it  is  certainly  true  of  intellec¬ 
tual  nature,  that  it  abhors  a  vacuum:  our  minds 
cannot  be  empty;  and  evil  will  break  in  upon 
them,  if  they  are  not  pre-occupied  by  good.  My 
dear  Sir,  mind  your  studies,  mind  your  business, 
make  your  lady  happy,  and  be  a  good  Chris¬ 
tian.  After  this, 

- tristitiam  et  metus 

Trades  protervis  in  mare  Creticum 
Portare  ventis. 

If  we  perform  our  duty,  we  shall  be  safe  and 
steady,  Siveper ,  &c.,  whether  we  climb  the  High¬ 
lands,  or  are  tost  among  the  Hebrides;  and  I 
hope  the  time  will  come  when  we  may  try  our 
powers  both  with  cliffs  and  water.  I  see  but  little 
of  Lord  Elibank,  I  know  not  why;  perhaps  by 
my  own  fault.  I  am  this  day  going  into  Stafford¬ 
shire  and  Derbyshire  for  six  weeks.  I  am,  dear 
Sir,  your  most  affectionate,  and  most  humble 
servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

London,  June  20,  1 77 1 


1 86 

To  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  in  Leicester-fields 

Dear  Sir,  When  I  came  to  Lichfield,  I  found 
that  my  portrait  had  been  much  visited,  and 
much  admired.  Every  man  has  a  lurking  wish 
to  appear  considerable  in  his  native  place;  and 
1  was  pleased  with  the  dignity  conferred  by 
such  a  testimony  of  your  regard. 

Be  pleased,  therefore,  to  accept  the  thanks  of, 
Sir,  your  most  obliged  and  most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

Ashbourn  in  Derbyshire 

July  17,1771 

Compliments  to  Miss  Reynolds 

To  Dr.  Johnson 

Edinburgh,  July  27,  1771 

My  Dear  Sir,  The  bearer  of  this,  Mr  Beat- 
tie,  Professor  of  Moral  Philosophy  at  Aberdeen, 
is  desirous  of  being  introduced  to  your  acquaint¬ 
ance.  His  genius  and  learning,  and  labours  in 
the  service  of  virtue  and  religion,  render  him 
very  worthy  of  it;  and  as  he  has  a  high  esteem  of 
your  character,  I  hope  you  will  give  him  a  fa¬ 
vourable  reception.  I  ever  am,  &c. 

James  Boswell 

To  Bennet  Langton,  Esq.,  at  Langton,  near 
Spilsby,  Lincolnshire 

Dear  Sir,  I  am  lately  returned  from  Stafford¬ 
shire  and  Derbyshire.  The  last  letter  mentions 
two  others  which  you  have  written  to  me  since 
you  received  my  pamphlet.  Of  these  two  I  never 
had  but  one,  in  which  you  mentioned  a  design 
of  visiting  Scotland,  and,  by  consequence,  put 
my  journey  to  Langton  out  of  my  thoughts.  My 
summer  wanderings  are  now  over,  and  I  am  en¬ 
gaging  in  a  very  great  work,  the  revision  of  my 
Dictionary;  from  which  I  know  not,  at  present, 
how  to  get  loose. 

If  you  have  observed,  or  been  told,  any  er- 
rours  or  omissions,  you  will  do  me  a  great  fa¬ 
vour  by  letting  me  know  them. 

Lady  Rothes,  I  find,  has  disappointed  you 
and  herself.  Ladies  will  have  these  tricks.  The 
Queen  and  Mrs.  Thrale,  both  ladies  of  experi¬ 
ence,  yet  both  missed  their  reckoning  this  sum¬ 
mer.  I  hope,  a  few  months  will  recompence 
your  uneasiness. 

Please  to  tell  Lady  Rothes  how  highly  I  value 
the  honour  of  her  invitation,  which  it  is  my  pur¬ 
pose  to  obey  as  soon  as  I  have  disengaged  my¬ 
self  In  the  mean  time  I  shall  hope  to  hear  often 
of  her  Ladyship,  and  every  day  better  news  and 
better,  till  I  hear  that  you  have  both  the  happi¬ 
ness,  which  to  both  is  very  sincerely  wished,  by, 
Sir,  your  most  affectionate,  and  most  humble 
servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

August  29,  1771 

In  October  I  again  wrote  to  him,  thanking 
him  for  his  last  letter,  and  his  obliging  reception 
of  Mr.  Beattie;  informing  him  that  I  had  been 


[  1772 

at  Alnwick  lately,  and  had  good  accounts  of 
him  from  Dr.  Percy. 

In  his  religious  record  of  this  year,  we  observe 
that  he  was  better  than  usual,  both  in  body  and 
mind,  and  better  satisfied  with  the  regularity  of 
his  conduct.  But  he  is  still  “trying  his  ways”  too 
rigorously.  He  charges  himself  with  not  rising 
early  enough;  yet  he  mentions  what  was  surely 
a  sufficient  excuse  for  this,  supposing  it  to  be  a 
duty  seriously  required,  as  he  all  his  life  appears 
to  have  thought  it.  “One  great  hindrance  is 
want  of  rest;  my  nocturnal  complaints  grow  less 
troublesome  towards  morning;  and  I  am  tempted 
to  repair  the  deficiencies  of  the  night.”1  Alas! 
how  hard  would  it  be  if  this  indulgence  were  to 
be  imputed  to  a  sick  man  as  a  crime.  In  his  re¬ 
trospect  on  the  following  Easter-Eve,  he  says, 
“When  I  review  the  last  year,  I  am  able  to  rec¬ 
ollect  so  little  done,  that  shame  and  sorrow, 
though  perhaps  too  weakly,  come  upon  me.” 
Had  he  been  judging  of  any  one  else  in  the  same 
circumstances,  how  clear  would  he  have  been 
on  the  favourable  side.  How  very  difficult,  and 
in  my  opinion  almost  constitutionally  impossi¬ 
ble  it  was  for  him  to  be  raised  early,  even  by  the 
strongest  resolutions,  appears  from  a  note  in  one 
of  his  little  paper-books,  (containing  words  ar¬ 
ranged  for  his  Dictionary ,)  written,  I  suppose, 
about  1753:  “I  do  not  remember  that  since  I 
left  Oxford  I  ever  rose  early  by  mere  choice,  but 
once  or  twice  at  Edial,  and  two  or  three  times 
for  the  Rambler .”  I  think  he  had  fair  ground 
enough  to  have  quieted  his  mind  on  this  subject, 
by  concluding  that  he  was  physically  incapable 
of  what  is  at  best  but  a  commodious  regulation. 

In  1772  he  was  altogether  quiescent  as  an 
authour;  but  it  will  be  found  from  the  various 
evidences  which  I  shall  bring  together  that  his 
mind  was  acute,  lively,  and  vigorous. 

To  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds 

Dear  Sir,  Be  pleased  to  send  to  Mr.  Banks, 
whose  place  of  residence  I  do  not  know,  this 
note,  which  I  have  sent  open,  that,  if  you  please, 
you  may  read  it. 

When  you  send  it,  do  not  use  your  own  seal. 
I  am,  Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

Feb.  27,  1772 

To  Joseph  Banks,  Esq. 

Perpetua  ambita  bis  terra  premia  lactis 
Hcec  habet  altrici  Capra  secunda  Jovis. 2 

1  Prayers  and  Meditations ,  p.  101  [105]. 

2Thus  translated  by  a  friend: 

In  fame  scarce  second  to  the  nurse  oj  Jove, 

This  Goaty  who  twice  the  world  had  traversed  roundy 

Deserving  both  her  master's  care  and  lovey 

Ease  and  perpetual  pasture  now  has  found. 


BOSWELL 


1772  ]  LI FE  OF 

Sir,  I  return  thanks  to  you  and  to  Dr.  Solan- 
der  for  the  pleasure  which  I  received  in  yester¬ 
day’s  conversation.  I  could  not  recollect  a  mot¬ 
to  for  your  Goat,  but  have  given  her  one.  You, 
Sir,  may  perhaps  have  an  epick  poem  from  some 
happier  pen  than,  Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

Johnson’s-court,  Fleet-street 

February  27,  1772 

To  Dr.  Johnson 

My  Dear  Sir,  It  is  hard  that  I  cannot  prevail 
on  you  to  write  to  me  oftener.  But  I  am  con¬ 
vinced  that  it  is  in  vain  to  expect  from  you  a 
private  correspondence  with  any  regularity.  I 
must,  therefore,  look  upon  you  as  a  fountain  of 
wisdom,  from  whence  few  rills  are  communi¬ 
cated  to  a  distance,  and  which  must  be  ap¬ 
proached  at  its  source,  to  partake  fully  of  its 
virtues. 

I  am  coming  to  London  soon,  and  am  to  ap¬ 
pear  in  an  appeal  from  the  Court  of  Session  in 
the  House  of  Lords.  A  schoolmaster  in  Scotland 
was,  by  a  court  of  inferiour  jurisdiction,  de¬ 
prived  of  his  office,  for  being  somewhat  severe 
in  the  chastisement  of  his  scholars.  The  Court  of 
Session,  considering  it  to  be  dangerous  to  the  in¬ 
terest  of  learning  and  education,  to  lessen  the 
dignity  of  teachers,  and  make  them  afraid  of  too 
indulgent  parents,  instigated  by  the  complaints 
of  their  children,  restored  him.  His  enemies  have 
appealed  to  the  House  of  Lords,  though  the  sal¬ 
ary  is  only  twenty  pounds  a  year.  I  was  Counsel 
for  him  here.  I  hope  there  will  be  litde  fear  of  a 
reversal;  but  I  must  beg  to  have  your  aid  in  my 
plan  of  supporting  the  decree.  It  is  a  general 
question,  and  not  a  point  of  particular  law.  .  .  . 
I  am,  &c., 

James  Boswell 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  That  you  are  coming  so  soon  to 
town  I  am  very  glad;  and  still  more  glad  that 
you  are  coming  as  an  advocate.  I  think  nothing 
more  likely  to  make  your  life  pass  happily  away, 
than  that  consciousness  of  your  own  value,  which 
eminence  in  your  profession  will  certainly  con¬ 
fer.  If  I  can  give  you  any  collateral  help,  I  hope 
you  do  not  suspect  that  it  will  be  wanting.  My 
kindness  for  you  has  neither  the  merit  of  singu¬ 
lar  virtue,  nor  the  reproach  of  singular  preju¬ 
dice.  Whether  to  love  you  be  right  or  wrong,  I 
have  many  on  my  side:  Mrs.  Thrale  loves  you, 
and  Mrs.  Williams  loves  you,  and  what  would 
have  inclined  me  to  love  you,  if  I  had  been  neu¬ 
tral  before,  you  are  a  great  favourite  of  Dr. 
Beattie. 

Of  Dr.  Beattie  I  should  have  thought  much, 
but  that  his  lady  puts  him  out  of  my  head;  she  is 
a  very  lovely  woman. 

The  ejection  which  you  come  hither  to  op¬ 
pose,  appears  very  cruel,  unreasonable,  and  op- 


JOHNSON  187 

pressive.  I  should  think  there  could  not  be  much 
doubt  of  your  success. 

My  health  grows  better,  yet  I  am  not  fully  re¬ 
covered.  I  believe  it  is  held,  that  men  do  not  re¬ 
cover  very  fast  after  threescore.  I  hope  yet  to  see 
Beattie’s  College:  and  have  not  given  up  the 
western  voyage.  But  however  all  this  may  be  or 
not,  let  us  try  to  make  each  other  happy  when 
we  meet,  and  not  refer  our  pleasure  to  distant 
times  or  distant  places. 

How  comes  it  that  you  tell  me  nothing  of  your 
lady?  I  hope  to  see  her  some  time,  and  till  then 
shall  be  glad  to  hear  of  her.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  &c., 

Sam.  Johnson 

March  15,  1772 

To  Bennet  Langton,  Esq.,  near  Spilsby, 
Lincolnshire 

Dear  Sir,  I  congratulate  you  and  Lady 
Rothes1  on  your  litde  man,  and  hope  you  will 
all  be  many  years  happy  together. 

Poor  Miss  Langton  can  have  litde  part  in  the 
joy  of  her  family.  She  this  day  called  her  aunt 
Langton  to  receive  the  sacrament  with  her;  and 
made  me  talk  yesterday  on  such  subjects  as  suit 
her  condition.  It  will  probably  be  her  viaticum. 
I  surely  need  not  mention  again  that  she  wishes 
to  see  her  mother.  I  am,  Sir,  your  most  humble 
servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

March  14,  1772 

On  the  2 1  st  of  March,  I  was  happy  to  find 
myself  again  in  my  friend’s  study,  and  was  glad 
to  see  my  old  acquaintance,  Mr.  Francis  Bar¬ 
ber,  who  was  now  returned  home.  Dr.  Johnson 
received  me  with  a  hearty  welcome;  saying,  “I 
am  glad  you  are  come,  and  glad  you  are  come 
upon  such  an  errand”:  (alluding  to  the  cause  of 
the  schoolmaster.)  Boswell.  “I  hope,  Sir,  he 
will  be  in  no  danger.  It  is  a  very  delicate  matter 
to  interfere  between  a  master  and  his  scholars: 
nor  do  I  see  how  you  can  fix  the  degree  of  sever¬ 
ity  that  a  master  may  use.”  Johnson.  “Why, 
Sir,  till  you  can  fix  the  degree  of  obstinacy  and 
negligence  of  the  scholars,  you  cannot  fix  the 
degree  of  severity  of  the  master.  Severity  must 
be  continued  until  obstinacy  be  subdued,  and 
negligence  be  cured.”  He  mentioned  the  sever¬ 
ity  of  Hunter,  his  own  Master.  “Sir,  (said  I,) 
Hunter  is  a  Scotch  name:  so  it  should  seem  this 
schoolmaster  who  beat  you  so  severely  was  a 
Scotchman,  I  can  now  account  for  your  preju¬ 
dice  against  the  Scotch.”  Johnson.  “Sir,  he  was 
not  Scotch;  and  abating  his  brutality,  he  was  a 
very  good  master.” 

We  talked  of  his  two  political  pamphlets,  The 
False  Alarm ,  and  Thoughts  concerning  Falkland!  s  Is - 

1Mr.  Langton  married  the  Countess  Dowager  of 
Rothes. 


BOSWELL 


1 88 

lands.  Johnson.  “Well,  Sir,  which  of  them  did 
you  think  the  best?”  Boswell.  “I  liked  the  sec¬ 
ond  best.”  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  I  liked  the  first 
best;  and  Beattie  liked  the  first  best.  Sir,  there  is 
a  subtlety  of  disquisition  in  the  first,  that  is  worth 
all  the  fire  of  the  second.”  Boswell.  “Pray,  Sir, 
is  it  true  that  Lord  North  paid  you  a  visit,  and 
that  you  got  two  hundred  a  year  in  addition  to 
your  pension?”  Johnson.  “No,  Sir.  Except  what 
I  had  from  the  bookseller,  I  did  not  get  a  farthing 
by  them.  And,  between  you  and  me,  I  believe 
Lord  North  is  no  friend  to  me.”  Boswell.  “How 
so,  Sir?”  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  you  cannot  ac¬ 
count  for  the  fancies  of  men.  Well,  how  does 
Lord  Elibank?  and  how  does  Lord  Monboddo?” 
Boswell.  “Very  well,  Sir.  Lord  Monboddo  still 
maintains  the  superiority  of  the  savage  life.” 
Johnson.  “What  strange  narrowness  of  mind 
now  is  that,  to  think  the  things  we  have  not 
known,  are  better  than  the  things  which  we  have 
known.”  Boswell.  “Why,  Sir,  that  is  a  common 
prejudice.”  Johnson.  “Yes,  Sir,  but  a  common 
prejudice  should  not  be  found  in  one  whose 
trade  it  is  to  rectify  errour.” 

A  gentleman  having  come  in  who  was  to  go 
as  a  mate  in  the  ship  along  with  Mr.  Banks  and 
Dr.  Solander,  Dr.  Johnson  asked  what  were  the 
names  of  the  ships  destined  for  the  expedition. 
The  gentleman  answered,  they  were  once  to  be 
called  the  Drake  and  the  Ralegh,  but  now  they 
were  to  be  called  the  Resolution  and  the  Adven¬ 
ture.  Johnson.  “Much  better;  for  had  the  Ra¬ 
legh  returned  without  going  round  the  world,  it 
would  have  been  ridiculous.  To  give  them  the 
names  of  the  Drake  and  the  Ralegh  was  laying  a 
trap  for  satire.”  Boswell.  “Had  not  you  some 
desire  to  go  upon  this  expedition,  Sir?”  John¬ 
son.  “Why  yes,  but  I  soon  laid  it  aside.  Sir,  there 
is  very  little  of  intellectual,  in  the  course.  Be¬ 
sides,  I  see  but  at  a  small  distance.  So  it  was  not 
worth  my  while  to  go  to  see  birds  fly,  which  I 
should  not  have  seen  fly;  and  fishes  swim,  which 
I  should  not  have  seen  swim.” 

The  gentleman  being  gone,  and  Dr.  Johnson 
having  left  the  room  for  some  time,  a  debate 
arose  between  the  Reverend  Mr.  Stockdale  and 
Mrs.  Desmoulins,  whether  Mr.  Banks  and  Dr. 
Solander  were  entitled  to  any  share  of  glory 
from  their  expedition.  When  Dr.  Johnson  re¬ 
turned  to  us,  I  told  him  the  subject  of  their  dis¬ 
pute.  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  it  was  properly  for 
botany  that  they  went  out:  I  believe  they  thought 
only  of  culling  of  simples.” 

I  thanked  him  for  showing  civilities  to  Beattie. 
“Sir,  (said  he,)  I  should  thankjww.  We  all  love 
Beattie.  Mrs.  Thrale  says,  if  ever  she  has  another 


1 1772 

husband,  she’ll  have  Beattie.  He  sunk  upon  us1 
that  he  was  married;  else  we  should  have  shewn 
his  lady  more  civilities.  She  is  a  very  fine  wom¬ 
an.  But  how  can  you  shew  civilities  to  a  non¬ 
entity?  I  did  not  think  he  had  been  married. 
Nay,  I  did  not  think  about  it  one  way  or  other; 
but  he  did  not  tell  us  of  his  lady  till  late.” 

He  then  spoke  of  St.  Kilda,  the  most  remote 
of  the  Hebrides.  I  told  him,  I  thought  of  buying 
it.  Johnson.  “Pray  do,  Sir.  We  will  go  and  pass 
a  winter  amid  the  blasts  there.  We  shall  have 
fine  fish,  and  we  will  take  some  dried  tongues 
with  us,  and  some  books.  We  will  have  a  strong 
built  vessel,  and  some  Orkney  men  to  navigate 
her.  We  must  build  a  tolerable  house:  but  we 
may  carry  with  us  a  wooden  house  ready  made, 
and  requiring  nothing  but  to  be  put  up.  Con¬ 
sider,  Sir,  by  buying  St.  Kilda,  you  may  keep 
the  people  from  falling  into  worse  hands.  We 
must  give  them  a  clergyman,  and  he  shall  be 
one  of  Beattie’s  choosing.  He  shall  be  educated 
at  Marischal  College.  I’ll  be  your  Lord  Chan¬ 
cellor,  or  what  you  please.”  Boswell.  “Are  you 
serious,  Sir,  in  advising  me  to  buy  St.  Kilda? 

JTo  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Edinburgh,  May  3,  1792 

My  Dear  Sir,  As  I  suppose  your  great  work 
will  soon  be  reprinted,  I  beg  leave  to  trouble  you 
with  a  remark  on  a  passage  of  it,  in  which  I  am  a 
little  misrepresented.  Be  not  alarmed;  the  misrep¬ 
resentation  is  not  imputable  to  you.  Not  having  the 
book  at  hand,  I  cannot  specify  the  page,  but  I  sup¬ 
pose  you  will  easily  find  it.  Dr.  Johnson  says,  speak¬ 
ing  of  Mrs.  Thrale’s  family  ‘Dr.  Beattie  sunk  upon  us 
that  he  was  married/  or  words  to  that  purpose.  I 
am  not  sure  that  I  understand  sunk  upon  us ,  which  is 
a  very  uncommon  phrase,  but  it  seems  to  me  to  im¬ 
ply,  (and  others,  I  find,  have  understood  it  in  the 
same  sense,)  studiously  concealed  from  us  his  being  mar¬ 
ried.  Now,  Sir,  this  was  by  no  means  the  case.  I 
could  have  no  motive  to  conceal  a  circumstance,  of 
which  I  never  was  nor  can  be  ashamed;  and  of 
which  Dr.  Johnson  seemed  to  think,  when  he  after¬ 
wards  became  acquainted  with  Mrs.  Beattie,  that  I 
had,  as  was  true,  reason  to  be  proud.  So  far  was  I 
from  concealing  her,  that  my  wife  had  at  that  time 
almost  as  numerous  an  acquaintance  in  London  as 
I  had  myself;  and  was,  not  very  long  after,  kindly 
invited  and  elegantly  entertained  at  Streatham  by 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Thrale. 

My  request,  therefore,  is,  that  you  would  rectify 
this  matter  in  your  new  edition.  You  are  at  liberty 
to  make  what  use  you  please  of  this  letter. 

My  best  wishes  ever  attend  you  and  your  fam¬ 
ily.  Believe  me  to  be,  with  the  utmost  regard  and 
esteem,  dear  Sir, 

Your  obliged  and  affectionate  humble  servant, 

J.  Beattie 

I  have,  from  my  respect  for  my  friend  Dr.  Beattie, 
and  regard  to  his  extreme  sensibility,  inserted  the 
foregoing  letter,  though  I  cannot  but  wonder  at  his 
considering  as  any  imputation  a  phrase  commonly 
used  among  the  best  friends. 


1772]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  189 


For  if  you  should  advise  me  to  go  to  Japan,  I  be¬ 
lieve  I  should  do  it.”  Johnson.  “Why  yes,  Sir,  I 
am  serious.”  Boswell.  “Why  then,  I’ll  see  what 
can  be  done.” 

I  gave  him  an  account  of  the  two  parties  in 
the  Church  of  Scotland,  those  for  supporting 
the  rights  of  patrons,  independent  of  the  people, 
and  those  against  it.  Johnson.  “It  should  be 
settled  one  way  or  other.  I  cannot  wish  well  to  a 
popular  election  of  the  clergy,  when  I  consider 
that  it  occasions  such  animosities,  such  unworthy 
courting  of  the  people,  such  slanders  between 
the  contending  parties,  and  other  disadvantages. 
It  is  enough  to  allow  the  people  to  remonstrate 
against  the  nomination  of  a  minister  for  solid 
reasons.”  (I  suppose  he  meant  heresy  or  immo¬ 
rality.) 

He  was  engaged  to  dine  abroad,  and  asked 
me  to  return  to  him  in  the  evening,  at  nine, 
which  I  accordingly  did. 

We  drank  tea  with  Mrs.  Williams,  who  told 
us  a  story  of  second  sight,  which  happened  in 
Wales  where  she  was  born.  He  listened  to  it  very 
attentively,  and  said  he  should  be  glad  to  have 
some  instances  of  that  faculty  well  authenti¬ 
cated.  His  elevated  wish  for  more  and  more  evi¬ 
dence  for  spirit,  in  opposition  to  the  groveling 
belief  of  materialism,  led  him  to  a  love  of  such 
mysterious  disquisitions.  He  again  justly  ob¬ 
served,  that  we  could  have  no  certainty  of  the 
truth  of  supernatural  appearances,  unless  some¬ 
thing  was  told  us  which  we  could  not  know  by 
ordinary  means,  or  something  done  which  could 
not  be  done  but  by  supernatural  power;  that 
Pharaoh  in  reason  and  justice  required  such  evi¬ 
dence  from  Moses;  nay,  that  our  Saviour  said, 
“If  I  had  not  done  among  them  the  works  which 
none  other  man  did,  they  had  not  had  sin.”  He 
had  said  in  the  morning,  that  Macaulay’s  His¬ 
tory  of  St.  Kilda  was  very  well  written,  except 
some  foppery  about  liberty  and  slavery.  I  men¬ 
tioned  to  him  that  Macaulay  told  me,  he  was 
advised  to  leave  out  of  his  book  the  wonderful 
story  that  upon  the  approach  of  a  stranger  all 
the  inhabitants  catch  cold;1  but  that  it  had  been 
so  well  authenticated,  he  determined  to  retain 
it.  Johnson.  “Sir,  to  leave  things  out  of  a  book, 
merely  because  people  tell  you  they  will  not  be 
believed,  is  meanness.  Macaulay  acted  with 
more  magnanimity.” 

We  talked  of  the  Roman  Gatholick  religion, 
and  how  little  difference  there  was  in  essential 
matters  between  ours  and  it.  Johnson.  “True, 
Sir;  all  denominations  of  Christians  have  really 
little  difference  in  point  of  doctrine,  though  they 

xSee  p.  158. 


may  differ  widely  in  external  forms.  There  is  a 
prodigious  difference  between  the  external  form 
of  one  of  your  Presbyterian  churches  in  Scot¬ 
land,  and  a  church  in  Italy;  yet  the  doctrine 
taught  is  essentially  the  same.” 

I  mentioned  the  petition  to  Parliament  for 
removing  the  subscription  to  the  Thirty-nine 
Articles.  Johnson.  “It  was  soon  thrown  out.  Sir, 
they  talk  of  not  making  boys  at  the  University 
subscribe  to  what  they  do  not  understand;  but 
they  ought  to  consider,  that  our  Universities 
were  founded  to  bring  up  members  for  the  Church 
of  England,  and  we  must  not  supply  our  ene¬ 
mies  with  arms  from  our  arsenal.  No,  Sir,  the 
meaning  of  subscribing  is,  not  that  they  fully 
understand  all  the  articles,  but  that  they  will 
adhere  to  the  Church  of  England.  Now  take  it 
in  this  way,  and  suppose  that  they  should  only 
subscribe  their  adherence  to  the  Church  of  Eng¬ 
land,  there  would  be  still  the  same  difficulty; 
for  still  the  young  men  would  be  subscribing  to 
what  they  do  not  understand.  For  if  you  should 
ask  them,  what  do  you  mean  by  the  Church  of 
England?  Do  you  know  in  what  it  differs  from 
the  Presbyterian  Church?  from  the  Romish 
Church?  from  the  Greek  Church?  from  the  Cop- 
tick  Church?  they  could  not  tell  you.  So,  Sir,  it 
comes  to  the  same  thing.”  Boswell.  “But,  would 
it  not  be  sufficient  to  subscribe  the  Bible?”  John¬ 
son.  “Why  no,  Sir;  for  all  sects  will  subscribe 
the  Bible;  nay,  the  Mahometans  will  subscribe 
the  Bible;  for  the  Mahometans  acknowledge 
Jesus  Christ,  as  well  as  Moses,  but  maintain 
that  God  sent  Mahomet  as  a  still  greater  pro¬ 
phet  than  either.” 

I  mentioned  the  motion  which  had  been  made 
in  the  House  of  Commons,  to  abolish  the  fast  of 
the  30th  of  January.  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  I 
could  have  wished  that  it  had  been  a  temporary 
act,  perhaps,  to  have  expired  with  the  century. 
I  am  against  abolishing  it;  because  that  would 
be  declaring  it  wrong  to  establish  it;  but  I  should 
have  no  objection  to  make  an  act,  continuing  it 
for  another  century,  and  then  letting  it  expire.” 

He  disapproved  of  the  Royal  Marriage  Bill; 
“Because  (said  he)  I  would  not  have  the  people 
think  that  the  validity  of  marriage  depends  on 
the  will  of  man,  or  that  the  right  of  a  King  de¬ 
pends  on  the  will  of  man.  I  should  not  have  been 
against  making  the  marriage  of  any  of  the  royal 
family  without  the  approbation  of  King  and 
Parliament,  highly  criminal.” 

In  the  morning  we  had  talked  of  old  families, 
and  the  respect  due  to  them.  Johnson.  “Sir,  you 
have  a  right  to  that  kind  of  respect,  and  are  ar¬ 
guing  for  yourself.  I  am  for  supporting  the  prin* 


BOSWELL 


190 

ciple,  and  am  disinterested  in  doing  it,  as  I  have 
no  such  right.”  Boswell.  “Why,  Sir,  it  is  one 
more  incitement  to  a  man  to  do  well.”  Johnson. 
“Yes,  Sir,  and  it  is  a  matter  of  opinion,  very  nec¬ 
essary  to  keep  society  together.  What  is  it  but 
opinion,  by  which  we  have  a  respect  for  author¬ 
ity,  that  prevents  us,  who  are  the  rabble,  from 
rising  up  and  pulling  down  you  who  are  gentle¬ 
men  from  your  places,  and  saying,  ‘We  will  be 
gentlemen  in  our  turn?5  Now,  Sir,  that  respect 
for  authority  is  much  more  easily  granted  to  a 
man  whose  father  has  had  it,  then  to  an  upstart, 
and  so  Society  is  more  easily  supported.”  Bos¬ 
well.  “Perhaps,  Sir,  it  might  be  done  by  the 
respect  belonging  to  office,  as  among  the  Ro¬ 
mans,  where  the  dress,  the  toga ,  inspired  rever¬ 
ence.”  Johnson.  “Why,  we  know  very  little 
about  the  Romans.  But,  surely,  it  is  much  easier 
to  respect  a  man  who  has  always  had  respect, 
than  to  respect  a  man  who  we  know  was  last 
year  no  better  than  ourselves,  and  will  be  no 
better  next  year.  In  republicks  there  is  not  a 
respect  for  authority,  but  a  fear  of  power.”  Bos¬ 
well.  “At  present,  Sir,  I  think  riches  seem  to 
gain  most  respect.”  Johnson.  “No,  Sir,  riches 
do  not  gain  hearty  respect;  they  only  procure 
external  attention.  A  very  rich  man,  from  low 
beginnings,  may  buy  his  election  in  a  borough; 
but,  cceteris  paribus ,  a  man  of  family  will  be  pre¬ 
ferred.  People  will  prefer  a  man  for  whose  father 
their  fathers  have  voted,  though  they  should  get 
no  more  money,  or  even  less.  That  shows  that 
the  respect  for  family  is  not  merely  fanciful,  but 
has  an  actual  operation.  If  gentlemen  of  family 
would  allow  the  rich  upstarts  to  spend  their 
money  profusely,  which  they  are  ready  enough 
to  do,  and  not  vie  with  them  in  expence,  the  up¬ 
starts  would  soon  be  at  an  end,  and  the  gentle¬ 
men  would  remain:  but  if  the  gentlemen  will  vie 
in  expence  with  the  upstarts,  which  is  very  fool¬ 
ish,  they  must  be  ruined.” 

I  gave  him  an  account  of  the  excellent  mim- 
ickry  of  a  friend  of  mine  in  Scotland;  observing, 
at  the  same  time,  that  some  people  thought  it  a 
very  mean  thing.  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  it  is  mak¬ 
ing  a  very  mean  use  of  a  man’s  powers.  But  to 
be  a  good  mimick,  requires  great  powers;  great 
acuteness  of  observation,  great  retention  of  what 
is  observed,  and  great  pliancy  of  organs,  to  rep¬ 
resent  what  is  observed,  I  remember  a  lady  of 

quality  in  this  town,  Lady - ,  who  was 

a  wonderful  mimick,  and  used  to  make  me  laugh 
immoderately.  I  have  heard  she  is  now  gone 
mad.”  Boswell.  “It  is  amazing  how  a  mimick 
can  not  only  give  you  the  gestures  and  voice  of 
a  person  whom  he  represents;  but  even  what  a 


[  1772 

person  would  say  on  any  particular  subject.” 
Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  you  are  to  consider  that 
the  manner  and  some  particular  phrases  of  a 
person  do  much  to  impress  you  with  an  idea  of 
him,  and  you  are  not  sure  that  he  would  say 
what  the  mimick  says  in  his  character.”  Bos¬ 
well.  “I  don’t  think  Foote  a  good  mimick,  Sir.” 
Johnson.  “No,  Sir;  his  imitations  are  not  like. 
He  gives  you  something  different  from  himself, 
but  not  the  character  which  he  means  to  as¬ 
sume.  He  goes  out  of  himself,  without  going  in¬ 
to  other  people.  He  cannot  take  off  any  person 
unless  he  is  strongly  marked,  such  as  George 
Faulkner.  He  is  like  a  painter,  who  can  draw 
the  portrait  of  a  man  who  has  a  wen  upon  his 
face,  and  who,  therefore,  is  easily  known.  If  a 
man  hops  upon  one  leg,  Foote  can  hop  upon 
one  leg.  But  he  has  not  that  nice  discrimination 
which  your  friend  seems  to  possess.  Foote  is 
however,  very  entertaining,  with  a  kind  of  con¬ 
versation  between  wit  and  buffoonery.” 

On  Monday,  March  23,  I  found  him  busy, 
preparing  a  fourth  edition  of  his  folio  Diction¬ 
ary.  Mr.  Peyton,  one  of  his  original  amanuenses, 
was  writing  for  him.  I  put  him  in  mind  of  a 
meaning  of  the  word  side ,  which  he  had  omitted, 
viz.  relationship;  as  father’s  side,  mother’s  side. 
He  inserted  it.  I  asked  him  if  humiliating  was  a 
good  word.  He  said,  he  had  seen  it  frequently 
used,  but  he  did  not  know  it  to  be  legitimate 
English.  He  would  not  admit  civilization ,  but 
only  civility.  With  great  deference  to  him,  I 
thought  civilization ,  from  to  civilize  better  in  the 
sense  opposed  to  barbarity ,  than  civility ;  as  it  is 
better  to  have  a  distinct  word  for  each  sense, 
than  one  word  with  two  senses,  which  civility  is, 
in  his  way  of  using  it. 

He  seemed  also  to  be  intent  on  some  sort  of 
chymical  operation.  I  was  entertained  by  ob¬ 
serving  how  he  contrived  to  send  Mr.  Peyton  on 
an  errand,  without  seeming  to  degrade  him. 
“Mr.  Peyton, — Mr.  Peyton,  will  you  be  so  good 
as  to  take  a  walk  to  Temple-Bar?  You  will  there 
see  a  chymist’s  shop;  at  which  you  will  be  pleased 
to  buy  for  me  an  ounce  of  oil  of  vitriol;  not  spirit 
of  vitriol,  but  oil  of  vitriol.  It  will  cost  three  half¬ 
pence.”  Peyton  immediately  went,  and  re¬ 
turned  with  it,  and  told  him  it  cost  but  a  penny. 

I  then  reminded  him  of  the  schoolmaster’s 
cause,  and  proposed  to  read  to  him  the  printed 
papers  concerning  it.  “No,  Sir,  (said  he,)  I  can 
read  quicker  than  I  can  hear.”  So  he  read  them 
to  himself. 

After  he  had  read  for  some  time,  we  were  in¬ 
terrupted  by  the  entrance  of  Mr.  Kristrom,  a 
Swede,  who  was  tutor  to  some  young  gentlemen 


1772]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


in  the  city.  He  told  me,  that  there  was  a  very 
good  History  of  Sweden,  by  Daline.  Having  at 
that  time  an  intention  of  writing  the  history  of 
that  country,  I  asked  Dr.  Johnson  whether  one 
might  write  a  history  of  Sweden,  without  going 
thither.  “Yes,  Sir,  (said  he,)  one  for  common 
use.53 

We  talked  of  languages.  Johnson  observed,  that 
Leibnitz  had  made  some  progress  in  a  work,  trac¬ 
ing  all  languages  up  to  the  Hebrew.  “Why,  Sir, 
(said  he,)  you  would  not  imagine  that  the  French 
jour ,  day,  is  derived  from  the  Latin  dies ,  and  yet 
nothing  is  more  certain;  and  the  intermediate 
steps  are  very  clear.  From  dies ,  comes  diurnus.  Diu 
is,  by  inaccurate  ears,  or  inaccurate  pronuncia¬ 
tion,  easily  confounded  with  giu ;  then  the  Itali¬ 
ans  form  a  substantive  of  the  ablative  of  an  adjec¬ 
tive,  and  thence  giurno ,  or,  as  they  make  it,  gi- 
orno;  which  is  readily  contracted  into  giour ,  or 
jour”  He  observed,  that  the  Bohemian  language 
was  true  Sclavonick.  The  Swede  said,  it  had  some 
similarity  with  the  German.  Johnson.  “Why, 
Sir,  to  be  sure,  such  parts  of  Sclavonia  as  con¬ 
fine  with  Germany,  will  borrow  German  words; 
and  such  parts  as  confine  with  Tartary  will  bor¬ 
row  Tartar  words.33 

He  said,  he  never  had  it  properly  ascertained 
that  the  Scotch  Highlanders  and  the  Irish  un¬ 
derstood  each  other.  I  told  him  that  my  cousin 
Colonel  Graham,  of  the  Royal  Highlanders, 
whom  I  met  at  Drogheda,  told  me  they  did. 
Johnson.  “Sir,  if  the  Highlanders  understood 
Irish,  why  translate  the  New  Testament  into  Erse, 
as  was  done  lately  at  Edinburgh,  when  there  is 
an  Irish  translation?33  Boswell.  “Although  the 
Erse  and  Irish  are  both  dialects  of  the  same  lan¬ 
guage,  there  may  be  a  good  deal  of  diversity  be¬ 
tween  them,  as  between  the  different  dialects  in 
Italy.33 — The  Swede  went  away,  and  Mr.  John¬ 
son  continued  his  reading  of  the  papers.  I  said, 
“I  am  afraid,  Sir,  it  is  troublesome.33  “Why,  Sir, 
(said  he,)  I  do  not  take  much  delight  in  it;  but 
I311  go  through  it.33 

We  went  to  the  Mitre,  and  dined  in  the  room 
where  he  and  I  first  supped  together.  He  gave 
me  great  hopes  of  my  cause.  “Sir,  (said  he,)  the 
government  of  a  schoolmaster  is  somewhat  of 
the  nature  of  military  government;  that  is  to  say, 
it  must  be  arbitrary,  it  must  be  exercised  by  the 
will  of  one  man,  according  to  particular  circum¬ 
stances.  You  must  shew  some  learning  upon  this 
occasion.  You  must  shew,  that  a  schoolmaster 
has  a  prescriptive  right  to  beat;  and  that  an  ac¬ 
tion  of  assault  and  battery  cannot  be  admitted 
against  him,  unless  there  is  some  great  excess, 
some  barbarity.  This  man  has  maimed  none  of 


his  boys.  They  are  all  left  with  the  full  exercise 
of  their  corporeal  faculties.  In  our  schools  in 
England,  many  boys  have  been  maimed;  yet  I 
never  heard  of  an  action  against  a  schoolmaster 
on  that  account.  Puffendorf,  I  think,  maintains 
the  right  of  a  schoolmaster  to  beat  his  scholars.33 

On  Saturday,  March  27,  I  introduced  to  him 
Sir  Alexander  Macdonald,  with  whom  he  had 
expressed  a  wish  to  be  acquainted.  He  received 
him  very  courteously. 

Sir  Alexander  observed,  that  the  Chancellors 
in  England  are  chosen  from  views  much  inferi- 
our  to  the  office,  being  chosen  from  temporary 
political  views.  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  in  such  a 
government  as  ours,  no  man  is  appointed  to  an 
office  because  he  is  the  fittest  for  it,  nor  hardly  in 
any  other  government;  because  there  are  so  many 
connections  and  dependencies  to  be  studied. 
A  despotick  prince  may  choose  a  man  to  an 
office,  merely  because  he  is  the  fittest  for  it.  The 
King  of  Prussia  may  do  it.33  Sir  A.  “I  think,  Sir, 
almost  all  great  lawyers,  such  at  least  as  have 
written  upon  law,  have  known  only  law,  and 
nothing  else.33  Johnson.  “Why  no.  Sir;  Judge 
Hale  was  a  great  lawyer,  and  wrote  upon  law; 
and  yet  he  knew  a  great  many  other  things,  and 
has  written  upon  other  things.  Selden  too.33  Sir 
A.  “Very  true,  Sir;  and  Lord  Bacon.  But  was 
not  Lord  Coke  a  mere  lawyer?33  Johnson  “Why, 
I  am  afraid  he  was;  but  he  would  have  taken  it 
very  ill  if  you  had  told  him  so.  He  would  have 
prosecuted  you  for  scandal.33  Boswell.  “Lord 
Mansfield  is  not  a  mere  lawyer.33  Johnson.  “No, 
Sir.  I  never  was  in  Lord  Mansfield’s  company; 
but  Lord  Mansfield  was  distinguished  at  the 
University.  Lord  Mansfield,  when  he  first  came  to 
town,  ‘drank  champagne  with  the  wits,3  as  Prior 
says.  He  was  the  friend  of  Pope.33  Sir  A.  “Bar¬ 
risters,  I  believe,  are  not  so  abusive  now  as  they 
were  formerly.  I  fancy  they  had  less  law  long 
ago,  and  so  were  obliged  to  take  to  abuse,  to  fill 
up  the  time.  Now  they  have  such  a  number  of 
precedents,  they  have  no  occasion  for  abuse.33 
Johnson.  “Nay,  Sir,  they  had  more  law  long 
ago  than  they  have  now.  As  to  precedents,  to  be 
sure  they  will  increase  in  course  of  time;  but  the 
more  precedents  there  are,  the  less  occasion  is 
there  for  law;  that  is  to  say,  the  less  occasion  is 
there  for  investigating  principles.33  Sir  A.  “I 
have  been  correcting  several  Scotch  accents  in 
my  friend  Boswell.  I  doubt,  Sir,  if  any  Scotch¬ 
man  ever  attains  to  a  perfect  English  pronuncia¬ 
tion.33  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  few  of  them  do,  be¬ 
cause  they  do  not  persevere  after  acquiring  a 
certain  degree  of  it.  But,  Sir,  there  can  be  no 
doubt  that  they  may  attain  to  a  perfect  English 


BOSWELL 


192 

pronunciation,  if  they  will.  We  find  how  near 
they  come  to  it;  and  certainly,  a  man  who  con¬ 
quers  nineteen  parts  of  the  Scottish  accent,  may 
conquer  the  twentieth.  But,  Sir,  when  a  man  has 
got  the  better  of  nine  tenths  he  grows  weary,  he 
relaxes  his  diligence,  he  finds  he  has  corrected 
his  accent  so  far  as  not  to  be  disagreeable,  and 
he  no  longer  desires  his  friends  to  tell  him  when 
he  is  wrong;  nor  does  he  choose  to  be  told.  Sir, 
when  people  watch  me  narrowly,  and  I  do  not 
watch  myself,  they  will  find  me  out  to  be  of  a  par¬ 
ticular  county.  In  the  same  manner,  Dunning 
may  be  found  out  to  be  a  Devonshire  man.  So 
most  Scotchmen  may  be  found  out.  But,  Sir,  lit¬ 
tle  aberrations  are  of  no  disadvantage.  I  never 
catched  Mallet  in  a  Scotch  accent;  and  yet  Mal¬ 
let,  I  suppose,  was  past  five-and-twenty  before 
he  came  to  London.55 

LTpon  another  occasion  I  talked  to  him  on 
this  subject,  having  myself  taken  some  pains  to 
improve  my  pronunciation,  by  the  aid  of  the 
late  Mr.  Love,  of  Drury-lane  theatre,  when  he 
was  a  player  at  Edinburgh,  and  also  of  old  Mr. 
Sheridan.  Johnson  said  to  me,  “Sir,  your  pro¬ 
nunciation  is  not  offensive.55  With  this  concession 
I  was  pretty  well  satisfied;  and  let  me  give  my 
countrymen  of  North  Britain  an  advice  not  to 
aim  at  absolute  perfection  in  this  respect;  not  to 
speak  High  English ,  as  we  are  apt  to  call  what  is 
far  removed  from  the  Scotch ,  but  which  is  by  no 
means  good  English ,  and  makes,  “the  fools  who 
use  it,55  truly  ridiculous.  Good  English  is  plain, 
easy,  and  smooth  in  the  mouth  of  an  unaffected 
English  Gentleman.  A  studied  and  factitious  pro¬ 
nunciation,  which  requires  perpetual  attention 
and  imposes  perpetual  constraint,  is  exceeding¬ 
ly  disgusting.  A  small  intermixture  of  provincial 
peculiarities  may,  perhaps,  have  an  agreeable 
effect,  as  the  notes  of  different  birds  concur  in 
the  harmony  of  the  grove,  and  please  more  than 
if  they  were  all  exactly  alike.  I  could  name  some 
gentlemen  of  Ireland,  to  whom  a  slight  propor¬ 
tion  of  the  accent  and  recitative  of  that  country 
is  an  advantage.  The  same  observation  will  ap¬ 
ply  to  the  gentlemen  of  Scotland.  I  do  not  mean 
that  we  should  speak  as  broad  as  a  certain  pros¬ 
perous  member  of  Parliament  from  that  coun¬ 
try;  though  it  has  been  well  observed,  that  “it 
has  been  of  no  small  use  to  him;  as  it  rouses  the 
attention  of  the  House  by  its  uncommonness; 
and  is  equal  to  tropes  and  figures  in  a  good  Eng¬ 
lish  speaker.55  I  would  give  as  an  instance  of 
what  I  mean  to  recommend  to  my  countrymen, 
the  pronunciation  of  the  late  Sir  Gilbert  Elliot; 
and  may  I  presume  to  add  that  of  the  present 
Earl  of  Marchmont,  who  told  me,  with  great 


[  1772 

good  humour,  that  the  master  of  a  shop  in  Lon¬ 
don,  where  he  was  not  known,  said  to  him,  “I 
suppose,  Sir,  you  are  an  American.55  “Why  so, 
Sir?55  (said  his  Lordship.)  “Because,  Sir,  (replied 
the  shopkeeper,)  you  speak  neither  English  nor 
Scotch,  but  something  different  from  both,  which 
I  conclude  is  the  language  of  America.55 

Boswell.  “It  may  be  of  use,  Sir,  to  have 
a  Dictionary  to  ascertain  the  pronunciation.55 
Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  my  Dictionary  shows  you 
the  accents  of  words,  if  you  can  but  remember 
them.55  Boswell.  “But,  Sir,  we  want  marks  to 
ascertain  the  pronunciation  of  the  vowels.  Sher¬ 
idan,  I  believe,  has  finished  such  a  work.55  John¬ 
son.  “Why,  Sir,  consider  how  much  easier  it  is 
to  learn  a  language  by  the  ear,  than  by  any 
marks.  Sheridan’s  Dictionary  may  do  very  well; 
but  you  cannot  always  carry  it  about  with  you : 
and,  when  you  want  the  word,  you  have  not  the 
Dictionary.  It  is  like  a  man  who  has  a  sword 
that  will  not  draw.  It  is  an  admirable  sword,  to 
be  sure:  but  while  your  enemy  is  cutting  your 
throat,  you  are  unable  to  use  it.  Besides,  Sir, 
what  entitles  Sheridan  to  fix  the  pronunciation 
of  English?  He  has,  in  the  first  place,  the  disad¬ 
vantage  of  being  an  Irishman:  and  if  he  says  he 
will  fix  it  after  the  example  of  the  best  company, 
why  they  differ  among  themselves.  I  remember 
an  instance:  when  I  published  the  Plan  for  my 
Dictionary ,  Lord  Chesterfield  toid  me  that  the 
word  great  should  be  pronounced  so  as  to  rhyme 
to  state ;  and  Sir  William  Yonge  sent  me  word 
that  it  should  be  pronounced  so  as  to  rhyme  to 
seat ,  and  that  none  but  an  Irishman  would  pro¬ 
nounce  it  grait.  Now  here  were  two  men  of  the 
highest  rank,  the  one,  the  best  speaker  in  the 
House  of  Lords,  the  other,  the  best  speaker  in 
the  House  of  Commons,  differing  entirely.55 

I  again  visited  him  at  night.  Finding  him  in 
a  very  good  humour,  I  ventured  to  lead  him  to 
the  subject  of  our  situation  in  a  future  state, 
having  much  curiosity  to  know  his  notions  on 
that  point.  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  the  happiness 
of  an  unembodied  spirit  will  consist  in  a  con¬ 
sciousness  of  the  favour  of  God,  in  the  contem¬ 
plation  of  truth,  and  in  the  possession  of  felici¬ 
tating  ideas.55  Boswell.  “But,  Sir,  is  there  any 
harm  in  our  forming  to  ourselves  conjectures  as 
to  the  particulars  of  our  happiness,  though  the 
scripture  has  said  but  very  little  on  the  subject? 
‘We  know  not  what  we  shall  be.5  55  Johnson.  “Sir, 
there  is  no  harm.  What  philosophy  suggests  to 
us  on  this  topick  is  probable:  what  scripture 
tells  us  is  certain.  Dr.  Henry  More  has  carried 
it  as  far  as  philosophy  can.  You  may  buy  both 
his  theological  and  philosophical  works  in  two 


1 772  ]  LIFE  OF 

volumes  folio,  for  about  eight  shillings.55  Bos¬ 
well.  “One  of  the  most  pleasing  thoughts  is, 
that  we  shall  see  our  friends  again.55  Johnson. 
“Yes,  Sir;  but  you  must  consider,  that  when  we 
are  become  purely  rational,  many  of  our  friend¬ 
ships  will  be  cut  off.  Many  friendships  are  formed 
by  a  community  of  sensual  pleasures:  all  these 
will  be  cut  off.  We  form  many  friendships  with 
bad  men,  because  they  have  agreeable  qualities, 
and  they  can  be  useful  to  us;  but,  after  death, 
they  can  no  longer  be  of  use  to  us.  We  form 
many  friendships  by  mistake,  imagining  people 
to  be  different  from  what  they  really  are.  After 
death,  we  shall  see  every  one  in  a  true  light. 
Then,  Sir,  they  talk  of  our  meeting  our  relations: 
but  then  all  relationship  is  dissolved;  and  we 
shall  have  no  regard  for  one  person  more  than 
another,  but  for  their  real  value.  However,  we 
shall  either  have  the  satisfaction  of  meeting  our 
friends,  or  be  satisfied  without  meeting  them.55 
Boswell.  “Yet,  Sir,  we  see  in  scripture,  that 
Dives  still  retained  an  anxious  concern  about 
his  brethren.55  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  we  must 
either  suppose  that  passage  to  be  metaphorical, 
or  hold  with  many  divines,  and  all  the  Purga- 
torians,  that  departed  souls  do  not  all  at  once 
arrive  at  the  utmost  perfection  of  which  they  are 
capable.55  Boswell.  “I  think,  Sir,  that  is  a  very 
rational  supposition.55  Johnson.  “Why,  yes,  Sir; 
but  we  do  not  know  it  is  a  true  one.  There  is  no 
harm  in  believing  it:  but  you  must  not  compel 
others  to  make  it  an  article  of  faith;  for  it  is  not 
revealed.55  Boswell.  “Do  you  think,  Sir,  it  is 
wrong  in  a  man  who  holds  the  doctrine  of  pur¬ 
gatory,  to  pray  for  the  souls  of  his  deceased 
friends?55  Johnson.  “Why,  no,  Sir.55  Boswell. 
“I  have  been  told,  that  in  the  Liturgy  of  the 
Episcopal  Church  of  Scotland,  there  was  a  form 
of  prayer  for  the  dead.55  Johnson.  “Sir,  it  is  not 
in  the  liturgy  which  Laud  framed  for  the  Epis¬ 
copal  Church  of  Scotland:  if  there  is  a  liturgy 
older  than  that,  I  should  be  glad  to  see  it.55  Bos¬ 
well.  “As  to  our  employment  in  a  future  state, 
the  sacred  writings  say  little.  The  Revelation, 
however,  of  St.  John  gives  us  many  ideas,  and 
particularly  mentions  musick. 5 5  J ohnson .  “Why, 
Sir,  ideas  must  be  given  you  by  means  of  some¬ 
thing  which  you  know:  and  as  to  musick  there 
are  some  philosophers  and  divines  who  have 
maintained  that  we  shall  not  be  spiritualized  to 
such  a  degree,  but  that  something  of  matter, 
very  much  refined,  will  remain.  In  that  case, 
musick  may  make  a  part  of  our  future  felicity.55 

Boswell.  “I  do  not  know  whether  there  are 
any  well-attested  stories  of  the  appearance  of 
ghosts.  You  know  there  is  a  famous  story  of  the 


JOHNSON  193 

appearance  of  Mrs.  Veal,  prefixed  to  Drelin - 
court  on  Death”  Johnson.  “I  believe,  Sir,  that  is 
given  up.  I  believe  the  woman  declared  upon 
her  death-bed  that  it  was  a  lie.551  Boswell. 
“This  objection  is  made  against  the  truth  of 
ghosts  appearing:  that  if  they  are  in  a  state  of 
happiness,  it  would  be  a  punishment  to  them  to 
return  to  this  world;  and  if  they  are  in  a  state  of 
misery,  it  would  be  giving  them  a  respite.55 
Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  as  the  happiness  or  misery 
of  embodied  spirits  does  not  depend  upon  place, 
but  is  intellectual,  we  cannot  say  that  they  are 
less  happy  or  less  miserable  by  appearing  upon 
earth.55 

We  went  down  between  twelve  and  one  to 
Mrs.  Williams’s  room,  and  drank  tea.  I  men¬ 
tioned  that  we  were  to  have  the  remains  of  Mr. 
Gray,  in  prose  and  verse,  published  by  Mr. 
Mason.  Johnson.  “I  think  we  have  had  enough 
of  Gray.  I  see  they  have  published  a  splendid 
edition  of  Akenside’s  works.  One  bad  ode  may 
be  suffered;  but  a  number  of  them  together 
makes  one  sick.55  Boswell.  “Akenside’s  distin¬ 
guished  poem  is  his  Pleasures  of  Imagination:  but 
for  my  part,  I  never  could  admire  it  so  much  as 
most  people  do.55  Johnson.  “Sir,  I  could  not 
read  it  through.55  Boswell.  “I  have  read  it 
through ;  but  I  did  not  find  any  great  power  in  it.5  5 

I  mentioned  Elwal,  the  heretick,  whose  trial 
Sir  John  Pringle  had  given  me  to  read.  John¬ 
son.  “Sir,  Mr.  Elwal  was,  I  think,  an  ironmon¬ 
ger  at  Wolverhampton;  and  he  had  a  mind  to 
make  himself  famous,  by  being  the  founder  of  a 
new  sect,  which  he  wished  much  should  be  called 
Elwallians.  He  held,  that  every  thing  in  the  Old 
Testament  that  was  not  typical,  was  to  be  of 
perpetual  observance;  and  so  he  wore  a  ribband 
in  the  plaits  of  his  coat,  and  he  also  wore  a  beard. 
I  remember  I  had  the  honour  of  dining  in  com¬ 
pany  with  Mr.  Elwal.  There  was  one  Barter,  a 
miller,  who  wrote  against  him;  and  you  had  the 
controversy  between  Mr.  Elwal  and  Mr.  Bar¬ 
ter.  To  try  to  make  himself  distinguished,  he 
wrote  a  letter  to  King  George  the  Second,  chal¬ 
lenging  him  to  dispute  with  him,  in  which  he 
said,  £ George,  if  you  be  afraid  to  come  by  your¬ 
self,  to  dispute  with  a  poor  old  man,  you  may 
bring  a  thousand  of  your  black-g uards  with  you; 
and  if  you  should  still  be  afraid,  you  may  bring 
a  thousand  of  your  raf-guaras.5  The  letter  had 
something  of  the  impudence  of  Junius  to  our 
present  King.  But  the  men  at  Wolverhampton 
were  not  so  inflammable  as  the  Common-Coun- 

1This  fiction  is  known  to  have  been  invented  by 
Daniel  Defoe,  and  was  added  to  Drelincourt’s  book, 
to  make  it  sell.  The  first  edition  had  it  not.  [M.] 


BOSWELL 


194 

cil  of  London;  so  Mr.  Elwal  failed  in  his  scheme 
of  making  himself  a  man  of  great  consequence.” 

On  Tuesday,  March  31,  he  and  I  dined  at 
General  Paoli’s.  A  question  was  started,  whether 
the  state  of  marriage  was  natural  to  man.  John¬ 
son.  “Sir,  it  is  so  far  from  being  natural  for  a 
man  and  woman  to  live  in  a  state  of  marriage, 
that  we  find  all  the  motives  which  they  have  for 
remaining  in  that  connection,  and  the  restraints 
which  civilized  society  imposes  to  prevent  sepa¬ 
ration,  are  hardly  sufficient  to  keep  them  togeth¬ 
er.”  The  General  said,  that  in  a  state  of  nature 
a  man  and  woman  uniting  together,  would  form 
a  strong  and  constant  affection,  by  the  mutual 
pleasure  each  would  receive;  and  that  the  same 
causes  of  dissention  would  not  arise  between 
them,  as  occur  between  husband  and  wife  in  a 
civilized  state.  Johnson.  “Sir,  they  would  have 
dissentions  enough,  though  of  another  kind.  One 
would  choose  to  go  a  hunting  in  this  wood,  the 
other  in  that;  one  would  choose  to  go  a  fishing 
in  this  lake,  the  other  in  that;  or,  perhaps,  one 
would  choose  to  go  a  hunting,  when  the  other 
would  choose  to  go  a  fishing;  and  so  they  would 
part.  Besides,  Sir,  a  savage  man  and  a  savage 
woman  meet  by  chance;  and  when  the  man 
sees  another  woman  that  pleases  him  better,  he 
will  leave  the  first.” 

We  then  fell  into  a  disquisition  whether  there 
is  any  beauty  independent  of  utility.  The  Gen¬ 
eral  maintained  there  was  not.  Dr.  Johnson 
maintained  that  there  was;  and  he  instanced  a 
coffee-cup  which  he  held  in  his  hand,  the  paint¬ 
ing  of  which  was  of  no  real  use,  as  the  cup  would 
hold  the  coffee  equally  well  if  plain;  yet  the 
painting  was  beautiful. 

We  talked  of  the  strange  custom  of  swearing 
in  conversation.  The  General  said,  that  all  bar¬ 
barous  nations  swore  from  a  certain  violence  of 
temper,  that  could  not  be  confined  to  earth, 
but  was  always  reaching  at  the  powers  above. 
He  said,  too,  that  there  was  greater  variety  of 
swearing,  in  proportion  as  there  was  a  greater 
variety  of  religious  ceremonies. 

Dr.  Johnson  went  home  with  me  to  my  lodg¬ 
ings  in  Conduit-street  and  drank  tea,  previous 
to  our  going  to  the  Pantheon,  which  neither  of 
us  had  seen  before. 

He  said,  “Goldsmith’s  Life  of  Parnell  is  poor; 
not  that  it  is  poorly  written,  but  that  he  had 
poor  materials;  for  nobody  can  write  the  life  of 
a  man,  but  those  who  have  eat  and  drunk  and 
lived  in  social  intercourse  with  him.” 

I  said,  that  if  it  was  not  troublesome  and  pre¬ 
suming  too  much,  I  would  request  him  to  tell 
me  all  the  little  circumstances  of  his  life;  what 


[  1772 

schools  he  attended,  when  he  came  to  Oxford, 
when  he  came  to  London,  &c.  &c.  He  did  not 
disapprove  of  my  curiosity  as  to  these  particu¬ 
lars;  but  said,  “They’ll  come  out  by  degrees  as 
we  talk  together.” 

He  censured  Ruff  head’s  Life  of  Pope ;  and 
said,  “he  knew  nothing  of  Pope,  and  nothing  of 
poetry.”  He  praised  Dr.  Joseph  Warton’s  Essay 
on  Pope;  but  said,  he  supposed  we  should  have 
no  more  of  it,  as  the  authour  had  not  been  able 
to  persuade  the  world  to  think  of  Pope  as  he  did. 
Boswell.  “Why,  Sir,  should  that  prevent  him 
from  continuing  his  work?  He  is  an  ingenious 
Counsel,  who  has  made  the  most  of  his  cause: 
he  is  not  obliged  to  gain  it.”  Johnson.  “But,  Sir, 
there  is  a  difference  when  the  cause  is  of  a  man’s 
own  making.” 

We  talked  of  the  proper  use  of  riches.  John¬ 
son.  “If  I  were  a  man  of  a  great  estate,  I  would 
drive  all  the  rascals  whom  I  did  not  like  out  of 
the  country  at  an  election.” 

I  asked  him  how  far  he  thought  wealth  should 
be  employed  in  hospitality.  Johnson.  “You  are 
to  consider  that  ancient  hospitality,  of  which 
we  hear  so  much,  was  in  an  uncommercial  coun¬ 
try,  when  men  being  idle,  were  glad  to  be  en¬ 
tertained  at  rich  men’s  tables.  But  in  a  com¬ 
mercial  country,  a  busy  country,  time  becomes 
precious,  and  therefore  hospitality  is  not  so  much 
valued.  No  doubt  there  is  still  room  for  a  certain 
degree  of  it;  and  a  man  has  a  satisfaction  in  see¬ 
ing  his  friends  eating  and  drinking  around  him. 
But  promiscuous  hospitality  is  not  the  way  to 
gain  real  influence.  You  must  help  some  people 
at  table  before  others;  you  must  ask  some  people 
how  they  like  their  wine  oftener  than  others. 
You  therefore  offend  more  people  than  you 
please.  You  are  like  the  French  statesman,  who 
said,  when  he  granted  a  favour,  cJ’ai  fait  dix 
mecontents  et  un  ingrat .’  Besides,  Sir,  being  enter¬ 
tained  ever  so  well  at  a  man’s  table,  impresses 
no  lasting  regard  or  esteem.  No,  Sir,  the  way  to 
make  sure  of  power  and  influence  is,  by  lending 
money  confidentially  to  your  neighbours  at  a 
small  interest,  or,  perhaps,  at  no  interest  at  all, 
and  having  their  bonds  in  your  possession.” 
Boswell.  “May  not  a  man,  Sir,  employ  his 
riches  to  advantage  in  educating  young  men  of 
merit?”  Johnson.  “Yes,  Sir,  if  they  fall  in  your 
way;  but  if  it  be  understood  that  you  patronize 
young  men  of  merit,  you  will  be  harassed  with 
solicitations.  You  will  have  numbers  forced  up¬ 
on  you  who  have  no  merit;  some  will  force  them 
upon  you  from  mistaken  partiality;  and  some 
from  downright  interested  motives,  without 
scruple;  and  you  will  be  disgraced.” 


1772] 

“Were  I  a  rich  man,  I  would  propagate  all 
kinds  of  trees  that  will  grow  in  the  open  air.  A 
greenhouse  is  childish.  I  would  introduce  for¬ 
eign  animals  into  the  country;  for  instance  the 
reindeer.”1 

The  conversation  now  turned  on  critical  sub¬ 
jects.  Johnson.  “Bayes,  in  The  Rehearsal ,  is  a 
mighty  silly  character.  If  it  was  intended  to  be 
like  a  particular  man,  it  could  only  be  diverting 
while  that  man  was  remembered.  But  I  ques¬ 
tion  whether  it  was  meant  for  Dryden,  as  has 
been  reported ;  for  we  know  some  of  the  passages 
said  to  be  ridiculed,  were  written  since  The  Re¬ 
hearsal]  at  least  a  passage  mentioned  in  the  Pref¬ 
ace2  is  of  a  later  date.”  I  maintained  that  it  had 
merit  as  a  general  satire  on  the  self-importance 
of  dramatick  authours.  But  even  in  this  light  he 
held  it  very  cheap. 

We  then  walked  to  the  Pantheon.  The  first 
view  of  it  did  not  strike  us  so  much  as  Ranelagh, 
of  which  he  said,  the  “ coup  deceit  was  the  finest 
thing  he  had  ever  seen.”  The  truth  is,  Ranelagh 
is  of  a  more  beautiful  form;  more  of  it,  or  rather 
indeed  the  whole  rotunda ,  appears  at  once,  and  it 
is  better  lighted.  However,  as  Johnson  observed, 
we  saw  the  Pantheon  in  time  of  mourning,  when 
there  was  a  dull  uniformity;  whereas  we  had 
seen  Ranelagh  when  the  view  was  enlivened 
with  a  gay  profusion  of  colours.  Mrs.  Bosville, 
of  Gunthwait,  in  Yorkshire,  joined  us,  and  en¬ 
tered  into  conversation  with  us.  Johnson  said  to 
me  afterwards,  “Sir,  this  is  a  mighty  intelligent 
lady.” 

I  said  there  was  not  half  a  guinea’s  worth  of 
pleasure  in  seeing  this  place.  Johnson.  “But, 
Sir,  there  is  half  a  guinea’s  worth  of  inferiority 
to  other  people  in  not  having  seen  it.”  Boswell. 
“I  doubt,  Sir,  whether  there  are  many  happy 
people  here.”  Johnson.  “Yes,  Sir,  there  are 
many  happy  people  here.  There  are  many  peo¬ 
ple  here  who  are  watching  hundreds,  and  who 
think  hundreds  are  watching  them.” 

Happening  to  meet  Sir  Adam  Fergusson,  I 
presented  him  to  Dr.  Johnson.  Sir  Adam  ex¬ 
pressed  some  apprehension  that  the  Pantheon 
would  encourage  luxury.  “Sir,  (said  Johnson,) 
I  am  a  great  friend  to  publick  amusements;  for 

HThis  project  has  since  been  realized.  Sir  Henry 
Liddel,  who  made  a  spirited  tour  into  Lapland, 
brought  two  reindeer  to  his  estate  in  Northumber¬ 
land,  where  they  bred;  but  the  race  has  unfortu¬ 
nately  perished. 

2Dr.  Johnson  seems  to  have  meant  the  Address 
to  the  Reader  with  a  Key  subjoined  to  it;  which 
have  been  prefixed  to  the  modern  editions  of  that 
play.  He  did  not  know,  it  appears,  that  several  ad¬ 
ditions  were  made  to  The  Rehearsal  after  the  first 
edition.  [M.] 


195 

they  keep  people  from  vice.  You  now  (address¬ 
ing  himself  to  me,)  would  have  been  with  a 
wench,  had  you  not  been  here. — O!  I  forgot 
you  were  married.” 

Sir  Adam  suggested,  that  luxury  corrupts  a 
people,  and  destroys  the  spirit  of  liberty.  John¬ 
son.  “Sir,  that  is  all  visionary.  I  would  not  give 
half  a  guinea  to  live  under  one  form  of  govern¬ 
ment  rather  than  another.  It  is  of  no  moment  to 
the  happiness  of  an  individual.  Sir,  the  danger 
of  the  abuse  of  power  is  nothing  to  a  private 
man.  What  Frenchman  is  prevented  from  pass¬ 
ing  his  life  as  he  pleases?”  Sir  Adam.  “But,  Sir, 
in  the  British  constitution  it  is  surely  of  import¬ 
ance  to  keep  up  a  spirit  in  the  people,  so  as  to 
preserve  a  balance  against  the  crown.”  John¬ 
son.  “Sir,  I  perceive  you  are  a  vile  Whig.  Why 
all  this  childish  jealousy  of  the  power  of  the 
crown?  The  crown  has  not  power  enough.  When 
I  say  that  all  governments  are  alike,  I  consider 
that  in  no  government  power  can  be  abused 
long.  Mankind  will  not  bear  it.  If  a  sovereign 
oppresses  his  people  to  a  great  degree,  they  will 
rise  and  cut  off  his  head.  There  is  a  remedy  in 
human  nature  against  tyranny,  that  will  keep 
us  safe  under  every  form  of  government.  Had 
not  the  people  of  France  thought  themselves 
honoured  as  sharing  in  the  brilliant  actions  of 
Lewis  XIV,  they  would  not  have  endured  him; 
and  we  may  say  the  same  of  the  King  of  Prussia’s 
people.”  Sir  Adam  introduced  the  ancient 
Greeks  and  Romans.  Johnson.  “Sir,  the  mass 
of  both  of  them  were  barbarians.  The  mass  of 
every  people  must  be  barbarous  where  there  is 
no  printing,  and  consequently  knowledge  is  not 
generally  diffused.  Knowledge  is  diffused  among 
our  people  by  the  news-papers.”  Sir  Adam  men¬ 
tioned  the  orators,  poets,  and  artists  of  Greece. 
Johnson.  “Sir,  I  am  talking  of  the  mass  of  the 
people.  We  see  even  what  the  boasted  Athenians 
were.  The  little  effect  which  Demosthenes’s  ora¬ 
tions  had  upon  them,  shews  that  they  were  bar¬ 
barians.” 

Sir  Adam  was  unlucky  in  his  topicks;  for  he 
suggested  a  doubt  of  the  propriety  of  Bishops 
having  seats  in  the  House  of  Lords.  Johnson. 
“How  so,  Sir?  Who  is  more  proper  for  having 
the  dignity  of  a  peer,  than  a  Bishop,  provided  a 
Bishop  be  what  he  ought  to  be;  and  if  impropej 
Bishops  be  made,  that  is  not  the  fault  of  the 
Bishops,  but  of  those  who  make  them.” 

On  Sunday,  April  5,  after  attending  divine 
service  at  St.  Paul’s  church,  I  found  him  alone. 
Of  a  schoolmaster  of  his  acquaintance,  a  native 
of  Scotland,  he  said,  “He  has  a  great  deal  of 
good  about  him;  but  he  is  also  very  defective  in 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


BOSWELL 


196 

some  respects.  His  inner  part  is  good,  but  his 
outer  part  is  mighty  awkward.  You  in  Scotland 
do  not  attain  that  nice  critical  skill  in  languages, 
which  we  get  in  our  schools  in  England.  I  would 
not  put  a  boy  to  him,  whom  I  intended  for  a 
man  of  learning.  But  for  the  sons  of  citizens, 
who  are  to  learn  a  little,  get  good  morals,  and 
then  go  to  trade,  he  may  do  very  well.” 

I  mentioned  a  cause  in  which  I  had  appeared 
as  counsel  at  the  bar  of  the  General  Assembly  of 
the  Church  of  Scotland,  where  a  Probationer ,  (as 
one  licensed  to  preach,  but  not  yet  ordained,  is 
called,)  was  opposed  in  his  application  to  be 
inducted,  because  it  was  alledged  that  he  had 
been  guilty  of  fornication  five  years  before.  John¬ 
son.  “Why,  Sir,  if  he  has  repented,  it  is  not  a 
sufficient  objection.  A  man  who  is  good  enough 
to  go  to  heaven,  is  good  enough  to  be  a  clergy¬ 
man.”  This  was  a  humane  and  liberal  senti¬ 
ment.  But  the  character  of  a  clergyman  is  more 
sacred  than  that  of  an  ordinary  Christian.  As  he 
is  to  instruct  with  authority,  he  should  be  re¬ 
garded  with  reverence,  as  one  upon  whom  di¬ 
vine  truth  has  had  the  effect  to  set  him  above 
such  transgressions,  as  men  less  exalted  by  spir¬ 
itual  habits,  and  yet  upon  the  whole  not  to  be 
excluded  from  heaven,  have  been  betrayed  into 
by  the  predominance  of  passion.  That  clergy¬ 
men  may  be  considered  as  sinners  in  general,  as 
all  men  are,  cannot  be  denied;  but  this  reflec¬ 
tion  will  not  counteract  their  good  precepts  so 
much,  as  the  absolute  knowledge  of  their  having 
been  guilty  of  certain  specifick  immoral  acts.  I 
told  him,  that  by  the  rules  of  the  Church  of 
Scotland,  in  their  Book  of  Discipline ,  if  a  scandal , 
as  it  is  called,  is  not  prosecuted  for  five  years,  it 
cannot  afterwards  be  proceeded  upon,  “unless 
it  be  of  a  heinous  nature ,  or  again  become  fla¬ 
grant”;  and  that  hence  a  question  arose,  whether 
fornication  was  a  sin  of  a  heinous  nature;  and 
that  I  had  maintained,  that  it  did  not  deserve 
that  epithet,  in  as  much  as  it  was  not  one  of 
those  sins  which  argue  very  great  depravity  of 
heart:  in  short,  was  not,  in  the  general  accepta¬ 
tion  of  mankind,  a  heinous  sin.  Johnson.  “No, 
Sir,  it  is  not  a  heinous  sin.  A  heinous  sin  is  that 
for  which  a  man  is  punished  with  death  or  ban¬ 
ishment.”  Boswell.  “But,  Sir,  after  I  had  ar¬ 
gued  that  it  was  not  a  heinous  sin,  an  old  clergy¬ 
man  rose  up,  and  repeating  the  text  of  scripture 
denouncing  judgement  against  whore-mongers, 
asked,  whether,  considering  this,  there  could  be 
any  doubt  of  fornication  being  a  heinous  sin.” 
Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  observe  the  word  whore¬ 
monger.  Every  sin,  if  persisted  in,  will  become 
heinous.  Whoremonger  is  a  dealer  in  whores,  as 


[  1772 

ironmonger  is  a  dealer  in  iron.  But  as  you  don’t 
call  a  man  an  ironmonger  for  buying  and  selling 
a  penknife;  so  you  don’t  call  a  man  a  whore¬ 
monger  for  getting  one  wench  with  child.”1 

I  spoke  of  the  inequality  of  the  livings  of  the 
clergy  in  England,  and  the  scanty  provisions  of 
some  of  the  Curates.  Johnson.  “Why  yes,  Sir; 
but  it  cannot  be  helped.  You  must  consider, 
that  the  revenues  of  the  clergy  are  not  at  the 
disposal  of  the  state,  like  the  pay  of  the  army. 
Different  men  have  founded  different  churches; 
and  some  are  better  endowed,  some  worse.  The 
State  cannot  interfere  and  make  an  equal  divi¬ 
sion  of  what  has  been  particularly  appropriated. 
Now  when  a  clergyman  has  but  a  small  living, 
or  even  two  small  livings,  he  can  afford  very 
little  to  a  curate.” 

He  said,  he  went  more  frequently  to  church 
when  there  were  prayers  only,  than  when  there 
was  also  a  sermon,  as  the  people  required  more 
an  example  for  the  one  than  the  other;  it  being 
much  easier  for  them  to  hear  a  sermon,  than  to 
fix  their  minds  on  prayer. 

On  Monday,  April  6,  I  dined  with  him  at  Sir 
Alexander  Macdonald’s,  where  was  a  young  of¬ 
ficer  in  the  regimentals  of  the  Scots  Royal,  who 
talked  with  a  vivacity,  fluency,  and  precision  so 
uncommon,  that  he  attracted  particular  atten¬ 
tion.  He  proved  to  be  the  Honourable  Thomas 
Erskine,  youngest  brother  to  the  Earl  of  Buchan, 
who  has  since  risen  into  such  brilliant  reputa¬ 
tion  at  the  bar  in  Westminster-hall. 

Fielding  being  mentioned,  Johnson  exclaimed, 
“he  was  a  blockhead”;  and  upon  my  expressing 
my  astonishment  at  so  strange  an  assertion,  he 
said,  “What  I  mean  by  his  being  a  blockhead  is 
that  he  was  a  barren  rascal.”  Boswell.  “Will 
you  not  allow,  Sir,  that  he  draws  very  natural 
pictures  of  human  life?”  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  it 
is  of  very  low  life.  Richardson  used  to  say,  that 
had  he  not  known  who  Fielding  was,  he  should 
have  believed  he  was  an  ostler.  Sir,  there  is  more 
knowledge  of  the  heart  in  one  letter  of  Richard¬ 
son’s,  than  in  all  Tom  Jones.  I,  indeed,  never  read 
Joseph  Andrews .”  Erskine.  “Surely,  Sir,  Rich¬ 
ardson  is  very  tedious.”  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  if 
you  were  to  read  Richardson  for  the  story,  your 
impatience  would  be  so  much  fretted  that  you 
would  hang  yourself.  But  you  must  read  him  for 
the  sentiment,  and  consider  the  story  as  only  giv¬ 
ing  occasion  to  the  sentiment.” — I  have  already 

Tt  must  not  be  presumed  that  Dr.  Johnson 
meant  to  give  any  countenance  to  licentiousness, 
though  in  the  character  of  an  Advocate  he  made  a 
just  and  subtle  distinction  between  occasional  and 
habitual  transgression. 


1 772] 

given  my  opinion  of  Fielding;  but  I  cannot  re¬ 
frain  from  repeating  here  my  wonder  at  John¬ 
son’s  excessive  and  unaccountable  depreciation 
of  one  of  the  best  writers  that  England  has  pro¬ 
duced.  Tom  Jones  has  stood  the  test  of  publick 
opinion  with  such  success,  as  to  have  established 
its  great  merit,  both  for  the  story,  the  sentiments, 
and  the  manners,  and  also  the  varieties  of  dic¬ 
tion,  so  as  to  leave  no  doubt  of  its  having  an  an¬ 
imated  truth  of  execution  throughout. 

A  book  of  travels,  lately  published  under  the 
title  of  Coriat  Junior ,  and  written  by  Mr.  Pater¬ 
son,1  was  mentioned.  Johnson  said,  this  book 
was  an  imitation  of  Sterne,2  and  not  of  Coriat, 
whose  name  Paterson  had  chosen  as  a  whimsical 
one.  “Tom  Coriat,  (said  he,)  was  a  humourist 
about  the  court  of  James  the  First.  He  had  a  mix¬ 
ture  of  learning,  of  wit,  and  of  buffoonery.  He 
first  travelled  through  Europe,  and  published  his 
travels.  He  afterwards  travelled  on  foot  through 
Asia,  and  had  made  many  remarks;  but  he  died 
at  Mandoa,  and  his  remarks  were  lost.” 

We  talked  of  gaming,  and  animadverted  on  it 
with  severity.  Johnson.  “Nay,  gentlemen,  let  us 
not  aggravate  the  matter.  It  is  not  roguery  to 
play  with  a  man  who  is  ignorant  of  the  game, 
while  you  are  master  of  it,  and  so  win  his  money; 
for  he  thinks  he  can  play  better  than  you,  as 
you  think  you  can  play  better  than  he;  and  the 
superiour  skill  carries  it.”  Erskine.  “He  is  a  fool, 
but  you  are  nota  rogue.”  Johnson.  “That’s  much 
about  the  truth,  Sir.  It  must  be  considered,  that 
a  man  who  only  does  what  every  one  of  the  so¬ 
ciety  to  which  he  belongs  would  do,  is  not  a  dis¬ 
honest  man.  In  the  republick  of  Sparta,  it  was 
agreed,  that  stealing  was  not  dishonourable,  if 
not  discovered.  I  do  not  commend  a  society 
where  there  is  an  agreement  that  what  would 
not  otherwise  be  fair,  shall  be  fair;  but  I  main¬ 
tain,  that  an  individual  of  any  society,  who  prac¬ 
tises  what  is  allowed,  is  not  a  dishonest  man.” 
Boswell.  “So  then,  Sir,  you  do  not  think  ill  of  a 
man  who  wins  perhaps  forty  thousand  pounds 
in  a  winter?”  Johnson.  “Sir,  I  do  not  call  a  game¬ 
ster  a  dishonest  man;  but  I  call  him  an  unsocial 
man,  an  unprofitable  man.  Gaming  is  a  mode  of 
transferring  property  without  producing  any  in¬ 
termediate  good.  Trade  gives  employment  to 
numbers,  and  so  produces  intermediate  good.” 

Mr.  Erskine  told  us,  that  when  he  was  in  the 
island  of  Minorca,  he  not  only  read  prayers,  but 

xMr.  Samuel  Paterson,  eminent  for  his  knowl¬ 
edge  of  books. 

2Mr.  Paterson,  in  a  pamphlet,  produced  some 
evidence  to  shew  that  his  work  was  written  before 
Sterne’s  Sentimental  Journey  appeared. 


197 

preached  two  sermons  to  the  regiment.  He  seemed 
to  object  to  the  passage  in  scripture  where  we 
are  told  that  the  angel  of  the  Lord  smote  in  one 
night  forty  thousand  Assyrians.  “Sir,  (said  John¬ 
son,)  you  should  recollect  that  there  was  a  sup¬ 
ernatural  interposition;  they  were  destroyed  by 
pestilence.  You  are  not  to  suppose  that  the  angel 
of  the  Lord  went  about  and  stabbed  each  of 
them  with  a  dagger,  or  knocked  them  on  the 
head,  man  by  man.” 

After  Mr.  Erskine  was  gone,  a  discussion  took 
place,  whether  the  present  Earl  of  Buchan,  when 
Lord  Cardross,  did  right  to  refuse  to  go  Secre¬ 
tary  of  the  Embassy  to  Spain,  when  Sir  James 
Gray,  a  man  of  inferiour  rank,  went  Ambassa- 
dour.  Dr.  Johnson  said,  that  perhaps  in  point  of 
interest  he  did  wrong;  but  in  point  of  dignity  he 
did  well.  Sir  Alexander  insisted  that  he  was 
wrong;  and  said  that  Mr.  Pitt  intended  it  as  an 
advantageous  thing  for  him.  “Why,  Sir,  (said 
Johnson,)  Mr.  Pitt  might  think  it  an  advanta¬ 
geous  thing  for  him  to  make  him  a  vintner,  and  get 
him  all  the  Portugal  trade;  but  he  would  have 
demeaned  himself  strangely  had  he  accepted  of 
such  a  situation.  Sir,  had  he  gone  Secretary  while 
his  inferiour  was  Ambassadour,  he  would  have 
been  a  traitor  to  his  rank  and  family.” 

I  talked  of  the  little  attachment  which  sub¬ 
sisted  between  near  relations  in  London.  “Sir, 
(said  Johnson,)  in  a  country  so  commercial  as 
ours,  where  every  man  can  do  for  himself,  there 
is  not  so  much  occasion  for  that  attachment.  No 
man  is  thought  the  worse  of  here,  whose  brother 
was  hanged.  In  uncommercial  countries,  many 
of  the  branches  of  a  family  must  depend  on  the 
stock;  so,  in  order  to  make  the  head  of  the  fam¬ 
ily  take  care  of  them,  they  are  represented  as 
connected  with  his  reputation,  that,  self-love  be¬ 
ing  interested,  he  may  exert  himself  to  promote 
their  interest.  You  have  first  large  circles,  or 
clans;  as  commerce  increases,  the  connection  is 
confined  to  families.  By  degrees,  that  too  goes 
off,  as  having  become  unnecessary,  and  there  be¬ 
ing  few  opportunities  of  intercourse.  One  broth¬ 
er  is  a  merchant  in  the  city,  and  another  is  an 
officer  in  the  guards.  How  little  intercourse  can 
these  two  have!” 

I  argued  warmly  for  the  old  feudal  system.  Sir 
Alexander  opposed  it,  and  talked  of  the  pleasure 
of  seeing  all  men  free  and  independent.  John¬ 
son.  “I  agree  with  Mr.  Boswell  that  there  must 
be  a  high  satisfaction  in  being  a  feudal  Lord;  but 
we  are  to  consider,  that  we  ought  not  to  wish  to 
have  a  number  of  men  unhappy  for  the  satisfac¬ 
tion  of  one.  ’  ’ — I  maintained  that  numbers,  name¬ 
ly,  the  vassals  or  followers,  were  not  unhappy; 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


ig8 

for  that  there  was  a  reciprocal  satisfaction  be¬ 
tween  the  Lord  and  them:  he  being  kind  in  his 
authority  over  them;  they  being  respectful  and 
faithful  to  him. 

On  Thursday,  April  9,  I  called  on  him  to  beg 
he  would  go  and  dine  with  me  at  the  Mitre  tav¬ 
ern.  He  had  resolved  not  to  dine  at  all  this  day, 
I  know  not  for  what  reason;  and  I  was  so  un¬ 
willing  to  be  deprived  of  his  company,  that  I 
was  content  to  submit  to  suffer  a  want,  which 
was  at  first  somewhat  painful,  but  he  soon  made 
me  forget  it;  and  a  man  is  always  pleased  with 
himself  when  he  finds  his  intellectual  inclina¬ 
tions  predominate. 

He  observed,  that  to  reason  philosophically 
on  the  nature  of  prayer,  was  very  unprofitable. 

Talking  of  ghosts,  he  said,  he  knew  one  friend, 
who  was  an  honest  man  and  a  sensible  man, 
who  told  him  he  had  seen  a  ghost,  old  Mr.  Ed¬ 
ward  Cave,  the  printer  at  St.  John’s  Gate.  He 
said,  Mr.  Cave  did  not  like  to  talk  of  it,  and 
seemed  to  be  in  great  horrour  whenever  it  was 
mentioned.  Boswell.  “Pray,  Sir,  what  did  he 
say  was  the  appearance?”  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir, 
something  of  a  shadowy  being.” 

I  mentioned  witches,  and  asked  him  what  they 
properly  meant.  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  they  prop¬ 
erly  mean  those  who  make  use  of  the  aid  of  evil 
spirits.”  Boswell.  “There  is  no  doubt,  Sir,  a 
general  report  and  belief  of  their  having  exist¬ 
ed.”  Johnson.  “You  have  not  only  the  general 
report  and  belief,  but  you  have  many  voluntary 
solemn  confessions.”  He  did  not  affirm  anything 
positively  upon  a  subject  which  it  is  the  fashion 
of  the  times  to  laugh  at  as  a  matter  of  absurd 
credulity.  He  only  seemed  willing,  as  a  candid 
enquirer  after  truth,  however  strange  and  inex¬ 
plicable,  to  shew  that  he  understood  what  might 
be  urged  for  it.1 

On  Friday,  April  1  o,  I  dined  with  him  at  Gen¬ 
eral  Oglethorpe’s,  where  we  found  Dr.  Gold¬ 
smith. 

Armorial  bearings  having  been  mentioned, 
Johnson  said  they  were  as  ancient  as  the  siege  of 
Thebes,  which  he  proved  by  a  passage  in  one  of 
the  tragedies  of  Euripides. 

I  started  the  question  whether  duelling  was 
consistent  with  moral  duty.  The  brave  old  Gen¬ 
eral  fired  at  this,  and  said,  with  a  lofty  air,  “Un¬ 
doubtedly  a  man  has  a  right  to  defend  his  hon¬ 
our.”  Goldsmith,  (turning  to  me,)  “I  ask  you 
first,  Sir,  what  would  you  do  if  you  were  affront¬ 
ed?”  I  answered  I  should  thinkit  necessary  to  fight. 

^ee  this  curious  question  treated  by  him  with 
most  acute  ability,  Journal  of  a  Tour  to  the  Hebrides , 
3rd  edit.,  p.  33.  [Aug.  16.] 


1 1772 

“Why  then,  (replied  Goldsmith,)  that  solves  the 
question.”  Johnson.  “No,  Sir,  it  does  not  solve 
the  question.  It  does  not  follow  that  what  a  man 
would  do  is  therefore  right.”  I  said,  I  wished  to 
have  it  settled,  whether  duelling  was  contrary  to 
the  laws  of  Christianity.  Johnson  immediately 
entered  on  the  subject,  and  treated  it  in  a  mas¬ 
terly  manner;  and  so  far  as  I  have  been  able  to 
recollect,  his  thoughts  were  these:  “Sir,  as  men 
become  in  a  high  degree  refined,  various  causes 
of  offence  arise;  which  are  considered  to  be  of 
such  importance,  that  life  must  be  staked  to  atone 
for  them,  though  in  reality  they  are  not  so.  A 
body  that  has  received  a  very  fine  polish  may  be 
easily  hurt.  Before  men  arrive  at  this  artificial 
refinement,  if  one  tells  his  neighbour  he  lies,  his 
neighbour  tells  him  he  lies;  if  one  gives  his  neigh¬ 
bour  a  blow,  his  neighbour  gives  him  a  blow: 
but  in  a  state  of  highly  polished  society,  an  af¬ 
front  is  held  to  be  a  serious  injury.  It  must  there¬ 
fore  be  resented,  or  rather  a  duel  must  be  fought 
upon  it;  as  men  have  agreed  to  banish  from  their 
society  one  who  puts  up  with  an  affront  without 
fighting  a  duel.  Now,  Sir,  it  is  never  unlawful  to 
fight  in  self-defence.  He,  then,  who  fights  a  duel, 
does  not  fight  from  passion  against  his  antago¬ 
nist,  but  out  of  self-defence;  to  avert  the  stigma 
of  the  world,  and  to  prevent  himself  from  being 
driven  out  of  society.  I  could  wish  there  was  not 
that  superfluity  of  refinement;  but  while  such 
notions  prevail,  no  doubt  a  man  may  lawfully 
fight  a  duel.” 

Let  it  be  remembered,  that  this  justification 
is  applicable  only  to  the  person  who  receives  an 
affront.  All  mankind  must  condemn  the  aggres¬ 
sor. 

The  General  told  us,  that  when  he  was  a  very 
young  man,  I  think  only  fifteen,  serving  under 
Prince  Eugene  of  Savoy,  he  was  sitting  in  a  com¬ 
pany  at  table  with  a  Prince  of  Wirtemberg.  The 
Prince  took  up  a  glass  of  wine,  and,  by  a  fillip, 
made  some  of  it  fly  in  Oglethorpe’s  face.  Here 
was  a  nice  dilemma.  To  have  challenged  him  in¬ 
stantly,  might  have  fixed  a  quarrelsome  char¬ 
acter  upon  the  young  soldier:  to  have  taken  no 
notice  of  it  might  have  been  considered  as  cow¬ 
ardice.  Oglethorpe,  therefore,  keeping  his  eye 
upon  the  Prince,  and  smiling  all  the  time,  as  if 
he  took  what  his  Highness  had  done  in  jest,  said 
“ Mon  Prince , — ”  (I  forget  the  French  words  he 
used,  the  purport  however  was,)  “That’s  a  good 
joke;  but  we  do  it  much  better  in  England”;  and 
threw  a  whole  glass  of  wine  in  the  Prince’s  face. 
An  old  General  who  sat  by,  said,  “//  a  bienfait , 
mon  Prince ,  volts  Vavez  commence and  thus  all 
ended  in  good  humour. 


BOSWELL 


1772]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  199 


Dr.  Johnson  said,  “Pray,  General,  give  us  an 
account  of  the  siege  of  Belgrade.55  Upon  which 
the  General,  pouring  a  little  wine  upon  the  table, 
described  every  thing  with  a  wet  finger:  “Here  we 
were,  here  were  the  Turks,55  &c.  &c.  Johnson 
listened  with  the  closest  attention. 

A  question  was  started,  how  far  people  who 
disagree  in  a  capital  point  can  live  in  friendship 
together.  Johnson  said  they  might.  Goldsmith 
said  they  could  not,  as  they  had  not  the  idem 
velle  atque  idem  nolle — the  same  likings  and  the 
same  aversions.  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  you  must 
shun  the  subject  as  to  which  you  disagree.  For 
instance,  I  can  live  very  well  with  Burke:  I  love 
his  knowledge,  his  genius,  his  diffusion,  and  af¬ 
fluence  of  conversation;  but  I  would  not  talk  to 
him  of  the  Rockingham  party.55  Goldsmith. 
“But,  Sir,  when  people  live  together  who  have 
something  as  to  which  they  disagree,  and  which 
they  want  to  shun,  they  will  be  in  the  situation 
mentioned  in  the  story  of  Bluebeard:  cYou  may 
look  into  all  the  chambers  but  one.5  But  we  should 
have  the  greatest  inclination  to  look  into  that 
chamber,  to  talk  of  that  subject. 55  Johnson,  (with 
a  loud  voice,)  “Sir,  I  am  not  saying  that  you 
could  live  in  friendship  with  a  man  from  whom 
you  differ  as  to  some  point:  I  am  only  saying 
that  I  could  do  it.  You  put  me  in  mind  of  Sap¬ 
pho  in  Ovid.55 

Goldsmith  told  us,  that  he  was  now  busy  in 
writing  a  natural  history,  and,  that  he  might 
have  full  leisure  for  it,  he  had  taken  lodgings,  at 
a  farmer’s  house,  near  to  the  six  milestone,  on 
the  Edgeware  road,  and  had  carried  down  his 
books  in  two  returned  post-chaises.  Ke  said,  he 
believed  the  farmer’s  family  thought  him  an  odd 
character,  similar  to  that  in  which  The  Spectator 
appeared  to  his  landlady  and  her  children:  he 
was  The  Gentleman.  Mr.  Mickle,  the  translator  of 
The  Lusiad ,  and  I  went  to  visit  him  at  this  place 
a  few  days  afterwards.  He  was  not  at  home;  but 
having  a  curiosity  to  see  his  apartment,  we  went 
in  and  found  curious  scraps  of  descriptions  of 
animals,  scrawled  upon  the  wall  with  a  black 
lead  pencil. 

The  subject  of  ghosts  being  introduced,  John¬ 
son  repeated  what  he  had  told  me  of  a  friend  of 
his,  an  honest  man,  and  a  man  of  sense,  having 
asserted  to  him,  that  he  had  seen  an  apparition. 
Goldsmith  told  us,  he  was  assured  by  his  broth¬ 
er,  the  Reverend  Mr.  Goldsmith,  that  he  also 
had  seen  one.  General  Oglethorpe  told  us,  that 
Prendergast,  an  officer  in  the  Duke  of  Marlbor¬ 
ough’s  army,  had  mentioned  to  many  of  his 
friends,  that  he  should  die  on  a  particular  day. 
That  upon  that  day  a  battle  took  place  with  the 


French;  that  after  it  was  over,  and  Prendergast 
was  still  alive,  his  brother  officers,  while  they 
were  yet  in  the  field,  jestingly  asked  him,  where 
was  his  prophecy  now.  Prendergast  gravely  an¬ 
swered,  “I  shall  die,  notwithstanding  what  you 
see.”  Soon  afterwards,  there  came  a  shot  from  a 
French  battery,  to  which  the  orders  for  a  cessa¬ 
tion  of  arms  had  not  yet  reached,  and  he  was 
killed  upon  the  spot.  Colonel  Cecil,  who  took 
possession  of  his  effects,  found  in  his  pocket-book 
the  following  solemn  entry: 

[Here  the  date.]  “Dreamt — or - 1  Sir 

John  Friend  meets  me”:  (here  the  very  day  on 
which  he  was  killed,  was  mentioned.)  Prender¬ 
gast  had  been  connected  with  Sir  John  Friend, 
who  was  executed  for  high  treason.  General  Og¬ 
lethorpe  said,  he  was  with  Colonel  Cecil  when 
Pope  came  and  enquired  into  the  truth  of  this 
story,  which  made  a  great  noise  at  the  time,  and 
was  then  confirmed  by  the  Colonel. 

On  Saturday,  April  11,  he  appointed  me  to 
come  to  him  in  the  evening,  when  he  should  be 
at  leisure  to  give  me  some  assistance  for  the  de¬ 
fence  of  Hastie,  the  schoolmaster  of  Campbell- 
town,  for  whom  I  was  to  appear  in  the  House  of 
Lords.  When  I  came,  I  found  him  unwilling  to 
exert  himself.  I  pressed  him  to  write  down  his 
thoughts  upon  the  subject.  He  said,  “There’s  no 
occasion  for  my  writing.  I’ll  talk  to  you.”  He 
was,  however,  at  last  prevailed  on  to  dictate  to 
me,  while  I  wrote  as  follows: 

“The  charge  is,  that  he  has  used  immoderate 
and  cruel  correction.  Correction,  in  itself,  is  not 
cruel;  children,  being  not  reasonable,  can  be 
governed  only  by  fear.  To  impress  this  fear,  is 
therefore  one  of  the  first  duties  of  those  who  have 
the  care  of  children.  It  is  the  duty  of  a  parent; 
and  has  never  been  thought  inconsistent  with 
parental  tenderness.  It  is  the  duty  of  a  master, 
who  is  in  his  highest  exaltation  when  he  is  loco 
parentis.  Yet,  as  good  things  become  evil  by  ex¬ 
cess,  correction,  by  being  immoderate,  may  be¬ 
come  cruel.  But  when  is  correction  immoderate? 
When  it  is  more  frequent  or  more  severe  than  is 
required  ad  monendum  et  docendum ,  for  reforma¬ 
tion  and  instruction.  No  severity  is  cruel  which 
obstinacy  makes  necessary;  for  the  greatest  cru¬ 
elty  would  be  to  desist,  and  leave  the  scholar  too 
careless  for  instruction,  and  too  much  hardened 
for  reproof.  Locke,  in  his  treatise  of  Education, 
mentions  a  mother,  with  applause,  who  whipped 

xHere  was  a  blank,  which  may  be  filled  up  thus: 
— “ was  told  by  an  apparition”; — the  writer  being 
probably  uncertain  whether  he  was  asleep  or  awake, 
when  his  mind  was  impressed  with  the  solemn  pre¬ 
sentiment  with  which  the  fact  afterwards  happened 
so  wonderfully  to  correspond. 


200 

an  infant  eight  times  before  she  had  subdued  it; 
for  had  she  stopped  at  the  seventh  act  of  correc¬ 
tion,  her  daughter,  says  he,  would  have  been  ru¬ 
ined.  The  degrees  of  obstinacy  in  young  minds 
are  very  different;  as  different  must  be  the  de¬ 
grees  of  persevering  severity.  A  stubborn  schol¬ 
ar  must  be  corrected  till  he  is  subdued.  The  dis¬ 
cipline  of  a  school  is  military.  There  must  be 
either  unbounded  licence  or  absolute  authority. 
The  master,  who  punishes,  not  only  consults  the 
future  happiness  of  him  who  is  the  immediate 
subject  of  correction;  but  he  propagates  obe¬ 
dience  through  the  whole  school;  and  establishes 
regularity  by  exemplary  justice.  The  victorious 
obstinacy  of  a  single  boy  would  make  his  future 
endeavours  of  reformation  or  instruction  totally 
ineffectual.  Obstinacy,  therefore,  must  never  be 
victorious.  Yet,  it  is  well  known,  that  there  some¬ 
times  occurs  a  sullen  and  hardy  resolution,  that 
laughs  at  all  common  punishment,  and  bids  de¬ 
fiance  to  all  common  degrees  of  pain.  Correc¬ 
tion  must  be  proportioned  to  occasions.  The  flex¬ 
ible  will  be  reformed  by  gentle  discipline,  and 
the  refractory  must  be  subdued  by  harsher  meth¬ 
ods.  The  degrees  of  scholastick,  as  of  military 
punishment,  no  stated  rules  can  ascertain.  It 
must  be  enforced  till  it  overpowers  temptation; 
till  stubbornness  becomes  flexible,  and  perverse¬ 
ness  regular.  Custom  and  reason  have,  indeed, 
set  some  bounds  to  scholastick  penalties.  The 
schoolmaster  inflicts  no  capital  punishments;  nor 
enforces  his  edicts  by  either  death  or  mutilation. 
The  civil  law  has  wisely  determined,  that  a  mas¬ 
ter  who  strikes  at  a  scholar’s  eye  shall  be  consid¬ 
ered  as  criminal.  But  punishments,  however  se¬ 
vere,  that  produce  no  lasting  evil,  may  be  just 
and  reasonable,  because  they  may  be  necessary. 
Such  have  been  the  punishments  used  by  the  re¬ 
spondent.  No  scholar  has  gone  from  him  either 
blind  or  lame,  or  with  any  of  his  limbs  or  pow¬ 
ers  injured  or  impaired.  They  were  irregular,  and 
he  punished  them:  they  were  obstinate,  and  he 
enforced  his  punishment.  But,  however  provoked, 
he  never  exceeded  the  limits  of  moderation, 
for  he  inflicted  nothing  beyond  present  pain; 
and  how  much  of  that  was  required,  no  man  is 
so  little  able  to  determine  as  those  who  have  de¬ 
termined  against  him; — the  parents  of  the  of¬ 
fenders.  It  has  been  said,  that  he  used  unprece¬ 
dented  and  improper  instruments  of  correction. 
Of  this  accusation  the  meaning  is  not  very  easy 
to  be  found.  No  instrument  of  correction  is  more 
proper  than  another,  but  as  it  is  better  adapted 
to  produce  present  pain  without  lasting  mischief. 
Whatever  were  his  instruments,  no  lasting  mis¬ 
chief  has  ensued;  and  therefore,  however  unus- 


[  1772 

ual,  in  hands  so  cautious  they  were  proper.  It 
has  been  objected,  that  the  respondent  admits 
the  charge  of  cruelty,  by  producing  no  evidence 
to  confute  it.  Let  it  be  considered,  that  his  schol¬ 
ars  are  either  dispersed  at  large  in  the  world,  or 
continue  to  inhabit  the  place  in  which  they  were 
bred.  Those  who  are  dispersed  cannot  be  found; 
those  who  remain  are  the  sons  of  his  persecutors, 
and  are  not  likely  to  support  a  man  to  whom 
their  fathers  are  enemies.  If  it  be  supposed  that 
the  enmity  of  their  fathers  proves  the  justice  of 
the  charge,  it  must  be  considered  how  often  ex¬ 
perience  shews  us,  that  men  who  are  angry  on 
one  ground  will  accuse  on  another;  with  how 
little  kindness,  in  a  town  of  low  trade,  a  man  who 
lives  by  learning  is  regarded;  and  how  implicit¬ 
ly,  where  the  inhabitants  are  not  very  rich,  a 
rich  man  is  hearkened  to  and  followed.  In  a 
place  like  Campbelltown,  it  is  easy  for  one  of  the 
principal  inhabitants  to  make  a  party.  It  is  easy 
for  that  party  to  heat  themselves  with  imagin¬ 
ary  grievances.  It  is  easy  for  them  to  oppress  a 
man  poorer  than  themselves;  and  natural  to  as¬ 
sert  the  dignity  of  riches,  by  persisting  in  oppres¬ 
sion.  The  argument  which  attempts  to  prove  the 
impropriety  of  restoring  him  to  the  school,  by 
alledging  that  he  has  lost  the  confidence  of  the 
people,  is  not  the  subject  of  juridical  considera¬ 
tion;  for  he  is  to  suffer,  if  he  must  suffer,  not  for 
their  judgement,  but  for  his  own  actions.  It  may 
be  convenient  for  them  to  have  another  master; 
but  it  is  a  convenience  of  their  own  making.  It 
would  be  likewise  convenient  for  him  to  find  an¬ 
other  school;  but  this  convenience  he  cannot  ob¬ 
tain.  The  question  is  not  what  is  now  conveni¬ 
ent,  but  what  is  generally  right.  If  the  people  of 
Campbelltown  be  distressed  by  the  restoration 
of  the  respondent,  they  are  distressed  only  by 
their  own  fault;  by  turbulent  passions  and  un¬ 
reasonable  desires;  by  tyranny,  which  law  has 
defeated,  and  by  malice,  which  virtue  has  sur¬ 
mounted.” 

“This,  Sir,  (said  he,)  you  are  to  turn  in  your 
mind,  and  make  the  best  use  of  it  you  can  in 
your  speech.” 

Of  our  friend,  Goldsmith,  he  said,  “Sir,  he  is 
so  much  afraid  of  being  unnoticed,  that  he  often 
talks  merely  lest  you  should  forget  that  he  is  in 
the  company.”  Boswell.  “Yes,  he  stands  for¬ 
ward.”  Johnson.  “True,  Sir;  but  if  a  man  is  to 
stand  forward,  he  should  wish  to  do  it  not  in  an 
aukward  posture,  not  in  rags,  not  so  as  that  he 
shall  only  be  exposed  to  ridicule.”  Boswell.  “For 
my  part,  I  like  very  well  to  hear  honest  Gold¬ 
smith  talk  away  carelessly.”  Johnson.  “Why  yes, 
Sir;  but  he  should  not  like  to  hear  himself.” 


BOSWELL 


201 


1772]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


On  Tuesday,  April  14,  the  decree  of  the  Court 
of  Session  in  the  schoolmaster’s  cause  was  re¬ 
versed  in  the  House  of  Lords,  after  a  very  elo¬ 
quent  speech  by  Lord  Mansfield,  who  shewed 
himself  an  adept  in  school  discipline,  but  I 
thought  was  too  rigorous  towards  my  client.  On 
the  evening  of  the  next  day  I  supped  with  Dr. 
Johnson,  at  the  Crown  and  Anchor  tavern,  in 
the  Strand,  in  company  with  Mr.  Langton  and 
his  brother-in-law,  Lord  Binning.  I  repeated  a 
sentence  of  Lord  Mansfield’s  speech,  of  which, 
by  the  aid  of  Mr.  Longlands,  the  solicitor  on  the 
other  side,  who  obligingly  allowed  me  to  com¬ 
pare  his  note  with  my  own,  I  have  a  full  copy: 
“My  Lords,  severity  is  not  the  way  to  govern 
either  boys  or  men.”  “Nay,  (said  Johnson,)  it  is 
the  way  Xo  govern  them.  I  know  not  whether  it  be 
the  way  to  mend  them.” 

I  talked  of  the  recent  expulsion  of  six  students 
from  the  University  of  Oxford,  who  were  meth- 
odists  and  would  not  desist  from  publickly  pray¬ 
ing  and  exhorting.  Johnson.  “Sir,  that  expulsion 
was  extremely  just  and  proper.  What  have  they 
to  do  at  an  University  who  are  not  willing  to  be 
taught,  but  will  presume  to  teach?  Where  is  re¬ 
ligion  to  be  learnt  but  at  an  University?  Sir, 
they  were  examined,  and  found  to  be  mighty  ig¬ 
norant  fellows.”  Boswell.  “But,  was  it  not  hard, 
Sir,  to  expel  them,  for  I  am  told  they  were  good 
beings?”  Johnson.  “I  believe  they  might  be  good 
beings;  but  they  were  not  fit  to  be  in  the  Uni¬ 
versity  of  Oxford.  A  cow  is  a  very  good  animal 
in  the  field;  but  we  turn  her  out  of  a  garden.” 
Lord  Elibank  used  to  repeat  this  as  an  illustra¬ 
tion  uncommonly  happy. 

Desirous  of  calling  Johnson  forth  to  talk,  and 
exercise  his  wit,  though  I  should  myself  be  the 
object  of  it,  I  resolutely  ventured  to  undertake 
the  defence  of  convivial  indulgence  in  wine, 
though  he  was  not  to-night  in  the  most  genial 
humour.  After  urging  the  common  plausible  top- 
icks,  I  at  last  had  recourse  to  the  maxim,  in  vino 
veritas ,  a  man  who  is  well  warmed  with  wine  will 
speak  truth.  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  that  may  be 
an  argument  for  drinking,  if  you  suppose  men 
in  general  to  be  liars.  But,  Sir,  I  would  not  keep 
company  with  a  fellow,  who  lyes  as  long  as  he  is 
sober,  and  whom  you  must  make  drunk  before 
you  can  get  a  word  of  truth  out  of  him.” 

Mr.  Langton  told  us  he  was  about  to  establish 
a  school  upon  his  estate,  but  it  had  been  sug¬ 
gested  to  him,  that  it  might  have  a  tendency  to 
make  the  people  less  industrious.  Johnson.  “No, 
Sir.  While  learning  to  read  and  write  is  a  dis¬ 
tinction,  the  few  who  have  that  distinction  may 
be  the  less  inclined  to  work ;  but  when  every  body 


learns  to  read  and  write,  it  is  no  longer  a  dis¬ 
tinction.  A  man  who  has  a  laced  waistcoat  is  too 
fine  a  man  to  work;  but  if  every  body  had  laced 
waistcoats,  we  should  have  people  working  in 
laced  waistcoats.  There  are  no  people  whatever 
more  industrious,  none  who  work  more,  than 
our  manufacturers;  yet  they  have  all  learnt  to 
read  and  write.  Sir,  you  must  not  neglect  doing 
a  thing  immediately  good,  from  fear  of  remote 
evil; — from  fear  of  its  being  abused.  A  man  who 
has  candles  may  sit  up  too  late,  which  he  would 
not  do  if  he  had  not  candles;  but  nobody  will 
deny  that  the  art  of  making  candles,  by  which 
light  is  continued  to  us  beyond  the  time  that  the 
sun  gives  us  light,  is  a  valuable  art,  and  ought  to 
be  preserved.”  Boswell.  “But,  Sir,  would  it  not 
be  better  to  follow  Nature;  and  go  to  bed  and 
rise  just  as  nature  gives  us  light  or  withholds 
it?”  Johnson.  “No,  Sir;  for  then  we  should  have 
no  kind  of  equality  in  the  partition  of  our  time 
between  sleeping  and  waking.  It  would  be  very 
different  in  different  seasons  and  in  different 
places.  In  some  of  the  northern  parts  of  Scotland 
how  little  light  is  there  in  the  depth  of  winter !” 

We  talked  of  Tacitus,  and  I  hazarded  an  opin¬ 
ion,  that  with  all  his  merit  for  penetration, 
shrewdness  of  judgement,  and  terseness  of  ex¬ 
pression,  he  was  too  compact,  too  much  broken 
into  hints,  as  it  were,  and  therefore  too  difficult 
to  be  understood.  To  my  great  satisfaction,  Dr. 
Johnson  sanctioned  this  opinion.  “Tacitus,  Sir, 
seems  to  me  rather  to  have  made  notes  for  an 
historical  work,  than  to  have  written  a  history.”1 

At  this  time  it  appears  from  his  Prayers  and 
Meditations ,  that  he  had  been  more  than  com¬ 
monly  diligent  in  religious  duties,  particularly 
in  reading  the  Holy  Scriptures.  It  was  Passion 
Week,  that  solemn  season  which  the  Christian 
world  has  appropriated  to  the  commemoration 
of  the  mysteries  of  our  redemption,  and  during 
which,  whatever  embers  of  religion  are  in  our 
breasts,  will  be  kindled  into  pious  warmth. 

I  paid  him  short  visits  both  on  Friday  and 
Saturday,  and  seeing  his  large  folio  Greek  Test¬ 
ament  before  him,  beheld  him  with  a  reverential 
awe,  and  would  not  intrude  upon  his  time.  While 
he  was  thus  employed  to  such  good  purpose, 
and  while  his  friends  in  their  intercourse  with 
him  constantly  found  a  vigorous  intellect  and  a 
lively  imagination,  it  is  melancholy  to  read  in 
his  private  register,  “My  mind  is  unsettled  and 

xIt  is  remarkable,  that  Lord  Monboddo,  whom, 
on  account  of  his  resembling  Dr.  Johnson  in  some 
particulars,  Foote  called  an  Elzevir  edition  of  him, 
has,  by  coincidence,  made  the  very  same  remark. 
Origin  and  Progress  of  Language,  vol.  iii,  2nd  edit.,  p. 
219. 


202 


BOSWELL 


my  memory  confused.  I  have  of  late  turned  my 
thoughts  with  a  very  useless  earnestness  upon 
past  incidents.  I  have  yet  got  no  command  over 
my  thoughts;  an  unpleasing  incident  is  almost 
certain  to  hinder  my  rest.”2  What  philosophick 
heroism  was  it  in  him  to  appear  with  such  man¬ 
ly  fortitude  to  the  world,  while  he  was  inwardly 
so  distressed!  We  may  surely  believe  that  the 
mysterious  principle  of  being  “made  perfect 
through  suffering”  was  to  be  strongly  exempli¬ 
fied  in  him. 

On  Sunday,  April  19,  being  Easter-day,  Gen¬ 
eral  Paoli  and  I  paid  him  a  visit  before  dinner. 
We  talked  of  the  notion  that  blind  persons  can 
distinguish  colours  by  the  touch.  Johnson  said, 
that  Professor  Sanderson  mentions  his  having  at¬ 
tempted  to  do  it,  but  that  he  found  he  was  aim¬ 
ing  at  an  impossibility;  that  to  be  sure  a  differ¬ 
ence  in  the  surface  makes  the  difference  of  col¬ 
ours;  but  that  difference  is  so  fine,  that  it  is  not 
sensible  to  the  touch.  The  General  mentioned 
jugglers  and  fraudulent  gamesters,  who  could 
know  cards  by  the  touch.  Dr.  Johnson  said,  “the 
cards  used  by  such  persons  must  be  less  polished 
than  ours  commonly  are.” 

We  talked  of  sounds.  The  General  said,  there 
was  no  beauty  in  a  simple  sound,  but  only  in  an 
harmonious  composition  of  sounds.  I  presumed 
to  differ  from  this  opinion,  and  mentioned  the 
soft  and  sweet  sound  of  a  fine  woman’s  voice. 
Johnson.  “No,  Sir,  if  a  serpent  or  a  toad  uttered 
it,  you  would  think  it  ugly.”  Boswell.  “So  you 
would  think,  Sir,  were  a  beautiful  tune  to  be  ut¬ 
tered  by  one  of  those  animals.”  Johnson.  “No, 
Sir,  it  would  be  admired.  We  have  seen  fine  fid¬ 
dlers  whom  we  liked  as  little  as  toads,”  (laugh- 
ing-) 

Talking  on  the  subject  of  taste  in  the  arts,  he 
said,  that  difference  of  taste  was,  in  truth,  dif¬ 
ference  of  skill.  Boswell.  “But,  Sir,  is  there  not 
a  quality  called  taste,  which  consists  merely  in 
perception  or  in  liking?  For  instance,  we  find 
people  differ  much  as  to  what  is  the  best  style  of 
English  composition.  Some  think  Swift’s  the  best; 
others  prefer  a  fuller  and  grander  way  of  writ¬ 
ing.”  Johnson.  “Sir,  you  must  first  define  what 
you  mean  by  style,  before  you  can  judge  who 
has  a  good  taste  in  style,  and  who  has  a  bad.  The 
two  classes  of  persons  whom  you  have  mentioned 
don’t  differ  as  to  good  and  bad.  They  both  agree 
that  Swift  has  a  good  neat  style;  but  one  loves  a 
neat  style,  another  loves  a  style  of  more  splen¬ 
dour.  In  like  manner,  one  loves  a  plain  coat,  an¬ 
other  loves  a  laced  coat;  but  neither  will  deny 
that  each  is  good  in  its  kind.” 

2 Prayers  and  Meditations ,  p.  1 1 1 . 


[  J772 

While  I  remained  in  London  this  spring,  I 
was  with  him  at  several  other  times,  both  by 
himself  and  in  company.  I  dined  with  him  one 
day  at  the  Crown  and  Anchor  tavern,  in  the 
Strand,  with  Lord  Elibank,  Mr.  Langton,  and 
Dr.  Vansittart  of  Oxford.  Without  specifying 
each  particular  day,  I  have  preserved  the  fol¬ 
lowing  memorable  things. 

I  regretted  the  reflection  in  his  Preface  to 
Shakspeare  against  Garrick,  to  whom  we  can¬ 
not  but  apply  the  following  passage:  “I  collated 
such  copies  as  I  could  procure,  and  wished  for 
more,  but  have  not  found  the  collectors  of  these 
rarities  very  communicative.”  I  told  him,  that 
Garrick  had  complained  to  me  of  it,  and  had 
vindicated  himself  by  assuring  me,  that  Johnson 
was  made  welcome  to  the  full  use  of  his  collec¬ 
tion,  and  that  he  left  the  key  of  it  with  a  servant, 
with  orders  to  have  a  fire  and  every  convenience 
for  him.  I  found  Johnson’s  notion  was,  that  Gar¬ 
rick  wanted  to  be  courted  for  them,  and  that, 
on  the  contrary,  Garrick  should  have  courted 
him,  and  sent  him  the  plays  of  his  own  accord. 
But,  indeed,  considering  the  slovenly  and  care¬ 
less  manner  in  which  books  were  treated  by 
Johnson,  it  could  not  be  expected  that  scarce 
and  valuable  editions  should  have  been  lent  to 
him. 

A  gentleman  having  to  some  of  the  usual  ar¬ 
guments  for  drinking  added  this:  “You  know, 
Sir,  drinking  drives  away  care,  and  makes  us 
forget  whatever  is  disagreeable.  Would  not  you 
allow  a  man  to  drink  for  that  reason?”  John¬ 
son.  “Yes,  Sir,  if  he  sat  next  you” 

I  expressed  a  liking  for  Mr.  Francis  Osborne’s 
works,  and  asked  him  what  he  thought  of  that 
writer.  He  answered,  “A  conceited  fellow.  Were 
a  man  to  write  so  now,  the  boys  would  throw 
stones  at  him.”  He,  however,  did  not  alter  my 
opinion  of  a  favourite  authour,  to  whom  I  was 
first  directed  by  his  being  quoted  in  The  Spectat¬ 
or  ,  and  in  whom  I  have  found  much  shrewd  and 
lively  sense,  expressed  indeed  on  a  style  somewhat 
quaint,  which,  however,  I  do  not  dislike.  His 
book  has  an  air  of  originality.  We  figure  to  our¬ 
selves  an  ancient  gentleman  talking  to  us. 

When  one  of  his  friends  endeavoured  to  main¬ 
tain  that  a  country  gentleman  might  contrive  to 
pass  his  life  very  agreeably,  “Sir,  (said  he,)  you 
cannot  give  me  an  instance  of  any  man  who  is 
permitted  to  lay  out  his  own  time,  contriving 
not  to  have  tedious  hours.”  This  observation, 
however,  is  equally  applicable  to  gentlemen  who 
live  in  cities,  and  are  of  no  profession. 

He  said,  “There  is  no  permanent  national 
character;  it  varies  according  to  circumstances. 


1772  ] 

Alexander  the  Great  swept  India:  now  the 
Turks  sweep  Greece.” 

A  learned  gentleman  who  in  the  course  of 
conversation  wished  to  inform  us  of  this  simple 
fact,  that  the  Counsel  upon  the  circuit  at  Shrews¬ 
bury  were  much  bitten  by  fleas,  took,  I  suppose, 
seven  or  eight  minutes  in  relating  it  circumstan¬ 
tially.  He  in  a  plenitude  of  phrase  told  us,  that 
large  bales  of  woollen  cloth  were  lodged  in  the 
town-hall; — that  by  reason  of  this,  fleas  nestled 
there  in  prodigious  numbers;  that  the  lodgings 
of  the  counsel  were  near  to  the  town-hall; — and 
that  those  little  animals  moved  from  place  to 
place  with  wonderful  agility.  Johnson  sat  in  great 
impatience  till  the  gentleman  had  finished  his 
tedious  narrative,  and  then  burst  out  (playfully 
however),  “It  is  a  pity,  Sir,  that  you  have  not 
seen  a  lion;  for  a  flea  has  taken  you  such  a  time, 
that  a  lion  must  have  served  you  a  twelve- 
month.”1 

He  would  not  allow  Scotland  to  derive  any 
credit  from  Lord  Mansfield;  for  he  was  educat¬ 
ed  in  England.  “Much  (said  he,)  may  be  made 
of  a  Scotchman,  if  he  be  caught  young.” 

Talking  of  a  modern  historian  and  a  modern 
moralist,  he  said,  “There  is  more  thought  in  the 
moralist  than  in  the  historian.  There  is  but  a 
shallow  stream  of  thought  in  history.”  Boswell. 
“But  surely,  Sir,  an  historian  has  reflection.” 
Johnson.  “Why  yes,  Sir;  and  so  has  a  cat  when 
she  catches  a  mouse  for  her  kitten.  But  she  can¬ 
not  write  like  *******;  neither  can  ******” 

He  said,  “I  am  very  unwilling  to  read  the  man¬ 
uscripts  of  authours,  and  give  them  my  opinion. 
If  the  authours  who  apply  to  me  have  money,  I 
bid  them  boldly  print  without  a  name;  if  they 
have  written  in  order  to  get  money,  I  tell  them 
to  go  to  the  booksellers,  and  make  the  best  bar¬ 
gain  they  can.”  Boswell.  “But,  Sir,  if  a  book¬ 
seller  should  bring  you  a  manuscript  to  look  at?” 
Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  I  would  desire  the  book¬ 
seller  to  take  it  away.” 

I  mentioned  a  friend  of  mine  who  had  resided 
long  in  Spain,  and  was  unwilling  to  return  to 
Britain.  Johnson.  “Sir,  he  is  attached  to  some 
woman.”  Boswell.  “I  rather  believe,  Sir,  it  is 
the  fine  climate  which  keeps  him  there.”  John¬ 
son.  “Nay,  Sir,  how  can  you  talk  so?  What  is 
climate  to  happiness?  Place  me  in  the  heart  of 
Asia,  should  I  not  be  exiled?  What  proportion 
does  climate  bear  to  the  complex  system  of  hu¬ 
man  life?  You  may  advise  me  to  go  to  live  at  Bo¬ 
logna  to  eat  sausages.  The  sausages  there  are  the 

1Mrs.  Piozzi,  to  whom  I  told  this  anecdote,  has 
related  it,  as  if  the  gentleman  had  given  “the  nat¬ 
ural  history  of  the  mouse J”  Anec .  p.  191. 


203 

best  in  the  world;  they  lose  much  by  being  car¬ 
ried.” 

On  Saturday,  May  9,  Mr.  Dempster  and  I  had 
agreed  to  dine  by  ourselves  at  the  British  Coffee¬ 
house.  Johnson,  on  whom  I  happened  to  call  in 
the  morning,  said  he  would  join  us,  which  he  did, 
and  we  spent  a  very  agreeable  day,  though  I 
recollect  but  little  of  what  passed. 

He  said,  “Walpole  was  a  minister  given  by 
the  King  to  the  people:  Pitt  was  a  minister  giv¬ 
en  by  the  people  to  the  King, — as  an  adjunct.” 

“The  misfortune  of  Goldsmith  in  conversa¬ 
tion  is  this:  he  goes  on  without  knowing  how  he 
is  to  get  off.  His  genius  is  great,  but  his  knowledge 
is  small.  As  they  say  of  a  generous  man,  it  is  a 
pity  he  is  not  rich,  we  may  say  of  Goldsmith,  it 
is  a  pity  he  is  not  knowing.  He  would  not  keep 
his  knowledge  to  himself.” 

Before  leaving  London  this  year,  I  consulted 
him  upon  a  question  purely  of  Scotch  law.  It  was 
held  of  old,  and  continued  for  a  long  period,  to 
be  an  established  principle  in  that  law,  that  who¬ 
ever  intermeddled  with  the  effects  of  a  person 
deceased,  without  the  interposition  of  legal  au¬ 
thority  to  guard  against  embezzlement,  should 
be  subjected  to  pay  all  the  debts  of  the  deceased, 
as  having  been  guilty  of  what  was  technically 
called  vicious  intromission.  The  Court  of  Session 
had  gradually  relaxed  the  strictness  of  this  prin¬ 
ciple,  where  the  interference  proved  had  been 
inconsiderable.  In  a  case2  which  came  before 
that  Court  the  preceding  winter,  I  had  laboured 
to  persuade  the  Judges  to  return  to  the  ancient 
law.  It  was  my  own  sincere  opinion,  that  they 
ought  to  adhere  to  it;  but  I  had  exhausted  all 
my  powers  of  reasoning  in  vain.  Johnson  thought 
as  I  did;  and  in  order  to  assist  me  in  my  applica¬ 
tion  to  the  Court  for  a  revision  and  alteration  of 
the  judgement,  he  dictated  to  me  the  following 
argument: 

“This,  we  are  told,  is  a  law  which  has  its  force 
only  from  the  long  practice  of  the  Court:  and 
may,  therefore,  be  suspended  or  modified  as  the 
Court  shall  think  proper. 

“Concerning  the  power  of  the  Court  to  make 
or  to  suspend  a  law,  we  have  no  intention  to  in¬ 
quire.  It  is  sufficient  for  our  purpose  that  every 
just  law  is  dictated  by  reason;  and  that  the  prac¬ 
tice  of  every  legal  Court  is  regulated  by  equity. 
It  is  the  quality  of  reason  to  be  invariable  and 
constant;  and  of  equity,  to  give  to  one  man  what, 
in  the  same  case,  is  given  to  another.  The  ad¬ 
vantage  which  humanity  derives  from  law  is  this: 
that  the  law  gives  every  man  a  rule  of  action, 
and  prescribes  a  mode  of  conduct  which  shall 

2 Wilson  against  Smith  and  Armour. 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


204 

entitle  him  to  the  support  and  protection  of  so¬ 
ciety.  That  the  law  may  be  a  rule  of  action,  it  is 
necessary  that  it  be  known;  it  is  necessary  that  it 
be  permanent  and  stable.  The  law  is  the  meas¬ 
ure  of  civil  right;  but  if  the  measure  be  change¬ 
able,  the  extent  of  the  thing  measured  never  can 
be  settled. 

“To  permit  a  law  to  be  modified  at  discretion, 
is  to  leave  the  community  without  law.  It  is  to 
withdraw  the  direction  of  that  publick  wisdom, 
by  which  the  deficiencies  of  private  understand¬ 
ing  are  to  be  supplied.  It  is  to  suffer  the  rash  and 
ignorant  to  act  at  discretion,  and  then  to  depend 
for  the  legality  of  that  action  on  the  sentence  of 
the  Judge.  He  that  is  thus  governed,  lives  not  by 
law,  but  by  opinion:  not  by  a  certain  rule  to 
which  he  can  apply  his  intention  before  he  acts, 
but  by  an  uncertain  and  variable  opinion,  which 
he  can  never  know  but  after  he  has  committed 
the  act  on  which  that  opinion  shall  be  passed. 
He  lives  by  a  law,  (if  a  law  it  be,)  which  he  can 
never  know  before  he  has  offended  it.  To  this 
case  may  be  justly  applied  that  important  prin¬ 
ciple,  miser  a  est  servitus  ubijus  est  aut  incognitum  aut 
vagum.  If  Intromission  be  not  criminal  till  it  ex¬ 
ceeds  a  certain  point,  and  that  point  be  unsettled, 
and  consequently  different  in  different  minds, 
the  right  of  Intromission,  and  the  right  of  the 
Creditor  arising  from  it,  are  all  jura  vaga ,  and, 
by  consequence,  are  jura  incognita ;  and  the  result 
can  be  no  other  than  a  misera  servitus ,  an  uncer¬ 
tainty  concerning  the  event  of  action,  a  servile 
dependence  on  private  opinion. 

“It  may  be  urged,  and  with  great  plausibili¬ 
ty,  that  there  may  be  Intromission  without  fraud ; 
which,  however  true,  will  by  no  means  justify  an 
occasional  and  arbitrary  relaxation  of  the  law. 
The  end  of  law  is  protection  as  well  as  venge¬ 
ance.  Indeed,  vengeance  is  never  used  but  to 
strengthen  protection.  That  society  only  is  well 
governed,  where  life  is  freed  from  danger  and 
from  suspicion;  where  possession  is  so  sheltered 
by  salutary  prohibitions,  that  violation  is  pre¬ 
vented  more  frequently  than  punished.  Such  a 
prohibition  was  this,  while  it  operated  with  its 
original  force.  The  creditor  of  the  deceased  was 
not  only  without  loss  but  without  fear.  He  was 
not  to  seek  a  remedy  for  an  injury  suffered;  for 
injury  was  warded  off. 

“As  the  law  has  been  sometimes  administered, 
it  lays  us  open  to  wounds,  because  it  is  imagined 
to  have  the  power  of  healing.  To  punish  fraud 
when  it  is  detected,  is  the  proper  act  of  vindic¬ 
tive  justice;  but  to  prevent  frauds,  and  make 
punishment  unnecessary,  is  the  great  employ¬ 
ment  of  legislative  wisdom.  To  permit  Intromis- 


[  1772 

sion,  and  to  punish  fraud,  is  to  make  law  no  bet¬ 
ter  than  a  pitfall. To  tread  upon  the  brink  is  safe; 
but  to  come  a  step  further  is  destruction.  But, 
surely,  it  is  better  to  enclose  the  gulf,  and  hinder 
all  access,  than  by  encouraging  us  to  advance  a 
little,  to  entice  us  afterwards  a  little  further,  and 
let  us  perceive  our  folly  only  by  our  destruction. 

“As  law  supplies  the  weak  with  adventitious 
strength,  it  likewise  enlightens  the  ignorant  with 
extrinsick  understanding.  Law  teaches  us  to  know 
when  we  commit  injury,  and  when  we  suffer  it. 
It  fixes  certain  marks  upon  actions,  by  which  we 
are  admonished  to  do  or  to  forbear  them.  Quisibi 
bene  temperat  in  licitis,  says  one  of  the  fathers,  nun - 
quam  cadet  in  illicita.  He  who  never  intromits  at  all, 
will  never  intromit  with  fraudulent  intentions. 

“The  relaxation  of  the  law  against  vicious  in¬ 
tromission  has  been  very  favourably  represent¬ 
ed  by  a  great  master  of  jurisprudence,1  whose 
words  have  been  exhibited  with  unnecessary 
pomp,  and  seem  to  be  considered  as  irresistibly 
decisive.  The  great  moment  of  his  authority 
makes  it  necessary  to  examine  his  position.  ‘Some 
ages  ago,  (says  he,)  before  the  ferocity  of  the  in¬ 
habitants  of  this  part  of  the  island  was  subdued, 
the  utmost  severity  of  the  civil  law  was  neces¬ 
sary,  to  restrain  individuals  from  plundering 
each  other.  Thus,  the  man  who  intermeddled 
irregularly  with  the  moveables  of  a  person  de¬ 
ceased,  was  subjected  to  all  the  debts  of  the  de¬ 
ceased  without  limitation.  This  makes  a  branch 
of  the  law  of  Scotland,  known  by  the  name  of 
vicious  intromission;  and  so  rigidly  was  this  regu¬ 
lation  applied  in  our  Courts  of  Law,  that  the 
most  trifling  moveable  abstracted  malafide ,  sub¬ 
jected  the  intermeddler  to  the  foregoing  conse¬ 
quences,  which  proved  in  many  instances  a  most 
rigorous  punishment.  But  this  severity  was  nec¬ 
essary,  in  order  to  subdue  the  undisciplined  na¬ 
ture  of  our  people.  It  is  extremely  remarkable, 
that  in  proportion  to  our  improvement  in  man¬ 
ners,  this  regulation  has  been  gradually  softened, 
and  applied  by  our  sovereign  Court  with  a 
sparing  hand.’ 

“I  find  myself  under  a  necessity  of  observing, 
that  this  learned  and  judicious  writer  has  not 
accurately  distinguished  the  deficiencies  and  de¬ 
mands  of  the  different  conditions  of  human  life, 
which,  from  a  degree  of  savageness  and  inde¬ 
pendence,  in  which  all  laws  are  vain,  passes  or 
may  pass,  by  innumerable  gradations,  to  a  state 
of  reciprocal  benignity,  in  which  laws  shall  be 
no  longer  necessary.  Men  are  first  wild  and  un¬ 
social,  living  each  man  to  himself,  taking  from 
the  weak,  and  losing  to  the  strong.  In  their  first 

Tord  Kames,  in  his  Historical  Law  Tracts, 


BOSWELL 


1772  ]  LIFE  OF 

coalitions  of  society,  much  of  this  original  sav¬ 
ageness  is  retained.  Of  general  happiness,  the 
product  of  general  confidence,  there  is  yet  no 
thought.  Men  continue  to  prosecute  their  own 
advantages  by  the  nearest  way;  and  the  utmost 
severity  of  the  civil  law  is  necessary  to  restrain 
individuals  from  plundering  each  other.  The  re¬ 
straints  then  necessary,  are  restraints  from 
plunder,  from  acts  of  publick  violence,  and  undis¬ 
guised  oppression.  The  ferocity  of  our  ancestors, 
as  of  all  other  nations,  produced  not  fraud,  but 
rapine.  They  had  not  yet  learned  to  cheat,  and 
attempted  only  to  rob.  As  manners  grow  more 
polished,  with  the  knowledge  of  good,  men  attain 
likewise  dexterity  in  evil.  Open  rapine  becomes 
less  frequent,  and  violence  gives  way  to  cunning. 
Those  who  before  invaded  pastures  and  stormed 
houses,  now  begin  to  enrich  themselves  by  un¬ 
equal  contracts  and  fraudulent  intromissions.  It 
is  not  against  the  violence  of  ferocity,  but  the  cir¬ 
cumventions  of  deceit,  that  this  law  was  framed; 
and  I  am  afraid  the  increase  of  commerce,  and 
the  incessant  struggle  for  riches  which  commerce 
excites,  give  us  no  prospect  of  an  end  speedily  to 
be  expected  of  artifice  and  fraud.  It  therefore 
seems  to  be  no  very  conclusive  reasoning,  which 
connects  those  two  propositions; — ‘the  nation 
is  become  less  ferocious,  and  therefore  the  laws 
against  fraud  and  covin  shall  be  relaxed/ 

“Whatever  reason  may  have  influenced  the 
Judges  to  a  relaxation  of  the  law,  it  was  not  that 
the  nation  was  grown  less  fierce ;  and,  I  am  afraid, 
it  cannot  be  affirmed,  that  it  is  grown  less  fraud¬ 
ulent. 

“Since  this  law  has  been  represented  as  rigor¬ 
ously  and  unreasonably  penal,  it  seems  not  im¬ 
proper  to  consider  what  are  the  conditions  and 
qualities  that  make  the  justice  or  propriety  of  a 
penal  law. 

“To  make  a  penal  law  reasonable  and  just, 
two  conditions  are  necessary,  and  two  proper.  It 
is  necessary  that  the  law  should  be  adequate  to 
its  end;  that,  if  it  be  observed,  it  shall  prevent 
the  evil  against  which  it  is  directed.  It  is,  secondly, 
necessary  that  the  end  of  the  law  be  of  such  im¬ 
portance,  as  to  deserve  the  security  of  a  penal  sanc¬ 
tion.  The  other  conditions  of  a  penal  law,  which 
though  not  absolutely  necessary,  are  to  a  very 
high  degree  fit,  are,  that  to  the  moral  violation 
of  the  law  there  are  many  temptations,  and  that 
of  the  physical  observance  there  is  great  facility. 

“All  these  conditions  apparently  concur  to 
justify  the  law  which  we  are  now  considering. 
Its  end  is  the  security  of  property;  and  property 
very  often  of  great  value.  The  method  by  which 
it  effects  the  security  is  efficacious,  because  it  ad- 


JOHNSON  205 

mits,  in  its  original  rigour,  no  gradations  of  in¬ 
jury;  but  keeps  guilt  and  innocence  apart,  by  a 
distinct  and  definite  limitation.  He  that  intro¬ 
mits,  is  criminal;  he  that  intromits  not,  is  inno¬ 
cent.  Of  the  two  secondary  considerations  it  can¬ 
not  be  denied  that  both  are  in  our  favour.  The 
temptation  to  intromit  is  frequent  and  strong; 
so  strong  and  so  frequent,  as  to  require  the  ut¬ 
most  activity  of  justice,  and  vigilance  of  caution, 
to  withstand  its  prevalence;  and  the  method  by 
which  a  man  may  entitle  himself  to  legal  intro¬ 
mission,  is  so  open  and  so  facile,  that  to  neglect 
it  is  a  proof  of  fraudulent  intention:  for  why 
should  a  man  omit  to  do  (but  for  reasons  which 
he  will  not  confess,)  that  which  he  can  do  so  eas¬ 
ily,  and  that  which  he  knows  to  be  required, by 
the  law?  If  temptation  were  rare,  a  penal  law 
might  be  deemed  unnecessary.  If  the  duty  en¬ 
joined  by  the  law  were  of  difficult  performance, 
omission,  though  it  could  not  be  justified,  might 
be  pitied.  But  in  the  present  case,  neither  equity 
nor  compassion  operate  against  it.  A  useful,  a 
necessary  law  is  broken,  not  only  without  a  rea¬ 
sonable  motive,  but  with  all  the  inducements  to 
obedience  that  can  be  derived  from  safety  and 
facility. 

“I  therefore  return  to  my  original  position, 
that  a  law,  to  have  its  effect,  must  be  permanent 
and  stable.  It  may  be  said,  in  the  language  of  the 
schools,  Lex  non  recipit  majus  et  minus , — we  may 
have  a  law,  or  we  may  have  no  law,  but  we  can¬ 
not  have  half  a  law.  We  must  either  have  a  rule 
of  action,  or  be  permitted  to  act  by  discretion 
and  by  chance.  Deviations  from  the  law  must  be 
uniformly  punished,  or  no  man  can  be  certain 
when  he  shall  be  safe. 

“That  from  the  rigour  of  the  original  institu¬ 
tion  this  Court  has  sometimes  departed,  cannot 
be  denied.  But,  as  it  is  evident  that  such  devia¬ 
tions,  as  they  make  law  uncertain,  make  life  un¬ 
safe,  I  hope,  that  of  departing  from  it  there  will 
now  be  an  end;  that  the  wisdom  of  our  ancestors 
will  be  treated  with  due  reverence;  andthatcon- 
sistent  and  steady  decisions  will  furnish  the  peo¬ 
ple  with  a  rule  of  action,  and  leave  fraud  and 
fraudulent  intromission  no  future  hope  of  im¬ 
punity  or  escape.” 

With  such  comprehension  of  mind,  and  such 
clearness  of  penetration,  did  he  thus  treat  a  sub¬ 
ject  altogether  new  to  him,  without  any  other 
preparation  than  my  having  stated  to  him  the 
arguments  which  had  been  used  on  each  side  of 
the  question.  His  intellectual  powers  appeared 
with  peculiar  lustre,  when  tried  against  those  of 
a  writer  of  so  much  fame  as  Lord  Karnes,  and 
that  too  in  his  Lordship’s  own  department. 


206 

This  masterly  argument,  after  being  prefaced 
and  concluded  with  some  sentences  of  my  own, 
and  garnished  with  the  usual  formularies,  was 
actually  printed  and  laid  before  the  Lords  of  Ses¬ 
sion,  but  without  success.  My  respected  friend 
Lord  Hailes,  however,  one  of  that  honourable 
body,  had  critical  sagacity  enough  to  discover  a 
more  than  ordinary  hand  in  the  Petition.  I  told 
him  Dr.  Johnson  had  favoured  me  with  his  pen. 
His  Lordship,  with  wonderful  acumen ,  pointed 
out  exactly  where  his  composition  began,  and 
where  it  ended.  But  that  I  may  do  impartial 
justice,  and  conform  to  the  great  rule  of  Courts, 
suum  cuique  tribuito ,  I  must  add,  that  their  Lord- 
ships  in  general,  though  they  were  pleased  to 
call  this  “a  well-drawn  paper,”  preferred  the  for¬ 
mer  very  inferiour  petition  which  I  had  written; 
thus  confirming  the  truth  of  an  observation  made 
to  me  by  one  of  their  number,  in  a  merry  mood: 
“My  dear  Sir,  give  yourself  no  trouble  in  the 
composition  of  the  papers  you  present  to  us;  for, 
indeed,  it  is  casting  pearls  before  swine.” 

I  renewed  my  solicitations  that  Dr.  Johnson 
would  this  year  accomplish  his  long-intended 
visit  to  Scotland. 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq,. 

Dear  Sir,  The  regret  has  not  been  little  with 
which  I  have  missed  a  journey  so  pregnant  with 
pleasing  expectations,  as  that  in  which  I  could 
promise  myself  not  only  the  gratification  of  cu¬ 
riosity,  both  rational  and  fanciful,  but  the  de¬ 
light  of  seeing  those  whom  I  love  and  esteem. 
*******  But  such  has  been  the  course  of 
things,  that  I  could  not  come;  and  such  has 
been,  I  am  afraid,  the  state  of  my  body,  that  it 
would  not  well  have  seconded  my  inclination. 
My  body,  I  think,  grows  better,  and  I  refer  my 
hopes  to  another  year;  for  I  am  very  sincere  in 
my  design  to  pay  the  visit,  and  take  the  ramble. 
In  the  mean  time,  do  not  omit  any  opportunity 
of  keeping  up  a  favourable  opinion  of  me  in  the 
minds  of  any  of  my  friends.  Beattie’s  book  is,  I 
believe,  every  day  more  liked;  at  least,  I  like  it 
more,  as  I  look  more  upon  it. 

I  am  glad  if  you  got  credit  by  your  cause,  and 
am  yet  of  opinion,  that  our  cause  was  good,  and 
that  the  determination  ought  to  have  been  in 
your  favour.  Poor  Hastie,  I  think,  had  but  his 
deserts. 

You  promised  to  get  me  a  little  Pindar ,  you 
may  add  to  it  a  little  Anacreon. 

The  leisure  which  I  cannot  enjoy,  it  will  be  a 
pleasure  to  hear  that  you  employ  upon  the  an¬ 
tiquities  of  the  feudal  establishment.  The  whole 
system  of  ancient  tenures  is  gradually  passing 
away;  and  I  wish  to  have  the  knowledge  of  it 
preserved  adequate  and  complete.  For  such  an 
institution  makes  a  very  important  part  of  the 


[  1773 

history  of  mankind.  Do  not  forget  a  design  so 
worthy  of  a  scholar  who  studies  the  laws  of  his 
country,  and  of  a  gentleman  who  may  naturally 
be  curious  to  know  the  condition  of  his  own  an¬ 
cestors.  Iam,  dear  Sir,  your’s  with  great  affection, 

Sam.  Johnson 

August  31,  1772 

To  Dr.  Johnson 

Edinburgh,  Dec.  25,  1772 

My  Dear  Sir,  ...  I  was  much  disappointed 
that  you  did  not  come  to  Scotland  last  autumn. 
However,  I  must  own  that  your  letter  prevents 
me  from  complaining-;  not  only  because  I  am 
sensible  that  the  state  of  your  health  was  but  too 
good  an  excuse,  but  because  you  write  in  a 
strain  which  shews  that  you  have  agreeable  views 
of  the  scheme  which  we  have  so  long  proposed. 

I  communicated  to  Beattie  what  you  said  of 
his  book  in  your  last  letter  to  me.  He  writes  to 
me  thus:  “You  judge  very  rightly  in  supposing 
that  Dr.  Johnson’s  favourable  opinion  of  my 
book  must  give  me  great  delight.  Indeed  it  is  im¬ 
possible  for  me  to  say  how  much  I  am  gratified 
by  it;  for  there  is  not  a  man  upon  earth  whose 
good  opinion  I  would  be  more  ambitious  to  cul¬ 
tivate.  His  talents  and  his  virtues  I  reverence 
more  than  any  words  can  express.  The  extraor¬ 
dinary  civilities  (the  paternal  attentions  I  should 
rather  say,)  and  the  many  instructions  I  have 
had  the  honour  to  receive  from  him,  will  to  me 
be  a  perpetual  source  of  pleasure  in  the  recol¬ 
lection, 

Dum  memor  ipse  mei,  dum  spiritus  hos  reget  artus. 

I  had  still  some  thoughts,  while  the  summer 
lasted,  of  being  obliged  to  go  to  London  on  some 
little  business;  otherwise  I  should  certainly  have 
troubled  him  with  a  letter  several  months  ago, 
and  given  some  vent  to  my  gratitude  and  ad¬ 
miration.  This  I  intend  to  do,  as  soon  as  I  am 
left  a  little  at  leisure.  Mean  time,  if  you  have  oc¬ 
casion  to  write  to  him,  I  beg  you  will  offer  him 
my  most  respectful  compliments, and  assure  him 
of  the  sincerity  of  my  attachment  and  the  warmth 
of  my  gratitude”.  ...  I  am,  &c. 

James  Boswell 

1773:  altat.  64.] — In  1773  his  only  publica¬ 
tion  was  an  edition  of  his  folio  Dictionary ,  with 
additions  and  corrections;  nor  did  he,  so  far  as 
is  known,  furnish  any  productions  of  his  fertile 
pen  to  any  of  his  numerous  friends  or  depend¬ 
ants,  except  the  Preface1  to  his  old  amanuensis 

^e,  however,  wrote,  or  partly  wrote,  an  Epi¬ 
taph  on  Mrs.  Bell,  wife  of  his  friend  John  Bell, 
Esq.,  brother  of  the  Reverend  Dr.  Bell,  Prebendary 
of  Westminster,  which  is  printed  in  his  Works  [i. 
1 5 1  ].  It  is  in  English  prose,  and  has  so  little  of  his 
manner,  that  I  did  not  believe  he  had  any  hand  in 
it,  till  I  was  satisfied  of  the  fact  by  the  authority  of 
Mr.  Bell. 


BOSWELL 


i773  ]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  207 


Macbean’s  Dictionary  of  Ancient  Geography.  His 
Shakspeare ,  indeed,  which  had  been  received  with 
high  approbation  by  the  publick,  and  gone 
through  several  editions,  was  this  year  re-pub¬ 
lished  by  George  Steevens,  Esq.,  a  gentleman 
not  only  deeply  skilled  in  ancient  learning,  and 
of  very  extensive  reading  in  English  literature, 
especially  the  early  writers,  but  at  the  same  time 
of  acute  discernment  and  elegant  taste.  It  is  al¬ 
most  unnecessary  to  say,  that  by  his  great  and 
valuable  additions  to  Dr.  Johnson’s  work,  he 
justly  obtained  considerable  reputation: 

Divisum  imperium  cum  Jove  Ccesar  habet 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  I  have  read  your  kind  fetter  much 
more  than  the  elegant  Pindar  which  it  accom¬ 
panied.  I  am  always  glad  to  find  myself  not  for¬ 
gotten;  and  to  be  forgotten  by  you  would  give 
me  great  uneasiness.  My  northern  friends  have 
never  been  unkind  to  me:  I  have  from  you,  dear 
Sir,  testimonies  of  affection,  which  I  have  not 
often  been  able  to  excite;  and  Dr.  Beattie  rates 
the  testimony  which  I  was  desirous  of  paying  to 
his  merit,  much  higher  than  I  should  have 
thought  it  reasonable  to  expect. 

I  have  heard  of  your  masquerade.1  What  says 
your  synod  to  such  innovations?  I  am  not  stu¬ 
diously  scrupulous,  nor  do  I  think  a  masquer¬ 
ade  either  evil  in  itself,  or  very  likely  to  be  the 
occasion  of  evil;  yet  as  the  world  thinks  it  a  very 
licentious  relaxation  of  manners,  I  would  not 
have  been  one  of  the  first  masquers  in  a  country 
where  no  masquerade  had  ever  been  before.2 

A  new  edition  of  my  great  Dictionary  is  printed, 
from  a  copy  which  I  was  persuaded  to  revise; 
but  having  made  no  preparation,  I  was  able  to 
do  very  little.  Some  superfluities  I  have  ex¬ 
punged,  and  some  faults  I  have  corrected,  and 
here  and  there  have  scattered  a  remark;  but  the 
main  fabrick  of  the  work  remains  as  it  was.  I  had 
looked  very  little  into  it  since  I  wrote  it,  and,  I 
think,  I  found  it  full  as  often  better,  as  worse, 
than  I  expected. 

Baretti  and  Davies  have  had  a  furious  quar¬ 
rel;  a  quarrel,  I  think,  irreconcileable.  Dr.  Gold¬ 
smith  has  a  new  comedy,  which  is  expected  in 
the  spring.  No  name  is  yet  given  it.  The  chief 
diversion  arises  from  a  stratagem  by  which  a 
lover  is  made  to  mistake  his  future  father-in- 
law’s  house  for  an  inn.  This,  you  see,  borders 
upon  farce.  The  dialogue  is  quick  and  gay,  and 
incidents  are  so  prepared  as  not  to  seem  im¬ 
probable. 

I  am  sorry  that  you  lost  your  cause  of  Intro¬ 
mission,  because  I  yet  think  the  arguments  on 
your  side  unanswerable.  But  you  seem,  I  think, 
to  say  that  you  gained  reputation  even  by  your 

JGiven  by  a  lady  at  Edinburgh. 

2There  had  been  masquerades  in  Scotland;  but 
not  for  a  very  long  time. 


defeat;  and  reputation  you  will  daily  gain,  if 
you  keep  Lord  Auchinleck’s  precept  in  your 
mind,  and  endeavour  to  consolidate  in  your 
mind  a  firm  and  regular  system  of  law,  instead 
of  picking  up  occasional  fragments. 

My  health  seems  in  general  to  improve;  but  I 
have  been  troubled  for  many  weeks  with  a  vexa¬ 
tious  catarrh,  which  is  sometimes  sufficiently 
distressful.  I  have  not  found  any  great  effects 
from  bleeding  and  physick;  and  am  afraid,  that 
I  must  expect  help  from  brighter  days  and  softer 
air. 

Write  to  me  now  and  then;  and  whenever  any 
good  befalls  you,  make  haste  to  let  me  know  it, 
for  no  one  will  rejoice  at  it  more  than,  dear  Sir, 
your  most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

London,  Feb .  24,  1773 

You  continue  to  stand  very  high  in  the  favour 
of  Mrs.  Thrale. 

While  a  former  edition  of  my  work  was  passing 
through  the  press,  I  was  unexpectedly  favoured 
with  a  packet  from  Philadelphia,  from  Mr. 
James  Abercrombie,  a  gentleman  of  that 
country,  who  is  pleased  to  honour  me  with  very 
high  praise  of  my  Life  of  Dr.  Johnson.  To  have 
the  fame  of  my  illustrious  friend,  and  his  faith¬ 
ful  biographer,  echoed  from  the  New  World  is 
extremely  flattering;  and  my  grateful  acknowl¬ 
edgements  shall  be  wafted  across  the  Atlantick. 
Mr.  Abercrombie  has  politely  conferred  on  me 
a  considerable  additional  obligation,  by  trans¬ 
mitting  to  me  copies  of  two  letters  from  Dr.  John¬ 
son  to  American  gentlemen.  “Gladly,  Sir,  (says 
he,)  would  I  have  sent  you  the  originals;  but 
being  the  only  relicks  of  the  kind  in  America, 
they  are  considered  by  the  possessors  of  such  in¬ 
estimable  value,  that  no  possible  consideration 
would  induce  them  to  part  with  them.  In  some 
future  publication  of  yours  relative  to  that  great 
and  good  man,  they  may  perhaps  be  thought 
worthy  of  insertion.” 

To  Mr.  B - d3 

Sir,  That  in  the  hurry  of  a  sudden  departure 
you  should  yet  find  leisure  to  consult  my  con¬ 
venience,  is  a  degree  of  kindness,  and  an  instance 
of  regard,  not  only  beyond  my  claims,  but  above 
my  expectation.  You  are  not  mistaken  in  sup¬ 
posing  that  I  set  a  high  value  on  my  American 
friends,  and  that  you  should  confer  a  very  valu¬ 
able  favour  upon  me  by  giving  me  an  opportu¬ 
nity  of  keeping  myself  in  their  memory. 

I  have  taken  the  liberty  of  troubling  you  with 
a  packet,  to  which  I  wish  a  safe  and  speedy  con- 

3This  gentleman,  who  now  resides  in  America  in 
a  publick  character  of  considerable  dignity,  de¬ 
sired  that  his  name  might  not  be  transcribed  at  full 
length. 


208 

veyance,  because  I  wish  a  safe  and  speedy  voy¬ 
age  to  him  that  conveys  it.  I  am,  Sir,  your  most 
humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

London,  Johnson’s-court, 

Fleet-street,  March  4,  1773 

To  the  Reverend  Mr.  White1 

Dear  Sir,  Your  kindness  for  your  friends  ac¬ 
companies  you  across  the  Atlantick.  It  was  long 
since  observed  by  Horace,  that  no  ship  could 
leave  care  behind;  you  have  been  attended  in 
your  voyage  by  other  powers, — by  benevolence 
and  constancy;  and  I  hope  care  did  not  often 
shew  her  face  in  their  company. 

I  received  the  copy  of  Rasselas.  The  impres¬ 
sion  is  not  magnificent,  but  it  flatters  an  au- 
thour,  because  the  printer  seems  to  have  ex¬ 
pected  that  it  would  be  scattered  among  the 
people.  The  little  book  has  been  well  received, 
and  is  translated  into  Italian,  French,  German, 
and  Dutch.  It  has  now  one  honour  more  by  an 
American  edition. 

I  know  not  that  much  has  happened  since 
your  departure  that  can  engage  your  curiosity. 
Of  all  publick  transactions  the  whole  world  is 
now  informed  by  the  news-papers.  Opposition 
seems  to  despond;  and  the  dissenters,  though 
they  have  taken  advantage  of  unsettled  times, 
and  a  government  much  enfeebled,  seem  not 
likely  to  gain  any  immunities. 

Dr.  Goldsmith  has  a  new  comedy  in  rehearsal 
at  Covent-Garden,  to  which  the  manager  pre¬ 
dicts  ill  success.  I  hope  he  will  be  mistaken.  I 
think  it  deserves  a  very  kind  reception. 

I  shall  soon  publish  a  new  edition  of  my  large 
Dictionary;  I  have  been  persuaded  to  revise  it, 
and  have  mended  some  faults,  but  added  little 
to  its  usefulness. 

No  book  has  been  published  since  your  de¬ 
parture,  of  which  much  notice  is  taken.  Faction 
only  fills  the  town  with  pamphlets,  and  greater 
subjects  are  forgotten  in  the  noise  of  discord. 

Thus  have  I  written,  only  to  tell  you  how  lit¬ 
tle  I  have  to  tell.  Of  myself  I  can  only  add,  that 
having  been  afflicted  many  weeks  with  a  very 
troublesome  cough,  I  am  now  recovered. 

I  take  the  liberty  which  you  give  me  of  trou¬ 
bling  you  with  a  letter,  of  which  you  will  please 
to  fill  up  the  direction.  I  am,  Sir,  your  most 
humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

Johnson’s-court,  Fleet-street, 

London,  March  4,  1773 

*Now  Doctor  White,  and  Bishop  of  the  Episco¬ 
pal  Church  in  Pennsylvania.  During  his  first  visit 
to  England  in  1 771,  as  a  candidate  for  holy  orders, 
he  was  several  times  in  company  with  Dr.  Johnson, 
who  expressed  a  wish  to  see  the  edition  of  his  Ras¬ 
selas,  which  Dr.  White  told  him  had  been  printed 
in  America.  Dr.  White,  on  his  return,  immediately 
sent  him  a  copy. 


[  1773 

On  Saturday,  April  3,  the  day  after  my  arriv¬ 
al  in  London  this  year,  I  went  to  his  house  late 
in  the  evening,  and  sat  with  Mrs.  Williams  till 
he  came  home.  I  found  in  The  London  Chronicle, 
Dr.  Goldsmith’s  apology  to  the  publick  for  beat¬ 
ing  Evans,  a  bookseller,  on  account  of  a  para¬ 
graph  in  a  newspaper  published  by  him,  which 
Goldsmith  thought  impertinent  to  him  and  to  a 
lady  of  his  acquaintance.  The  apology  was  writ¬ 
ten  so  much  in  Dr.  Johnson’s  manner,  that  both 
Mrs.  Williams  and  I  supposed  it  to  be  his;  but 
when  he  came  home,  he  soon  undeceived  us. 
When  he  said  to  Mrs.  Williams,  “Well,  Dr. 
Goldsmith’s  manifesto  has  got  into  your  paper”; 
I  asked  him  if  Dr.  Goldsmith  had  written  it, 
with  an  air  that  made  him  see  I  suspected  it  was 
his,  though  subscribed  by  Goldsmith.  Johnson. 
“Sir,  Dr.  Goldsmith  would  no  more  have  asked 
me  to  write  such  a  thing  as  that  for  him,  than  he 
would  have  asked  me  to  feed  him  with  a  spoon, 
or  to  do  anything  else  that  denoted  his  imbecil¬ 
ity.  I  as  much  believe  that  he  wrote  it,  as  if  I 
had  seen  him  do  it.  Sir,  had  he  shewn  it  to  any 
one  friend,  he  would  not  have  been  allowed  to 
publish  it.  He  has,  indeed,  done  it  very  well;  but 
it  is  a  foolish  thing  well  done.  I  suppose  he  has 
been  so  much  elated  with  the  success  of  his  new 
comedy,  that  he  has  thought  every  thing  that 
concerned  him  must  be  of  importance  to  the  pub¬ 
lick.”  Boswell.  “I  fancy,  Sir,  this  is  the  first  time 
that  he  has  been  engaged  in  such  an  adventure.” 
Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  I  believe  it  is  the  first  time 
he  has  beat',  he  may  have  been  beaten  before.  This, 
Sir,  is  a  new  plume  to  him.” 

I  mentioned  Sir  John  Dalrymple’s  Memoirs  of 
Great-Britain  and  Ireland,  and  his  discoveries  to 
the  prejudice  of  Lord  Russel  and  Algernon  Syd¬ 
ney.  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  every  body  who  had 
just  notions  of  government  thought  them  rascals 
before.  It  is  well  that  all  mankind  now  see  them 
to  be  rascals.”  Boswell.  “But,  Sir,  may  not  those 
discoveries  be  true  without  their  being  rascals?” 
Johnson.  “Consider,  Sir;  would  any  of  them 
have  been  willing  to  have  had  it  known  that  they 
intrigued  with  France?  Depend  upon  it,  Sir,  he 
who  does  what  he  is  afraid  should  be  known,  has 
something  rotten  about  him.  This  Dalrymple 
seems  to  be  an  honest  fellow;  for  he  tells  equally 
what  makes  against  both  sides.  But  nothing  can 
be  poorer  than  his  mode  of  writing,  it  is  the  mere 
bouncing  of  a  school-boy.  Great  He !  but  great¬ 
er  She!  and  such  stuff.” 

I  could  not  agree  with  him  in  this  criticism; 
for  though  Sir  John  Dalrymple’s  style  is  not  reg¬ 
ularly  formed  in  any  respect,  and  one  cannot 
help  smiling  sometimes  at  his  affected  grandilo - 


BOSWELL 


i773  ]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  209 


quence ,  there  is  in  his  writing  a  pointed  vivacity, 
and  much  of  a  gentlemanly  spirit. 

At  Mr.  Thrale’s,  in  the  evening,  he  repeated 
his  usual  paradoxical  declamation  against  ac¬ 
tion  in  publick  speaking.  “Action  can  have  no 
effect  upon  reasonable  minds.  It  may  augment 
noise,  but  it  never  can  enforce  argument.  If  you 
speak  to  a  dog,  you  use  action;  you  hold  up  your 
hand  thus,  because  he  is  a  brute;  and  in  propor¬ 
tion  as  men  are  removed  from  brutes,  action 
will  have  the  less  influence  upon  them.”  Mrs. 
Thrale.  “What  then,  Sir,  becomes  of  Demos¬ 
thenes’s  saying?  ‘Action,  action,  action  !’  ”  John¬ 
son.  “Demosthenes,  Madam,  spoke  to  an  assem¬ 
bly  of  brutes;  to  a  barbarous  people.” 

I  thought  it  extraordinary,  that  he  should  de¬ 
ny  the  power  of  rhetorical  action  upon  human 
nature,  when  it  is  proved  by  innumerable  facts 
in  all  stages  of  society.  Reasonable  beings  are 
not  solely  reasonable.  They  have  fancies  which 
may  be  pleased,  passions  which  may  be  roused. 

Lord  Chesterfield  being  mentioned,  Johnson 
remarked,  that  almost  all  of  that  celebrated  no¬ 
bleman’s  witty  sayings  were  puns.  He,  however, 
allowed  the  merit  of  good  wit  to  his  Lordship’s 
saying  of  Lord  Tyrawley  and  himself,  when  both 
very  old  and  infirm:  “Tyrawley  and  I  have  been 
dead  these  two  years;  but  we  don’t  choose  to 
have  it  known.” 

He  talked  with  approbation  of  an  intended 
edition  of  The  Spectator ,  with  notes;  two  volumes 
of  which  had  been  prepared  by  a  gentleman  em¬ 
inent  in  the  literary  world,  and  the  materials 
which  he  had  collected  for  the  remainder  had 
been  transferred  to  another  hand.  He  observed, 
that  all  works  which  describe  manners,  require 
notes  in  sixty  or  seventy  years,  or  less;  and  told 
us,  he  had  communicated  all  he  knew  that  could 
throw  light  upon  The  Spectator.  He  said,  “Addi¬ 
son  had  made  his  Sir  Andrew  Freeport  a  true 
Whig,  arguing  against  giving  charity  to  beg¬ 
gars,  and  throwing  out  other  such  ungracious 
sentiments;  but  that  he  had  thought  better,  and 
made  amends  by  making  him  found  an  hospital 
for  decayed  farmers.”  He  called  for  the  volume 
of  The  Spectator ,  in  which  that  account  is  con¬ 
tained,  and  read  it  aloud  to  us.  He  read  so  well, 
that  every  thing  acquired  additional  weight  and 
grace  from  his  utterance. 

The  conversation  having  turned  on  modern 
imitations  of  ancient  ballads,  and  some  one  hav¬ 
ing  praised  their  simplicity,  he  treated  them 
with  that  ridicule  which  he  always  displayed 
when  that  subject  was  mentioned. 

He  disapproved  of  introducing  scripture 
phrases  into  secular  discourse.  This  seemed  to 


me  a  question  of  some  difficulty.  A  scripture  ex¬ 
pression  may  be  used,  like  a  highly  classical 
phrase,  to  produce  an  instantaneous  strong  im¬ 
pression;  and  it  may  be  done  without  being  at 
all  improper.  Yet  I  own  there  is  danger,  that  ap¬ 
plying  the  language  of  our  sacred  book  to  ordi¬ 
nary  subjects  may  tend  to  lessen  our  reverence 
for  it.  If  therefore  it  be  introduced  at  all,  it 
should  be  with  very  great  caution. 

On  Thursday,  April  8, 1  sat  a  good  part  of  the 
evening  with  him,  but  he  was  very  silent.  He 
said,  “Burnet’s  History  of  His  Own  Times  is  very 
entertaining.  The  style,  indeed,  is  mere  chit¬ 
chat.  I  do  not  believe  that  Burnet  intentionally 
lyed;  but  he  was  so  much  prejudiced,  that  he 
took  no  pains  to  find  out  the  truth.  He  was  like  a 
man  who  resolves  to  regulate  his  time  by  a  cer¬ 
tain  watch;  but  will  not  inquire  whether  the 
watch  is  right  or  not.” 

Though  he  was  not  disposed  to  talk,  he  was 
unwilling  that  I  should  leave  him;  and  when  I 
looked  at  my  watch,  and  told  him  it  was  twelve 
o’clock,  he  cried,  “What’s  that  to  you  and  me?” 
and  ordered  Frank  to  tell  Mrs.  Williams  that  we 
were  coming  to  drink  tea  with  her,  which  we 
did.  It  was  settled  that  we  should  go  to  church 
together  next  day. 

On  the  9th  of  April,  being  Good  Friday,  I 
breakfasted  with  him  on  tea  and  cross-buns; 
Doctor  Levet,  as  Frank  called  him,  making  the 
tea.  He  carried  me  with  him  to  the  church  of  St. 
Clement  Danes,  where  he  had  his  seat;  and  his 
behaviour  was,  as  I  had  imaged  to  myself,  sol¬ 
emnly  devout.  I  never  shall  forget  the  tremulous 
earnestness  with  which  he  pronounced  the  aw¬ 
ful  petition  in  the  Litany:  “In  the  hour  of  death, 
and  in  the  day  of  judgement,  good  Lord  deliver 
us.” 

We  went  to  church  both  in  the  morning  and 
evening.  In  the  interval  between  the  two  serv¬ 
ices  we  did  not  dine;  but  he  read  in  the  Greek 
New  Testament,  and  I  turned  over  several  of 
his  books. 

In  Archbishop  Laud’s  Diary,  I  found  the  fol¬ 
lowing  passage,  which  I  read  to  Dr.  Johnson: 

“1623.  February  1,  Sunday.  I  stood  by  the 
most  illustrious  Prince  Charles,1  at  dinner.  He 
was  then  very  merry,  and  talked  occasionally  of 
many  things  with  his  attendants.  Among  other 
things,  he  said,  that  if  he  were  necessitated  to 
take  any  particular  profession  of  life,  he  could  not 
be  a  lawyer,  adding  his  reasons:  ‘I  cannot  (saith 
he,)  defend  a  bad,  nor  yield  in  a  good  cause.’  ” 

Johnson.  “Sir,  this  is  false  reasoning;  because 
every  cause  has  a  bad  side:  and  a  lawyer  is  not 

1  After  wards  Charles  I. 


210 


BOSWELL 


overcome,  though  the  cause  which  he  has  en¬ 
deavoured  to  support  be  determined  against 
him.” 

I  told  him  that  Goldsmith  had  said  to  me  a 
few  days  before,  “As  I  take  my  shoes  from  the 
shoemaker,  and  my  coat  from  the  taylor,  so  I 
take  my  religion  from  the  priest.”  I  regretted 
this  loose  way  of  talking.  Johnson.  “Sir,  he 
knows  nothing;  he  has  made  up  his  mind  about 
nothing.” 

To  my  great  surprize  he  asked  me  to  dine  with 
him  on  Easter-day.  I  never  supposed  that  he 
had  a  dinner  at  his  house;  for  I  had  not  then 
heard  of  any  one  of  his  friends  having  been  en¬ 
tertained  at  his  table.  He  told  me,  “I  generally 
have  a  meat  pye  on  Sunday:  it  is  baked  at  a  pub- 
lick  oven,  which  is  very  properly  allowed,  be¬ 
cause  one  man  can  attend  it;  and  thus  the  ad¬ 
vantage  is  obtained  of  not  keeping  servants  from 
church  to  dress  dinners.” 

April  n,  being  Easter-Sunday,  after  having 
attended  Divine  Service  at  St.  PauPs,  I  repaired 
to  Dr.  Johnson’s.  I  had  gratified  my  curiosity 
much  in  dining  with  Jean  Jaques  Rousseau, 
while  he  lived  in  the  wilds  of  Neufchatel:  I  had 
as  great  a  curiosity  to  dine  with  Dr.  Samuel 
Johnson,  in  the  dusky  recess  of  a  court  in  Fleet- 
street.  I  supposed  we  should  scarcely  have  knives 
and  forks,  and  only  some  strange,  uncouth,  ill- 
drest  dish:  but  I  found  every  thing  in  very  good 
order.  We  had  no  other  company  but  Mrs.  Wil¬ 
liams  and  a  young  woman  whom  I  did  not  know. 
As  a  dinner  here  was  considered  as  a  singular 
phenomenon,  and  as  I  was  frequently  interro¬ 
gated  on  the  subject,  my  readers  may  perhaps 
be  desirous  to  know  our  bill  of  fare.  Foote,  I  re¬ 
member,  in  allusion  to  Francis,  the  negro ,  was 
willing  to  suppose  that  our  repast  was  black  broth. 
But  the  fact  was,  that  we  had  a  very  good  soup, 
a  boiled  leg  of  lamb  and  spinach,  a  veal  pye, 
and  a  rice  pudding. 

Of  Dr.  John  Campbell,  the  authour,  he  said, 
“He  is  a  very  inquisitive  and  a  very  able  man, 
and  a  man  of  good  religious  principles,  though  I 
am  afraid  he  has  been  deficient  in  practice. 
Campbell  is  radically  right;  and  we  may  hope, 
that  in  time  there  will  be  good  practice.” 

He  owned  that  he  thought  Hawkesworth  was 
one  of  his  imitators,  but  he  did  not  think  Gold¬ 
smith  was.  Goldsmith,  he  said,  had  great  merit. 
Boswell.  “But,  Sir,  he  is  much  indebted  to  you 
for  his  getting  so  high  in  the  publick  estimation.” 
Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  he  has  perhaps  got  sooner 
to  it  by  his  intimacy  with  me.” 

Goldsmith,  though  his  vanity  often  excited 
him  to  occasional  competition,  had  a  very  high 


[  l773 

regard  for  Johnson,  which  he  at  this  time  ex¬ 
pressed  in  the  strongest  manner  in  the  Dedica¬ 
tion  of  his  comedy,  entitled,  She  Stoops  to  Conquer } 
Johnson  observed,  that  there  were  very  few 
books  printed  in  Scotland  before  the  Union.  He 
had  seen  a  complete  collection  of  them  in  the 
possession  of  the  Hon.  Archibald  Campbell,  a 
non-juring  Bishop.2  I  wish  this  collection  had 
been  kept  entire.  Many  of  them  are  in  the  library 
of  the  Faculty  of  Advocates  at  Edinburgh.  I  told 
Dr.  Johnson  that  I  had  some  intention  to  write 
the  life  of  the  learned  and  worthy  Thomas  Rud- 
diman.  He  said,  “I  should  take  pleasure  in  help¬ 
ing  you  to  do  honour  to  him.  But  his  farewell 
letter  to  the  Faculty  of  Advocates,  when  he  re¬ 
signed  the  office  of  their  Librarian,  should  have 
been  in  Latin.” 

I  put  a  question  to  him  upon  a  fact  in  com¬ 
mon  life,  which  he  could  not  answer,  nor  have  I 
found  any  one  else  who  could.  What  is  the  rea¬ 
son  that  women  servants,  though  obliged  to  be 
at  the  expense  of  purchasing  their  own  clothes, 
have  much  lower  wages  than  men  servants,  to 
whom  a  great  proportion  of  that  article  is  fur¬ 
nished,  and  when  in  fact  our  female  house  serv¬ 
ants  work  much  harder  than  the  male? 

He  told  me  that  he  had  twelve  or  fourteen 
times  attempted  to  keep  a  journal  of  his  life, but 
never  could  persevere.  He  advised  me  to  do  it. 
“The  great  thing  to  be  recorded,  (said  he,)  is 
the  state  of  your  own  mind;  and  you  should 
write  down  every  thing  that  you  remember,  for 
you  cannot  judge  at  first  what  is  good  or  bad ;  and 
write  immediately  while  the  impression  is  fresh, 
for  it  will  not  be  the  same  a  wreek  afterwards.” 

I  again  solicited  him  to  communicate  to  me 
the  particulars  of  his  early  life.  He  said,  “You 
shall  have  them  all  for  twopence.  I  hope  you 
shall  know  a  great  deal  more  of  me  before  you 
write  my  Life.”  He  mentioned  to  me  this  day 
many  circumstances,  which  I  wrote  down  when 
I  went  home,  and  have  interwoven  in  the  for¬ 
mer  part  of  this  narrative. 

On  Tuesday,  April  13,  he  and  Dr.  Goldsmith 
and  I  dined  at  General  Oglethorpe’s.  Goldsmith 
expatiated  on  the  common  topick,  that  the  race 

A“By  inscribing  this  slight  performance  to  you,  I 
do  not  mean  so  much  to  compliment  you  as  my¬ 
self.  It  may  do  me  some  honour  to  inform  the  pub- 
lick,  that  I  have  lived  many  years  in  intimacy  with 
you.  It  may  serve  the  interests  of  mankind  also  to 
inform  them,  that  the  greatest  wit  may  be  found  in 
a  character,  without  impairing  the  most  unaffect¬ 
ed  piety.” 

2See  an  account  of  this  learned  and  respectable 
gentleman,  and  of  his  curious  work  on  the  Middle 
State ,  Journal  oj  a  Tour  to  the  Hebrides ,  3rd  edit.,  p. 
371.  [Oct.  25.] 


2 1 1 


1773]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


of  our  people  was  degenerated,  and  that  this 
was  owing  to  luxury.  Johnson.  “Sir,  in  the  first 
place,  I  doubt  the  fact.  I  believe  there  are  as 
many  tall  men  in  England  now,  as  ever  there 
were.  But,  secondly,  supposing  the  stature  of  our 
people  to  be  diminished,  that  is  not  owing  to 
luxury;  for,  Sir,  consider  to  how  very  small  a 
proportion  of  our  people  luxury  can  reach.  Our 
soldiery,  surely,  are  not  luxurious,  who  live  on 
sixpence  a  day;  and  the  same  remark  will  apply 
to  almost  all  the  other  classes.  Luxury,  so  far  as 
it  reaches  the  poor,  will  do  good  to  the  race  of 
people;  it  will  strengthen  and  multiply  them. 
Sir,  no  nation  was  ever  hurt  by  luxury;  for,  as  I 
said  before,  it  can  reach  but  to  a  very  few.  I  ad¬ 
mit  that  the  great  increase  of  commerce  and 
manufactures  hurts  the  military  spirit  of  a  peo¬ 
ple;  because  it  produces  a  competition  for  some¬ 
thing  else  than  martial  honours, — a  competition 
for  riches.  It  also  hurts  the  bodies  of  the  people; 
for  you  will  observe,  there  is  no  man  who  works 
at  any  particular  trade,  but  you  may  know  him 
from  his  appearance  to  do  so.  One  part  or  other 
of  his  body  being  more  used  than  the  rest,  he  is 
in  some  degree  deformed:  but,  Sir,  that  is  not 
luxury.  A  tailor  sits  cross-legged;  but  that  is  not 
luxury.”  Goldsmith.  “Come,  you’re  just  going 
to  the  same  place  by  another  road.”  Johnson. 
“Nay,  Sir,  I  say  that  is  not  luxury.  Let  us  take  a 
walk  from  Charing-cross  to  White-chapel, 
through,  I  suppose,  the  greatest  series  of  shops 
in  the  world;  what  is  there  in  any  of  these  shops 
(if  you  except  gin-shops,)  that  can  do  any  hu¬ 
man  being  any  harm?”  Goldsmith.  “Well,  Sir, 
I’ll  accept  your  challenge.  The  very  next  shop 
to  Northumberlandhouse  is  a  pickle-shop.” 
Johnson.  “Well,  Sir:  do  we  not  know  that  a 
maid  can  in  one  afternoon  make  pickles  suffici¬ 
ent  to  serve  a  whole  family  for  a  year?  nay,  that 
five  pickle-shops  can  serve  all  the  kingdom?  Be¬ 
sides,  Sir,  there  is  no  harm  done  to  any  body  by 
the  making  of  pickles,  or  the  eating  of  pickles.” 

We  drank  tea  with  the  ladies;  and  Goldsmith 
sung  Tony  Lumpkin’s  song  in  his  comedy,  She 
Stoops  to  Conquer ,  and  a  very  pretty  one,  to  an 
Irish  tune,1  which  he  had  designed  for  Miss 
Hardcastle;  but  as  Mrs.  Bulkeley,  who  played 
the  part,  could  not  sing,  it  was  left  out.  He  after¬ 
wards  wrote  it  down  for  me,  by  which  means  it 
was  preserved,  and  now  appears  amongst  his 
poems.  Dr.  Johnson,  in  his  way  home,  stopped 
at  my  lodgings  in  Piccadilly,  and  sat  with  me, 
drinking  tea  a  second  time,  till  a  late  hour. 

I  told  him  that  Mrs.  Macaulay  said,  she  won¬ 
dered  how  he  could  reconcile  his  political  prin- 

xThe  humours  of  Ballamagairy. 


ciples  with  his  moral;  his  notions  of  inequality 
and  subordination  with  wishing  well  to  the  hap¬ 
piness  of  all  mankind,  who  might  live  so  agree¬ 
ably,  had  they  all  their  portions  of  land,  and 
none  to  domineer  over  another.  Johnson.  “Why, 
Sir,  I  reconcile  my  principles  very  well,  because 
mankind  are  happier  in  a  state  of  inequality  and 
subordination.  Were  they  to  be  in  this  pretty 
state  of  equality,  they  would  soon  degenerate  in¬ 
to  brutes; — they  would  become  Monboddo’s  na¬ 
tion; — their  tails  would  grow.  Sir,  all  would  be 
losers  were  all  to  work  for  all: — they  would  have 
no  intellectual  improvement.  All  intellectual  im¬ 
provement  arises  from  leisure;  all  leisure  arises 
from  one  working  for  another.” 

Talking  of  the  family  of  Stuart,  he  said,  “It 
should  seem  that  the  family  at  present  on  the 
throne  has  now  established  as  good  a  right  as 
the  former  family,  by  the  long  consent  of  the 
people;  and  that  to  disturb  this  right  might  be 
considered  as  culpable.  At  the  same  time  I  own, 
that  it  is  a  very  difficult  question,  when  consid¬ 
ered  with  respect  to  the  house  of  Stuart.  To 
oblige  people  to  take  oaths  as  to  the  disputed 
right,  is  wrong.  I  know  not  whether  I  could  take 
them:  but  I  do  not  blame  those  who  do.”  So 
conscientious  and  so  delicate  was  he  upon  this 
subject,  which  has  occasioned  so  much  clamour 
against  him. 

Talking  of  law  cases,  he  said,  “The  English 
reports,  in  general,  are  very  poor:  only  the  half 
of  what  has  been  said  is  taken  down;  and  of  that 
half,  much  is  mistaken.  Whereas,  in  Scotland, 
the  arguments  on  each  side  are  deliberately  put 
in  writing,  to  be  considered  by  the  Court.  I  think 
a  collection  of  your  cases  upon  subjects  of  im¬ 
portance,  with  the  opinions  of  the  Judges  upon 
them,  would  be  valuable.” 

On  Thursday,  April  15, 1  dined  with  him  and 
Dr.  Goldsmith  at  General  Paoli’s.  We  found 
here  Signor  Martinelli,  of  Florence,  authour  of 
a  History  of  England,  in  Italian,  printed  at  London. 

I  spoke  of  Allan  Ramsay’s  Gentle  Shepherd ,  in 
the  Scottish  dialect,  as  the  best  pastoral  that  had 
ever  been  written;  not  only  abounding  with 
beautiful  rural  imagery,  and  just  and  pleasing 
sentiments,  but  being  a  real  picture  of  manners; 
and  I  offered  to  teach  Dr.  Johnson  to  under¬ 
stand  it.  “No,  Sir,  (said  he,)  I  won’t  learn  it. 
You  shall  retain  your  superiority  by  my  not 
knowing  it.” 

This  brought  on  a  question  whether  one  man 
is  lessened  by  another’s  acquiring  an  equal  de¬ 
gree  of  knowledge  with  him.  Johnson  asserted 
the  affirmative.  I  maintained  that  the  position 
might  be  true  in  those  kinds  of  knowledge  which 


212 


BOSWELL 


produce  wisdom,  power,  and  force,  so  as  to  en¬ 
able  one  man  to  have  the  government  of  others; 
but  that  a  man  is  not  in  any  degree  lessened  by 
others  knowing  as  well  as  he  what  ends  in  mere 
pleasure: — eating  fine  fruits,  drinking  delicious 
wines,  reading  exquisite  poetry. 

The  General  observed,  that  Martinelli  was  a 
Whig.  Johnson.  “I  am  sorry  for  it.  It  shows  the 
spirit  of  the  times:  he  is  obliged  to  temporise.” 
Boswell.  UI  rather  think,  Sir,  that  Toryism  pre¬ 
vails  in  this  reign.”  Johnson.  “I  know  not  why 
you  should  think  so,  Sir.  You  see  your  friend 
Lord  Lyttelton,  a  nobleman,  is  obliged  in  his 
History  to  write  the  most  vulgar  Whiggism.” 

An  animated  debate  took  place  whether  Mar¬ 
tinelli  should  continue  his  History  of  England  to 
the  present  day.  Goldsmith.  “To  be  sure  he 
should.”  Johnson.  “No,  Sir;  he  would  give  great 
offence.  He  would  have  to  tell  of  almost  all  the 
living  great  what  they  do  not  wish  told.”  Gold¬ 
smith.  “It  may,  perhaps,  be  necessary  for  a  na¬ 
tive  to  be  more  cautious;  but  a  foreigner  who 
comes  among  us  without  prejudice,  may  be  con¬ 
sidered  as  holding  the  place  of  a  Judge,  and  may 
speak  his  mind  freely.”  Johnson.  “Sir,  a  foreign¬ 
er,  when  he  sends  a  work  from  the  press,  ought 
to  be  on  his  guard  against  catching  the  errour 
and  mistaken  enthusiasm  of  the  people  among 
whom  he  happens  to  be.”  Goldsmith.  “Sir,  he 
wants  only  to  sell  his  history,  and  to  tell  truth; 
one  an  honest,  the  other  a  laudable  motive.” 
Johnson.  “Sir,  they  are  both  laudable  motives. 
It  is  laudable  in  a  man  to  wish  to  live  by  his  la¬ 
bours;  but  he  should  write  so  as  he  may  live  by 
them,  not  so  as  he  may  be  knocked  on  the  head. 
I  would  advise  him  to  be  at  Calais  before  he 
publishes  his  history  of  the  present  age.  A  for¬ 
eigner  who  attaches  himself  to  a  political  party 
in  this  country,  is  in  the  worst  state  that  can  be 
imagined:  he  is  looked  upon  as  a  mere  intermed¬ 
dler.  A  native  may  do  it  from  interest.”  Bos¬ 
well.  “Or  principle.”  Goldsmith.  “There  are 
people  who  tell  a  hundred  political  lies  every 
day,  and  are  not  hurt  by  it.  Surely,  then,  one 
may  tell  truth  with  safety.”  Johnson.  “Why, 
Sir,  in  the  first  place,  he  who  tells  a  hundred  lies 
has  disarmed  the  force  of  his  lies.  But  besides;  a 
man  had  rather  have  a  hundred  lies  told  of  him, 
than  one  truth  which  he  does  not  wish  should  be 
told.”  Goldsmith.  “For  my  part,  I’d  tell  truth, 
and  shame  the  devil.”  Johnson.  “Yes,  Sir;  but 
the  devil  will  be  angry.  I  wish  to  shame  the  devil 
as  much  as  you  do,  but  I  should  choose  to  be  out 
of  the  reach  of  his  claws.”  Goldsmith.  “His 
claws  can  do  you  no  harm,  when  you  have  the 
shield  of  truth.” 


[  1773 

It  having  been  observed  that  there  was  little 
hospitality  in  London; — Johnson.  “Nay,  Sir,  any 
man  who  has  a  name,  or  who  has  the  power  of 
pleasing,  will  be  very  generally  invited  in  Lon¬ 
don.  The  man,  Sterne,  I  have  been  told,  has  had 
engagements  for  three  months.”  Goldsmith. 
“And  a  very  dull  fellow.”  Johnson.  “Why,  no, 
Sir.” 

Martinelli  told  us,  that  for  several  years  he 
lived  much  with  Charles  Townshend,  and  that 
he  ventured  to  tell  him  he  was  a  bad  joker. 
Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  thus  much  I  can  say  upon 
the  subject.  One  day  he  and  a  few  more  agreed 
to  go  and  dine  in  the  country,  and  each  of  them 
was  to  bring  a  friend  in  his  carriage  with  him. 
Charles  Townshend  asked  Fitzherbert  to  go  with 
him,  but  told  him,  ‘You  must  find  somebody  to 
bring  you  back:  I  can  only  carry  you  there.9 
Fitzherbert  did  not  much  like  this  arrangement. 
He  however  consented,  observing  sarcastically, 
‘It  will  do  very  well;  for  then  the  same  jokes 
will  serve  you  in  returning  as  in  going.9  ” 

An  eminent  publick  character  being  men¬ 
tioned; — Johnson.  “I  remember  being  present 
when  he  shewed  himself  to  be  so  corrupted,  or 
at  least  something  so  different  from  what  I  think 
right,  as  to  maintain,  that  a  member  of  parlia¬ 
ment  should  go  along  with  his  party  right  or 
wrong.  Now,  Sir,  this  is  so  remote  from  native 
virtue,  from  scholastick  virtue,  that  a  good  man 
must  have  undergone  a  great  change  before  he 
can  reconcile  himself  to  such  a  doctrine.  It  is 
maintaining  that  you  may  lie  to  the  publick; 
for  you  lie  when  you  call  that  right  which  you 
think  wrong,  or  the  reverse.  A  friend  of  ours, 
who  is  too  much  an  echo  of  that  gentleman,  ob¬ 
served,  that  a  man  who  does  not  stick  uniform¬ 
ly  to  a  party,  is  only  waiting  to  be  bought.  Why 
then,  said  I,  he  is  only  waiting  to  be  what  that 
gentleman  is  already.” 

We  talked  of  the  King’s  coming  to  see  Gold¬ 
smith’s  new  play. — “I  wish  he  would,”  said 
Goldsmith;  adding,  however,  with  an  affected 
indifference,  “Not  that  it  would  do  me  the  least 
good.”  Johnson.  “Well  then,  Sir,  let  us  say  it 
would  do  him  good,  (laughing.)  No,  Sir,  this  af¬ 
fectation  will  not  pass; — it  is  mighty  idle.  In 
such  a  state  as  ours,  who  would  not  wish  to  please 
the  Chief  Magistrate?”  Goldsmith.  “I  do  wish 
to  please  him.  I  remember  a  line  in  Dryden, 

And  every  poet  is  the  monarch's  friend. 

It  ought  to  be  reversed.”  Johnson.  “Nay,  there 
are  finer  lines  in  Dryden  on  this  subject: 

For  colleges  on  bounteous  Kings  depend , 

And  never  rebel  was  to  arts  a  friend .” 


1773]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  213 


General  Paoli  observed,  that  “successful  reb¬ 
els  might.”  Martinelli.  “Happy  rebellions.” 
Goldsmith.  “We  have  no  such  phrase.”  Gen¬ 
eral  Paoli.  “But  have  you  not  the  thing ?”  Gold¬ 
smith.  “Yes;  all  our  happy  revolutions.  They  have 
hurt  our  constitution,  and  will  hurt  it,  till  we 
mend  it  by  another  happy  revolution.”  I  nev¬ 
er  before  discovered  that  my  friend  Goldsmith 
had  so  much  of  the  old  prejudice  in  him. 

General  Paoli,  talking  of  Goldsmith’s  new 
play,  said,  “//  a  fait  un  compliment  tres  gracieux  a 
une  certaine  grande  dame” ;  meaning  a  Duchess  of 
the  first  rank. 

I  expressed  a  doubt  whether  Goldsmith  in¬ 
tended  it,  in  order  that  I  might  hear  the  truth 
from  himself.  It,  perhaps,  was  not  quite  fair  to 
endeavour  to  bring  him  to  a  confession,  as  he 
might  not  wish  to  avow  positively  his  taking  part 
against  the  Court.  He  smiled  and  hesitated.  The 
General  at  once  relieved  him,  by  this  beautiful 
image:  “ Monsieur  Goldsmith  est  comme  la  mer ,  qui 
jette  des  perles  et  beaucoup  d’autres  belles  choses,  sans 
s’en  appercevoir”  Goldsmith.  “  Tres  bien  dit  et  tres 
elegamment.” 

A  person  was  mentioned,  who  it  was  said 
could  take  down  in  short  hand  the  speeches  in 
parliament  with  perfect  exactness.  Johnson.  “Sir, 
it  is  impossible.  I  remember  one,  Angel,  who 
came  to  me  to  write  for  him  a  Preface  or  Dedi¬ 
cation  to  a  book  upon  short  hand,  and  he  pro¬ 
fessed  to  write  as  fast  as  a  man  could  speak.  In 
order  to  try  him,  I  took  down  a  book,  and  read 
while  he  wrote;  and  I  favoured  him,  for  I  read 
more  deliberately  than  usual.  I  had  proceeded 
but  a  very  little  way,  when  he  begged  I  would 
desist,  for  he  could  not  follow  me.”  Hearing 
now  for  the  first  time  of  this  Preface  or  Dedica¬ 
tion,  I  said,  “What  an  expense,  Sir,  do  you  put 
us  to  in  buying  books,  to  which  you  have  writ¬ 
ten  Prefaces  or  Dedications.”  Johnson.  “Why, 
I  have  dedicated  to  the  Royal  family  all  round; 
that  is  to  say,  to  the  last  generation  of  the  Royal 
family.”  Goldsmith.  “And  perhaps,  Sir,  not  one 
sentence  of  wit  in  a  whole  Dedication.”  John¬ 
son.  “Perhaps  not,  Sir.”  Boswell.  “What  then 
is  the  reason  for  applying  to  a  particular  person 
to  do  that  which  any  one  may  do  as  well?” 
Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  one  man  has  greater  read¬ 
iness  at  doing  it  than  another.” 

I  spoke  of  Mr.  Harris,  of  Salisbury,  as  being  a 
very  learned  man,  and  in  particular  an  eminent 
Grecian.  Johnson.  “I  am  not  sure  of  that.  His 
friends  give  him  out  as  such,  but  I  know  not  who 
of  his  friends  are  able  to  judge  of  it.”  Gold¬ 
smith.  “He  is  what  is  much  better:  he  is  a  worthy 
humane  man.”  Johnson.  “Nay,  Sir,  that  is  not 


to  the  purpose  of  our  argument:  that  will  as 
much  prove  that  he  can  play  upon  the  fiddle  as 
well  as  Giardini,  as  that  he  is  an  eminent  Gre¬ 
cian.”  Goldsmith.  “The  greatest  musical  per¬ 
formers  have  but  small  emoluments.  Giardini,  I 
am  told,  does  not  get  above  seven  hundred  a 
year.”  Johnson.  “That  is  indeed  but  little  for  a 
man  to  get,  who  does  best  that  which  so  many 
endeavour  to  do.  There  is  nothing,  I  think,  in 
which  the  power  of  art  is  shown  so  much  as  in 
playing  on  the  fiddle.  In  all  other  things  we  can 
do  something  at  first.  Any  man  will  forge  a  bar 
of  iron,  if  you  give  him  a  hammer;  not  so  well  as 
a  smith,  but  tolerably.  A  man  will  saw  a  piece 
of  wood,  and  make  a  box,  though  a  clumsy  one; 
but  give  him  a  fiddle  and  a  fiddle-stick,  and  he 
can  do  nothing.” 

On  Monday,  April  19,  he  called  on  me  with 
Mrs.  Williams,  in  Mr.  Strahan’s  coach,  and  car¬ 
ried  me  out  to  dine  with  Mr.  Elphinston,  at  his 
academy  at  Kensington.  A  printer  having  ac¬ 
quired  a  fortune  sufficient  to  keep  his  coach,  was 
a  good  topick  for  the  credit  of  literature.  Mrs 
Williams  said,  that  another  printer,  Mr.  Ham¬ 
ilton,  had  not  waited  so  long  as  Mr.  Strahan, 
but  had  kept  his  coach  several  years  sooner. 
Johnson.  “He  was  in  the  right.  Life  is  short. 
The  sooner  that  a  man  begins  to  enjoy  his  wealth 
the  better.” 

Mr.  Elphinston  talked  of  a  new  book  that  was 
much  admired,  and  asked  Dr.  Johnson  if  he  had 
read  it.  Johnson.  “I  have  looked  into  it.”  “What, 
(said  Elphinston,)  have  you  not  read  it  through?” 
Johnson,  offended  at  being  thus  pressed,  and  so 
obliged  to  own  his  cursory  mode  of  reading,  an¬ 
swered  tartly,  “No,  Sir,  do  you  read  books 
through ?” 

He  this  day  again  defended  duelling,  and  put 
his  argument  upon  what  I  have  ever  thought 
the  most  solid  basis;  that  if  publick  war  be  al¬ 
lowed  to  be  consistent  with  morality,  private 
war  must  be  equally  so.  Indeed  we  may  observe 
what  strained  arguments  are  used,  to  reconcile 
war  with  the  Christian  religion.  But,  in  my  opin¬ 
ion,  it  is  exceedingly  clear  that  duelling,  having 
better  reasons  for  its  barbarous  violence,  is  more 
justifiable  than  war,  in  which  thousands  go  forth 
without  any  cause  of  personal  quarrel,  and  mas¬ 
sacre  each  other. 

On  Wednesday,  April  21,  I  dined  with  him 
at  Mr.  Thrale’s.  A  gentleman  attacked  Garrick 
for  being  vain.  Johnson.  “No  wonder,  Sir,  that 
he  is  vain;  a  man  who  is  perpetually  flattered  in 
every  mode  that  can  be  conceived.  So  many  bel¬ 
lows  have  blown  the  fire,  that  one  wonders  he  is 
not  by  this  time  become  a  cinder.”  Boswell. 


BOSWELL 


2 1 4 

4 ‘And  such  bellows  too.  Lord  Mansfield  with  his 
cheeks  like  to  burst:  Lord  Chatham  like  an  /Eo- 
lus.  I  have  read  such  notes  from  them  to  him  as 
were  enough  to  turn  his  head.”  Johnson.  “True. 
When  he  whom  every  body  else  flatters,  flatters 
me,  I  then  am  truly  happy.”  Mrs.  Thrale. 
“The  sentiment  is  in  Congreve,  I  think.”  John¬ 
son.  “Yes,  Madam,  in  The  Way  of  the  World: 

If  there's  delight  in  love ,  'tis  when  I  see 
That  heart  which  others  bleed for,  bleed for  me. 

No,  Sir,  I  should  not  be  surprized  though  Gar¬ 
rick  chained  the  ocean,  and  lashed  the  winds.” 
Boswell.  “Should  it  not  be,  Sir,  lashed  the 
ocean  and  chained  the  winds?”  Johnson.  “No, 
Sir,  recollect  the  original: 

In  Corum  atque  Eurum  solitus  scevire  flagellis 
Barbaras,  /Eolio  nunquam  hoc  in  carcere  passos, 
Ipsum  compedibus  qui  vinxerat  Ennosigceum. 

This  does  very  well,  when  both  the  winds  and 
the  sea  are  personified,  and  mentioned  by  their 
mythological  names,  as  in  Juvenal;  but  when 
they  are  mentioned  in  plain  language,  the  ap¬ 
plication  of  the  epithets  suggested  by  me,  is  the 
most  obvious;  and  accordingly  my  friend  him¬ 
self,  in  his  imitation  of  the  passage  which  de¬ 
scribes  Xerxes,  has 

The  waves  he  lashes,  and  enchains  the  wind. 

The  modes  of  living  in  different  countries,  and 
the  various  views  with  which  men  travel  in  quest 
of  new  scenes,  having  been  talked  of,  a  learned 
gentleman  who  holds  a  considerable  office  in 
the  law,  expatiated  on  the  happiness  of  a  savage 
life ;  and  mentioned  an  instance  of  an  officer  who 
had  actually  lived  for  some  time  in  the  wilds  of 
America,  of  whom,  when  in  that  state,  he  quot¬ 
ed  this  reflection  with  an  air  of  admiration,  as  if 
it  had  been  deeply  philosophical:  “Here  am  I, 
free  and  unrestrained,  amidst  the  rude  magnif¬ 
icence  of  Nature,  with  this  Indian  woman  by 
my  side,  and  this  gun  with  which  I  can  procure 
food  when  I  want  it:  what  more  can  be  desired 
for  human  happiness?”  It  did  not  require  much 
sagacity  to  foresee  that  such  a  sentiment  would 
not  be  permitted  to  pass  without  due  animad¬ 
version.  Johnson.  “Do  not  allow  yourself,  Sir, 
to  be  imposed  upon  by  such  gross  absurdity.  It 
is  sad  stuff;  it  is  brutish.  If  a  bull  could  speak,  he 
might  as  well  exclaim, — Here  am  I  with  this 
cow  and  this  grass;  what  being  can  enjoy  greater 
felicity?” 

We  talked  of  the  melancholy  end  of  a  gentle¬ 
man  who  had  destroyed  himself.  Johnson.  “It 
was  owing  to  imaginary  difficulties  in  his  af¬ 


[  1773 

fairs,  which,  had  he  talked  with  any  friend, 
would  soon  have  vanished.”  Boswell.  “Do  you 
think,  Sir,  that  all  who  commit  suicide  are  mad?” 
Johnson.  “Sir,  they  arc  often  not  universally 
disordered  in  their  intellects,  but  one  passion 
presses  so  upon  them,  that  they  yield  to  it,  and 
commit  suicide,  as  a  passionate  man  will  stab 
another.”  He  added,  44 1  have  often  thought, 
that  after  a  man  has  taken  the  resolution  to  kill 
himself,  it  is  not  courage  in  him  to  do  any  thing, 
however  desperate,  because  he  has  nothing  to 
fear.”  Goldsmith.  “I  don’t  see  that.”  Johnson. 
“Nay,  but  my  dear  Sir,  why  should  not  you  see 
what  every  one  else  sees?”  Goldsmith.  44 It  is  for 
fear  of  something  that  he  has  resolved  to  kill 
himself;  and  will  not  that  timid  disposition  re¬ 
strain  him?”  Johnson.  “It  does  not  signify  that 
the  fear  of  something  made  him  resolve;  it  is  up¬ 
on  the  state  of  his  mind,  after  the  resolution  is 
taken,  that  I  argue.  Suppose  a  man,  either  from 
fear,  or  pride,  or  conscience,  or  whatever  mo¬ 
tive,  has  resolved  to  kill  himself;  when  once  the 
resolution  is  taken,  he  has  nothing  to  fear.  He 
may  then  go  and  take  the  King  of  Prussia  by  the 
nose,  at  the  head  of  his  army.  He  cannot  fear 
the  rack,  who  is  resolved  to  kill  himself.  When 
Eustace  Budgel  was  walking  down  to  the 
Thames,  determined  to  drown  himself,  he 
might,  if  he  pleased,  without  any  apprehension 
of  danger,  have  turned  aside,  and  first  set  fire  to 
St.  James’s  palace.” 

On  Tuesday,  April  27,  Mr.  Beauclerk  and  I 
called  on  him  in  the  morning.  As  we  walked  up 
Johnson’s-court,  I  said,  44 1  have  a  veneration 
for  this  court”;  and  was  glad  to  find  that  Beau- 
clerk  had  the  same  reverential  enthusiasm.  We 
found  him  alone.  We  talked  of  Mr.  Andrew 
Stuart’s  elegant  and  plausible  Letters  to  Lord 
Mansfield:  a  copy  of  which  had  been  sent  by  the 
authour  to  Dr.  Johnson.  Johnson.  “They  have 
not  answered  the  end.  They  have  not  ■  been 
talked  of;  I  have  never  heard  of  them.  This  is 
owing  to  their  not  being  sold.  People  seldom 
read  a  book  which  is  given  to  them;  and  few  are 
given.  The  way  to  spread  a  work  is  to  sell  it  at  a 
low  price.  No  man  will  send  to  buy  a  thing  that 
costs  even  sixpence,  without  an  intention  to  read 
it.”  Boswell.  “May  it  not  be  doubted,  Sir, 
whether  it  be  proper  to  publish  letters,  arraign¬ 
ing  the  ultimate  decision  of  an  important  cause 
by  the  supreme  judicature  of  the  nation?”  John¬ 
son.  “No,  Sir,  I  do  not  think  it  was  wrong  to 
publish  these  letters.  If  they  are  thought  to  do 
harm,  why  not  answer  them?  But  they  will  do 
no  harm;  if  Mr.  Douglas  be  indeed  the  son  of 
Lady  Jane,  he  cannot  be  hurt:  if  he  be  not  her 


1773]  LIFE  OF 

son,  and  yet  has  the  great  estate  of  the  family  of 
Douglas,  he  may  well  submit  to  have  a  pam- 
phlet  against  him  by  Andrew  Stuart.  Sir,  I  think 
such  a  publication  does  good,  as  it  does  good  to 
shew  us  the  possibilities  of  human  life.  And  Sir, 
you  will  not  say  that  the  Douglas  cause  was  a 
cause  of  easy  decision,  when  it  divided  your 
Court  as  much  as  it  could  do,  to  be  determined 
at  all.  When  your  Judges  were  seven  and  seven, 
the  casting  vote  of  the  President  must  be  given 
on  one  side  or  other:  no  matter,  for  my  argu¬ 
ment,  on  which;  one  or  the  other  must  be  taken: 
as  when  I  am  to  move,  there  is  no  matter  which 
leg  I  move  first.  And  then,  Sir,  it  was  otherwise 
determined  here.  No,  Sir,  a  more  dubious  deter¬ 
mination  of  any  question  cannot  be  imagined.551 

He  said,  “Goldsmith  should  not  be  for  ever  at¬ 
tempting  to  shine  in  conversation:  he  has  not 
temper  for  it,  he  is  so  much  mortified  when  he 
fails.  Sir,  a  game  of  jokes  is  composed  partly  of 
skill,  partly  of  chance,  a  man  may  be  beat  at 
times  by  one  who  has  not  the  tenth  part  of  his 
wit.  Now  Goldsmith’s  putting  himself  against 
another,  is  like  a  man  laying  a  hundred  to  one 
who  cannot  spare  the  hundred.  It  is  not  worth  a 
man’s  while.  A  man  should  not  lay  a  hundred  to 
one,  unless  he  can  easily  spare  it,  though  he  has 
a  hundred  chances  for  him:  he  can  get  but  a 
guinea,  and  he  may  lose  a  hundred.  Goldsmith 
is  in  this  state.  When  he  contends,  if  he  gets  the 
better,  it  is  a  very  little  addition  to  a  man  of  his 
literary  reputation:  if  he  does  not  get  the  better, 
he  is  miserably  vexed.55 

Johnson’s  own  superlative  powers  of  wit  set 
him  above  any  risk  of  such  uneasiness.  Garrick 
had  remarked  to  me  of  him,  a  few  days  before, 
“Rabelais  and  all  other  wits  are  nothing  com¬ 
pared  with  him.  You  may  be  diverted  by  them; 
but  Johnson  gives  you  a  forcible  hug,  and  shakes 
laughter  out  of  you,  whether  you  will  or  no.55* 

Goldsmith,  however,  was  often  very  fortunate 
in  his  witty  contests,  even  when  he  entered  the 
lists  with  Johnson  himself.  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds 
was  in  company  with  them  one  day,  when  Gold¬ 
smith  said,  that  he  thought  he  could  write  a  good 

*1  regretted  that  Dr.  Johnson  never  took  the 
trouble  to  study  a  question  which  interested  na¬ 
tions.  He  would  not  even  read  a  pamphlet  which  I 
wrote  upon  it,  entitled  The  Essence  of  the  Douglas 
Cause;  which,  I  have  reason  to  flatter  myself,  had 
considerable  effect  in  favour  of  Mr.  Douglas;  of 
whose  legitimate  filiation  I  was  then,  and  am  still, 
firmly  convinced.  Let  me  add,  that  no  fact  can  be 
more  respectably  ascertained,  than  by  the  judge¬ 
ment  of  the  most  august  tribunal  in  the  world;  a 
judgment,  in  which  Lord  Mansfield  and  Lord 
Camden  united  in  1769,  and  from  which  only  five 
of  a  numerous  body  entered  a  protest. 


JOHNSON  215 

fable,  mentioned  the  simplicity  which  that  kind 
of  composition  requires,  and  observed,  that  in 
most  fables  the  animals  introduced  seldom  talk 
in  character.  “For  instance,  (said  he,)  the  fable 
of  the  little  fishes,  who  saw  birds  fly  over  their 
heads,  and  envying  them,  petitioned  Jupiter  to 
be  changed  into  birds.  The  skill  (continued  he,) 
consists  in  making  them  talk  like  little  fishes.55 
While  he  indulged  himself  in  this  fanciful  rev¬ 
erie,  he  observed  Johnson  shaking  his  sides,  and 
laughing.  Upon  which  he  smartly  proceeded, 
“Why,  Dr.  Johnson,  this  is  not  so  easy  as  you 
seem  to  think;  for  if  you  were  to  make  little 
fishes  talk,  they  would  talk  like  whales.55 

Johnson,  though  remarkable  for  his  great  va¬ 
riety  of  composition,  never  exercised  his  talents 
in  fable,  except  we  allow  his  beautiful  tale  pub¬ 
lished  in  Mrs.  Williams’s  Miscellanies  to  be  of 
that  species.  I  have,  however,  found  among  his 
manuscript  collections  the  following  sketch  of 
one: — 

“Glow-worm2  lying  in  the  garden  saw  a  can¬ 
dle  in  a  neighbouring  palace, — and  complained 
of  the  littleness  of  his  own  light; — another  ob¬ 
served — wait  a  little; — soon  dark, — have  out¬ 
lasted  7 roXX  [many]  of  these  glaring  lights  which 
are  only  brighter  as  they  haste  to  nothing.55 

On  Thursday,  April  29,  I  dined  with  him  at 
General  Oglethorpe’s,  where  were  Sir  Joshua 
Reynolds,  Mr.  Langton,  Dr.  Goldsmith,  and  Mr. 
Thrale.  I  was  very  desirous  to  get  Dr.  Johnson 
absolutely  fixed  in  his  resolution  to  go  with  me 
to  the  Hebrides  this  year;  and  I  told  him  that  I 
had  received  a  letter  from  Dr.  Robertson  the 
historian,  upon  the  subject,  with  which  he  was 
much  pleased;  and  now  talked  in  such  a  man¬ 
ner  of  his  long-intended  tour,  that  I  was  satisfied 
he  meant  to  fulfil  his  engagement. 

The  custom  of  eating  dogs  at  Otaheit6  being 
mentioned,  Goldsmith  observed,  that  this  was 
also  a  custom  in  China;  that  a  dog-butcher  is  as 
common  there  as  any  other  butcher;  and  that 
when  he  walks  abroad  all  the  dogs  fall  on  him. 
Johnson.  “That  is  not  owing  to  his  killing  dogs, 
Sir.  I  remember  a  butcher  at  Lichfield,  whom  a 
dog  that  was  in  the  house  where  I  lived,  always 
attacked.  It  is  the  smell  of  carnage  which  pro¬ 
vokes  this,  let  the  animals  he  has  killed  be  what 
they  may.”  GoldSxMith.  “Yes,  there  is  a  general 
abhorrence  in  animals  at  the  signs  of  massacre. 
If  you  put  a  tub  full  of  blood  into  a  stable,  the 
horses  are  like  to  go  mad.”  Johnson.  “I  doubt 

2It  has  already  been  observed  (ante}  159),  that 
one  of  his  first  Essays  was  a  Latin  Poem  on  a  glow¬ 
worm;  but  whether  it  be  any  where  extant,  has  not 
been  ascertained.  [M.] 


216  BOSWELL  [1773 


that.”  Goldsmith.  “Nay,  Sir,  it  is  a  fact  well 
authenticated.”  Thrale.  “You  had  better  prove 
it  before  you  put  it  into  your  book  on  natural 
history.  You  may  do  it  in  my  stable  if  you  will.” 
Johnson.  “Nay,  Sir,  I  would  not  have  him  prove 
it.  If  he  is  content  to  take  his  information  from 
others,  he  may  get  through  his  book  with  little 
trouble,  and  without  much  endangering  his  rep¬ 
utation.  But  if  he  makes  experiments  for  so  com¬ 
prehensive  a  book  as  his,  there  would  be  no  end 
to  them;  his  erroneous  assertions  would  then  fall 
upon  himself,  and  he  might  be  blamed  for  not 
having  made  experiments  as  to  every  particular.” 

The  character  of  Mallet  having  been  intro¬ 
duced,  and  spoken  of  slightingly  by  Goldsmith; 
Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  Mallet  had  talents  enough 
to  keep  his  literary  reputation  alive  as  long  as 
he  himself  lived;  and  that,  let  me  tell  you,  is  a 
good  deal.”  Goldsmith.  “But  I  cannot  agree 
that  it  was  so.  His  literary  reputation  was  dead 
long  before  his  natural  death.  I  consider  an  au- 
thour’s  literary  reputation  to  be  alive  only  while 
his  name  will  ensure  a  good  price  for  his  copy 
from  the  booksellers.  I  will  get  you  (to  Johnson,) 
a  hundred  guineas  for  any  thing  whatever  that 
you  shall  write,  if  you  put  your  name  to  it.” 

Dr.  Goldsmith’s  new  play,  She  Stoops  to  Con - 
quer ,  being  mentioned;  Johnson.  “I  know  of  no 
comedy  for  many  years  that  has  so  much  ex¬ 
hilarated  an  audience,  that  has  answered  so 
much  the  great  end  of  comedy — making  an  au¬ 
dience  merry.” 

Goldsmith  having  said,  that  Garrick’s  com¬ 
pliment  to  the  Queen,  which  he  intoduced  into 
the  play  of  The  Chances ,  which  he  had  altered 
and  revised  this  year,  was  mean  and  gross  flat¬ 
tery;  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  I  would  not  write ,  I 
would  not  give  solemnly  under  my  hand,  a  char¬ 
acter  beyond  what  I  thought  really  true;  but  a 
speech  on  the  stage,  let  it  flatter  ever  so  extrava¬ 
gantly,  is  formular.  It  has  always  been  formular 
to  flatter  Kings  and  Queens;  so  much  so,  that 
even  in  our  church-service  we  have  ‘our  most 
religious  King,’  used  indiscriminately,  whoever 
is  King.  Nay,  they  even  flatter  themselves; — cwe 
have  been  graciously  pleased  to  grant.’  No  mod¬ 
ern  flattery,  however,  is  so  gross  as  that  of  the 
Augustan  age,  where  the  Emperour  was  deified. 
‘ Prasens  Divus  habebitur  Augustus'  And  as  to 
meanness,  (rising  into  warmth,)  how  is  it  mean 
in  a  player, — a  showman, — a  fellow  who  exhib¬ 
its  himself  for  a  shilling,  to  flatter  his  Queen? 
The  attempt,  indeed,  was  dangerous;  for  if  it 
had  missed,  what  became  of  Garrick,  and  what 
became  of  the  Queen?  As  Sir  William  Temple 
says  of  a  great  General,  it  is  necessary  not  only 


that  his  designs  be  formed  in  a  masterly  man¬ 
ner,  but  that  they  should  be  attended  with  suc¬ 
cess.  Sir,  it  is  right,  at  a  time  when  the  Royal 
Family  is  not  generally  liked,  to  let  it  be  seen 
that  the  people  like  at  least  one  of  them.”  Sir 
Joshua  Reynolds.  “I  do  not  perceive  why  the 
profession  of  a  player  should  be  despised;  for  the 
great  and  ultimate  end  of  all  the  employments 
of  mankind  is  to  produce  amusement.  Garrick 
produces  more  amusement  than  any  body.” 
Boswell.  “You  say,  Dr.  Johnson,  that  Garrick 
exhibits  himself  for  a  shilling.  In  this  respect  he 
is  only  on  a  footing  with  a  lawyer  who  exhibits 
himself  for  his  fee,  and  even  will  maintain  any 
nonsense  or  absurdity,  if  the  case  requires  it. 
Garrick  refuses  a  play  or  a  part  which  he  does 
not  like;  a  lawyer  never  refuses.”  Johnson. 
“Why,  Sir,  what  does  this  prove?  only  that  a 
lawyer  is  worse.  Boswell  is  now  like  Jack  in  The 
Tale  of  a  Tub ,  who,  when  he  is  puzzled  by  an 
argument,  hangs  himself.  He  thinks  I  shall  cut 
him  down,  but  I’ll  let  him  hang.”  (laughing 
vociferously.)  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds.  “Mr.  Bos¬ 
well  thinks  that  the  profession  of  a  lawyer  being 
unquestionably  honourable,  if  he  can  show  the 
profession  of  a  player  to  be  more  honourable,  he 
proves  his  argument.” 

On  Friday,  April  30,  I  dined  with  him  at  Mr. 
Beauclerk’s,  where  were  Lord  Charlemont,  Sir 
Joshua  Reynolds,  and  some  more  members  of 
the  Literary  Club,  whom  he  had  obligingly 
invited  to  meet  me,  as  I  was  this  evening  to  be 
balloted  for  as  candidate  for  admission  into  that 
distinguished  society.  Johnson  had  done  me  the 
honour  to  propose  me,  and  Beauclerk  was  very 
zealous  for  me. 

Goldsmith  being  mentioned;  Johnson.  “It  is 
amazing  how  little  Goldsmith  knows.  He  seldom 
comes  where  he  is  not  more  ignorant  than  any 
one  else.”  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds.  “Yet  there  is 
no  man  whose  company  is  more  liked.”  John¬ 
son.  “To  be  sure,  Sir.  When  people  find  a  man 
of  the  most  distinguished  abilities  as  a  writer, 
their  inferiour  while  he  is  with  them,  it  must  be 
highly  gratifying  to  them.  What  Goldsmith  com¬ 
ically  says  of  himself  is  very  true, — he  always 
gets  the  better  when  he  argues  alone;  meaning, 
that  he  is  master  of  a  subject  in  his  study,  and 
can  write  well  upon  it;  but  when  he  comes  into 
company,  grows  confused,  and  unable  to  talk. 
Take  him  as  a  poet,  his  Traveller  is  a  very  fine 
performance;  ay,  and  so  is  his  Deserted  Village , 
were  it  not  sometimes  too  much  the  echo  of  his 
Traveller.  Whether,  indeed,  we  take  him  as  a 
poet, — as  a  comick  writer, — or  as  an  historian, 
he  stands  in  the  first  class.”  Boswell.  “An  his- 


1773]  LIFE  OF 

torian !  My  dear  Sir,  you  surely  will  not  rank  his 
compilation  of  the  Roman  History  with  the 
works  of  other  historians  of  this  age?55  Johnson. 
“Why,  who  are  before  him?55  Boswell.  “Hume, 
— Robertson, — Lord  Lyttelton.55  Johnson  (his 
antipathy  to  the  Scotch  beginning  to  rise).  “I 
have  not  read  Hume;  but,  doubtless, Goldsmith’s 
History  is  better  than  the  verbiage  of  Robertson, 
or  the  foppery  of  Dalrymple.55  Boswell.  “Will 
you  not  admit  the  superiority  of  Robertson,  in 
whose  History  we  find  such  penetration — such 
painting?55  Johnson.  “Sir,  you  must  consider 
how  that  penetration  and  that  painting  are  em¬ 
ployed.  It  is  not  history,  it  is  imagination.  He 
who  describes  what  he  never  saw,  draws  from 
fancy.  Robertson  paints  minds  as  Sir  Joshua 
paints  faces  in  a  history-piece:  he  imagines  an 
heroic  countenance.  You  must  look  upon  Rob¬ 
ertson’s  work  as  romance,  and  try  it  by  that 
standard.  History  it  is  not.  Besides,  Sir,  it  is  the 
great  excellence  of  a  writer  to  put  into  his  book 
as  much  as  his  book  will  hold.  Goldsmith  has 
done  this  in  his  History .  Now  Robertson  might 
have  put  twice  as  much  into  his  book.  Robert¬ 
son  is  like  a  man  who  has  packed  gold  in  wool: 
the  wool  takes  up  more  room  than  the  gold.  No, 
Sir;  I  always  thought  Robertson  would  be 
crushed  by  his  own  weight, —  would  be  buried 
under  his  own  ornaments.  Goldsmith  tells  you 
shortly  all  you  want  to  know:  Robertson  detains 
you  a  great  deal  too  long.  No  man  will  read 
Robertson’s  cumbrous  detail  a  second  time;  but 
Goldsmith’s  plain  narrative  will  please  again 
and  again.  I  would  say  to  Robertson  what  an 
old  tutor  of  a  college  said  to  one  of  his  pupils: 
'Read  over  your  compositions,  and  where  ever 
you  meet  with  a  passage  which  you  think  is  par¬ 
ticularly  fine,  strike  it  out.5  Goldsmith’s  abridge¬ 
ment  is  better  than  that  of  Lucius  Florus  or 
Eutropius;  and  I  will  venture  to  say,  that  if  you 
compare  him  with  Vertot,  in  the  same  places  of 
the  Roman  History,  you  will  find  that  he  excels 
Vertot.  Sir,  he  has  the  art  of  compiling,  and  of 
saying  every  thing  he  has  to  say  in  a  pleasing 
manner.  He  is  now  writing  a  Natural  History 
and  will  make  it  as  entertaining  as  a  Persian 
Tale.55 

I  cannot  dismiss  the  present  topick  without 
observing,  that  it  is  probable  that  Dr.  Johnson, 
who  owned  that  he  often  “  talked  for  victory,” 
rather  urged  plausible  objections  to  Dr.  Robert¬ 
son’s  excellent  historical  works,  in  the  ardour  of 
contest,  than  expressed  his  real  and  decided 
opinion;  for  it  is  not  easy  to  suppose,  that  he 
should  so  widely  differ  from  the  rest  of  the  liter¬ 
ary  world. 


JOHNSON  217 

Johnson.  “I  remember  once  being  with  Gold¬ 
smith  in  Westminster-abbey.  While  we  sur¬ 
veyed  the  Poets’  Corner,  I  said  to  him, 

Forsitan  et  nostrum  nomen  miscebitur  istis.1 

When  we  got  to  Temple-bar  he  stopped  me, 
pointed  to  the  heads  upon  it,  and  slily  whis¬ 
pered  to  me, 

Forsitan  et  nostrum  nomen  miscebitur  istis.”  2 

Johnson  praised  John  Bunyan  highly.  “His 
Pilgrim's  Progress  has  great  merit,  both  for  inven¬ 
tion,  imagination,  and  the  conduct  of  the  story; 
and  it  has  had  the  best  evidence  of  its  merit,  the 
general  and  continued  approbation  of  mankind. 
Few  books,  I  believe,  have  had  a  more  extensive 
sale.  It  is  remarkable,  that  it  begins  very  much 
like  the  poem  of  Dante;  yet  there  was  no  trans¬ 
lation  of  Dante  when  Bunyan  wrote.  There  is 
reason  to  think  that  he  had  read  Spenser.” 

A  proposition  which  had  been  agitated,  that 
monuments  to  eminent  persons  should,  for  the 
time  to  come,  be  erected  in  St.  Paul’s  church 
as  well  as  in  Westminster-abbey,  was  mentioned; 
and  it  was  asked,  who  should  be  honoured  by 
having  his  monument  first  erected  there.  Some¬ 
body  suggested  Pope.  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  as 
Pope  was  a  Roman  Catholick,  I  would  not  have 
his  to  be  first.  I  think  Milton’s  rather  should 
have  the  precedence.3  I  think  more  highly  of 
him  now  than  I  did  at  twenty.  There  is  more 
thinking  in  him  and  in  Butler,  than  in  any  of 
our  poets.” 

Some  of  the  company  expressed  a  wonder 
why  the  authour  of  so  excellent  a  book  as  The 
Whole  Duty  of  Man  should  conceal  himself.  John¬ 
son.  “There  may  be  different  reasons  assigned 
for  this,  any  one  of  which  would  be  very  suffi¬ 
cient.  He  may  have  been  a  clergyman,  and  may 
have  thought  that  his  religious  counsels  would 
have  less  weight  when  known  to  come  from  a 
man  whose  profession  was  Theology.  He  may 
have  been  a  man  whose  practice  was  not  suit¬ 
able  to  his  principles,  so  that  his  character 
might  injure  the  effect  of  his  book,  which  he 
had  written  in  a  season  of  penitence.  Or  he 
may  have  been  a  man  of  rigid  self-denial,  so 
that  he  would  have  no  reward  for  his  pious 

1Ovid,  De  Art.  Amand .  I.  iii.  13  [339]. 

2In  allusion  to  Dr.  Johnson’s  supposed  political 
principles,  and  perhaps  his  own. 

3Here  is  another  instance  of  his  high  admiration 
of  Milton  as  a  Poet,  notwithstanding  his  just  ab¬ 
horrence  of  that  sour  Republican’s  political  prin¬ 
ciples.  His  candour  and  discrimination  are  equally 
conspicuous.  Let  us  hear  no  more  of  his  “injustice 
to  Milton.” 


218  BOSWELL  [1773 


labours  while  in  this  world,  but  refer  it  all  to  a 
future  state.” 

The  gentlemen  went  away  to  their  club,  and 
I  was  left  at  Beauclerk’s  till  the  fate  of  my  elec¬ 
tion  should  be  announced  to  me.  I  sat  in  a  state 
of  anxiety  which  even  the  charming  conversa¬ 
tion  of  Lady  Di  Beauclerk  could  not  entirely 
dissipate.  In  a  short  time  I  received  the  agree¬ 
able  intelligence  that  I  was  chosen.  I  hastened 
to  the  place  of  meeting,  and  was  introduced  to 
such  a  society  as  can  seldom  be  found.  Mr.  Ed¬ 
mund  Burke,  whom  I  then  saw  for  the  first  time, 
and  whose  splendid  talents  had  long  made  me 
ardently  wish  for  his  acquaintance;  Dr.  Nugent, 
Mr.  Garrick,  Dr.  Goldsmith,  Mr.  (afterwards 
Sir  William)  Jones,  and  the  company  with  whom 
I  had  dined.  Upon  my  entrance,  Johnson  placed 
himself  behind  a  chair,  on  which  he  leaned  as 
on  a  desk  or  pulpit,  and  with  humorous  formal¬ 
ity  gave  me  a  Charge ,  pointing  out  the  conduct 
expected  from  me  as  a  good  member  of  this 
club. 

Goldsmith  produced  some  very  absurd  verses 
which  had  been  publickly  recited  to  an  audi¬ 
ence  for  money.  Johnson.  “I  can  match  this 
nonsense.  There  was  a  poem  called  Eugenio , 
which  came  out  some  years  ago,  and  concludes 
thus: 

And  now,  ye  triflings  self -assuming  elves, 

Brimful  of  pride,  of  nothing ,  of  yourselves. 

Survey  Eugenio ,  view  him  o'er  and  o' er. 

Then  sink  into  yourselves,  and  be  no  more.1 

Nay,  Dryden  in  his  poem  on  the  Royal  Society, 
has  these  lines: 

Then  we  upon  our  globe's  last  verge  shall  go, 

And  see  the  ocean  leaning  on  the  sky; 

From  thence  our  rolling  neighbours  we  shall  know, 
And  on  the  lunar  world  securely  pry." 

JDr.  Johnson’s  memory  here  was  not  perfectly 
accurate:  Eugenio  does  not  conclude  thus.  There 
are  eight  more  lines  after  the  last  of  those  quoted 
by  him;  and  the  passage  which  he  meant  to  recite 
is  as  follows: 

Say  now  ye  fluttering,  poor  assuming  elves, 

Stark  full  of  pride ,  of  folly,  of —yourselves; 

Say  where's  the  wretch  of  all  your  impious  crew 
Who  dares  confront  his  character  to  view? 

Behold  Eugenio,  view  him  o'er  and  o'er, 

Then  sink  into  yourselves,  and  be  no  more. 

Mr.  Reed  informs  me  that  the  Authour  of  Eu¬ 
genio,  a  Wine  Merchant  at  Wrexham  in  Denbigh¬ 
shire,  soon  after  its  publication,  viz.  17th  May, 
1737,  cut  his  own  throat;  and  that  it  appears  by 
Swift’s  Works  that  the  poem  had  been  shewn  to 
him,  and  received  some  of  his  corrections.  Johnson 
had  read  Eugenio  on  bis  first  coming  to  town,  for 
we  see  it  mentioned  in  one  of  his  letters  to  Mr. 
Gave,  which  has  been  inserted  in  this  work;  [ante, 
P-31]* 


Talking  of  puns,  Johnson,  who  had  a  great 
contempt  for  that  species  of  wit,  deigned  to 
allow  that  there  was  one  good  pun  in  Menagiana, 
I  think  on  the  word  corps. 2 

Much  pleasant  conversation  passed,  which 
Johnson  relished  with  great  good  humour.  But 
his  conversation  alone,  or  what  led  to  it,  or  was 
interwoven  with  it,  is  the  business  of  this  work. 

On  Saturday,  May  1,  we  dined  by  ourselves 
at  our  old  rendezvous,  the  Mitre  tavern.  He  was 
placid,  but  not  much  disposed  to  talk.  He  ob¬ 
served  that  “The  Irish  mix  better  with  the  Eng¬ 
lish  than  the  Scotch  do;  their  language  is  nearer 
to  English;  as  a  proof  of  which,  they  succeed 
very  well  as  players,  which  Scotchmen  do  not. 
Then,  Sir,  they  have  not  that  extreme  national¬ 
ity  which  we  find  in  the  Scotch.  I  will  do  you, 
Boswell,  the  justice  to  say,  that  you  are  the  most 
unscottified  of  your  countrymen.  You  are  almost 
the  only  instance  of  a  Scotchman  that  I  have 
known,  who  did  not  at  every  other  sentence 
bring  in  some  other  Scotchman.” 

We  drank  tea  with  Mrs.  Williams.  I  intro¬ 
duced  a  question  which  has  been  much  agitated 
in  the  Church  of  Scotland,  whether  the  claim  of 
lay-patrons  to  present  ministers  to  parishes  be 
well  founded;  and  supposing  it  to  be  well  found¬ 
ed,  whether  it  ought  to  be  exercised  without  the 
concurrence  of  the  people?  That  Church  is  com¬ 
posed  of  a  series  of  judicatures:  a  Presbytery,  a 
Synod,  and  finally,  a  General  Assembly;  before 
all  of  which,  this  matter  may  be  contended:  and 
in  some  cases  the  Presbytery  having  refused  to 
induct  or  settle ,  as  they  call  it,  the  person  pre¬ 
sented  by  the  patron,  it  has  been  found  necessary 
to  appeal  to  the  General  Assembly.  He  said,  I 
might  see  the  subject  well  treated  in  the  Defence 
of  Pluralities;  and  although  he  thought  that  a 

2I  formerly  thought  that  I  had  perhaps  mistaken 
the  word,  and  imagined  it  to  be  Corps,  from  its  sim¬ 
ilarity  of  sound  to  the  real  one.  For  an  accurate 
and  shrewd  unknown  gentleman,  to  whom  I  am 
indebted  for  some  remarks  on  my  work,  observes 
on  this  passage — “Q.  if  not  on  the  word  Fort?  A 
vociferous  French  preacher  said  of  Bourdaloue, 
£I1  preche  fort  bien,  et  moi  bien  fort.' — Menagiana. 
See  also  Anecdotes  Litteraires,  Article  Bourdaloue.” 
But  my  ingenious  and  obliging  correspondent,  Mr. 
Abercrombie  of  Philadelphia,  has  pointed  out  to 
me  the  following  passage  in  Menagiana;  which  ren¬ 
ders  the  preceding  conjecture  unnecessary,  and 
confirms  my  original  statement: 

iCAfadme  de  Bourdonne,  Chanoinesse  de  Remiremont , 
venoit  d' entendre  un  discours  plein  defeu  et  d' esprit,  mais 
fort  pen  solide,  et  tres-irregulier.  Une  de  ses  amies,  qui y 
prenoit  interet  pour  I'orateur,  lui  dit  en  sortant ,  lEh  bien, 
Madme,  que  vous  semble-t-il  de  ce  que  vous  venez  d' en¬ 
tendre?— Qu'il  y  a  d' esprit?' — c//  y  a  tant,  repondit 
Madme  de  Bourdonne,  que  je  n'y  ai  pas  vu  de  corps.'  " — 
Menagiana  vol.  ii,  p.  64.  Amsterd.,  i713- 


1773  ]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  219 


patron  should  exercise  his  right  with  tenderness 
to  the  inclinations  of  the  people  of  a  parish,  he 
was  very  clear  as  to  his  right.  Then  supposing 
the  question  to  be  pleaded  before  the  General 
Assembly,  he  dictated  to  me  what  follows: 

“Against  the  right  of  patrons  is  commonly 
opposed,  by  the  inferiour  judicatures,  the  plea 
of  conscience.  Their  conscience  tells  them,  that 
the  people  ought  to  choose  their  pastor;  their 
conscience  tells  them  that  they  ought  not  to  im¬ 
pose  upon  a  congregation  a  minister  ungrateful 
and  unacceptable  to  his  auditors.  Conscience  is 
nothing  more  than  a  conviction  felt  by  ourselves 
of  something  to  be  done,  or  something  to  be 
avoided;  and  in  questions  of  simple  unperplexed 
morality,  conscience  is  very  often  a  guide  that 
may  be  trusted.  But  before  conscience  can  de¬ 
termine,  the  state  of  the  question  is  supposed  to 
be  completely  known.  In  questions  of  law,  or  of 
fact,  conscience  is  very  often  confounded  with 
opinion.  No  man’s  conscience  can  tell  him  the 
right  of  another  man;  they  must  be  known  by 
rational  investigation  or  historical  enquiry. 
Opinion,  which  he  that  holds  it  may  call  his 
conscience,  may  teach  some  men  that  religion 
would  be  promoted,  and  quiet  preserved,  by 
granting  to  the  people  universally  the  choice  of 
their  ministers.  But  it  is  a  conscience  very  ill  in¬ 
formed  that  violates  the  rights  of  one  man,  for 
the  convenience  of  another.  Religion  cannot  be 
promoted  by  injustice:  and  it  was  never  yet 
found  that  a  popular  election  was  very  quietly 
transacted. 

“That  justice  would  be  violated  by  transfer¬ 
ring  to  the  people  the  right  of  patronage,  is 
apparent  to  all  who  know  whence  that  right  had 
its  original.  The  right  of  patronage  was  not  at 
first  a  privilege  torn  by  power  from  unresisting 
poverty.  It  is  not  an  authority  at  first  usurped 
in  times  of  ignorance,  and  established  only  by 
succession  and  by  precedents.  It  is  not  a  grant 
capriciously  made  from  a  higher  tyrant  to  a 
lower.  It  is  a  right  dearly  purchased  by  the  first 
possessors,  and  justly  inherited  by  those  that 
succeeded  them.  When  Christianity  was  estab¬ 
lished  in  this  island,  a  regular  mode  of  publick 
worship  was  prescribed.  Publick  worship  re¬ 
quires  a  publick  place;  and  the  proprietors  of 
lands,  as  they  were  converted,  built  churches 
for  their  families  and  their  vassals.  For  the  main¬ 
tenance  of  ministers,  they  settled  a  certain  por¬ 
tion  of  their  lands;  and  a  district,  through  which 
each  minister  was  required  to  extend  his  care, 
was,  by  that  circumscription,  constituted  a  par¬ 
ish.  This  is  a  position  so  generally  received  in 
England,  that  the  extent  of  a  manor  and  of  a 


parish  are  regularly  received  for  each  other.  The 
churches  which  the  proprietors  of  lands  had 
thus  built  and  thus  endowed,  they  justly  thought 
themselves  entitled  to  provide  with  ministers; 
and  where  the  episcopal  government  prevails, 
the  Bishop  has  no  power  to  reject  a  man  nomi¬ 
nated  by  the  patron,  but  for  some  crime  that 
might  exclude  him  from  the  priesthood.  For  the 
endowment  of  the  church  being  the  gift  of  the 
landlord,  he  was  consequently  at  liberty  to  give 
it  according  to  his  choice,  to  any  man  capable 
of  performing  the  holy  offices.  The  people  did 
not  choose  him,  because  the  people  did  not  pay 
him. 

“We  hear  it  sometimes  urged,  that  this  origi¬ 
nal  right  is  passed  out  of  memory,  and  is  oblit¬ 
erated  and  obscured  by  many  translations  of 
property  and  changes  of  government;  that 
scarce  any  church  is  now  in  the  hands  of  the 
heirs  of  the  builders;  and  that  the  present  per¬ 
sons  have  entered  subsequently  upon  the  pre¬ 
tended  rights  by  a  thousand  accidental  and  un¬ 
known  causes.  Much  of  this,  perhaps,  is  true. 
But  how  is  the  right  of  patronage  extinguished? 
If  the  right  followed  the  lands,  it  is  possessed  by 
the  same  equity  by  which  the  lands  are  pos¬ 
sessed.  It  is,  in  effect,  part  of  the  manor,  and 
protected  by  the  same  laws  with  every  other 
privilege.  Let  us  suppose  an  estate  forfeited  by 
treason,  and  granted  by  the  Crown  to  a  new 
family.  With  the  lands  were  forfeited  all  the 
rights  appendant  to  those  lands;  by  the  same 
power  that  grants  the  lands,  the  rights  also  are 
granted.  The  right  lost  to  the  patron  falls  not  to 
the  people,  but  is  either  retained  by  the  Crown, 
or  what  to  the  people  is  the  same  thing,  is  by  the 
Crown  given  away.  Let  it  change  hands  ever  so 
often,  it  is  possessed  by  him  that  receives  it  with 
the  same  right  as  it  was  conveyed.  It  may,  in¬ 
deed,  like  all  our  possessions,  be  forcibly  seized 
or  fraudulently  obtained.  But  no  injury  is  still 
done  to  the  people;  for  what  they  never  had, 
they  have  never  lost.  Caius  may  usurp  the  right 
of  Titius;  but  neither  Caius  nor  Titius  injure  the 
people;  and  no  man’s  conscience,  however  ten¬ 
der  or  however  active,  can  prompt  him  to  restore 
what  may  be  proved  to  have  been  never  taken 
away.  Supposing,  what  I  think  cannot  be  proved, 
that  a  popular  election  of  ministers  were  to  be 
desired,  our  desires  are  not  the  measure  of 
equity.  It  were  to  be  desired  that  power  should 
be  only  in  the  hands  of  the  merciful,  and  riches 
in  the  possession  of  the  generous;  but  the  law 
must  leave  both  riches  ana  power  where  it  finds 
them:  and  must  often  leave  riches  with  the  cov¬ 
etous,  and  power  with  the  cruel.  Convenience 


220 


BOSWELL 


may  be  a  rule  in  little  things,  where  no  other 
rule  has  been  established.  But  as  the  great  end 
of  government  is  to  give  every  man  his  own,  no 
inconvenience  is  greater  than  that  of  making 
right  uncertain.  Nor  is  any  man  more  an  enemy 
to  publick  peace,  than  he  who  fills  weak  heads 
with  imaginary  claims,  and  breaks  the  series  of 
civil  subordination,  by  inciting  the  lower  classes 
of  mankind  to  encroach  upon  the  higher. 

“Having  thus  shown  that  the  right  of  patron¬ 
age,  being  originally  purchased,  may  be  legally 
transferred,  and  that  it  is  now  in  the  hands  of 
lawful  possessors,  at  least  as  certainly  as  any 
other  right;— we  have  left  to  the  advocates  of 
the  people  no  other  plea  than  that  of  conven¬ 
ience.  Let  us,  therefore,  now  consider  what  the 
people  would  really  gain  by  a  general  abolition 
of  the  right  of  patronage.  What  is  most  to  be 
desired  by  such  a  change  is,  that  the  country 
should  be  supplied  with  better  ministers.  But 
why  should  we  suppose  that  the  parish  will  make 
a  wiser  choice  than  the  patron?  If  we  suppose 
mankind  actuated  by  interest,  the  patron  is  more 
likely  to  choose  with  caution,  because  he  will 
suffer  more  by  choosing  wrong.  By  the  deficien¬ 
cies  of  his  minister,  or  by  his  vices,  he  is  equally 
offended  with  the  rest  of  the  congregation;  but 
he  will  have  this  reason  more  to  lament  them, 
that  they  will  be  imputed  to  his  absurdity  or 
corruption.  The  qualifications  of  a  minister  are 
well  known  to  be  learning  and  piety.  Of  his 
learning  the  patron  is  probably  the  only  judge 
in  the  parish;  and  of  his  piety  not  less  a  judge 
than  others;  and  is  more  likely  to  enquire  min¬ 
utely  and  diligently  before  he  gives  a  presenta¬ 
tion,  than  one  of  the  parochial  rabble,  who  can 
give  nothing  but  a  vote.  It  may  be  urged,  that 
though  the  parish  might  not  choose  better  min¬ 
isters,  they  would  at  least  choose  ministers  whom 
they  like  better,  and  who  would  therefore  offici¬ 
ate  with  greater  efficacy.  That  ignorance  and 
perverseness  should  always  obtain  what  they 
like,  was  never  considered  as  the  end  of  govern¬ 
ment;  of  which  it  is  the  great  and  standing  ben¬ 
efit,  that  the  wise  see  for  the  simple,  and  the 
regular  act  for  the  capricious.  But  that  this  argu¬ 
ment  supposes  the  people  capable  of  judging, 
and  resolute  to  act  according  to  their  best  judge¬ 
ments,  though  this  be  sufficiently  absurd,  it  is 
not  all  its  absurdity.  It  supposes  not  only  wis¬ 
dom,  but  unanimity  in  those,  who  upon  no 
other  occasions  are  unanimous  or  wise.  If  by 
some  strange  concurrence  all  the  voices  of  a 
parish  should  unite  in  the  choice  of  any  single 
man,  though  I  could  not  charge  the  patron 
with  injustice  for  presenting  a  minister,  I  should 


[  1773 

censure  him  as  unkind  and  injudicious.  But,  it 
is  evident,  that  as  in  all  other  popular  elections 
there  will  be  contrariety  of  judgement  and  acri¬ 
mony  of  passion,  a  parish  upon  every  vacancy 
would  break  into  factions,  and  the  contest  for 
the  choice  of  a  minister  would  set  neighbours  at 
variance,  and  bring  discord  into  families.  The 
minister  would  be  taught  all  the  arts  of  a  candi¬ 
date,  would  flatter  some,  and  bribe  others;  and 
the  electors,  as  in  all  other  cases,  would  call  for 
holidays  and  ale,  and  break  the  heads  of  each 
other  during  the  jollity  of  the  canvas.  The  time 
must,  however,  come  at  last,  when  one  of  the 
factions  must  prevail,  and  one  of  the  ministers 
get  possession  of  the  church.  On  what  terms  does 
he  enter  upon  his  ministry  but  those  of  enmity 
with  half  his  parish?  By  what  prudence  or  what 
diligence  can  he  hope  to  conciliate  the  affections 
of  that  party  by  whose  defeat  he  has  obtained 
his  living?  Every  man  who  voted  against  him 
will  enter  the  church  with  hanging  head  and 
downcast  eyes,  afraid  to  encounter  that  neigh¬ 
bour  by  whose  vote  and  influence  he  has  been 
overpowered.  He  will  hate  his  neighbour  for 
opposing  him,  and  his  minister  for  having  pros¬ 
pered  by  the  opposition;  and  as  he  will  never 
see  him  but  with  pain,  he  will  never  see  him 
but  with  hatred.  Of  a  minister  presented  by  the 
patron,  the  parish  has  seldom  any  thing  worse 
to  say  than  that  they  do  not  know  him.  Of  a 
minister  chosen  by  a  popular  contest,  all  those 
who  do  not  favour  him,  have  nursed  up  in  their 
bosoms  principles  of  hatred  and  reasons  of  re¬ 
jection.  Anger  is  excited  principally  by  pride. 
The  pride  of  a  common  man  is  very  little  exas¬ 
perated  by  the  supposed  usurpation  of  an  ac¬ 
knowledged  superiour.  He  bears  only  his  little 
share  of  a  general  evil,  and  suffers  in  common 
with  the  whole  parish;  but  when  the  contest  is 
between  equals,  the  defeat  has  many  aggrava¬ 
tions;  and  he  that  is  defeated  by  his  next  neigh¬ 
bour,  is  seldom  satisfied  without  some  revenge; 
and  it  is  hard  to  say  what  bitterness  of  malignity 
would  prevail  in  a  parish  where  these  elections 
should  happen  to  be  frequent,  and  the  enmity  of 
opposition  should  be  re-kindled  before  it  had 
cooled.” 

Though  I  present  to  my  readers  Dr.  Johnson’s 
masterly  thoughts  on  the  subject,  I  think  it  proper 
to  declare,  that  notwithstanding  I  am  myself  a 
lay  patron,  I  do  not  entirely  subscribe  to  his 
opinion. 

On  Friday,  May  7,  I  breakfasted  with  him  at 
Mr.  Thrale’s  in  the  Borough.  While  we  were 
alone,  I  endeavoured  as  well  as  I  could  to  apol¬ 
ogise  for  a  lady  who  had  been  divorced  from  her 


221 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


1773] 

husband  by  act  of  Parliament.  I  said,  that  he 
had  used  her  very  ill,  had  behaved  brutally  to 
her,  and  that  she  could  not  continue  to  live  with 
him  without  having  her  delicacy  contaminated; 
that  all  affection  for  him  was  thus  destroyed; 
that  the  essence  of  conjugal  union  being  gone, 
there  remained  only  a  cold  form,  a  mere  civil 
obligation;  that  she  was  in  the  prime  of  life,  with 
qualities  to  produce  happiness;  that  these  ought 
not  to  be  lost;  and,  that  the  gentleman  on  whose 
account  she  was  divorced  had  gained  her  heart 
while  thus  unhappily  situated.  Seduced,  per¬ 
haps,  by  the  charms  of  the  lady  in  question,  I 
thus  attempted  to  palliate  what  I  was  sensible 
could  not  be  justified;  for  when  I  had  finished 
my  harangue,  my  venerable  friend  gave  me  a 
proper  check:  “My  dear  Sir,  never  accustom 
your  mind  to  mingle  virtue  and  vice.  The 
woman’s  a  whore,  and  there’s  an  end  on’t.” 

He  described  the  father  of  one  of  his  friends 
thus:  “Sir,  he  was  so  exuberant  a  talker  at  pub- 
lick  meeting,  that  the  gentlemen  of  his  county 
were  afraid  of  him.  No  business  could  be  done 
for  his  declamation.” 

He  did  not  give  me  full  credit  when  I  men¬ 
tioned  that  I  had  carried  on  a  short  conversa¬ 
tion  by  signs  with  some  Esquimaux  who  were 
then  in  London,  particularly  with  one  of  them 
who  was  a  priest.  He  thought  I  could  not  make 
them  understand  me.  No  man  was  more  in¬ 
credulous  as  to  particular  facts,  which  were  at 
all  extraordinary;  and  therefore  no  man  was 
more  scrupulously  inquisitive,  in  order  to  dis¬ 
cover  the  truth. 

I  dined  with  him  this  day  at  the  house  of  my 
friends,  Messieurs  Edward  and  Charles  Dilly, 
booksellers  in  the  Poultry:  there  were  present 
their  elder  brother  Mr.  Dilly  of  Bedfordshire, 
Dr.  Goldsmith,  Mr.  Langton,  Mr.  Claxton, 
Reverend  Dr.  Mayo  a  dissenting  minister,  the 
Reverend  Mr.  Toplady,  and  my  friend  the  Rev¬ 
erend  Mr.  Temple. 

Hawkesworth’s  compilation  of  the  voyages  to 
the  South  Sea  being  mentioned;  Johnson.  “Sir, 
if  you  talk  of  it  as  a  subject  of  commerce,  it  will 
be  gainful;  if  as  a  book  that  is  to  increase  human 
knowledge,  I  believe  there  will  not  be  much  of 
that.  Hawkesworth  can  tell  only  what  the  voy¬ 
agers  have  told  him;  and  they  have  found  very 
little,  only  one  new  animal,  I  think.”  Boswell. 
“But  many  insects,  Sir,”  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir, 
as  to  insects,  Ray  reckons  of  British  insects 
twenty  thousand  species.  They  might  have  staid 
at  home  and  discovered  enough  in  that  way.” 

Talking  of  birds,  I  mentioned  Mr.  Daines  Bar¬ 
rington’s  ingenious  Essay  against  the  received 


notion  of  their  migration.  Johnson.  “I  think  we 
have  as  good  evidence  for  the  migration  of  wood¬ 
cocks  as  can  be  desired.  We  find  they  disappear 
at  a  certain  time  of  the  year,  and  appear  again 
at  a  certain  time  of  the  year;  and  some  of  them, 
when  weary  in  their  flight,  have  been  known  to 
alight  on  the  rigging  of  ships  far  out  at  sea.”  One 
of  the  company  observed,  that  there  had  been 
instances  of  some  of  them  found  in  summer  in 
Essex.  Johnson.  “Sir,  that  strengthens  our  argu¬ 
ment.  Exceptio  probat  regulam.  Some  being  found 
shews,  that,  if  all  remained,  many  would  be 
found.  A  few  sick  or  lame  ones  may  be  found.” 
Goldsmith.  “There  is  a  partial  migration  of  the 
swallows;  the  stronger  ones  migrate,  the  others 
do  not.” 

Boswell.  “I  am  well  assured  that  the  people 
of  Otaheite  who  have  the  bread  tree,  the  fruit 
of  which  serves  them  for  bread,  laughed  heartily 
when  they  were  informed  of  the  tedious  process 
necessary  with  us  to  have  bread; — plowing, 
sowing,  harrowing,  reaping,  threshing,  grind¬ 
ing,  baking.”  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  all  ignorant 
savages  will  laugh  when  they  are  told  of  the  ad¬ 
vantages  Of  civilized  life.  Were  you  to  tell  men 
who  live  without  houses,  how  we  pile  brick  upon 
brick,  and  rafter  upon  rafter,  and  that  after  a 
house  is  raised  to  a  certain  height,  a  man  tum¬ 
bles  off  a  scaffold,  and  breaks  his  neck;  he  would 
laugh  heartily  at  our  folly  in  building;  but  it 
does  not  follow  that  men  are  better  without 
houses.  No,  Sir,  (holding  up  a  slice  of  a  good 
loaf,)  this  is  better  than  the  bread  tree.” 

He  repeated  an  argument,  which  is  to  be 
found  in  his  Rambler ,  against  the  notion  that  the 
brute  creation  is  endowed  with  the  faculty  of 
reason:  “birds  build  by  instinct;  they  never  im¬ 
prove;  they  build  their  first  nest  as  well  as  any 
one  they  ever  build.”  Goldsmith.  “Yet  we  see 
if  you  take  away  a  bird’s  nest  with  the  eggs  in  it, 
she  will  make  a  slighter  nest  and  lay  again.” 
Johnson.  “Sir,  that  is  because  at  first  she  has 
full  time  and  makes  her  nest  deliberately.  In  the 
case  you  mention  she  is  pressed  to  lay,  and  must 
therefore  make  her  nest  quickly,  and  conse¬ 
quently  it  will  be  slight.”  Goldsmith.  “The 
nidification  of  birds  is  what  is  least  known  in 
natural  history,  though  one  of  the  most  curious 
things  in  it.” 

I  introduced  the  subject  of  toleration.  John¬ 
son.  “Every  society  has  a  right  to  preserve  pub- 
lick  peace  and  order,  and  therefore  has  a  good 
right  to  prohibit  the  propagation  of  opinions 
which  have  a  dangerous  tendency.  To  say  the 
magistrate  has  this  right,  is  using  an  inadequate 
word:  it  is  the  society  for  which  the  magistrate  is 


BOSWELL  [1773 


agent.  He  may  be  morally  or  theologically  wrong 
in  restraining  the  propagation  of  opinions  which 
he  thinks  dangerous,  but  he  is  politically  right.” 
Mayo.  “I  am  of  opinion,  Sir,  that  every  man  is 
entitled  to  liberty  of  conscience  in  religion;  and 
that  the  magistrate  cannot  restrain  that  right.” 
Johnson.  “Sir,  I  agree  with  you.  Every  man  has 
a  right  to  liberty  of  conscience,  and  with  that 
the  magistrate  cannot  interfere.  People  con¬ 
found  liberty  of  thinking  with  liberty  of  talking; 
nay,  with  liberty  of  preaching.  Every  man  has  a 
physical  right  to  think  as  he  pleases;  for  it  can¬ 
not  be  discovered  how  he  thinks.  He  has  not  a 
moral  right,  for  he  ought  to  inform  himself,  and 
think  justly.  But,  Sir,  no  member  of  a  society 
has  a  right  to  teach  any  doctrine  contrary  to  what 
the  society  holds  to  be  true.  The  magistrate,  I 
say,  may  be  wrong  in  what  he  thinks:  but  while 
he  thinks  himself  right,  he  may  and  ought  to  en¬ 
force  what  he  thinks.”  Mayo.  “Then,  Sir,  we 
are  to  remain  always  in  errour,  and  truth  never 
can  prevail;  and  the  magistrate  was  right  in  per¬ 
secuting  the  first  Christians.”  Johnson.  “Sir,  the 
only  method  by  which  religious  truth  can  be  es¬ 
tablished  is  by  martyrdom.  The  magistrate  has 
a  right  to  enforce  what  he  thinks;  and  he  who  is 
conscious  of  the  truth  has  a  right  to  suffer.  I  am 
afraid  there  is  no  other  way  of  ascertaining  the 
truth,  but  by  persecution  on  the  one  hand  and 
enduring  it  on  the  other.”  Goldsmith.  “But  how 
is  a  man  to  act,  Sir?  Though  firmly  convinced 
of  the  truth  of  his  doctrine,  may  he  not  think  it 
wrong  to  expose  himself  to  persecution?  Has  he 
a  right  to  do  so?  Is  it  not,  as  it  were,  committing 
voluntary  suicide?”  Johnson.  “Sir,  as  to  volun¬ 
tary  suicide,  as  you  call  it,  there  are  twenty  thou¬ 
sand  men  in  an  army  who  will  go  without  scruple 
to  be  shot  at,  and  mount  a  breach  for  five-pence 
a  day.”  Goldsmith.  “But  have  they  a  moral  right 
to  do  this?”  Johnson.  “Nay,  Sir,  if  you  will  not 
take  the  universal  opinion  of  mankind,  I  have 
nothing  to  say.  If  mankind  cannot  defend  their 
own  way  of  thinking,  I  cannot  defend  it.  Sir,  if 
a  man  is  in  doubt  whether  it  would  be  better  for 
him  to  expose  himself  to  martyrdom  or  not,  he 
should  not  do  it.  He  must  be  convinced  that  he 
has  a  delegation  from  heaven.”  Goldsmith.  “I 
would  consider  whether  there  is  the  greater 
chance  of  good  or  evil  upon  the  whole.  If  I  see  a 
man  who  had  fallen  into  a  well,  I  would  wish  to 
help  him  out;  but  if  there  is  a  greater  probabil¬ 
ity  that  he  shall  pull  me  in,  than  that  I  shall  pull 
him  out,  I  would  not  attempt  it.  So  were  I  to  go 
to  Turkey,  I  might  wish  to  convert  the  Grand 
Signor  to  the  Christian  faith;  but  when  I  con¬ 
sidered  that  I  should  probably  be  put  to  death 


without  effectuating  my  purpose  in  any  degree, 
I  should  keep  myself  quiet.”  Johnson.  “Sir,  you 
must  consider  that  we  have  perfect  and  imper¬ 
fect  obligations.  Perfect  obligations,  which  are 
generally  not  to  do  something,  are  clear  and  pos¬ 
itive;  as,  ‘thou  shalt  not  kill.’  But  charity,  for  in¬ 
stance,  is  not  definable  by  limits.  It  is  a  duty  to 
give  to  the  poor;  but  no  man  can  say  how  much 
another  should  give  to  the  poor,  or  when  a  man 
has  given  too  little  to  save  his  soul.  In  the  same 
manner  it  is  a  duty  to  instruct  the  ignorant,  and 
of  consequence  to  convert  infidels  to  Christian¬ 
ity;  but  no  man  in  the  common  course  of  things 
is  obliged  to  carry  this  to  such  a  degree  as  to  in¬ 
cur  the  danger  of  martyrdom,  as  no  man  is 
obliged  to  strip  himself  to  the  shirt  in  order  to 
give  charity.  I  have  said,  that  a  man  must  be 
persuaded  that  he  has  a  particular  delegation 
from  heaven.”  Goldsmith.  “How  is  this  to  be 
known?  Our  first  reformers,  who  were  burnt  for 
not  believing  bread  and  wine  to  be  Christ” — 
Johnson,  (interrupting  him),  “Sir,  they  were 
not  burnt  for  not  believing  bread  and  wine  to 
be  Christ,  but  for  insulting  those  who  did  be¬ 
lieve  it.  And,  Sir,  when  the  first  reformers  be¬ 
gan,  they  did  not  intend  to  be  martyred:  as  many 
of  them  ran  away  as  could.”  Boswell.  “But, 
Sir,  there  was  your  countryman,  Elwal,  who 
you  told  me  challenged  King  George  with  his 
black-guards,  and  his  red-guards.”  Johnson. 
“My  countryman,  Elwal,  Sir,  should  have  been 
put  in  the  stocks;  a  proper  pulpit  for  him;  and 
he’d  have  had  a  numerous  audience.  A  man  who 
preaches  in  the  stocks  will  always  have  hearers 
enough.”  Boswell.  “But  Elwal  thought  him¬ 
self  in  the  right.”  Johnson.  “We  are  not  provid¬ 
ing  for  mad  people;  there  are  places  for  them 
in  the  neighbourhood,”  (meaning  Moorfields.) 
Mayo.  “But,  Sir,  is  it  not  very  hard  that  I  should 
not  be  allowed  to  teach  my  children  what  I  re¬ 
ally  believe  to  be  the  truth?”  Johnson.  “Why, 
Sir,  you  might  contrive  to  teach  your  children 
extra  scandalum ;  but,  Sir,  the  magistrate,  if  he 
knows  it,  has  a  right  to  restrain  you.  Suppose 
you  teach  your  children  to  be  thieves?”  Mayo. 
“This  is  making  a  joke  of  the  subject.”  Johnson. 
“Nay,  Sir,  take  it  thus: — that  you  teach  them 
the  community  of  goods;  for  which  there  are  as 
many  plausible  arguments  as  for  most  erroneous 
doctrines.  You  teach  them  that  all  things  at  first 
were  in  common,  and  that  no  man  had  a  right 
to  any  thing  but  as  he  laid  his  hands  upon  it; 
and  that  this  still  is,  or  ought  to  be,  the  rule 
amongst  mankind.  Here,  Sir,  you  sap  a  great 
principle  in  society, — property.  And  don’t  you 
think  the  magistrate  would  have  a  right  to  pre- 


1773  ] 

vent  you?  Or,  suppose  you  should  teach  your 
children  the  notion  of  the  Adamites,  and  they 
should  run  naked  into  the  streets,  would  not  the 
magistrate  have  a  right  to  flog  ’em  into  their 
doublets?”  Mayo.  “I  think  the  magistrate  has 
no  right  to  interfere  till  there  is  some  overt  act.” 
Boswell.  “So,  Sir,  though  he  sees  an  enemy  to 
the  state  charging  a  blunderbuss,  he  is  not  to  in¬ 
terfere  till  it  is  fired  off?”  Mayo.  “He  must  be 
sure  of  its  direction  against  the  state.”  Johnson. 
“The  magistrate  is  to  judge  of  that. — He  has  no 
right  to  restrain  your  thinking,  because  the  evil 
centers  in  yourself.  If  a  man  were  sitting  at  this 
table,  and  chopping  off  his  fingers,  the  magis¬ 
trate,  as  guardian  of  the  community,  has  no  au¬ 
thority  to  restrain  him,  however  he  might  do  it 
from  kindness  as  a  parent.  Though,  indeed, 
upon  more  consideration,  I  think  he  may;  as  it 
is  probable,  that  he  who  is  chopping  off  his  own 
fingers,  may  soon  proceed  to  chop  off  those  of 
other  people.  If  I  think  it  right  to  steal  Mr.  Dil- 
ly’s  plate,  I  am  a  bad  man;  but  he  can  say  noth¬ 
ing  to  me.  If  I  make  an  open  declaration  that  I 
think  so,  he  will  keep  me  out  of  his  house.  If  I 
put  forth  my  hand,  I  shall  be  sent  to  Newgate. 
This  is  the  gradation  of  thinking,  preaching,  and 
acting:  if  a  man  thinks  erroneously,  he  may 
keep  his  thoughts  to  himself,  and  nobody  will 
trouble  him;  if  he  preaches  erroneous  doctrine, 
society  may  expel  him;  if  he  acts  in  consequence 
of  it,  the  law  takes  place,  and  he  is  hanged.” 
Mayo.  “But,  Sir,  ought  not  Christians  to  have 
liberty  of  conscience?”  Johnson.  “I  have  al¬ 
ready  told  you  so,  Sir.  You  are  coming  back  to 
where  you  were.”  Boswell.  “Dr.  Mayo  is  al¬ 
ways  taking  a  return  post-chaise,  and  going  the 
stage  over  again.  He  has  it  at  half  price.”  John¬ 
son.  “Dr.  Mayo,  like  other  champions  for  un¬ 
limited  toleration,  has  got  a  set  of  words.1  Sir,  it 
is  no  matter,  politically,  whether  the  magistrate 
be  right  or  wrong.  Suppose  a  club  were  to  be 
formed,  to  drink  confusion  to  King  George  the 
Third,  and  a  happy  restoration  to  Charles  the 
Third,  this  would  be  very  bad  with  respect  to 
the  State;  but  every  member  of  that  club  must 
either  conform  to  its  rules,  or  be  turned  out  of  it. 
Old  Baxter,  I  remember,  maintains,  that  the 
magistrate  should  Tolerate  all  things  that  are 

*Dr.  Mayo’s  calm  temper  and  steady  persever¬ 
ance,  rendered  him  an  admirable  subject  for  the 
exercise  of  Dr.  Johnson’s  powerful  abilities.  He 
never  flinched;  but,  after  reiterated  blows,  re¬ 
mained  seemingly  unmoved  as  at  the  first.  The 
scintillations  of  Johnson’s  genius  flashed  every  time 
he  was  struck,  without  his  receiving  any  injury. 
Hence  he  obtained  the  epithet  of  The  Literary 
Anvil. 


223 

tolerable.’  This  is  no  good  definition  of  tolera¬ 
tion  upon  any  principle;  but  it  shews  that  he 
thought  some  things  were  not  tolerable.”  Top- 
lady.  “Sir,  you  have  untwisted  this  difficult 
subject  with  great  dexterity.” 

During  this  argument,  Goldsmith  sat  in  rest¬ 
less  agitation,  from  a  wish  to  get  in  and  shine. 
Finding  himself  excluded,  he  had  taken  his  hat 
to  go  away,  but  remained  for  some  time  with  it 
in  his  hand,  like  a  gamester,  who  at  the  close  of 
a  long  night,  lingers  for  a  little  while,  to  see  if  he 
can  have  a  favourable  opening  to  finish  with 
success.  Once  when  he  was  beginning  to  speak, 
he  found  himself  overpowered  by  the  loud  voice 
of  Johnson,  who  was  at  the  opposite  end  of  the 
table,  and  did  not  perceive  Goldsmith’s  attempt. 
Thus  disappointed  of  his  wish  to  obtain  the  at¬ 
tention  of  the  company,  Goldsmith  in  a  passion 
threw  down  his  hat,  looking  angrily  at  Johnson, 
and  exclaiming  in  a  bitter  tone,  “  Take  it .”  When 
Toplady  was  going  to  speak,  Johnson  uttered 
some  sound,  which  led  Goldsmith  to  think  that 
he  was  beginning  again,  and  taking  the  words 
from  Toplady.  Upon  which,  he  seized  this  op¬ 
portunity  of  venting  his  own  envy  and  spleen, 
under  the  pretext  of  supporting  another  person: 
“Sir,  (said  he  to  Johnson,)  the  gentleman  has 
heard  you  patiently  for  an  hour;  pray  allow  us 
now  to  hear  him.”  Johnson,  (sternly,)  “Sir,  I 
was  not  interrupting  the  gentleman.  I  was  only 
giving  him  a  signal  of  my  attention.  Sir,  you  are 
impertinent.”  Goldsmith  made  no  reply,  but 
continued  in  the  company  for  some  time. 

A  gentleman  present  ventured  to  ask  Dr.  John¬ 
son  if  there  was  not  a  material  difference  as  to 
toleration  of  opinions  which  lead  to  action,  and 
opinions  merely  speculative;  for  instance,  would 
it  be  wrong  in  the  magistrate  to  tolerate  those 
who  preach  against  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity? 
Johnson  was  highly  offended,  and  said,  “I  won¬ 
der,  Sir,  how  a  gentleman  of  your  piety  can  in¬ 
troduce  this  subject  in  a  mixed  company.”  He 
told  me  afterwards,  that  the  impropriety  was, 
that  perhaps  some  of  the  company  might  have 
talked  on  the  subject  in  such  terms  as  might 
have  shocked  him;  or  he  might  have  been  forced 
to  appear  in  their  eyes  a  narrow-minded  man. 
The  gentleman,  with  submissive  deference,  said, 
he  had  only  hinted  at  the  question  from  a  desire 
to  hear  Dr.  Johnson’s  opinion  upon  it.  Johnson. 
“Why  then,  Sir,  I  think  that  permitting  men  to 
preach  any  opinion  contrary  to  the  doctrine  of 
the  established  church  tends,  in  a  certain  degree, 
to  lessen  the  authority  of  the  church,  and  con¬ 
sequently,  to  lessen  the  influence  of  religion.” 
“It  may  be  considered,  (said  the  gentleman,) 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


224 

whether  it  would  not  be  politick  to  tolerate  in 
such  a  case.”  Johnson.  “Sir,  we  have  been  talk¬ 
ing  of  right :  this  is  another  question.  I  think  it  is 
not  politick  to  tolerate  in  such  a  case.” 

Though  he  did  not  think  it  fit  that  so  aweful 
a  subject  should  be  introduced  in  a  mixed  com¬ 
pany,  and  therefore  at  this  time  waved  the  the¬ 
ological  question;  yet  his  own  orthodox  belief 
in  the  sacred  mystery  of  the  Trinity  is  evinced 
beyond  doubt,  by  the  following  passage  in  his 
private  devotions: 

“O  Lord,  hear  my  prayer  [prayers],  for  Je¬ 
sus  Christ’s  sake;  to  whom  with  thee  and  the 
Holy  Ghost,  three  persons  and  one  God,  be  all 
honour  and  glory,  world  without  end,  Amen.”1 

Boswell.  “Pray,  Mr.  Dilly,  how  does  Dr.  Le- 
land’s  History  of  Ireland  sell?”  Johnson  (bursting 
forth  with  a  generous  indignation,)  “The  Irish 
are  in  a  most  unnatural  state;  for  we  see  there 
the  minority  prevailing  over  the  majority.  There 
is  no  instance,  even  in  the  ten  persecutions,  of 
such  severity  as  that  which  the  protestants  of  Ire¬ 
land  have  exercised  against  the  Catholicks.  Did 
we  tell  them  we  have  conquered  them,  it  would 
be  above  board:  to  punish  them  by  confiscation 
and  other  penalties,  as  rebels,  was  monstrous  in¬ 
justice.  King  William  was  not  their  lawful  sov¬ 
ereign:  he  had  not  been  acknowledged  by  the 
Parliament  of  Ireland,  when  they  appeared  in 
arms  against  him.” 

I  here  suggested  something  favourable  of  the 
Roman  Catholicks.  Toplady.  “Does  not  their 
invocation  of  saints  suppose  omnipresence  in 
the  saints?”  Johnson.  “No,  Sir,  it  supposes  only 
pluri-presence,  and  when  spirits  are  divested  of 
matter,  it  seems  probable  that  they  should  see 
with  more  extent  than  when  in  an  embodied 
state.  There  is,  therefore,  no  approach  to  an 
invasion  of  any  of  the  divine  attributes,  in 
the  invocation  of  saints.  But  I  think  it  is  will- 
worship,  and  presumption.  I  see  no  command 
for  it,  and  therefore  think  it  is  safer  not  to  prac¬ 
tise  it.” 

He  and  Mr.  Langton  and  I  went  together  to 
the  club,  where  we  found  Mr.  Burke,  Mr.  Gar¬ 
rick,  and  some  other  members,  and  amongst 
them  our  friend  Goldsmith,  who  sat  silently 
brooding  over  Johnson’s  reprimand  to  him  after 
dinner.  Johnson  perceived  this,  and  said  aside 
to  some  of  us,  “I’ll  make  Goldsmith  forgive  me”; 
and  then  called  to  him  in  a  loud  voice,  “Dr. 
Goldsmith,— something  passed  today  where  you 
and  I  dined;  I  ask  your  pardon.”  Goldsmith  an¬ 
swered  placidly,  “It  must  be  much  from  you, 
Sir,  that  I  take  ill.”  And  so  at  once  the  differ- 

1Prayers  and  Meditations ,  p.  40. 


[ 1 773 

ence  was  over,  and  they  were  on  as  easy  terms 
as  ever,  and  Goldsmith  rattled  away  as  usual. 

In  our  way  to  the  club  to-night,  when  I  re¬ 
gretted  that  Goldsmith  would,  upon  every  oc¬ 
casion,  endeavour  to  shine,  by  which  he  often 
exposed  himself,  Mr.  Langton  observed,  that  he 
was  not  like  Addison,  who  was  content  with  the 
fame  of  his  writings,  and  did  not  aim  also  at  ex¬ 
cellency  in  conversation,  for  which  he  found 
himself  unfit;  and  that  he  said  to  a  lady  who 
complained  of  his  having  talked  little  in  com¬ 
pany,  “Madam,  I  have  but  ninepence  in  ready 
money,  but  I  can  draw  for  a  thousand  pounds.” 
I  observed,  that  Goldsmith  had  a  great  deal  of 
gold  in  his  cabinet,  but,  not  content  with  that, 
was  always  taking  out  his  purse.  Johnson.  “Yes, 
Sir,  and  that  so  often  an  empty  purse!” 

Goldsmith’s  incessant  desire  of  being  conspic¬ 
uous  in  company,  was  the  occasion  of  his  some¬ 
times  appearing  to  such  disadvantage  as  one 
should  hardly  have  supposed  possible  in  a  man 
of  his  genius.  When  his  literary  reputation  had 
risen  deservedly  high,  and  his  society  was  much 
courted,  he  became  very  jealous  of  the  extra¬ 
ordinary  attention  which  was  every  where  paid 
to  Johnson.  One  evening,  in  a  circle  of  wits,  he 
found  fault  with  me  for  talking  of  Johnson  as  en¬ 
titled  to  the  honour  of  unquestionable  superi¬ 
ority.  “Sir,  (said  he,)  you  are  for  making  a  mon¬ 
archy  of  what  should  be  a  republick.” 

He  was  still  more  mortified,  when  talking  in 
a  company  with  fluent  vivacity,  and,  as  he  flat¬ 
tered  himself,  to  the  admiration  of  all  who  were 
present;  a  German  who  sat  next  him,  and  per¬ 
ceived  Johnson  rolling  himself,  as  if  about  to 
speak,  suddenly  stopped  him,  saying,  “Stay,  stay, 
— Toctor  Shonson  is  going  to  say  something.” 
This  was,  no  doubt,  very  provoking,  especially 
to  one  so  irritable  as  Goldsmith,  who  frequently 
mentioned  it  with  strong  expressions  of  indig¬ 
nation. 

It  may  also  be  observed,  that  Goldsmith  was 
sometimes  content  to  be  treated  with  an  easy 
familiarity,  but,  upon  occasions,  would  be  con¬ 
sequential  and  important.  An  instance  of  this 
occurred  in  a  small  particular.  Johnson  had  a 
way  of  contracting  the  names  of  his  friends;  as 
Beauclerk,  Beau;  Boswell,  Bozzy;  Langton, 
Lanky;  Murphy,  Mur;  Sheridan,  Sherry.  I  re¬ 
member  one  day,  when  Tom  Davies  was  telling 
that  Dr.  Johnson  said,  “We  are  all  in  labour  for 
a  name  to  Gold/s  play,”  Goldsmith  seemed  dis¬ 
pleased  that  such  a  liberty  should  be  taken  with 
his  name,  and  said,  “I  have  often  desired  him 
not  to  call  me  Goldy .”  Tom  was  remarkably  at¬ 
tentive  to  the  most  minute  circumstance  about 


BOSWELL 


1773  ] 

Johnson.  I  recollect  his  telling  me  once,  on  my 
arrival  in  London,  “Sir,  our  great  friend  has 
made  an  improvement  on  his  appellation  of  old 
Mr.  Sheridan.  He  calls  him  now  Sherry  deny” 

To  the  Reverend  Mr.  Bagshaw, 
at  Bromley1 

Sir,  I  return  you  my  sincere  thanks  for  your 
additions  to  my  Dictionary;  but  the  new  edition 
has  been  published  some  time,  and  therefore  I 
cannot  now  make  use  of  them.  Whether  I  shall 
ever  revise  it  more,  I  know  not.  If  many  readers 
had  been  as  judicious,  as  diligent,  and  as  com¬ 
municative  as  yourself,  my  work  had  been  bet¬ 
ter.  The  world  must  at  present  take  it  as  it  is.  I 
am,  Sir,  your  most  obliged  and  most  humble 
servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

May  8,  1773 

On  Sunday,  May  8,  I  dined  with  Johnson  at 
Mr.  Langton’s  with  Dr.  Beattie  and  some  other 
company.  He  descanted  on  the  subject  of  Liter¬ 
ary  Property.  “There  seems  (said  he,)  to  be  in 
authours  a  stronger  right  of  property  than  that 
by  occupancy;  a  metaphysical  right,  a  right,  as 
it  were,  of  creation,  which  should  from  its  na¬ 
ture  be  perpetual;  but  the  consent  of  nations  is 
against  it,  and  indeed  reason  and  the  interests 
of  learning  are  against  it;  for  were  it  to  be  per¬ 
petual,  no  book,  however  useful,  could  be  uni¬ 
versally  diffused  amongst  mankind,  should  the 
proprietor  take  it  into  his  head  to  restrain  its  cir¬ 
culation.  No  book  could  have  the  advantage  of 
being  edited  with  notes,  however  necessary  to 
its  elucidation,  should  the  proprietor  perversely 
oppose  it.  For  the  general  good  of  the  world, 
therefore,  whatever  valuable  work  has  once  been 
created  by  an  authour,  and  issued  out  by  him, 
should  be  understood  as  no  longer  in  his  power, 
but  as  belonging  to  the  publick;  at  the  same  time 

JThe  Reverend  Thomas  Bagshaw,  M.A.,  who 
died  on  November  20,  1 787,  in  the  seventy-seventh 
year  of  his  age.  Chaplain  of  Bromley  College,  in 
Kent,  and  Rector  of  Southfleet.  He  had  resigned 
the  cure  of  Bromley  Parish  some  time  before  his 
death.  For  this,  and  another  letter  from  Dr.  John¬ 
son  in  1 784,  to  the  same  truely  respectable  man,  I 
am  indebted  to  Dr.  John  Loveday,  of  the  Com¬ 
mons,  a  son  of  the  late  learned  and  pious  John 
Loveday,  Esq.,  of  Caversham  in  Berkshire,  who 
obligingly  transcribed  them  for  me  from  the  orig¬ 
inals  in  his  possession.  This  worthy  gentleman,  hav¬ 
ing  retired  from  business,  now  lives  in  Warwick¬ 
shire.  The  world  has  been  lately  obliged  to  him  as 
the  Editor  of  the  late  Rev.  Dr.  Townson’s  excel¬ 
lent  work,  modestly  entitled,  A  Discourse  on  the 
Evangelical  History ,  from  the  Interment  to  the  Ascension 
of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ;  to  which  is  pre¬ 
fixed,  a  truly  interesting  and  pleasing  account  of 
the  authour,  by  the  Reverend  Mr.  Ralph  Churton. 


225 

the  authour  is  entitled  to  an  adequate  reward. 
This  he  should  have  by  an  exclusive  right  to  his 
work  for  a  considerable  number  of  years.5’ 

He  attacked  Lord  Monboddo’s  strange  spec¬ 
ulation  on  the  primitive  state  of  human  nature; 
observing,  “Sir,  it  is  all  conjecture  about  a  thing 
useless,  even  were  it  known  to  be  true.  Knowl¬ 
edge  of  all  kinds  is  good.  Conjecture,  as  to  things 
useful,  is  good ;  but  conjecture  as  to  what  it  would 
be  useless  to  know,  such  as  whether  men  went 
upon  all  four,  is  very  idle.55 

On  Monday,  May  9,  as  I  was  to  set  out  on  my 
return  to  Scotland  next  morning,  I  was  desirous 
to  see  as  much  of  Dr.  Johnson  as  I  could.  But  I 
first  called  on  Goldsmith  to  take  leave  of  him. 
The  jealousy  and  envy  which,  though  possessed 
of  many  most  amiable  qualities,  he  frankly 
avowed,  broke  out  violently  at  this  interview. 
Upon  another  occasion,  when  Goldsmith  con¬ 
fessed  himself  to  be  of  an  envious  disposition,  I 
contended  with  Johnson  that  we  ought  not  to 
be  angry  with  him,  he  was  so  candid  in  owning 
it.  “Nay,  Sir,  (said  Johnson,)  we  must  be  angry 
that  a  man  has  such  a  superabundance  of  an 
odious  quality,  that  he  cannot  keep  it  within  his 
own  breast,  but  it  boils  over.55  In  my  opinion, 
however,  Goldsmith  had  not  more  of  it  than 
other  people  have,  but  only  talked  of  it  freely. 

He  now  seemed  very  angry  that  Johnson  was 
going  to  be  a  traveller;  said  “he  would  be  a  dead 
weight  for  me  to  carry,  and  that  I  should  never 
be  able  to  lug  him  along  through  the  Highlands 
and  Hebrides.55  Nor  would  he  patiently  allow 
me  to  enlarge  upon  Johnson’s  wonderful  abili¬ 
ties;  but  exclaimed,  “Is  he  like  Burke,  who  winds 
into  a  subject  like  a  serpent?”  “But,  (said  I,) 
Johnson  is  the  Hercules  who  strangled  serpents 
in  his  cradle.” 

I  dined  with  Dr.  Johnson  at  General  Paoli’s. 
He  was  obliged,  by  indisposition,  to  leave  the 
company  early;  he  appointed  me,  however,  to 
meet  him  in  the  evening  at  Mr.  (now  Sir  Rob¬ 
ert)  Chambers’s  in  the  Temple,  where  he  ac¬ 
cordingly  came,  though  he  continued  to  be  very 
ill.  Chambers,  as  is  common  on  such  occasions, 
prescribed  various  remedies  to  him.  Johnson. 
(fretted  by  pain,)  “Pr’ythee  don’t  tease  me.  Stay 
till  I  am  well,  and  then  you  shall  tell  me  how  to 
cure  myself.”  He  grew  better,  and  talked  with  a 
noble  enthusiasm  of  keeping  up  the  representa¬ 
tion  of  respectable  families.  His  zeal  on  this  sub¬ 
ject  was  a  circumstance  in  his  character  exceed¬ 
ingly  remarkable,  when  it  is  considered  that  he 
himself  had  no  pretensions  to  blood.  I  heard 
him  once  say,  “I  have  great  merit  in  being  zeal¬ 
ous  for  subordination  and  the  honours  of  birth; 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


226  BOSWELL  [1773 


for  I  can  hardly  tell  who  was  my  grandfather.” 
He  maintained  the  dignity  and  propriety  of  male 
succession,  in  opposition  to  the  opinion  of  one 
of  our  friends,  who  had  that  day  employed  Mr. 
Chambers  to  draw  his  will,  devising  his  estate  to 
his  three  sisters,  in  preference  to  a  remote  male 
heir.  Johnson  called  them  “three  dowdies”  and 
said,  with  as  high  a  spirit  as  the  boldest  Baron  in 
the  most  perfect  days  of  the  feudal  system,  “An 
ancient  estate  should  always  go  to  males.  It  is 
mighty  foolish  to  let  a  stranger  have  it  because  he 
marries  your  daughter,  and  takes  your  name. 
As  for  an  estate  newly  acquired  by  trade,  you 
may  give  it,  if  you  will,  to  the  dog  Towser ,  and 
let  him  keep  his  own  name.” 

I  have  known  him  at  times  exceedingly  di¬ 
verted  at  what  seemed  to  others  a  very  small 
sport.  He  now  laughed  immoderately,  without 
any  reason  that  we  could  perceive,  at  our  friend’s 
making  his  will;  called  him  the  testator ,  and 
added,  “I  dare  say,  he  thinks  he  has  done  a 
mighty  thing.  He  won’t  stay  till  he  gets  home  to 
his  seat  in  the  country,  to  produce  this  wonder¬ 
ful  deed:  he’ll  call  up  the  landlord  of  the  first 
inn  on  the  road;  and,  after  a  suitable  preface 
upon  mortality  and  the  uncertainty  of  life,  will 
tell  him  that  he  should  not  delay  making  his  will; 
and  here,  Sir,  will  he  say,  is  my  will,  which  I 
have  just  made,  with  the  assistance  of  one  of  the 
ablest  lawyers  in  the  kingdom;  and  he  will  read 
it  to  him  (laughing  all  the  time).  He  believes  he 
has  made  this  will;  but  he  did  not  make  it:  you, 
Chambers,  made  it  for  him.  I  trust  you  have 
had  more  conscience  than  to  make  him  say,  ‘be¬ 
ing  of  sound  understanding’;  ha,  ha,  ha!  I  hope 
he  has  left  me  a  legacy.  I’d  have  his  will  turned 
into  verse,  like  a  ballad.” 

In  this  playful  manner  did  he  run  on,  exult¬ 
ing  in  his  own  pleasantry,  which  certainly  was 
not  such  as  might  be  expected  from  the  authour 
of  The  Rambler ,  but  which  is  here  preserved, 
that  my  readers  may  be  acquainted  even  with 
the  slightest  occasional  characteristicks  of  so  em¬ 
inent  a  man. 

Mr.  Chambers  did  not  by  any  means  relish 
this  jocularity  upon  a  matter  of  which  pars  mag - 
na  fuit ,  and  seemed  impatient  till  he  got  rid  of  us. 
Johnson  could  not  stop  his  merriment,  but  con¬ 
tinued  it  all  the  way  till  we  got  without  the  Tem¬ 
ple-gate.  He  then  burst  into  such  a  fit  of  laugh¬ 
ter,  that  he  appeared  to  be  almost  in  a  convul¬ 
sion;  and,  in  order  to  support  himself,  laid  hold 
of  one  of  the  posts  at  the  side  of  the  foot  pave¬ 
ment,  and  sent  forth  peals  so  loud,  that  in  the 
silence  of  the  night  his  voice  seemed  to  resound 
from  Temple-bar  to  Fleet-ditch. 


This  most  ludicrous  exhibition  of  the  aweful, 
melancholy,  and  venerable  Johnson,  happened 
well  to  counteract  the  feelings  of  sadness  which 
I  used  to  experience  when  parting  with  him  for 
a  considerable  time.  I  accompanied  him  to  his 
door,  where  he  gave  me  his  blessing. 

He  records  of  himself  this  year,  “Between  Eas¬ 
ter  and  Whitsuntide,  having  always  considered 
that  time  as  propitious  to  study,  I  attempted  to 
learn  the  Low  Dutch  language.”1  It  is  to  be  ob¬ 
served,  that  he  here  admits  an  opinion  of  the 
human  mind  being  influenced  by  seasons,  which 
he  ridicules  in  his  writings.  His  progress,  he  says, 
was  interrupted  by  a  fever,  “which,  by  the  im¬ 
prudent  use  of  a  small  print,  left  an  inflamma¬ 
tion  in  his  useful  eye.”  We  cannot  but  admire 
his  spirit  when  we  know,  that  amidst  a  compli¬ 
cation  of  bodily  and  mental  distress,  he  was  still 
animated  with  the  desire  of  intellectual  improve¬ 
ment.  Various  notes  of  his  studies  appear  on  dif¬ 
ferent  days,  in  his  manuscript  diary  of  this  year, 
such  as, 

“ Inchoavi  lectionem  Pentateuchi — Finivi  lectionem 
Conf.  Fab .  Burdonum. — Legi  primum  actum  Troad- 
um. — Legi  Dissertationem  Clerici  postremam  de  Pent . 
— 2  of  Clark's  Sermons. — L.  Appolonii  pugnam  Be - 
triciam. — L.  centum  versus  Homeri .” 

Let  this  serve  as  a  specimen  of  what  accessions 
of  literature  he  was  perpetually  infusing  into  his 
mind,  while  he  charged  himself  with  idleness. 

This  year  died  Mrs.  Salusbury,  (mother  of 
Mrs.  Thrale,)  a  lady  whom  he  appears  to  have 
esteemed  much,  and  whose  memory  he  honour¬ 
ed  with  an  Epitaph.2 

In  a  letter  from  Edinburgh,  dated  the  29th  of 
May,  I  pressed  him  to  persevere  in  his  resolu¬ 
tion  to  make  this  year  the  projected  visit  to  the 
Hebrides,  of  which  he  and  I  had  talked  for  many 
years,  and  which  I  was  confident  would  afford 
us  much  entertainment. 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  When  your  letter  came  to  me,  I 
was  so  darkened  by  an  inflammation  in  my  eye, 
that  I  could  not  for  some  time  read  it.  I  can 
now  write  without  trouble,  and  can  read  large 
prints.  My  eye  is  gradually  growing  stronger; 
and  I  hope  will  be  able  to  take  some  delight  in 
the  survey  of  a  Caledonian  loch. 

Chambers  is  going  a  Judge,  with  six  thousand 
a  year,  to  Bengal.  He  and  I  shall  come  down  to¬ 
gether  as  far  as  Newcastle,  and  thence  I  shall 
easily  get  to  Edinburgh.  Let  me  know  the  exact 
time  when  your  Courts  intermit.  I  must  con¬ 
form  a  little  to  Chamber’s  occasions,  and  he 

lPrayers  and  Meditation ,  p.  129. 

2Mrs.  Piozzi’s  Anecdotes  of  Johnson,  p.  131. 


227 


1773]  LIFE  OF 

must  conform  a  little  to  mine.  The  time  which 
you  shall  fix,  must  be  the  common  point  to 
which  we  will  come  as  near  as  we  can.  Except 
this  eye,  I  am  very  well. 

Beattie  is  so  caressed,  and  invited,  and  treated, 
and  liked,  and  flattered,  by  the  great,  that  I  can 
see  nothing  of  him.  I  am  in  great  hope  that  he 
will  be  well  provided  for,  and  then  we  will  live 
upon  him  at  the  Marischal  College,  without 
pity  or  modesty. 

- left  the  town  without  taking  leave  of 

me,  and  is  gone  in  deep  dudgeon  to  - . 

Is  not  this  very  childish?  Where  is  now  my 
legacy? 

I  hope  your  dear  lady  and  her  dear  baby  are 
both  well.  I  shall  see  them  too  when  I  come; 
and  I  have  that  opinion  of  your  choice,  as  to 
suspect  that  when  I  have  seen  Mrs.  Boswell,  I 
shall  be  less  willing  to  go  away.  I  am,  dear  Sir, 
your  affectionate  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

Johnson’s-court,  Fleet-street 

My  5>  '773 

Write  to  me  as  soon  as  you  can.  Chambers  is 
now  at  Oxford. 

I  again  wrote  to  him,  informing  him  that  the 
Court  of  Session  rose  on  the  twelfth  of  August, 
hoping  to  see  him  before  that  time,  and  express¬ 
ing  perhaps  in  too  extravagant  terms,  my  ad¬ 
miration  of  him,  and  my  expectation  of  pleas¬ 
ure  from  our  intended  tour. 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  I  shall  set  out  from  London  on  Fri¬ 
day  the  sixth  of  this  month,  and  purpose  not  to 
loiter  much  by  the  way.  Which  day  I  shall  be  at 
Edinburgh,  I  cannot  exacdy  tell.  I  suppose  I 
must  drive  to  an  inn,  and  send  a  porter  to  find 
you. 

I  am  afraid  Beattie  will  not  be  at  his  College 
soon  enough  for  us,  and  I  shall  be  sorry  to  miss 
him;  but  there  is  no  staying  for  the  concurrence 
of  all  conveniences.  We  will  do  as  well  as  we 
can.  I  am,  Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

August  3,  1773 

To  the  Same 

Dear  Sir,  Not  being  at  Mr.  Thrale’s  when 
your  letter  came,  I  had  written  the  enclosed 
paper  and  sealed  it;  bringing  it  hither  for  a 
frank,  I  found  yours.  If  any  thing  could  repress 
my  ardour,  it  would  be  such  a  letter  as  yours.  To 
disappoint  a  friend  is  unpleasing;  and  he  that 
forms  expectations  like  yours,  must  be  disap¬ 
pointed.  Think  only  when  you  see  me,  that  you 
see  a  man  who  loves  you,  and  is  proud  and  glad 
that  you  love  him.  I  am,  Sir,  your  most  affec¬ 
tionate, 

Sam.  Johnson 


JOHNSON 

To  the  Same 

Newcastle,  Aug.  n,  1771 

Dear  Sir,  I  came  hither  last  night,  and  hope, 
but  do  not  absolutely  promise,  to  be  in  Edin¬ 
burgh  on  Saturday.  Beattie  will  not  come  so 
soon.  I  am,  Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

My  compliments  to  your  lady. 

To  the  Same 

Mr.  Johnson  sends  his  compliments  to  Mr. 
Boswell,  being  just  arrived  at  Boyd’s. — Satur¬ 
day  night. 

His  stay  in  Scotland  was  from  the  18th  of 
August,  on  which  day  he  arrived,  till  the  22nd  of 
November,  when  he  set  out  on  his  return  to  Lon¬ 
don;  and  I  believe  ninety-four  days  were  never 
passed  by  any  man  in  a  more  vigorous  exertion. 

He  came  by  the  way  of  Berwick  upon  Tweed 
to  Edinburgh,  where  he  remained  a  few  days, 
and  then  went  by  St.  Andrew’s,  Aberdeen,  In¬ 
verness,  and  Fort  Augustus,  to  the  Hebrides,  to 
visit  which  was  the  principal  object  he  had  in 
view.  He  visited  the  isles  of  Sky,  Rasay,  Col, 
Mull,  Inchkenneth,  and  Icolmkill.  He  travelled 
through  Argyleshire  by  Inverary,  and  from 
thence  by  Lochlomond  and  Dunbarton  to  Glas¬ 
gow,  then  by  Loudon  to  Auchinleck  in  Ayrshire, 
the  seat  of  my  family,  and  then  by  Hamilton, 
back  to  Edinburgh,  where  he  again  spent  some 
time.  He  thus  saw  the  four  Universities  of  Scot¬ 
land,  its  three  principal  cities,  and  as  much  of 
the  Highland  and  insular  life  as  was  sufficient 
for  his  philosophical  contemplation.  I  had  the 
pleasure  of  accompanying  him  during  the  whole 
of  this  journey.  He  was  respectfully  entertained 
by  the  great,  the  learned,  and  the  elegant,  wher¬ 
ever  he  went;  nor  was  he  less  delighted  with  the 
hospitality  which  he  experienced  in  humbler  life. 

His  various  adventures,  and  the  force  and  vi¬ 
vacity  of  his  mind,  as  exercised  during  this  per¬ 
egrination,  upon  innumerable  topicks,  have  been 
faithfully,  and  to  the  best  of  my  abilities,  dis¬ 
played  in  my  Journal  of  a  Tour  to  the  Hebrides ,  to 
which,  as  the  publick  has  been  pleased  to  hon¬ 
our  it  by  a  very  extensive  circulation,  I  beg  leave 
to  refer,  as  to  a  separate  and  remarkable  por¬ 
tion  of  his  life,1  which  may  be  there  seen  in  de- 

Uhe  authour  was  not  a  small  gainer  by  this  ex¬ 
traordinary  Journey;  for  Dr.  Johnson  thus  writes 
to  Mrs.  Thrale,  Nov.  3,  1 773: — “Boswell  will  praise 
my  resolution  and  perseverance,  and  I  shall  in  re¬ 
turn  celebrate  his  good  humour  and  perpetual 
cheerfulness.  He  has  better  faculties  than  I  had 
imagined;  more  justness  of  discernment,  and  more 
fecundity  of  images.  It  is  very  convenient  to  travel 
with  him;  for  there  is  no  house  where  he  is  not  re¬ 
ceived  with  kindness  and  respect.”  Let.  90,  to  Mrs. 
Thrale.  [M.] 


August  3,  1773 


228 

tail,  and  which  exhibits  as  striking  a  view  of  his 
powers  in  conversation,  as  his  works  do  of  his 
excellence  in  writing.  Nor  can  I  deny  to  myself 
the  very  flattering  gratification  of  inserting  here 
the  character  which  my  friend  Mr.  Courtenay 
has  been  pleased  to  give  of  that  work: 

With  Reynolds’  pencil,  vivid ,  bold ,  and  true , 

So  fervent  Boswell  gives  him  to  our  view: 

In  every  trait  we  see  his  mind  expand; 

The  master  rises  by  the  pupil’s  hand; 

We  love  the  writer,  praise  his  happy  vein. 

Grac’d  with  the  naivete  of  the  sage  Montaigne . 

Hence  not  alone  are  brighter  parts  display’d , 

But  e’en  the  specks  of  character  pourtray’d: 

We  see  the  Rambler  with  fastidious  smile 

Mark  the  lone  tree,  and  note  the  heath-clad  isle; 

But  when  th ’  heroick  tale  of  Flora’s  charms. 

Deck’d  in  a  kilt ,  he  wields  a  chieftain’s  arms: 

The  tuneful  piper  sounds  a  martial  strain. 

And  Samuel  sings,  “  The  King  shall  have  his  ain.” 

During  his  stay  at  Edinburgh,  after  his  return 
from  the  Hebrides,  he  was  at  great  pains  to  ob¬ 
tain  information  concerning  Scotland;  and  it 
will  appear  from  his  subsequent  letters,  that  he 
was  not  less  solicitous  for  intelligence  on  this 
subject  after  his  return  to  London. 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  I  came  home  last  night,  without 
any  incommodity,  danger,  or  weariness,  and  am 
ready  to  begin  a  new  journey.  I  shall  go  to  Ox¬ 
ford  on  Monday.  I  know  Mrs.  Boswell  wished 
me  well  to  go;1  her  wishes  have  not  been  disap¬ 
pointed.  Mrs.  Williams  has  received  Sir  A’s2 
letter. 

Make  my  compliments  to  all  those  to  whom 
my  compliments  may  be  welcome. 

Let  the  box3  be  sent  as  soon  as  it  can,  and  let 
me  know  when  to  expect  it. 

JIn  this  he  shewed  a  very  acute  penetration.  My 
wife  paid  him  the  most  assiduous  and  respectful 
attention,  while  he  was  our  guest;  so  that  I  wonder 
how  he  discovered  her  wishing  for  his  departure. 
The  truth  is,  that  his  irregular  hours  and  uncouth 
habits,  such  as  turning  the  candles  with  their  heads 
downwards,  when  they  did  not  burn  bright  enough, 
and  letting  the  wax  drop  upon  the  carpet,  could 
not  but  be  disagreeable  to  a  lady.  Besides,  she  had 
not  that  high  admiration  of  him  which  was  felt  by 
most  of  those  who  knew  him;  and  what  was  very 
natural  to  a  female  mind,  she  thought  he  had  too 
much  influence  over  her  husband.  She  once  in  a 
little  warmth,  made,  with  more  point  than  justice, 
this  remark  upon  that  subject:  “I  have  seen  many 
a  bear  led  by  a  man;  but  I  never  before  saw  a  man 
led  by  a  bear.” 

2Sir  Alexander  Gordon,  one  of  the  Professors  at 
Aberdeen. 

3This  was  a  box  containing  a  number  of  curious 
things  which  he  had  picked  up  in  Scotland,  par¬ 
ticularly  some  horn  spoons. 


[  1773 

Enquire,  if  you  can,  the  order  of  the  Clans: 
Macdonald  is  first,  Maclean  second;  further  I 
cannot  go.  Quicken  Dr.  Webster.4  I  am,  Sir, 
yours  affectionately, 

Sam.  Johnson 

Nov.  27,  1773 

Mr.  Boswell  to  Dr.  Johnson 

Edinburgh,  Dec.  2,  1773 

.  .  .  You  shall  have  what  information  I  can 
procure  as  to  the  order  of  the  Clans.  A  gentle¬ 
man  of  the  name  of  Grant  tells  me,  that  there  is 
no  settled  order  among  them;  and  he  says,  that 
the  Macdonalds  were  not  placed  upon  the  right 
of  the  army  at  Culloden;  the  Stuarts  were.  I 
shall,  however,  examine  witnesses  of  every  name 
that  I  can  find  here.  Dr.  Webster  shall  be  quick¬ 
ened  too.  I  like  your  little  memorandums;  they 
are  symptoms  of  your  being  in  earnest  with  your 
book  of  northern  travels. 

Your  box  shall  be  sent  next  week  by  sea.  You 
will  find  in  it  some  pieces  of  the  broom  bush, 
which  you  saw  growing  on  the  old  castle  of  Au- 
chinleck.  The  wood  has  a  curious  appearance 
when  sawn  across.  You  may  either  have  a  little 
writing-standish  made  of  it,  or  get  it  formed  in¬ 
to  boards  for  a  treatise  on  witchcraft,  by  way  of 
a  suitable  binding.  .  .  . 

Mr.  Boswell  to  Dr.  Johnson 

Edinburgh,  Dec .  18,  1773 

...  You  promised  me  an  inscription  for  a 
print  to  be  taken  from  an  historical  picture  of 
Mary  Queen  of  Scots  being  forced  to  resign  her 
crown,  which  Mr.  Hamilton  at  Rome  has  painted 
for  me.  The  two  following  have  been  sent  to  me: 

Maria  Scotorum  Regina  meliori  seculo  digna,  jus 
regium  civibus  seditiosis  invita  resignat. 

Cives  seditiosi  Mariam  Scotorum  Reginam  sese  mu- 
neri  abdicare  invitam  cogunt. 

Be  so  good  as  to  read  the  passage  in  Robert¬ 
son,  and  see  if  you  cannot  give  me  a  better  in¬ 
scription.  I  must  have  it  both  in  Latin  and  Eng¬ 
lish;  so  if  you  should  not  give  me  another  Latin 
one,  you  will  at  least  choose  the  best  of  these 
two,  and  send  a  translation  of  it.  .  .  . 

His  humane  forgiving  disposition  was  put  to 
a  pretty  strong  test  on  his  return  to  London,  by 
a  liberty  which  Mr.  Thomas  Davies  had  taken 
with  him  in  his  absence,  which  was,  to  publish 
two  volumes,  entitled,  Miscellaneous  and  Fugitive 
Pieces ,  which  he  advertised  in  the  news-papers, 
“By  the  Authour  of  the  Rambler.”  In  this  col¬ 
lection,  several  of  Dr.  Johnson’s  acknowledged 
writings,  several  of  his  anonymous  performances, 
and  some  which  he  had  written  for  others,  were 

4The  Rev.  Dr.  Alexander  Webster,  one  of  the 
ministers  of  Edinburgh,  a  man  of  distinguished 
abilities,  who  had  promised  him  information  con¬ 
cerning  the  Highlands  and  Islands  of  Scotland. 


BOSWELL 


1774] 

inserted;  but  there  were  also  some  in  which  he 
had  no  concern  whatever.  He  was  at  first  very 
angry,  as  he  had  good  reason  to  be.  But,  upon 
consideration  of  his  poor  friend’s  narrow  circum¬ 
stances,  and  that  he  had  only  a  little  profit  in 
view,  and  meant  no  harm,  he  soon  relented,  and 
continued  his  kindness  to  him  as  formerly. 

In  the  course  of  his  self-examination  with  ret¬ 
rospect  to  this  year,  he  seems  to  have  been  much 
dejected;  for  he  says,  January  i,  1774,  “This 
year  has  passed  with  so  little  improvement,  that 
I  doubt  whether  I  have  not  rather  impaired 
than  increased  my  learning”;1  and  yet  we  have 
seen  how  he  read ,  and  we  know  how  he  talked 
during  that  period. 

He  was  now  seriously  engaged  in  writing  an 
account  of  our  travels  in  the  Hebrides,  in  conse¬ 
quence  of  which  I  had  the  pleasure  of  a  more 
frequent  correspondence  with  him. 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  My  operations  have  been  hindered 
by  a  cough;  at  least  I  flatter  myself,  that  if  my 
cough  had  not  come,  I  should  have  been  further 
advanced.  But  I  have  had  no  intelligence  from 

Dr.  W - ,  [Webster,]  nor  from  the  Excise- 

office,  nor  from  you.  No  account  of  the  litde 
borough.2  Nothing  of  the  Erse  language.  I  have 
yet  heard  nothing  of  my  box. 

You  must  make  haste  and  gather  me  all  you 
can,  and  do  it  quickly,  or  I  will  and  shall  do 
without  it. 

Make  my  compliments  to  Mrs.  Boswell,  and 
tell  her  that  I  do  not  love  her  the  less  for  wishing 
me  away.  I  gave  her  trouble  enough,  and  shall 
be  glad,  in  recompense,  to  give  her  any  pleasure. 

I  would  send  some  porter  into  the  Hebrides, 
if  I  knew  which  way  it  could  be  got  to  my  kind 
friends  there.  Enquire,  and  let  me  know. 

Make  my  compliments  to  all  the  Doctors  of 
Edinburgh,  and  to  all  my  friends,  from  one  end 
of  Scotland  to  the  other. 

Write  to  me,  and  send  me  what  intelligence 
you  can:  and  if  any  thing  is  too  bulky  for  the 
post,  let  me  have  it  by  the  carrier.  I  do  not  like 
trusting  winds  and  waves.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  your 
most,  &c. 

Sam.  Johnson 

Jan.  29,  1774 


229 

Tell  Mrs.  Boswell  that  my  good  intentions 
towards  her  still  continue.  I  should  be  glad  to  do 
anything  that  would  either  benefit  or  please  her. 

Chambers  is  not  yet  gone,  but  so  hurried,  or 
so  negligent,  or  so  proud,  that  I  rarely  see  him. 
I  have,  indeed,  for  some  weeks  past,  been  very 
ill  of  a  cold  and  cough,  and  have  been  at  Mrs. 
Thrale’s,  that  I  might  be  taken  care  of.  I  am 
much  better:  nova  redeunt  in pralia  vires;  but  I  am 
yet  tender,  and  easily  disordered.  How  happy  it 
was  that  neither  of  us  were  ill  in  the  Hebrides. 

The  question  of  Literary  Property  is  this  day 
before  the  Lords.  Murphy  drew  up  the  Appel¬ 
lants’  case,  that  is,  the  plea  against  the  perpet¬ 
ual  right.  I  have  not  seen  it,  nor  heard  the  de¬ 
cision.  I  would  not  have  the  right  perpetual. 

I  will  write  to  you  as  any  thing  occurs,  and 
do  you  send  me  something  about  my  Scottish 
friends.  I  have  very  great  kindness  for  them.  Let 
me  know  likewise  how  fees  come  in,  and  when  we 
are  to  see  you.  I  am,  Sir,  yours  affectionately, 

Sam.  Johnson 

London,  Feb.  7,  1774 

He  at  this  time  wrote  the  following  letters  to 
Mr.  Steevens,  his  able  associate  in  editing  Shak- 
speare: 

To  George  Steevens,  Esq., 
in  Hampstead 

Sir,  If  I  am  asked  when  I  have  seen  Mr. 
Steevens,  you  know  what  answer  I  must  give; 
if  I  am  asked  when  I  shall  see  him,  I  wish  you 
would  tell  me  what  to  say. 

If  you  have  Lesley’s  History  of  Scotland,  or  any 
other  book  about  Scotland,  except  Boetius  and 
Buchanan,  it  will  be  a  kindness  if  you  send 
them  to,  Sir,  your  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

Feb.  7,  1774 

To  the  Same 

Sir,  We  are  thinking  to  augment  our  club 
and  I  am  desirous  of  nominating  you,  if  you 
care  to  stand  the  ballot,  and  can  attend  on  Fri¬ 
day  nights  at  least  twice  in  five  weeks:  less  than 
this  is  too  little,  and  rather  more  will  be  ex¬ 
pected.  Be  pleased  to  let  me  know  before  Friday. 
I  am,  Sir,  your  most,  & c. 

Sam.  Johnson 

Feb.  21,  1774 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


To  the  Same 

Dear  Sir,  In  a  day  or  two  after  I  had  written 
the  last  discontented  letter,  I  received  my  box, 
which  was  very  welcome.  But  still  I  must  en¬ 
treat  you  to  hasten  Dr.  Webster,  and  continue 
to  pick  up  what  you  can  that  may  be  useful. 

Mr.  Oglethorpe  was  with  me  this  morning, 
you  know  his  errand.  He  was  not  unwelcome. 

1 Prayers  and  Meditations ,  p.  129. 

2The  ancient  Burgh  of  Prestick,  in  Ayrshire. 


To  the  Same 

Sir,  Last  night  you  became  a  member  of  the 
club;  if  you  call  on  me  on  Friday,  I  will  intro¬ 
duce  you.  A  gentleman,  proposed  after  you, 
was  rejected. 

I  thank  you  for  Neander ,  but  wish  he  were  not 
so  fine.  I  will  take  care  of  him.  I  am,  Sir,  your 
humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

March  5,  1774 


230 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  Dr.  Webster’s  informations  were 
much  less  exact  and  much  less  determinate  than 
I  expected:  they  are,  indeed,  much  less  positive 
than,  if  he  can  trust  his  own  book1  which  he  laid 
before  me,  he  is  able  to  give.  But  I  believe  it 
will  always  be  found,  that  he  who  calls  much  for 
information  will  advance  his  work  but  slowly. 

I  am,  however,  obliged  to  you,  dear  Sir,  for 
your  endeavours  to  help  me,  and  hope,  that  be¬ 
tween  us  something  will  some  time  be  done,  if 
not  on  this,  on  some  occasion. 

Chambers  is  either  married,  or  almost  mar¬ 
ried,  to  Miss  Wilton,  a  girl  of  sixteen,  exquisite¬ 
ly  beautiful,  whom  he  has,  with  his  lawyer’s 
tongue,  persuaded  to  take  her  chance  with  him 
in  the  East. 

We  have  added  to  the  club,  Charles  Fox,  Sir 
Charles  Bunbury,  Dr .  Fordyce,  and  Mr.  Steevens. 

Return  my  thanks  to  Dr.  Webster.  Tell  Dr. 
Robertson  I  have  not  much  to  reply  to  his  cen¬ 
sure  of  my  negligence;  and  tell  Dr.  Blair,  that 
since  he  has  written  hither  what  I  said  to  him, 
we  must  now  consider  ourselves  as  even,  forgive 
one  another,  and  begin  again.  I  care  not  how 
soon,  for  he  is  a  very  pleasing  man.  Pay  my 
compliments  to  all  my  friends,  and  remind 
Lord  Elibank  of  his  promise  to  give  me  all  his 
works. 

I  hope  Mrs.  Boswell  and  little  Miss  are  well. — 
When  shall  I  see  them  again?  She  is  a  sweet 
lady,  only  she  was  so  glad  to  see  me  go,  that  I 
have  almost  a  mind  to  come  again,  that  she  may 
again  have  the  same  pleasure. 

Enquire  if  it  be  practicable  to  send  a  small 
present  of  a  cask  of  porter  to  Dunvegan,  Rasay, 
and  Col.  I  would  not  wish  to  be  thought  forget¬ 
ful  of  civilities.  I  am,  Sir,  your  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

March  5,  1774 

On  the  5th  of  March  I  wrote  to  him,  request¬ 
ing  his  counsel  whether  I  should  this  spring  come 
to  London.  I  stated  to  him  on  the  one  hand  some 
pecuniary  embarrassments,  which,  together  with 
my  wife’s  situation  at  that  time,  made  me  hesi¬ 
tate;  and,  on  the  other,  the  pleasure  and  im¬ 
provement  which  my  annual  visit  to  the  metrop¬ 
olis  always  afforded  me;  and  particularly  men¬ 
tioned  a  peculiar  satisfaction  which  I  experi¬ 
enced  in  celebrating  the  festival  of  Easter  in  St. 
Paul’s  cathedral;  that  to  my  fancy  it  appeared 
like  going  up  to  Jerusalem  at  the  feast  of  the 
Passover;  and  that  the  strong  devotion  which  I 

1A  manuscript  account  drawn  by  Dr.  Webster 
of  all  the  parishes  in  Scotland,  ascertaining  then- 
length,  breadth,  number  of  inhabitants,  and  dis¬ 
tinguishing  Protestants  and  Roman  Catholicks. 
This  book  had  been  transmitted  to  government, 
and  Dr.  Johnson  saw  a  copy  of  it  in  Dr.  Webster’s 
possession. 


[  1774 

felt  on  that  occasion  diffused  its  influence  on  my 
mind  through  the  rest  of  the  year. 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

[Not  dated ,  but  written  about 
the  ijth  of  March] 

Dear  Sir,  I  am  ashamed  to  think  that  since 
I  received  your  letter  I  have  passed  so  many 
days  without  answering  it. 

I  think  there  is  no  great  difficulty  in  resolving 
your  doubts.  The  reasons  for  which  you  are  in¬ 
clined  to  visit  London,  are,  I  think,  not  of  suffi¬ 
cient  strength  to  answer  the  objections.  That 
you  should  delight  to  come  once  a  year  to  the 
fountain  of  intelligence  and  pleasure,  is  very  natu¬ 
ral;  but  both  information  and  pleasure  must  be 
regulated  by  propriety.  Pleasure,  which  cannot 
be  obtained  but  by  unseasonable  or  unsuitable 
expence,  must  always  end  in  pain;  and  pleasure, 
which  must  be  enjoyed  at  the  expence  of  anoth¬ 
er’s  pain,  can  never  be  such  as  a  worthy  mind 
can  fully  delight  in. 

What  improvement  you  might  gain  by  com¬ 
ing  to  London,  you  may  easily  supply,  or  easily 
compensate,  by  enjoining  yourself  some  particu¬ 
lar  study  at  home,  or  opening  some  new  avenue 
to  information.  Edinburgh  is  not  yet  exhausted; 
and  I  am  sure  you  will  find  no  pleasure  here 
which  can  deserve  either  that  you  should  antici¬ 
pate  any  part  of  your  future  fortune,  or  that  you 
should  condemn  yourself  and  your  lady  to  pe¬ 
nurious  frugality  for  the  rest  of  the  year. 

I  need  not  tell  you  what  regard  you  owe  to 
Mrs.  Boswell ’s  entreaties ;  or  how  much  you  ought 
to  study  the  happiness  of  her  who  studies  yours 
with  so  much  diligence,  and  of  whose  kindness 
you  enjoy  such  good  effects.  Life  cannot  subsist 
in  society  but  by  reciprocal  concessions.  She 
permitted  you  to  ramble  last  year,  you  must  per¬ 
mit  her  now  to  keep  you  at  home. 

Your  last  reason  is  so  serious,  that  I  am  un¬ 
willing  to  oppose  it.  Yet  you  must  remember, 
that  your  image  of  worshipping  once  a  year  in  a 
certain  place,  in  imitation  of  the  Jews,  is  but  a 
comparison;  and  simile  non  es  idem;  if  the  annual 
resort  to  Jerusalem  was  a  duty  to  the  Jews,  it 
was  a  duty  because  it  was  commanded;  and  you 
have  no  such  command,  therefore  no  such  duty. 
It  may  be  dangerous  to  receive  too  readily,  and 
indulge  too  fondly,  opinions,  from  which,  per¬ 
haps,  no  pious  mind  is  wholly  disengaged,  of  lo¬ 
cal  sanctity  and  local  devotion.  You  know  what 
strange  effects  they  have  produced  over  a  great 
part  of  the  Christian  world.  I  am  now  writing, 
and  you,  when  you  read  this,  are  reading  under 
the  Eye  of  Omnipresence. 

To  what  degree  fancy  is  to  be  admitted  into 
religious  offices,  it  would  require  much  deliber¬ 
ation  to  determine.  I  am  far  from  intending  to¬ 
tally  to  exclude  it.  Fancy  is  a  faculty  bestowed 
by  our  Creator,  and  it  is  reasonable  that  all  His 
gifts  should  be  used  to  His  glory,  that  all  our  fac- 


BOSWELL 


1774]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  231 


ulties  should  co-operate  in  His  worship;  but  they 
are  to  co-operate  according  to  the  will  of  Him 
that  gave  them,  according  to  the  order  which 
His  wisdom  has  established.  As  ceremonies  pru¬ 
dential  or  convenient  are  less  obligatory  than 
positive  ordinances,  as  bodily  worship  is  only 
the  token  to  others  or  ourselves  of  mental  adora¬ 
tion,  so  Fancy  is  always  to  act  in  subordination 
to  Reason.  We  may  take  Fancy  for  a  companion, 
but  must  follow  Reason  as  our  guide.  We  may 
allow  Fancy  to  suggest  certain  ideas  in  certain 
places;  but  Reason  must  always  be  heard,  when 
she  tells  us,  that  those  ideas  and  those  places 
have  no  natural  or  necessary  relation.  When  we 
enter  a  church  we  habitually  recall  to  mind  the 
duty  of  adoration,  but  we  must  not  omit  adora¬ 
tion  for  want  of  a  temple;  because  we  know,  and 
ought  to  remember,  that  the  Universal  Lord  is 
everywhere  present;  and  that,  therefore,  to  come 
to  Jona,1  or  to  Jerusalem,  though  it  may  be  use¬ 
ful,  cannot  be  necessary. 

Thus  I  have  answered  your  letter,  and  have 
not  answered  it  negligendy.  I  love  you  too  well 
to  be  careless  when  you  are  serious. 

I  think  I  shall  be  very  diligent  next  week  about 
our  travels,  which  I  have  too  long  neglected.  I 
am,  dear  Sir,  your  most,  &c. 

Sam.  Johnson 

Compliments  to  Madam  and  Miss. 

To  the  Same 

Dear  Sir,  The  lady  who  delivers  this  has  a 
lawsuit,  in  which  she  desires  to  make  use  of  your 
skill  and  eloquence,  and  she  seems  to  think  that 
she  shall  have  something  more  of  both  for  a  rec¬ 
ommendation  from  me;  which,  though  I  know 
how  little  you  want  any  external  incitement  to 
your  duty,  I  could  not  refuse  her,  because  I 
know  that  at  least  it  will  not  hurt  her,  to  tell  you 
that  I  wish  her  well.  I  am,  Sir,  your  most  hum¬ 
ble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

May  10,  1774 

Mr.  Boswell  to  Dr.  Johnson 

Edinburgh,  May  12,  1774 

Lord  Hailes  has  begged  of  me  to  offer  you  his 
best  respects,  and  to  transmit  to  you  specimens 
of  Annals  of  Scotland,  from  the  Accession  of  Malcolm 
Kenmore  to  the  Death  of  James  V,  in  drawing  up 
which,  his  Lordship  has  been  engaged  for  some 
time.  His  Lordship  writes  to  me  thus:  “If  I  could 
procure  Dr.  Johnson’s  criticisms,  they  would  be 
of  great  use  to  me  in  the  prosecution  of  my 
work,  as  they  would  be  judicious  and  true.  I 
have  no  right  to  ask  that  favour  of  him.  If  you 
you  could,  it  would  highly  oblige  me.” 

Dr.  Blair  requests  you  may  be  assured  that  he 
did  not  write  to  London  what  you  said  to  him, 
and  that  neither  by  word  nor  letter  has  he  made 
the  least  complaint  of  you;  but,  on  the  contrary, 

1Iona. 


has  a  high  respect  for  you,  and  loves  you  much 
more  since  he  saw  you  in  Scotland.  It  would 
both  divert  and  please  you  to  see  his  eagerness 
about  this  matter. 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Streatham,  June  21,  1774 

Dear  Sir,  Yesterday  I  put  the  first  sheets  of 
the  Journey  to  the  Hebrides  to  the  press.  I  have  en¬ 
deavoured  to  do  you  some  justice  in  the  first 
paragraph.  It  will  be  one  volume  in  octavo,  not 
thick. 

It  will  be  proper  to  make  some  presents  in 
Scotland.  You  shall  tell  me  to  whom  I  shall  give; 
and  I  have  stipulated  twenty-five  for  you  to  give 
in  your  own  name.  Some  will  take  the  present 
better  from  me,  others  better  from  you.  In  this, 
you  who  are  to  live  in  the  place  ought  to  direct. 
Consider  it.  Whatever  you  can  get  for  my  pur¬ 
pose  send  me;  and  make  my  compliments  to 
your  lady  and  both  the  young  ones.  I  am,  Sir. 
your,  &c. 

Sam.  Johnson 

Mr.  Boswell  to  Dr.  Johnson 

Edinburgh,  June  24,  1774 

You  do  not  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  the  va¬ 
rious  packets  which  I  have  sent  to  you.  Neither 
can  I  prevail  with  you  to  answer  letters,  though 
you  honour  me  with  returns.  You  have  said  noth¬ 
ing  to  me  about  poor  Goldsmith,2  nothing  about 
Langton. 

I  have  received  for  you,  from  the  Society  for 
propagating  Christian  Knowledge  in  Scotland, 
the  following  Erse  books:  The  New  Testament; 
Baxter’s  Call ;  The  Confession  of  Faith  of  the  Assem¬ 
bly  of  Divines  at  Westminster ;  The  Mother’s  Cate¬ 
chism;  A  Gaelick  and  English  Vocabulary. 3 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  I  wish  you  could  have  looked  over 
my  book  before  the  printer,  but  it  could  not  eas¬ 
ily  be.  I  suspect  some  mistakes;  but  as  I  deal, 
perhaps,  more  in  notions  than  in  facts,  the  mat¬ 
ter  is  not  great,  and  the  second  edition  will  be 
mended,  if  any  such  there  be.  The  press  will  go 
on  slowly  for  a  time,  because  I  am  going  into 
Wales  to-morrow. 

I  should  be  very  sorry  if  I  appeared  to  treat 
such  a  character  as  Lord  Hailes  otherwise  than 
with  high  respect.  I  return  the  sheets,4  to  which 
I  have  done  what  mischief  I  could;  and  finding 
it  so  little,  thought  not  much  of  sending  them. 
The  narrative  is  clear,  lively,  and  short. 

2Dr.  Goldsmith  died  April  4,  this  year. 

3These  books  Dr.  Johnson  presented  to  the  Bod¬ 
leian  Library. 

4On  the  covers  enclosing  them,  Dr.  Johnson 
wrote,  “If  my  delay  has  given  any  reason  for  sup¬ 
posing  that  I  have  not  a  very  deep  sense  of  the 
honour  done  me  by  asking  my  judgement,  I  am 
very  sorry.” 


232 

I  have  done  worse  to  Lord  Hailes  than  by  ne¬ 
glecting  his  sheets:  I  have  run  him  in  debt.  Dr. 
Horne,  the  President  of  Magdalen  College  in 
Oxford,  wrote  to  me  about  three  months  ago, 
that  he  purposed  to  reprint  Walton's  Lives ,  and 
desired  me  to  contribute  to  the  work:  my  an¬ 
swer  was,  that  Lord  Hailes  intended  the  same 
publication;  and  Dr.  Horne  has  resigned  it  to 
him.  His  Lordship  must  now  think  seriously 
about  it. 

Of  poor  dear  Dr.  Goldsmith  there  is  little  to 
be  told,  more  than  the  papers  have  made  pub- 
lick.  He  died  of  a  fever,  made,  I  am  afraid,  more 
violent  by  uneasiness  of  mind.  His  debts  began 
to  be  heavy,  and  all  his  resources  were  exhausted. 
Sir  Joshua  is  of  opinion  that  he  owed  not  less 
than  two  thousand  pounds.  Was  ever  poet  so 
trusted  before? 

You  may,  if  you  please,  put  the  inscription 
thus: 

Maria  Scotorum  Regina  nata  75 — ,  a  suis  in  exili¬ 
um  acta  75 — ,  ab  hospita  neci  data  75 — .  You  must 
find  the  years. 

Of  your  second  daughter  you  certainly  gave 
the  account  yourself,  though  you  have  forgotten 
it.  While  Mrs.  Boswell  is  well,  never  doubt  of  a 
boy.  Mrs.  Thrale  brought,  I  think,  five  girls 
running,  but  while  I  was  with  you  she  had  a 
boy. 

I  am  obliged  to  you  for  all  your  pamphlets, 
and  of  the  last  I  hope  to  make  some  use.  I  made 
some  of  the  former.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  most 
affectionate  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

July  4,  1774 

My  compliments  to  all  the  three  ladies. 

To  Bennet  Langton,  Esq.,  at  Lang- 

TON,  NEAR  SpILSBY,  LINCOLNSHIRE 

Dear  Sir,  You  have  reason  to  reproach  me 
that  I  have  left  your  last  letter  so  long  unan¬ 
swered,  but  I  had  nothing  particular  to  say. 
Chambers,  you  find,  is  gone  far,  and  poor  Gold¬ 
smith  is  gone  much  further.  He  died  of  a  fever, 
exasperated,  as  I  believe,  by  the  fear  of  distress. 
He  had  raised  money  and  squandered  it,  by 
every  artifice  of  acquisition,  and  folly  of  ex¬ 
pence.  But  let  not  his  frailties  be  remembered; 
he  was  a  very  great  man. 

I  have  just  begun  to  print  my  Journey  to  the 
Hebrides ,  and  am  leaving  the  press  to  take  anoth¬ 
er  journey  into  Wales,  whither  Mr.  Thrale  is 
going,  to  take  possession  of,  at  least,  five  hun¬ 
dred  a  year,  fallen  to  his  lady.  All  at  Streatham, 
that  are  alive,  are  well. 

I  have  never  recovered  from  the  last  dreadful 
illness,  but  flatter  myself  that  I  grow  gradually 
better:  much,  however,  yet  remains  to  mend. 
K vpie  k\kr)aov. 

If  you  have  the  Latin  version  of  Busy ,  curious , 
thirsty  fly ,  be  so  kind  as  to  transcribe  and  send  it; 
but  you  need  not  be  in  haste,  for  I  shall  be  I 


[ 1 774 

know  not  where,  for  at  least  five  weeks.  I  wrote 
the  following  tetastrick  on  poor  Goldsmith: 

Top  TCL(f>ov  elaopaas  top  ’OXi/3apoto.  kovLt)v 
*'A(f>po(TL  pi)  (T€pui)vt  ’Eeiue,  iroSeaai  ira-rei 
Olcri  pepqXe  (frvais,  pkrpoiv  x&PiSt  7raXaicop, 

KAaUre  iron)TT)v,  iaropiKbuy  4>v<nKov. 

Please  to  make  my  most  respectful  compli¬ 
ments  to  all  the  ladies,  and  remember  me  to 
young  George  and  his  sisters.  I  reckon  George 
begins  to  shew  a  pair  of  heels. 

Do  not  be  sullen  now,  but  let  me  find  a  letter 
when  I  come  back.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  affec¬ 
tionate,  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

July  5,  1774 

To  Mr.  Robert  Levet 

Llewenny,  in  Denbighshire, 

Aug.  16,  1774 

Dear  Sir,  Mr.  Thrale’s  affairs  have  kept  him 
here  a  great  while,  nor  do  I  know  exactly  when 
we  shall  come  hence.  I  have  sent  you  a  bill  upon 
Mr.  Strahan. 

I  have  made  nothing  of  the  Ipecacuanha,  but 
have  taken  abundance  of  pills,  and  hope  that 
they  have  done  me  good. 

Wales,  so  far  as  I  have  yet  seen  of  it,  is  a  very 
beautiful  and  rich  country,  all  enclosed,  and 
planted.  Denbigh  is  not  a  mean  town.  Make  my 
compliments  to  all  my  friends,  and  tell  Frank  I 
hope  he  remembers  my  advice.  When  his  mon¬ 
ey  is  out,  let  him  have  more.  I  am,  Sir,  your 
humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

Mr.  Boswell  to  Dr.  Johnson 

Edinburgh,  Aug.  30,  1774 

You  have  given  me  an  inscription  for  a  por¬ 
trait  of  Mary  Queen  of  Scots,  in  which  you,  in  a 
short  and  striking  manner,  point  out  her  hard 
fate.  But  you  will  be  pleased  to  keep  in  mind, 
that  my  picture  is  a  representation  of  a  particu¬ 
lar  scene  in  her  history;  her  being  forced  to  re¬ 
sign  her  crown,  while  she  was  imprisoned  in  the 
castle  of  Lochlevin.  I  must,  therefore,  beg  that 
you  will  be  kind  enough  to  give  me  an  inscrip¬ 
tion  suited  to  that  particular  scene;  or  determine 
which  of  the  two  formerly  transmitted  to  you  is 
the  best;  and,  at  any  rate,  favour  me  with  an 
English  translation.  It  will  be  doubly  kind  if  you 
comply  with  my  request  speedily. 

Your  critical  notes  on  the  specimen  of  Lord 
Haile’s  Annals  oj  Scotland  are  excellent.  I  agreed 
with  you  in  every  one  of  them.  He  himself  ob¬ 
jected  only  to  the  alteration  of  free  to  brave ,  in 
the  passage  where  he  says  that  Edward  “departed 
with  the  glory  due  to  the  conquerour  of  a  free 
people.”  He  says,  “to  call  the  Scots  brave  would 
only  add  to  the  glory  of  their  conquerour.”  You 
will  make  allowance  for  the  national  zeal  of  our 
annalist.  I  now  send  a  few  more  leaves  of  the 


BOSWELL 


1774  ] 

Annals ,  which  I  hope  you  will  peruse,  and  return 
with  observations,  as  you  did  upon  the  former 
occasion.  Lord  Hailes  writes  to  me  thus: — “Mr. 
Boswell  will  be  pleased  to  express  the  grateful 
sense  which  Sir  David  Dalrymple  has  of  Dr. 
Johnson’s  attention  to  his  little  specimen.  The 
further  specimen  will  show,  that 

Even  in  an  Edward  he  can  see  desert .” 

It  gives  me  much  pleasure  to  hear  that  a  re¬ 
publication  of  Isaac  Walton's  Lives  is  intended. 
You  have  been  in  a  mistake  in  thinking  that 
Lord  Hailes  had  it  in  view.  I  remember  one 
morning,  while  he  sat  with  you  in  my  house,  he 
said,  that  there  should  be  a  new  edition  of  Wal¬ 
ton’s  Lives ;  and  you  said  that  “they  should  be  be- 
noted  a  litde.”  This  was  all  that  passed  on  that 
subject.  You  must,  therefore,  inform  Dr.  Horne, 
that  he  may  resume  his  plan.  I  enclose  a  note 
concerning  it;  and  if  Dr.  Horne  will  write  to  me, 
all  the  attention  that  I  can  give  shall  be  cheer¬ 
fully  bestowed,  upon  what  I  think  a  pious  work, 
the  preservation  and  elucidation  of  Walton,  by 
whose  writings  I  have  been  most  pleasingly  edi¬ 
fied _ 

Mr.  Boswell  to  Dr.  Johnson 

Edinburgh,  Sept.  16,  1774 

Wales  has  probably  detained  you  longer  than 
I  supposed.  You  will  have  become  quite  a  moun¬ 
taineer,  by  visiting  Scotland  one  year  and  Wales 
another.  You  must  next  go  to  Switzerland.  Cam¬ 
bria  will  complain,  if  you  do  not  honour  her 
also  with  some  remarks.  And  I  find  concessere  col¬ 
umn#,  the  booksellers  expect  another  book.  I  am 
impatient  to  see  your  Tour  to  Scotland  and  the 
Hebrides.  Might  you  not  send  me  a  copy  by  the 
post  as  soon  as  it  is  printed  off?  .  .  . 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  Yesterday  I  returned  from  myWelch 
journey.  I  was  sorry  to  leave  my  book  suspended 
so  long;  but  having  an  opportunity  of  seeing, 
with  so  much  convenience,  a  new  part  of  the 
island,  I  could  not  reject  it.  I  have  been  in  five 
of  the  six  counties  of  North  Wales;  and  have 
seen  St.  Asaph  and  Bangor,  the  two  seats  of 
their  Bishops;  have  been  upon  Penmanmaur 
and  Snowden,  and  passed  over  into  Anglesea. 
But  Wales  is  so  little  different  from  England, 
that  it  offers  nothing  to  the  speculation  of  the 
traveller. 

When  I  came  home,  I  found  several  of  your 
papers,  with  some  pages  of  Lord  Hailes’s  Annals , 
which  I  will  consider.  I  am  in  haste  to  give  you 
some  account  of  myself,  lest  you  should  suspect 
me  of  negligence  in  the  pressing  business  which 
I  find  recommended  to  my  care,  and  which  I 
knew  nothing  of  till  now,  when  all  care  is  vain.1 

XI  had  written  to  him,  to  request  his  interposi¬ 
tion  in  behalf  of  a  convict,  who  I  thought  was  very 
unjustly  condemned. 


233 

In  the  distribution  of  my  books  I  purpose  to 
follow  your  advice,  adding  such  as  shall  occur 
to  me.  I  am  not  pleased  with  your  notes  of  re¬ 
membrance  added  to  your  names,  for  I  hope  I 
shall  not  easily  forget  them. 

I  have  received  four  Erse  books,  without  any 
direction,  and  suspect  that  they  are  intended  for 
the  Oxford  library.  If  that  is  the  intention,  I 
think  it  will  be  proper  to  add  the  metrical  psalms, 
and  whatever  else  is  printed  in  Erse ,  that  the 
present  may  be  complete.  The  donor’s  name 
should  be  told. 

I  wish  you  could  have  read  the  book  before  it 
was  printed,  but  our  distance  does  not  easily 
permit  it. 

I  am  sorry  Lord  Hailes  does  not  intend  to  pub¬ 
lish  Walton ;  I  am  afraid  it  will  not  be  done  so 
well,  if  it  be  done  at  all. 

I  purpose  now  to  drive  the  book  forward. 
Make  my  compliments  to  Mrs.  Boswell,  and  let 
me  hear  often  from  you.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  af¬ 
fectionate  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

London,  October  1,  1774 

This  tour  to  Wales,  which  was  made  in  com¬ 
pany  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Thrale,  though  it  no 
doubt  contributed  to  his  health  and  amusement, 
did  not  give  an  occasion  to  such  a  discursive  ex¬ 
ercise  of  his  mind  as  our  tour  to  the  Hebrides.  I 
do  not  find  that  he  kept  any  journal  or  notes  of 
what  he  saw  there.  All  that  I  heard  him  say  of  it 
was,  that  “instead  of  bleak  and  barren  moun¬ 
tains,  there  were  green  and  fertile  ones;  and  that 
one  of  the  castles  in  Wales  would  contain  all  the 
castles  that  he  had  seen  in  Scotland.” 

Parliament  having  been  dissolved,  and  his 
friend  Mr.  Thrale,  who  was  a  steady  supporter 
of  government,  having  again  to  encounter  the 
storm  of  a  contested  election,  he  wrote  a  short 
political  pamphlet,  entitled  The  Patriot ,*  ad¬ 
dressed  to  the  electors  of  Great-Britain;  a  title 
which,  to  factious  men,  who  consider  a  patriot 
only  as  an  opposer  of  the  measures  of  govern¬ 
ment,  will  appear  strangely  misapplied.  It  was, 
however,  written  with  energetick  vivacity;  and, 
except  those  passages  in  which  it  endeavours  to 
vindicate  the  glaring  outrage  of  the  House  of 
Commons  in  the  case  of  the  Middlesex  election, 
and  to  justify  the  attempt  to  reduce  our  fellow- 
subjects  in  America  to  unconditional  submis¬ 
sion,  it  contained  an  admirable  display  of  the 
properties  of  a  real  patriot,  in  the  original  and 
genuine  sense; — a  sincere,  steady,  rational,  and 
unbiassed  friend  to  the  interests  and  prosperity 
of  his  King  and  country.  It  must  be  acknowl¬ 
edged,  however,  that  both  in  this  and  his  two 
former  pamphlets,  there  was,  amidst  many  pow- 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


234 

erful  arguments,  not  only  a  considerable  por¬ 
tion  of  sophistry,  but  a  contemptuous  ridicule  of 
his  opponents,  which  was  very  provoking. 

To  Mr.  Perkins1 

Sir,  You  may  do  me  a  very  great  favour.  Mrs. 
Williams,  a  gentlewoman  whom  you  may  have 
seen  at  Mr.  Thrale’s,  is  a  petitioner  for  Mr. 
Hetherington’s  charity:  petitions  are  this  day 
issued  at  Christ’s  Hospital. 

I  am  a  bad  manager  of  business  in  a  crowd; 
and  if  I  should  send  a  mean  man,  he  may  be  put 
away  without  his  errand.  I  must  therefore  in¬ 
treat  that  you  will  go,  and  ask  for  a  petition  for 
Anna  Williams,  whose  paper  of  enquiries  was 
delivered  with  answers  at  the  counting-house  of 
the  hospital  on  Thursday  the  20th.  My  servant 
will  attend  you  thither,  and  bring  the  petition 
home  when  you  have  it. 

The  petition,  which  they  are  to  give  us,  is  a 
form  which  they  deliver  to  every  petitioner,  and 
which  the  petitioner  is  afterwards  to  fill  up,  and 
return  to  them  again.  This  we  must  have,  or  we 
cannot  proceed  according  to  their  directions. 
You  need,  I  believe,  only  ask  for  a  petition;  if 
they  enquire  for  whom  you  ask,  you  can  tell 
them. 

I  beg  pardon  for  giving  you  this  trouble;  but 
it  is  a  matter  of  great  importance.  I  am,  Sir, 
your  most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

October  25,  1774 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  There  has  appeared  lately  in  the 
papers  an  account  of  a  boat  overset  between 
Mull  and  Ulva,  in  which  many  passengers  were 
lost,  and  among  them  Maclean  of  Col.  We,  you 
know,  were  once  drowned;2  I  hope,  therefore, 
that  the  story  is  either  wantonly  or  erroneously 
told.  Pray  satisfy  me  by  the  next  post. 

I  have  printed  two  hundred  and  forty  pages. 
I  am  able  to  do  nothing  much  worth  doing  to 
dear  Lord  Hailes’s  book.  I  will,  however,  send 
back  the  sheets;  and  hope,  by  degrees,  to  answer 
all  your  reasonable  expectations. 

JMr.  Perkins  was  for  a  number  of  years  the 
worthy  superintendant  of  Mr.  Thrale’s  great  brew¬ 
ery,  and  after  his  death  became  one  of  the  pro¬ 
prietors  of  it;  and  now  resides  in  Mr.  Thrale’s 
house  in  Southwark,  which  was  the  scene  of  so 
many  literary  meetings,  and  in  which  he  continues 
the  liberal  hospitality  for  which  it  was  eminent. 
Dr.  Johnson  esteemed  him  much.  He  hung  up  in 
the  counting-house  a  fine  proof  of  the  admirable 
mezzotinto  of  Dr.  Johnson,  by  Doughty;  and  when 
Mrs.  Thrale  asked  him  somewhat  flippantly,  “Why 
do  you  put  him  up  in  the  counting-house?”  he  an¬ 
swered,  “Because,  Madam,  I  wish  to  have  one 
wise  man  there.”  “Sir,  (said  Johnson,)  I  thank 
you.  It  is  a  very  handsome  compliment,  and  I  be¬ 
lieve  you  speak  sincerely.” 

2In  the  news-papers. 


[ 1 774 

Mr.  Thrale  has  happily  surmounted  a  very 
violent  and  acrimonious  opposition;  but  all  joys 
have  their  abatement:  Mrs.  Thrale  has  fallen 
from  her  horse,  and  hurt  herself  very  much.  The 
rest  of  our  friends,  I  believe,  are  well.  My  com¬ 
pliments  to  Mrs.  Boswell.  I  am,  Sir,  your  most 
affectionate  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

London,  October  27,  1774 

This  letter,  which  shews  his  tender  concern 
for  an  amiable  young  gentleman  to  whom  he 
had  been  very  much  obliged  in  the  Hebrides,  I 
have  inserted  according  to  its  date,  though  be¬ 
fore  receiving  it  I  had  informed  him  of  the  mel¬ 
ancholy  event  that  the  young  Laird  of  Col  was 
unfortunately  drowned. 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  Last  night  I  corrected  the  last  page 
of  our  Journey  to  the  Hebrides .  The  printer  has  de¬ 
tained  it  all  this  time,  for  I  had,  before  I  went 
into  Wales,  written  all  except  two  sheets.  The 
Patriot  was  called  for  by  my  political  friends  on 
Friday,  was  written  on  Saturday,  and  I  have 
heard  little  of  it.  So  vague  are  conjectures  at  a 
distance.3  As  soon  as  I  can,  I  will  take  care  that 
copies  be  sent  to  you,  for  I  would  wish  that  they 
might  be  given  before  they  are  bought;  but  I  am 
afraid  that  Mr.  Strahan  will  send  to  you  and  to 
the  booksellers  at  the  same  time.  Trade  is  as  dili¬ 
gent  as  courtesy.  I  have  mentioned  all  that  you 
recommended.  Pray  make  my  compliments  to 
Mrs.  Boswell  and  the  younglings.  The  club  has, 
I  think,  not  yet  met. 

Tell  me,  and  tell  me  honestly,  what  you  think 
and  what  others  say  of  our  travels.  Shall  we 
touch  the  continent?4 1  am,  dear  Sir,  your  most 
humble  servant 

Sam.  Johnson 

Nov.  26,  1774 

In  his  manuscript  diary  of  this  year,  there  is 
the  following  entry: 

“Nov.  27.  Advent  Sunday.  I  considered  that 
this  day,  being  the  beginning  of  the  ecclesiastic¬ 
al  year,  was  a  proper  time  for  a  new  course  of 
life.  I  began  to  read  the  Greek  Testament  reg¬ 
ularly  at  160  verses  every  Sunday.  This  day  I 
began  the  Acts. 

“  In  this  week  I  read  Virgil’s  Pastorals .  I  learned 
to  repeat  the  Pollio  and  Gallus .  I  read  carelessly 
the  first  GeorgickP 

3Alluding  to  a  passage  in  a  letter  of  mine,  where 
speaking  of  his  Journey  to  the  Hebrides ,  I  say,  “But 
has  not  The  Patriot  been  an  interruption,  by  the 
time  taken  to  write  it,  and  the  time  luxuriously 
spent  in  listening  to  its  applauses?” 

4We  had  projected  a  voyage  together  up  the 
Baltick,  and  talked  of  visiting  some  of  the  more 
northern  regions. 


BOSWELL 


1 775  ] 

Such  evidences  of  his  unceasing  ardour,  both 
for  “divine  and  human  lore,”  when  advanced 
into  his  sixty-fifth  year,  and  notwithstanding  his 
many  disturbances  from  disease,  must  make  us 
at  once  honour  his  spirit,  and  lament  that  it 
should  be  so  grievously  clogged  by  its  material 
tegument.  It  is  remarkable,  that  he  was  very 
fond  of  the  precision  which  calculation  pro¬ 
duces.  Thus  we  find  in  one  of  his  manuscript 
diaries,  “12  pages  in  4to.  Gr.  Test,  and  30 
pages  in  Beza’s  folio,  comprize  the  whole  in  40 
days.” 

Dr.  Johnson  to  John  Hoole,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  I  have  returned  your  play,1  which 
you  will  find  underscored  with  red,  where  there 
was  a  word  which  I  did  not  like.  The  red  will  be 
washed  off  with  a  little  water. 

The  plot  is  so  well  framed,  the  intricacy  so 
artful,  and  the  disentanglement  so  easy,  the  sus¬ 
pense  so  affecting,  and  the  passionate  parts  so 
properly  interposed,  that  I  have  no  doubt  of  its 
success.  I  am,  Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

December  19,  1774 

1775:  je tat.  66.] — The  first  effort  of  his  pen 
in  1775  was,  Proposals  for  publishing  the  Works  of 
Mrs .  Charlotte  Lennox ,  f  in  three  volumes  quarto. 
In  his  diary,  January  2, 1  find  this  entry:  “Wrote 
Charlotte’s  Proposals.”  But,  indeed,  the  internal 
evidence  would  have  been  quite  sufficient.  Her 
claim  to  the  favour  of  the  publick  was  thus  en¬ 
forced  : 

“Most  of  the  pieces,  as  they  appeared  singly, 
have  been  read  with  approbation,  perhaps  above 
their  merits,  but  of  no  great  advantage  to  the 
writer.  She  hopes,  therefore,  that  she  shall  not  be 
considered  as  too  indulgent  to  vanity,  or  too 
studious  of  interest,  if,  from  that  labour  which 
has  hitherto  been  chiefly  gainful  to  others,  she 
endeavours  to  obtain  at  last  some  profit  for  her¬ 
self  and  her  children.  She  cannot  decently  en¬ 
force  her  claim  by  the  praise  of  her  own  perform¬ 
ances;  nor  can  she  suppose,  that,  by  the  most 
artful  and  laboured  address,  any  additional  no¬ 
tice  could  be  procured  to  a  publication,  of  which 
Her  Majesty  has  condescended  to  be  the  Pa¬ 
troness.” 

He  this  year  also  wrote  the  Preface  to  Baretti’s 
Easy  Lessons  in  Italian  and  English,  f 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  You  never  did  ask  for  a  book  by  the 
post  till  now,  and  I  did  not  think  on  it.  You  see 
now  it  is  done.  I  sent  one  to  the  King,  and  I 
hear  he  likes  it. 

lClsonice . 


235 

I  shall  send  a  parcel  into  Scotland  for  pres¬ 
ents,  and  intend  to  give  to  many  of  my  friends. 
In  your  catalogue  you  left  out  Lord  Auchin- 
leck. 

Let  me  know,  as  fast  as  you  read  it,  how  you 
like  it;  and  let  me  know  if  any  mistake  is  com¬ 
mitted,  or  any  thing  important  left  out.  I  wish 
you  could  have  seen  the  sheets.  My  compli¬ 
ments  to  Mrs.  Boswell,  and  to  Veronica,  and  to 
all  my  friends.  I  am,  Sir,  your  most  humble 
servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

January  14,  1775 

Mr.  Boswell  to  Dr.  Johnson 

Edinburgh,  Jan.  19,  1775 

Be  pleased  to  accept  of  my  best  thanks  for 
your  Journey  to  the  Hebrides ,  which  came  to  me 
by  last  night’s  post.  I  did  really  ask  the  favour 
twice;  but  you  have  been  even  with  me  by 
granting  it  so  speedily.  Bis  dat  qui  cito  dat.  Though 
ill  of  a  bad  cold,  you  kept  me  up  the  greatest 
part  of  the  last  night;  for  I  did  not  stop  till  I  had 
read  every  word  of  your  book.  I  looked  back 
to  our  first  talking  of  a  visit  to  the  Hebrides, 
which  was  many  years  ago,  when  sitting  by  our¬ 
selves  in  the  Mitre  tavern,  in  London,  I  think 
about  witching  time  o’  night ;  and  then  exulted 
in  contemplating  our  scheme  fulfilled,  and  a 
monumentum  perenne  of  it  erected  by  your  supe- 
riour  abilities.  I  shall  only  say,  that  your  book 
has  afforded  me  a  high  gratification.  I  shall 
afterwards  give  you  my  thoughts  on  particular 
passages.  In  the  mean  time,  I  hasten  to  tell  you 
of  your  having  mistaken  two  names,  which  you 
will  correct  in  London,  as  I  shall  do  here,  that 
the  gentlemen  who  deserve  the  valuable  com¬ 
pliments  which  you  have  paid  them,  may  en¬ 
joy  their  honours.  In  page  106,  for  Gordon  read 
Murchison;  and  in  page  357,  for  Maclean  read 
Macleod.  .  .  . 

But  I  am  now  to  apply  to  you  for  immediate 
aid  in  my  profession,  which  you  have  never  re¬ 
fused  to  grant  when  I  requested  it.  I  enclose 
you  a  petition  for  Dr.  Memis,  a  physician  at 
Aberdeen,  in  which  Sir  John  Dalrymple  has 
exerted  his  talents,  and  which  I  am  to  answer 
as  Counsel  for  the  managers  of  the  Royal  In¬ 
firmary  in  that  city.  Mr.  Jopp,  the  Provost,  who 
delivered  to  you  your  freedom,  is  one  of  my 
clients,  and,  as  a  citizen  of  Aberdeen ,  you  will  sup¬ 
port  him. 

The  fact  is  shortly  this.  In  a  translation  of  the 
charter  of  the  Infirmary  from  Latin  into  Eng¬ 
lish,  made  under  the  authority  of  the  managers, 
the  same  phrase  in  the  original  is  in  one  place 
rendered  Physician ,  but  when  applied  to  Dr. 
Memis  is  rendered  Doctor  of  Medicine.  Dr.  Me¬ 
mis  complained  of  this  before  the  translation 
was  printed,  but  was  not  indulged  with  having 
it  altered;  and  he  has  brought  an  action  for  dam¬ 
ages,  on  account  of  a  supposed  injury,  as  if  the 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


236 

designation  given  to  him  was  an  inferiour  one, 
tending  to  make  it  be  supposed  he  is  not  a 
Physician ,  and,  consequently,  to  hurt  his  prac¬ 
tice.  My  father  has  dismissed  the  action  as 
groundless,  and  now  he  has  appealed  to  the 
whole  Court.1 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  I  long  to  hear  how  you  like  the 
book;  it  is,  I  think,  much  liked  here.  But  Mac- 
pherson  is  very  furious;  can  you  give  me  any 
more  intelligence  about  him,  or  his  Fingal ?  Do 
what  you  can  and  do  it  quickly.  Is  Lord  Hailes 
on  our  side? 

Pray  let  me  know  what  I  owed  you  when  I 
left  you,  that  I  may  send  it  to  you. 

I  am  going  to  write  about  the  Americans.  If 
you  have  picked  up  any  hints  among  your  law¬ 
yers,  who  are  great  masters  of  the  law  of  nations, 
or  if  your  own  mind  suggests  any  thing,  let  me 
know.  But  mum,  it  is  a  secret. 

I  will  send  your  parcel  of  books  as  soon  as  I 
can;  but  I  cannot  do  as  I  wish.  However,  you 
find  every  thing  mentioned  in  the  book  which 
you  recommended. 

Langton  is  here;  we  are  all  that  ever  we  were. 
He  is  a  worthy  fellow,  without  malice,  though 
not  without  resentment. 

Poor  Beauclerk  is  so  ill,  that  his  life  is  thought 
to  be  in  danger.  Lady  Di  nurses  him  with  very 
great  assiduity. 

Reynolds  has  taken  too  much  to  strong  liq¬ 
uor,2  and  seems  to  delight  in  his  new  char¬ 
acter. 

This  is  all  the  news  that  I  have;  but  as  you 
love  verses,  I  will  send  you  a  few  which  I  made 
upon  Inchkenneth;3  but  remember  the  condi¬ 
tion,  you  shall  not  shew  them,  except  to  Lord 
Hailes,  whom  I  love  better  than  any  man  whom 
I  know  so  little.  If  he  asks  you  to  transcribe 
them  for  him,  you  may  do  it,  but  I  think  he 
must  promise  not  to  let  them  be  copied  again, 
nor  to  shew  them  as  mine. 

I  have  at  last  sent  back  Lord  Hailes’s  sheets.  I 
never  think  about  returning  them,  because  I  al¬ 
ter  nothing.  You  will  see  that  I  might  as  well 
have  kept  them.  However,  I  am  ashamed  of  my 
delay;  and  if  I  have  the  honour  of  receiving  any 
more,  promise  punctually  to  return  them  by  the 
next  post.  Make  my  compliments  to  dear  Mrs. 

Tn  the  Court  of  Session  of  Scotland  an  action  is 
first  tried  by  one  of  the  Judges,  who  is  called  the 
Lord  Ordinary;  and  if  either  party  is  dissatisfied, 
he  may  appeal  to  the  whole  Court,  consisting  of  fif¬ 
teen,  the  Lord  President  and  fourteen  other  Judg¬ 
es,  who  have  both  in  and  out  of  Court  the  title  of 
Lords,  from  the  names  of  their  estates;  as,  Lord 
Auchinleck,  Lord  Monboddo,  &c. 

2It  should  be  recollected,  that  this  fanciful  de¬ 
scription  of  his  friend  was  given  by  Johnson  after 
he  himself  had  become  a  water-drinker. 

3See  them  in  Journal  of  a  Tour  to  the  Hebrides ,  3rd 
edit.,  p.  337  [Oct.  17]. 


[ 1 775 

Boswell,  and  to  Miss  Veronica.  I  am,  dear  Sir, 
yours  most  faithfully, 

Sam.  Johnson4 

Jan.  21,  1775 

Mr.  Boswell  to  Dr.  Johnson 

Edinburgh,  Jan.  27,  1775 

. .  .  You  rate  our  lawyers  here  too  high,  when 
you  call  them  great  masters  of  the  law  of  na¬ 
tions.  .  .  . 

As  for  myself,  I  am  ashamed  to  say  I  have 
read  little  and  thought  little  on  the  subject  of 
America.  I  will  be  much  obliged  to  you,  if  you 
will  direct  me  where  I  shall  find  the  best  infor¬ 
mation  of  what  is  to  be  said  on  both  sides.  It  is 
a  subject  vast  in  its  present  extent  and  future 
consequences.  The  imperfect  hints  which  now 
float  in  my  mind,  tend  rather  to  the  formation 
of  an  opinion  that  our  government  has  been  pre¬ 
cipitant  and  severe  in  the  resolutions  taken  against 
the  Bostonians.  Well  do  you  know  that  I  have 
no  kindness  for  that  race.  But  nations,  or  bodies 
of  men,  should,  as  well  as  individuals,  have  a 
fair  trial,  and  not  be  condemned  on  character 
alone.  Have  we  not  express  contracts  with  our 
colonies,  which  afford  a  more  certain  founda¬ 
tion  of  judgement,  than  general  political  specu- 
tions  on  the  mutual  rights  of  States  and  their 
provinces  or  colonies?  Pray  let  me  know  imme¬ 
diately  what  to  read,  and  I  shall  diligently  en¬ 
deavour  to  gather  for  you  any  thing  that  I  can 
find.  Is  Burke’s  speech  on  American  taxation 
published  by  himself?  Is  it  authentick?  I  remem¬ 
ber  to  have  heard  you  say,  that  you  had  never 
considered  East-Indian  affairs;  though,  surely, 
they  are  of  much  importance  to  Great-Britain. 
Under  the  recollection  of  this,  I  shelter  myself 
from  the  reproach  of  ignorance  about  the  Amer¬ 
icans.  If  you  write  upon  the  subject  I  shall  cer¬ 
tainly  understand  it.  But,  since  you  seem  to  ex¬ 
pect  that  I  should  know  something  of  it,  without 
your  instruction,  and  that  my  own  mind  should 

4He  now  sent  me  a  Latin  inscription  for  my  his¬ 
torical  picture  of  Mary  Queen  of  Scots,  and  after¬ 
wards  favoured  me  with  an  English  translation. 
Mr.  Alderman  Boydell,  that  eminent  Patron  of  the 
Arts,  has  subjoined  them  to  the  engraving  from  my 
picture. 

Maria  Scotorum  Regina 
Hominum  seditiosorum 
Contumeliis  lassata , 

Minis  territa ,  clamoribus  victa 
Libello ,  per  quern 
Regno  cedit , 

Lacrimans  trepidansque 
Nomen  apponit. 

Mary  Queen  of  Scots 
Harassed ,  terrified ,  and  overpowered 
By  the  insults ,  menaces , 

And  clamours 
Of  her  rebellious  subjects , 

1 Sets  her  hand , 

With  tears  and  confusion , 

To  a  resignation  of  the  kingdom. 


BOSWELL 


237 


1775]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


suggest  something,  I  trust  you  will  put  me  in  the 
way.  .  .  . 

What  does  Becket  mean  by  the  Originals  of 
Fingal  and  other  poems  of  Ossian,  which  he  ad¬ 
vertises  to  have  lain  in  his  shop? 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq,. 

Dear  Sir,  You  sent  me  a  case  to  consider,  in 
which  I  have  no  facts  but  which  are  against  us, 
nor  any  principles  on  which  to  reason.  It  is  vain 
to  try  to  write  thus  without  materials.  The  fact 
seems  to  be  against  you;  at  least  I  cannot  know 
nor  say  any  thing  to  the  contrary.  I  am  glad 
that  you  like  the  book  so  well.  I  hear  no  more  of 
Macpherson.  I  shall  long  to  know  what  Lord 
Hailes  says  of  it.  Lend  it  him  privately.  I  shall 
send  the  parcel  as  soon  as  I  can.  Make  my  com¬ 
pliments  to  Mrs.  Boswell.  I  am,  Sir,  &c. 

Sam.  Johnson 

Jan.  28,  1775 

Mr.  Boswell  to  Dr.  Johnson 

Edinburgh,  Feb.  2,  1775 

:  .  .  As  to  Macpherson,  I  am  anxious  to  have  * 
from  yourself  a  full  and  pointed  account  of  what 
has  passed  between  you  and  him.  It  is  confident¬ 
ly  told  here,  that  before  your  book  came  out  he 
sent  to  you,  to  let  you  know  that  he  understood 
you  meant  to  deny  the  authenticity  of  Ossian’s 
poems;  that  the  originals  were  in  his  possession; 
that  you  might  have  inspection  of  them,  and 
might  take  the  evidence  of  people  skilled  in  the 
Erse  language;  and  that  he  hoped,  after  this  fair 
offer,  you  would  not  be  so  uncandid  as  to  assert 
that  he  had  refused  reasonable  proof.  That  you 
paid  no  regard  to  his  message,  but  published 
your  strong  attack  upon  him;  and  then  he  wrote 
a  letter  to  you,  in  such  terms  as  he  thought 
suited  to  one  who  had  not  acted  as  a  man  of 
veracity.  You  may  believe  it  gives  me  pain  to 
hear  your  conduct  represented  as  unfavourable, 
while  I  can  only  deny  what  is  said,  on  the  ground 
that  your  character  refutes  it,  without  having 
any  information  to  oppose.  Let  me,  I  beg  it  of 
you,  be  furnished  with  a  sufficient  answer  to  any 
calumny  upon  this  occasion. 

Lord  Hailes  writes  to  me,  (for  we  correspond 
more  than  we  talk  together,)  4 ‘As  to  Fingal,  I  see 
a  controversy  arising,  and  purpose  to  keep  out 
of  its  way.  There  is  no  doubt  that  I  might  men¬ 
tion  some  circumstances;  but  I  do  not  choose  to 
commit  them  to  paper.55  What  his  opinion  is,  I 
do  not  know.  He  says,  “I  am  singularly  obliged 
to  Dr.  Johnson  for  his  accurate  and  useful  criti¬ 
cisms.  Had  he  given  some  strictures  on  the  gen¬ 
eral  plan  of  the  work,  it  would  have  added 
much  to  his  favours.55  He  is  charmed  with  your 
verses  on  Inchkenneth,  says  they  are  very  ele¬ 
gant,  but  bids  me  tell  you  he  doubts  whether 
Legitimas faciunt  pectorapura  preces 
be  according  to  the  rubrick:  but  that  is  your 
concern;  for,  you  know,  he  is  a  Presbyterian. . . . 


To  Dr.  Lawrence1 

.  .  Feb.  7,  1775 

Sir,  One  of  the  Scotch  physicians  is  now  pros¬ 
ecuting  a  corporation  that  in  some  publick  in¬ 
strument  have  stiled  him  Doctor  of  Medicine  in¬ 
stead  of  Physician.  Boswell  desires,  being  advo¬ 
cate  for  the  corporation,  to  know  whether  Doc¬ 
tor  of  Medicine  is  not  a  legitimate  title,  and 
whether  it  may  be  considered  as  a  disadvan¬ 
tageous  distinction.  I  am  to  write  to-night;  be 
pleased  to  tell  me.  I  am,  Sir,  your  most,  &c., 

Sam.  Johnson 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

My  Dear  Boswell,  I  am  surprized  that, 
knowing  as  you  do  the  disposition  of  your  coun¬ 
trymen  to  tell  lies  in  favour  of  each  other,2  you 
can  be  at  all  affected  by  any  reports  that  circu¬ 
late  among  them.  Macpherson  never  in  his  life 
offered  me  a  sight  of  any  original  or  of  any  evi¬ 
dence  of  any  kind;  but  thought  only  of  intimi¬ 
dating  me  by  noise  and  threats,  till  my  last  an¬ 
swer, — that  I  would  not  be  deterred  from  detect¬ 
ing  what  I  thought  a  cheat,  by  the  menaces  of  a 
ruffian — put  an  end  to  our  correspondence. 

The  state  of  the  question  is  this.  He,  and  Dr. 
Blair,  whom  I  consider  as  deceived,  say,  that  he 
copied  the  poem  from  old  manuscripts.  His  cop¬ 
ies,  if  he  had  them,  and  I  believe  him  to  have 
none,  are  nothing.  Where  are  the  manuscripts? 
They  can  be  shewn  if  they  exist,  but  they  were 
never  shewn.  De  non  existentibus  et  non  apparenti- 
bus,  says  our  law,  eadem  est  ratio.  No  man  has  a 
claim  to  credit  upon  his  own  word,  when  better 
evidence,  if  he  had  it,  may  be  easily  produced. 
But,  so  far  as  we  can  find,  the  Erse  language  was 
never  written  till  very  lately  for  the  purposes  of 
religion.  A  nation  that  cannot  write,  or  a  lan¬ 
guage  that  was  never  written,  has  no  manuscripts. 

But  whatever  he  has  he  never  offered  to  show. 
If  old  manuscripts  should  now  be  mentioned,  I 
should,  unless  there  were  more  evidence  than 
can  be  easily  had,  suppose  them  another  proof 
of  Scotch  conspiracy  in  national  falsehood. 

Do  not  censure  the  expression;  you  know  it  to 
be  true. 

Dr.  Memis’s  question  is  so  narrow  as  to  allow 
no  speculation;  and  I  have  no  facts  before  me 
but  those  which  his  advocate  has  produced 
against  you. 

I  consulted  this  morning  the  President  of  the 
London  College  of  Physicians,  who  says,  that 
with  us,  Doctor  of  Physick  (we  do  not  say  Doctor  of 
Medicine )  is  the  highest  title  that  a  practicer  of 
physick  can  have;  that  Doctor  implies  not  only 
Physician,  but  teacher  of  physick;  that  every 

JThe  learned  and  worthy  Dr.  Lawrence,  whom 
Dr.  Johnson  respected  and  loved  as  his  physician 
and  friend. 

2My  friend  has,  in  this  letter,  relied  upon  my 
testimony,  with  a  confidence,  of  which  the  ground 
has  escaped  my  recollection. 


238  BOSWELL  [i775 


Doctor  is  legally  a  Physician;  but  no  man,  not  a 
Doctor ,  can  practice  physick  but  by  licence  particu¬ 
larly  granted.  The  Doctorate  is  a  licence  of  it¬ 
self.  it  seems  to  us  a  very  slender  cause  of  prose¬ 
cution.  ... 

I  am  now  engaged,  but  in  a  little  time  I  hope 
to  do  all  you  would  have.  My  compliments  to 
Madam  and  Veronica.  I  am,  Sir,  your  most 
humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

February  7,  1775 

What  words  were  used  by  Mr.  Macpherson  in 
his  letter  to  the  venerable  Sage,  I  have  never 
heard;  but  they  are  generally  said  to  have  been 
of  a  nature  very  different  from  the  language  of 
literary  contest.  Dr.  Johnson’s  answer  appeared 
in  the  news-papers  of  the  day,  and  has  since  been 
frequently  re-published;  but  not  with  perfect  ac¬ 
curacy.  I  give  it  as  dictated  to  me  by  himself, 
written  down  in  his  presence,  and  authenticated 
by  a  note  in  his  own  hand-writing,  “  This,  I  think , 
is  a  true  copy.”1 

Mr.James  Macpherson,  I  received  your  fool- 
lish  and  impudent  letter.  Any  violence  offered 
me  I  shall  do  my  best  to  repel;  and  what  I  can¬ 
not  do  for  myself,  the  law  shall  do  for  me.  I  hope 
I  shall  never  be  deterred  from  detecting  what  I 
think  a  cheat,  by  the  menaces  of  a  ruffian. 

What  would  you  have  me  retract?  I  thought 
your  book  an  imposture;  I  think  it  an  imposture 
still.  For  this  opinion  I  have  given  my  reasons  to 
the  publick,  which  I  here  dare  you  to  refute. 
Your  rage  I  defy.  Your  abilities,  since  your 
Homer,  are  not  so  formidable;  and  what  I  hear 
of  your  morals,  inclines  me  to  pay  regard  not  to 
what  you  shall  say,  but  to  what  you  shall  prove. 
You  may  print  this  if  you  will. 

Sam.  Johnson 

Mr.  Macpherson  little  knew  the  character  of 
Dr.  Johnson,  if  he  supposed  that  he  could  be 
easily  intimidated;  for  no  man  was  ever  more 
remarkable  for  personal  courage.  He  had,  in¬ 
deed,  an  aweful  dread  of  death,  or  rather,  “of 
something  after  death” ;  and  what  rational  man, 
who  seriously  thinks  of  quitting  all  that  he  has 
ever  known,  and  going  into  a  new  and  unknown 
state  of  being,  can  be  without  that  dread?  But 
his  fear  was  from  reflection;  his  courage  natural. 
His  fear,  in  that  one  instance,  was  the  result  of 
philosophical  and  religious  consideration.  He 
feared  death,  but  he  feared  nothing  else,  not 
even  what  might  occasion  death.  Many  instances 
of  his  resolution  may  be  mentioned.  One  day, 
at  Mr.  Beauclerk’s  house  in  the  country,  when 
two  large  dogs  were  fighting,  he  went  up  to  them, 
and  beat  them  till  they  separated;  and  at  anoth- 

JI  have  deposited  it  in  the  British  Museum. 


er  time,  when  told  of  the  danger  there  was  that 
a  gun  might  burst  if  charged  with  many  balls, 
he  put  in  six  or  seven,  and  fired  it  off  against  a 
wall.  Mr.  Langton  told  me,  that  when  they  were 
swimming  together  near  Oxford,  he  cautioned 
Dr.  Johnson  against  a  pool,  which  was  reckoned 
particularly  dangerous;  upon  which  Johnson  di¬ 
rectly  swam  into  it.  He  told  me  himself  that  one 
night  he  was  attacked  in  the  street  by  four  men, 
to  whom  he  would  not  yield,  but  kept  them  all 
at  bay,  till  the  watch  came  up,  and  carried  both 
him  and  them  to  the  round-house.  In  the  play¬ 
house  at  Lichfield,  as  Mr.  Garrick  informed  me, 
Johnson  having  for  a  moment  quitted  a  chair 
which  was  placed  for  him  between  the  side- 
scenes,  a  gentleman  took  possession  of  it,  and 
when  Johnson  on  his  return  civilly  demanded 
his  seat,  rudely  refused  to  give  it  up;  upon  which 
Johnson  laid  hold  of  it,  and  tossed  him  and  the 
chair  into  the  pit.  Foote,  who  so  successfully  re- 
.vived  the  old  comedy,  by  exhibiting  living  char¬ 
acters,  had  resolved  to  imitate  Johnson  on  the 
stage,  expecting  great  profits  from  his  ridicule 
of  so  celebrated  a  man.  Johnson  being  informed 
of  his  intention,  and  being  at  dinner  at  Mr. 
Thomas  Davies’s  the  bookseller,  from  whom  I 
had  the  story,  he  asked  Mr.  Davies  “what  was 
the  common  price  of  an  oak  stick”;  and  being 
answered  six-pence,  “Why  then,  Sir,  (said  he,) 
give  me  leave  to  send  your  servant  to  purchase 
me  a  shilling  one.  I’ll  have  a  double  quantity; 
for  I  am  told  Foote  means  to  take  me  off,  as  he 
calls  it,  and  I  am  determined  the  fellow  shall 
not  do  it  with  impunity.”  Davies  took  care  to 
acquaint  Foote  of  this,  which  effectually  checked 
the  wantonness  of  the  mimick.  Mr.  Macpher- 
son’s  menaces  made  Johnson  provide  himself 
with  the  same  implement  of  defence;  and  had 
he  been  attacked,  I  have  no  doubt  that,  old  as 
he  was,  he  would  have  made  his  corporal  prow¬ 
ess  be  felt  as  much  as  his  intellectual. 

His  Journey  to  the  Western  Islands  of  Scotland*  is 
a  most  valuable  performance.  It  abounds  in  ex¬ 
tensive  philosophical  views  of  society,  and  in  in¬ 
genious  sentiment  and  lively  description.  A  con¬ 
siderable  part  of  it,  indeed,  consists  of  specula¬ 
tions,  which  many  years  before  he  saw  the  wild 
regions  which  we  visited  together,  probably  had 
employed  his  attention,  though  the  actual  sight 
of  those  scenes  undoubtedly  quickened  and  aug¬ 
mented  them.  Mr.  Orme,  the  very  able  histo¬ 
rian,  agreed  with  me  in  this  opinion,  which  he 
thus  strongly  expressed: — “There  are  in  that 
book  thoughts,  which,  by  long  revolution  in  the 
great  mind  of  Johnson,  have  been  formed  and 
polished  like  pebbles  rolled  in  the  ocean !” 


1775]  LIFE  OF 

That  he  was  to  some  degree  of  excess  a  true- 
born  Englishman ,  so  as  to  have  entertained  an  un¬ 
due  prejudice  against  both  the  country  and  the 
people  of  Scotland,  must  be  allowed.  But  it  was 
a  prejudice  of  the  head,  and  not  of  the  heart.  He 
had  no  ill-will  to  the  Scotch;  for,  if  he  had  been 
conscious  of  that,  he  would  never  have  thrown 
himself  into  the  bosom  of  their  country,  and 
trusted  to  the  protection  of  its  remote  inhabit¬ 
ants  with  a  fearless  confidence.  His  remark  up¬ 
on  the  nakedness  of  the  country,  from  its  being 
denuded  of  trees,  was  made  after  having  trav¬ 
elled  two  hundred  miles  along  the  eastern  coast, 
where  certainly  trees  are  not  to  be  found  near 
the  road;  and  he  said  it  was  “a  map  of  the  road55 
which  he  gave.  His  disbelief  of  the  authenticity 
of  the  poems  ascribed  to  Ossian,  a  Highland 
bard,  was  confirmed  in  the  course  of  his  journey, 
by  a  very  strict  examination  of  the  evidence  of¬ 
fered  for  it;  and  although  their  authenticity  was 
made  too  much  a  national  point  by  the  Scotch, 
there  were  many  respectable  persons  in  that 
country,  who  did  not  concur  in  this;  so  that  his 
judgement  upon  the  question  ought  not  to  be 
decried,  even  by  those  who  differ  from  him.  As 
to  myself,  I  can  only  say,  upon  a  subject  now  be¬ 
come  very  uninteresting,  that  when  the  frag¬ 
ments  of  Highland  poetry  first  came  out,  I  was 
much  pleased  with  their  wild  peculiarity,  and 
was  one  of  those  who  subscribed  to  enable  their 
editor,  Mr.  Macpherson,  then  a  young  man,  to 
make  a  search  in  the  Highlands  and  Hebrides 
for  a  long  poem  in  the  Erse  language,  which  was 
reported  to  be  preserved  somewhere  in  those 
regions.  But  when  there  came  forth  an  Epick 
Poem  in  six  books,  with  all  the  common  circum¬ 
stances  of  former  compositions  of  that  nature; 
and  when,  upon  an  attentive  examination  of  it, 
there  was  found  a  perpetual  recurrence  of  the 
same  images  which  appear  in  the  fragments; 
and  when  no  ancient  manuscript,  to  authenti¬ 
cate  the  work,  was  deposited  in  any  publick  li¬ 
brary,  though  that  was  insisted  on  as  a  reason¬ 
able  proof,  who  could  forbear  to  doubt? 

Johnson’s  grateful  acknowledgements  of  kind¬ 
nesses  received  in  the  course  of  this  tour,  com¬ 
pletely  refute  the  brutal  reflections  which  have 
been  thrown  out  against  him,  as  if  he  had  made 
an  ungrateful  return;  and  his  delicacy  in  spar¬ 
ing  in  his  book  those  who  we  find  from  his  let¬ 
ters  to  Mrs.  Thrale  were  just  objects  of  censure, 
is  much  to  be  admired.  His  candour  and  ami¬ 
able  disposition  is  conspicuous  from  his  conduct, 
when  informed  by  Mr.  Macleod,  of  Rasay,  that 
he  had  committed  a  mistake,  which  gave  that 
gentleman  some  uneasiness.  He  wrote  him  a 


JOHNSON  239 

courteous  and  kind  letter,  and  inserted  in  the 
news-papers  an  advertisement,  correcting  the 
mistake.1 

The  observations  of  my  friend  Mr.  Dempster 
in  a  letter  written  to  me,  soon  after  he  had  read 
Dr.  Johnson’s  book,  are  so  just  and  liberal,  that 
they  cannot  be  too  often  repeated: 

ce.  .  .  There  is  nothing  in  the  book,  from  be¬ 
ginning  to  end,  that  a  Scotchman  need  to  take 
amiss.  What  he  says  of  the  country  is  true;  and 
his  observations  on  the  people  are  what  must 
naturally  occur  to  a  sensible,  observing,  and  re¬ 
flecting  inhabitant  of  a  convenient  metropolis, 
where  a  man  on  thirty  pounds  a  year  may  be 
better  accommodated  with  all  the  little  wants 
of  life,  than  Col  or  Sir  Allan. 

“I  am  charmed  with  his  researches  concern¬ 
ing  the  Erse  language,  and  the  antiquity  of  their 
manuscripts.  I  am  quite  convinced;  and  I  shall 
rank  Ossian  and  his  Fingals  and  Oscars  amongst 
the  nursery  tales,  not  the  true  history  of  our 
country,  in  all  time  to  come. 

“Upon  the  whole,  the  book  cannot  displease, 
for  it  has  no  pretensions.  The  authour  neither 
says  he  is  a  geographer,  nor  an  antiquarian,  nor 
very  learned  in  the  history  of  Scotland,  nor  a 
naturalist,  nor  a  fossilist.  The  manners  of  the 
people,  and  the  face  of  the  country,  are  all  he 
attempts  to  describe,  or  seems  to  have  thought 
of.  Much  were  it  to  be  wished,  that  they  who 
have  travelled  into  more  remote,  and  of  course 
more  curious  regions,  had  all  possessed  his  good 
sense.  Of  the  state  of  learning,  his  observations 
on  Glasgow  University  show  he  has  formed  a 
very  sound  judgement.  He  understands  our  cli¬ 
mate  too;  and  he  has  accurately  observed  the 
changes,  however  slow  and  imperceptible  to  us, 
which  Scotland  has  undergone,  in  consequence 
of  the  blessings  of  liberty  and  internal  peace. . . .” 

Mr.  Knox,  another  native  of  Scotland,  who 
has  since  made  the  same  tour,  and  published  an 
account  of  it,  is  equally  liberal. 

“I  have  read  (says  he,)  his  book  again  and 
again,  travelled  with  him  from  Berwick  to  Glen- 
elg,  through  countries  with  which  I  am  well  ac¬ 
quainted;  sailed  with  him  from  Glenelg  to  Ra¬ 
say,  Sky,  Rum,  Col,  Mull,  and  Icolmkill,  but 
have  not  been  able  to  correct  him  in  any  matter 
of  consequence.  I  have  often  admired  the  ac¬ 
curacy,  the  precision,  and  the  justness  of  what 
he  advances,  respecting  both  the  country  and 
the  people. 

“The  Doctor  has  every  where  delivered  his 
sentiments  with  freedom,  and  in  many  instances 

xSee  Journal  of  a  Tour  to  the  Hebrides,  3rd  edit.,  p. 
520  [p.  431]. 


BOSWELL 


240 

with  a  seeming  regard  for  the  benefit  of  the  in¬ 
habitants  and  the  ornament  of  the  country.  His 
remarks  on  the  want  of  trees  and  hedges  for 
shade,  as  well  as  for  shelter  to  the  cattle,  are  well 
founded,  and  merit  the  thanks,  not  the  illiberal 
censure  of  the  natives.  He  also  felt  for  the  dis¬ 
tresses  of  the  Highlanders,  and  explodes  with 
great  propriety  the  bad  management  of  the 
grounds,  and  the  neglect  of  timber  in  the  Heb¬ 
rides.” 

Having  quoted  Johnson’sjust  compliments  on 
the  Rasay  family,  he  says:  “On  the  other  hand, 
I  found  this  family  equally  lavish  in  their  en¬ 
comiums  upon  the  Doctor’s  conversation,  and 
his  subsequent  civilities  to  a  young  gentleman 
of  that  country,  who,  upon  waiting  upon  him  at 
London,  was  well  received,  and  experienced  all 
the  attention  and  regard  that  a  warm  friend 
could  bestow.  Mr.  Macleod  having  also  been  in 
London,  waited  upon  the  Doctor,  who  provided 
a  magnificent  and  expensive  entertainment  in 
honour  of  his  old  Hebridean  acquaintance.” 
And  talking  of  the  military  road  by  Fort  Augus¬ 
tus,  he  says:  “By  this  road,  though  one  of  the 
most  rugged  in  Great  Britain,  the  celebrated  Dr. 
Johnson  passed  from  Inverness  to  the  Hebride 
Isles.  His  observations  on  the  country  and  peo¬ 
ple  are  extremely  correct,  judicious,  and  instruc¬ 
tive.”1 

Mr.  Tytler,  the  acute  and  able  vindicator  of 
Mary  Queen  of  Scots,  in  one  of  his  letters  to  Mr. 
James  Elphinstone,  published  in  that  gentle¬ 
man’s  Forty  Tears’  Correspondence ,  says: 

“I  read  Dr.  Johnson’s  Tour  with  very  great 
pleasure.  Some  few  errours  he  has  fallen  into, 
but  of  no  great  importance,  and  those  are  lost  in 
the  numberless  beauties  of  his  work. 

“If  I  had  leisure,  I  could  perhaps  point  out 
the  most  exceptionable  places;  but  at  present  I 
am  in  the  country,  and  have  not  his  book  at 
hand.  It  is  plain  he  meant  to  speak  well  of  Scot¬ 
land;  and  he  has  in  my  apprehension  done  us 
great  honour  in  the  most  capital  article,  the 
character  of  the  inhabitants.” 

His  private  letters  to  Mrs.  Thrale,  written 
during  the  course  of  his  journey,  which  therefore 
may  be  supposed  to  convey  his  genuine  feelings 
at  the  time,  abound  in  such  benignant  senti¬ 
ments  towards  the  people  who  showed  him  civ¬ 
ilities,  that  no  man  whose  temper  is  not  very 
harsh  and  sour,  can  retain  a  doubt  of  the  good¬ 
ness  of  his  heart. 

It  is  painful  to  recollect  with  what  rancour  he 
was  assailed  by  numbers  of  shallow  irritable 
North  Britons,  on  account  of  his  supposed  in- 

JPage  103. 


[  r775 

jurious  treatment  of  their  country  and  country¬ 
men,  in  his  Journey.  Had  there  been  any  just 
ground  for  such  a  charge,  would  the  virtuous  and 
candid  Dempster  have  given  his  opinion  of  the 
book,  in  the  terms  which  I  have  quoted?  Would 
the  patriotick  Knox2  have  spoken  of  it  as  he  has 
done?  Would  Mr.  Tytler,  surely 

- a  Scot,  if  ever  Scot  there  were , 

have  expressed  himself  thus?  And  let  me  add, 
that,  citizen  of  the  world  as  I  hold  myself  to  be, 
I  have  that  degree  of  predilection  for  my  natale 
solum ,  nay,  I  have  that  just  sense  of  the  merit  of 
an  ancient  nation,  which  has  been  ever  re¬ 
nowned  for  its  valour,  which  in  former  times 
maintained  its  independence  against  a  powerful 
neighbour,  and  in  modern  times  has  been  equal¬ 
ly  distinguished  for  its  ingenuity  and  industry 
in  civilized  life,  that  I  should  have  felt  a  gener¬ 
ous  indignation  at  any  injustice  done  to  it.  John¬ 
son  treated  Scotland  no  worse  than  he  did  even 
his  best  friends,  whose  characters  he  used  to  give 
as  they  appeared  to  him,  both  in  light  and  shade. 
Some  people,  who  had  not  exercised  their  minds 
sufficiently,  condemned  him  for  censuring  his 
friends.  But  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  whose  philo¬ 
sophical  penetration  and  justness  of  thinking 
were  not  less  known  to  those  who  lived  with  him, 
than  his  genius  in  his  art  is  admired  by  the  world, 
explained  his  conduct  thus:  “He  was  fond  of 
discrimination,  which  he  could  not  shew  with¬ 
out  pointing  out  the  bad  as  well  as  the  good  in 
every  character;  and  as  his  friends  were  those 
whose  characters  he  knew  best,  they  afforded 
him  the  best  opportunity  for  showing  the  acute¬ 
ness  of  his  judgement.” 

He  expressed  to  his  friend  Mr.  Windham  of 
Norfolk,  his  wonder  at  the  extreme  jealousy  of 
the  Scotch,  and  their  resentment  at  having  their 
country  described  by  him  as  it  really  was;  when, 
to  say  that  it  was  a  country  as  good  as  England, 
would  have  been  a  gross  falsehood.  “None  of  us, 
(said  he,)  would  be  offended  if  a  foreigner  who 
has  travelled  here  should  say,  that  vines  and 
olives  don’t  grow  in  England.”  And  as  to  his 
prejudice  against  the  Scotch,  which  I  always 
ascribed  to  that  nationality  which  he  observed 
in  them ,  he  said  to  the  same  gentleman,  “When 
I  find  a  Scotchman,  to  whom  an  Englishman  is 
as  a  Scotchman,  that  Scotchman  shall  be  as  an 
Englishman  to  me.”  His  intimacy  with  many 
gentlemen  of  Scotland,  and  his  employing  so 

2I  observed  with  much  regret,  while  the  first 
edition  of  this  work  was  passing  through  the  press 
(Aug.  1790),  that  this  ingenious  gentleman  was 
dead. 


1775]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  241 


many  natives  of  that  country  as  his  amanuenses, 
prove  that  his  prejudice  was  not  virulent;  and  I 
have  deposited  in  the  British  Museum,  amongst 
other  pieces  of  his  writing,  the  following  note  in 
answer  to  one  from  me,  asking  if  he  would  meet 
me  at  dinner  at  the  Mitre,  though  a  friend  of 
mine,  a  Scotchman,  was  to  be  there: 

“Mr.  Johnson  does  not  see  why  Mr.  Boswell 
should  suppose  a  Scotchman  less  acceptable  than 
any  other  man.  He  will  be  at  the  Mitre.35 

My  much-valued  friend  Dr.  Barnard,  now 
Bishop  of  Killaloe,  having  once  expressed  to 
him  an  apprehension,  that  if  he  should  visit 
Ireland  he  might  treat  the  people  of  that  coun¬ 
try  more  unfavourably  than  he  had  done  the 
Scotch,  he  answered  with  strong  pointed  double- 
edged  wit,  “Sir,  you  have  no  reason  to  be  afraid 
of  me.  The  Irish  are  not  in  a  conspiracy  to  cheat 
the  world  by  false  representations  of  the  merits  of 
their  countrymen.  No,  Sir;  the  Irish  are  a  fair 
people  ; — they  never  speak  well  of  one  another.33 

Johnson  told  me  of  an  instance  of  Scottish 
nationality,  which  made  a  very  unfavourable 
impression  upon  his  mind.  A  Scotchman,  of 
some  consideration  in  London,  solicited  him  to 
recommend,  by  the  weight  of  his  learned  au¬ 
thority,  to  be  master  of  an  English  school,  a 
person  of  whom  he  who  recommended  him  con¬ 
fessed  he  knew  no  more  but  that  he  was  his 
countryman.  Johnson  was  shocked  at  this  un- 
conscientious  conduct. 

All  the  miserable  cavillings  against  his  Journey, 
in  newspapers,  magazines,  and  other  fugitive 
publications,  I  can  speak  from  certain  knowl¬ 
edge,  only  furnished  him  with  sport.  At  last 
there  came  out  a  scurrilous  volume,  larger  than 
Johnson’s  own,  filled  with  malignant  abuse,  un¬ 
der  a  name,  real  or  fictitious,  of  some  low  man 
in  an  obscure  corner  of  Scotland,  though  sup¬ 
posed  to  be  the  work  of  another  Scotchman, 
who  has  found  means  to  make  himself  well 
known  both  in  Scotland  and  England.  The  ef¬ 
fect  which  it  had  upon  Johnson  was,  to  produce 
this  pleasant  observation  to  Mr.  Seward,  to 
whom  he  lent  the  book:  “This  fellow  must  be 
a  blockhead.  They  don’t  know  how  to  go  about 
their  abuse.  Who  will  read  a  five  shilling  book 
against  me?  No,  Sir,  if  they  had  wit,  they  should 
have  kept  pelting  me  with  pamphlets.33 

Mr.  Boswell  to  Dr.  Johnson 

Edinburgh,  Feb.  18,  1775 

You  would  have  been  very  well  pleased  if  you 
had  dined  with  me  to-day.  I  had  for  my  guests, 
Macquharrie,  young  Maclean  of  Col,  the  suc¬ 
cessor  of  our  friend,  a  very  amiable  man,  though 
not  marked  with  such  active  qualities  as  his 


brother;  Mr.  Maclean  of  Torloisk  in  Mull,  a 
gentleman  of  Sir  Allan’s  family;  and  two  of  the 
clan  Grant;  so  that  the  Highland  and  Hebridean 
genius  reigned.  We  had  a  great  deal  of  conver¬ 
sation  about  you,  and  drank  your  health  in  a 
bumper.  The  toast  was  not  proposed  by  me, 
which  is  a  circumstance  to  be  remarked,  for  I 
am  now  so  connected  with  you,  that  any  thing 
that  I  can  say  or  do  to  your  honour  has  not  the 
value  of  an  additional  compliment.  It  is  only 
giving  you  a  guinea  out  of  that  treasure  of  ad¬ 
miration  which  already  belongs  to  you,  and 
which  is  no  hidden  treasure;  for  I  suppose  my 
admiration  of  you  is  co-existent  with  the  knowl¬ 
edge  of  my  character. 

I  find  that  the  Highlanders  and  Hebrideans 
in  general  are  much  fonder  of  your  Journey  than 
the  low-country  or  hither  Scots.  One  of  the  Grants 
said  to-day,  that  he  was  sure  you  were  a  man  of 
a  good  heart,  and  a  candid  man,  and  seemed  to 
hope  he  should  be  able  to  convince  you  of  the 
antiquity  of  a  good  proportion  of  the  poems  of 
Ossian.  After  all  that  has  passed,  I  think  the 
matter  is  capable  of  being  proved  to  a  certain 
degree.  I  am  told  that  Macpherson  got  one  old 
Erse  MS.  from  Clanranald,  for  the  restitution  of 
which  he  executed  a  formal  obligation;  and  it  is 
affirmed,  that  the  Gaelick  (call  it  Erse  or  call  it 
Irish,)  has  been  written  in  the  Highlands  and 
Hebrides  for  many  centuries.  It  is  reasonable  to 
suppose,  that  such  of  the  inhabitants  as  ac¬ 
quired  any  learning,  possessed  the  art  of  writing 
as  well  as  their  Irish  neighbours,  and  Celtick 
cousins;  and  the  question  is,  can  sufficient  evi¬ 
dence  be  shewn  of  this? 

Those  who  are  skilled  in  ancient  writings  can 
determine  the  age  of  MSS.  or  at  least  can  ascer¬ 
tain  the  century  in  which  they  were  written; 
and  if  men  of  veracity,  who  are  so  skilled,  shall 
tell  us  that  MSS.  in  the  possession  of  families  in 
the  Highlands  and  isles  are  the  works  of  a  re¬ 
mote  age,  I  think  we  should  be  convinced  by 
their  testimony. 

There  is  now  come  to  this  city,  Ranald  Mac¬ 
donald  from  the  Isle  of  Egg,  who  has  several 
MSS.  of  Erse  poetry,  which  he  wishes  to  publish 
by  subscription.  I  have  engaged  to  take  three 
copies  of  the  book,  the  price  of  which  is  to  be 
six  shillings,  as  I  would  subscribe  for  all  the 
Erse  that  can  be  printed  be  it  old  or  new,  that  the 
language  may  be  preserved.  This  man  says,  that 
some  of  his  manuscripts  are  ancient;  and,  to  be 
sure,  one  of  them  which  was  shewn  to  me  does 
appear  to  have  the  duskyness  of  antiquity.  .  .  . 

The  enquiry  is  not  yet  quite  hopeless,  and  I 
should  think  that  the  exact  truth  may  be  dis¬ 
covered,  if  proper  means  be  used.  I  am,  &c. 

James  Boswell 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  I  am  sorry  that  I  could  get  no 
books  for  my  friends  in  Scotland.  Mr.  Strahan 


‘242 

has  at  last  promised  to  send  two  dozen  to  you. 
If  they  come,  put  the  names  of  my  friends  into 
them;  you  may  cut  them  out1,  and  paste  them 
with  a  little  starch  in  the  book. 

You  then  are  going  wild  about  Ossian.  Why 
do  you  think  any  part  can  be  proved?  The  dusky 
manuscript  of  Egg  is  probably  not  fifty  years 
old;  if  it  be  an  hundred,  it  proves  nothing.  The 
tale  of  Clanranald  is  no  proof.  Has  Clanranald 
told  it?  Can  he  prove  it?  There  are,  I  believe,  no 
Erse  manuscripts.  None  of  the  old  families  had 
a  single  letter  in  Erse  that  we  heard  of.  You  say 
it  is  likely  that  they  could  write.  The  learned,  if 
any  learned  there  were,  could;  but  knowing  by 
that  learning,  some  written  language,  in  that 
language  they  wrote,  as  letters  had  never  been 
applied  to  their  own.  If  there  are  manuscripts, 
let  them  be  shewn,  with  some  proof  that  they 
are  not  forged  for  the  occasion.  You  say  many 
can  remember  parts  of  Ossian.  I  believe  all 
those  parts  are  versions  of  the  English;  at  least 
there  is  no  proof  of  their  antiquity. 

Macpherson  is  said  to  have  made  some  trans¬ 
lations  himself;  and  having  taught  a  boy  to 
write  it,  ordered  him  to  say  that  he  had  learnt  it 
of  his  grandmother.  The  boy,  when  he  grew  up, 
told  the  story.  This  Mrs.  Williams  heard  at  Mr. 
Strahan’s  table.  Don’t  be  credulous;  you  know 
how  little  a  Highlander  can  be  trusted.  Mac¬ 
pherson  is,  so  far  as  I  know,  very  quiet.  Is  not 
that  proof  enough?  Every  thing  is  against  him. 
No  visible  manuscript;  no  inscription  in  the  lan¬ 
guage:  no  correspondence  among  friends:  no 
transaction  of  business,  of  which  a  single  scrap 
remains  in  the  ancient  families.  Macpherson’s 
pretence  is,  that  the  character  was  Saxon.  If  he 
had  not  talked  unskilfully  of  manuscripts ,  he 
might  have  fought  with  oral  tradition  much 
longer.  As  to  Mr.  Grant’s  information,  I  sup¬ 
pose  he  knows  much  less  of  the  matter  than  our¬ 
selves. 

In  the  mean  time,  the  bookseller  says  that  the 
sale2  is  sufficiently  quick.  They  printed  four  thou¬ 
sand.  Correct  your  copy  wherever  it  is  wrong, 
and  bring  it  up.  Your  friends  will  all  be  glad  to 
see  you.  I  think  of  going  myself  into  the  country 
about  May. 

I  am  sorry  that  I  have  not  managed  to  send 
the  book  sooner.  I  have  left  four  for  you,  and  do 
not  restrict  you  absolutely  to  follow  my  direc¬ 
tions  in  the  distribution.  You  must  use  your  own 
discretion. 

Make  my  compliments  to  Mrs.  Boswell:  I 
suppose  she  is  now  just  beginning  to  forgive  me. 
I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

Feb .  25,  1775 

On  Tuesday,  March  21, 1  arrived  in  London; 
and  on  repairing  to  Dr.  Johnson’s  before  dinner, 

Trom  a  list  in  his  hand-writing. 

2Of  his  Journey  to  the  Western  Islands  of  Scotland . 


[ 1 775 

found  him  in  his  study,  sitting  with  Mr.  Peter 
Garrick,  the  elder  brother  of  David,  strongly  re¬ 
sembling  him  in  countenance  and  voice,  but  of 
more  sedate  and  placid  manners.  Johnson  in¬ 
formed  me,  that  “though  Mr.  Beauclerk  was  in 
great  pain,  it  was  hoped  he  was  not  in  danger, 
and  that  he  now  wished  to  consult  Dr.  Heber- 
den  to  try  the  effect  of  a  new  understanding .”  Both 
at  this  interview,  and  in  the  evening  at  Mr. 
Thrale’s,  where  he  and  Mr.  Peter  Garrick  and  I 
met  again,  he  was  vehement  on  the  subject  of 
the  Ossian  controversy;  observing,  “We  do  not 
know  that  there  are  any  ancient  Erse  manu¬ 
scripts;  and  we  have  no  other  reason  to  disbe¬ 
lieve  that  there  are  men  with  three  heads,  but 
that  we  do  not  know  that  there  are  any  such 
men.”  He  also  was  outrageous,  upon  his  sup¬ 
position  that  my  countrymen  “loved  Scotland 
better  than  truth,”  saying,  “All  of  them, — nay 
not  all, — but  droves  of  them,  would  come  up, 
and  attest  any  thing  for  the  honour  of  Scotland.” 
He  also  persevered  in  his  wild  allegation,  that 
he  questioned  if  there  was  a  tree  between  Edin¬ 
burgh  and  the  English  border  older  than  him¬ 
self.  I  assured  him  he  was  mistaken,  and  sug¬ 
gested  that  the  proper  punishment  would  be 
that  he  should  receive  a  stripe  at  every  tree 
above  a  hundred  years  old,  that  was  found  with¬ 
in  that  space.  He  laughed,  and  said,  “I  believe 
I  might  submit  to  it  for  a  baubee !” 

The  doubts  which,  in  my  correspondence 
with  him,  I  had  ventured  to  state  as  to  the 
justice  and  wisdom  of  the  conduct  of  Great- 
Britain  towards  the  American  colonies,  while  I 
at  the  same  time  requested  that  he  would  en¬ 
able  me  to  inform  myself  upon  that  momentous 
subject,  he  had  altogether  disregarded;  and  had 
recently  published  a  pamphlet,  entitled,  Taxa¬ 
tion  no  Tyranny ;  an  Answer  to  the  Resolutions  and 
Address  of  the  American  Congress.  * 

Pie  had  long  before  indulged  most  unfavour¬ 
able  sentiments  of  our  fellow-subjects  in  Amer¬ 
ica.  For,  as  early  as  1 769, 1  was  told  by  Dr.  John 
Campbell,  that  he  had  said  of  them,  “Sir,  they 
are  a  race  of  convicts,  and  ought  to  be  thankful 
for  any  thing  we  allow  them  short  of  hanging.” 

Of  this  performance  I  avoided  to  talk  with 
him;  for  I  had  now  formed  a  clear  and  settled 
opinion,  that  the  people  of  America  were  well 
warranted  to  resist  a  claim  that  their  fellow- 
subjects  in  the  mother-country  should  have  the 
entire  command  of  their  fortunes,  by  taxing  them 
without  their  own  consent;  and  the  extreme 
violence  which  it  breathed,  appeared  to  me  so 
unsuitable  to  the  mildness  of  a  Christian  phil¬ 
osopher,  and  so  directly  opposite  to  the  princi- 


BOSWELL 


1775  ] 

pies  of  peace  which  he  had  so  beautifully  recom¬ 
mended  in  his  pamphlet  respecting  Falkland’s 
Islands,  that  I  was  sorry  to  see  him  appear  in  so 
unfavourable  a  light.  Besides,  I  could  not  per¬ 
ceive  in  it  that  ability  of  argument,  or  that  felic¬ 
ity  of  expression,  for  which  he  was,  upon  other 
occasions,  so  eminent.  Positive  assertion,  sarcas- 
tical  severity,  and  extravagant  ridicule,  which 
he  himself  reprobated  as  a  test  of  truth,  were 
united  in  this  rhapsody. 

That  this  pamphlet  was  written  at  the  desire 
of  those  who  were  then  in  power,  I  have  no 
doubt;  and,  indeed,  he  owned  to  me,  that  it  had 
been  revised  and  curtailed  by  some  of  them.  He 
told  me,  that  they  had  struck  out  one  passage, 
which  was  to  this  effect: — “That  the  Colonists 
could  with  no  solidity  argue  from  their  not  hav¬ 
ing  been  taxed  while  in  their  infancy,  that  they 
should  not  now  be  taxed.  We  do  not  put  a  calf 
into  the  plow;  we  wait  till  he  is  an  ox.”  He  said, 
“They  struck  it  out  either  critically  as  too  ludi¬ 
crous,  or  politically  as  too  exasperating.  I  care 
not  which.  It  was  their  business.  If  an  architect 
says,  I  will  build  five  stories,  and  the  man  who 
employs  him  says,  I  will  have  only  three,  the 
employer  is  to  decide.”  “Yes,  Sir,  (said  I,)  in 
ordinary  cases.  But  should  it  be  so  when  the 
architect  gives  his  skill  and  labour  gratis ?” 

Unfavourable  as  I  am  constrained  to  say  my 
opinion  of  this  pamphlet  was,  yet,  since  it  was 
congenial  with  the  sentiments  of  numbers  at 
that  time,  and  as  everything  relating  to  the 
writings  of  Dr.  Johnson  is  of  importance  in  liter¬ 
ary  history,  I  shall  therefore  insert  some  pas¬ 
sages  which  were  struck  out,  it  does  not  appear 
why,  either  by  himself  or  those  who  revised  it. 
They  appear  printed  in  a  few  proof  leaves  of 
it  in  my  possession,  marked  with  corrections  in 
his  own  handwriting.  I  shall  distinguish  them 
by  Italicks. 

In  the  paragraph  where  he  says  the  Ameri¬ 
cans  were  incited  to  resistance  by  European 
intelligence  from  “Men  whom  they  thought 
their  friends,  but  who  were  friends  only  to  them¬ 
selves,”  there  followed, — “ and  made  by  their  self¬ 
ishness, ,  the  enemies  of  their  country .” 

And  the  next  paragraph  ran  thus: — “On  the 
original  contrivers  of  mischief,  rather  than  on 
those  whom  they  have  deluded ,  let  an  insulted  na¬ 
tion  pour  out  its  vengeance.” 

The  paragraph  which  came  next  was  in  these 
words:  “ Unhappy  is  that  country  in  which  men  can 
hope  for  advancement  by  favouring  its  enemies.  The 
tranquillity  of  stable  government  is  not  always  easily 
preserved  against  the  machinations  of  single  innovators ; 
but  what  can  be  the  hope  of  quiet ,  when  factions  hos- 


243 

tile  to  the  legislature  can  be  openly  formed  and  openly 
avowed ?” 

After  the  paragraph  which  now  concludes 
the  pamphlet,  there  followed  this,  in  which  he 
certainly  means  the  great  Earl  of  Chatham,  and 
glances  at  a  certain  popular  Lord  Chancellor. 

“If,  by  the  fortune  of  war ,  they  drive  us  utterly 
away,  what  they  will  do  next  can  only  be  conjectured. 
If  a  new  monarchy  is  erected,  they  will  want  a  King. 
He  who  first  takes  into  his  hand  the  sceptre  of  America, 
should  have  a  name  of  good  omen.  William  has  been 
known  both  as  conqueror  and  deliverer ;  and  perhaps 
England,  however  contemned,  might  yet  supply  them 
with  another  Willi  am.  Whigs,  indeed,  are  not 
willing  to  be  governed;  and  it  is  possible  that  King 
William  may  be  strongly  inclined  to  guide  their 
measures:  but  Whigs  have  been  cheated  like  other  mor¬ 
tals,  and  suffered  their  leader  to  become  their  tyrant, 
under  the  name  of  their  Protector.  What  more  they 
will  receive  from  England,  no  man  can  tell.  In  their 
rudiments  of  empire  they  may  want  a  Chancellor.” 

Then  came  this  paragraph: 

“  Their  numbers  are,  at  present,  not  quite  sufficient 
for  the  greatness  which,  in  some  form  of  government  or 
other ,  is  to  rival  the  ancient  monarchies;  but  by  Dr. 
Franklin's  rule  of  progression ,  they  will,  in  a  century 
and  a  quarter ,  be  ’ more  than  equal  to  the  inhabitants  of 
Europe.  When  the  Whigs  of  America  are  thus  multi¬ 
plied,  let  the  Princes  of  the  earth  tremble  in  their  pal¬ 
aces.  If  they  should  continue  to  double  and  to  double, 
their  own  hemisphere  would  not  contain  them.  But  let 
not  our  boldest  oppugners  of  authority  look  forward 
with  delight  to  this  futurity  of  Whiggism." 

How  it  ended  I  know  not,  as  it  is  cut  off 
abruptly  at  the  foot  of  the  last  of  these  proof 
pages. 

His  pamphlets  in  support  of  the  measures  of 
administration  were  published  on  his  own  ac¬ 
count,  and  he  afterwards  collected  them  into  a 
volume,  with  the  title  of  Political  Tracts,  by  the 
Authour  of  the  Rambler,  with  this  motto: 

Fallitur  egregio  quisquis  sub  Principe  credit 
Servitium;  nunquam  libertas  gratior  extat 
Quam  sub  Rege  pio. 

Claudianus 

These  pamphlets  drew  upon  him  numerous 
attacks.  Against  the  common  weapons  of  literary 
warfare  he  was  hardened;  but  there  were  two 
instances  of  animadversion  which  I  communi¬ 
cated  to  him,  and  from  what  I  could  judge,  both 
from  his  silence  and  his  looks,  appeared  to  me  to 
impress  him  much. 

One  was,  A  letter  to  Dr.  Samuel  Johnson,  occa¬ 
sioned  by  his  late  political  Publications.  It  appeared 
previous  to  his  Taxation  no  Tyranny ,  and  was 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


BOSWELL 


244 

written  by  Dr.  Joseph  Towers.  In  that  perform¬ 
ance,  Dr.  Johnson  was  treated  with  the  respect 
due  to  so  eminent  a  man,  while  his  conduct  as  a 
political  writer  was  boldly  and  pointedly  ar¬ 
raigned,  as  inconsistent  with  the  character  of 
one,  who,  if  he  did  employ  his  pen  upon  poli¬ 
tics,  “It  might  reasonably  be  expected  should 
distinguish  himself,  not  by  party  violence  and 
rancour,  but  by  moderation  and  by  wisdom.” 

It  concluded  thus:— “I  would,  however,  wish 
you  to  remember,  should  you  again  address  the 
publick  under  the  character  of  a  political  writer, 
that  luxuriance  of  imagination  or  energy  of  lan¬ 
guage  will  ill  compensate  for  the  want  of  can¬ 
dour,  of  justice,  and  of  truth.  And  I  shall  only 
add,  that  should  I  hereafter  be  disposed  to  read, 
as  I  heretofore  have  done,  the  most  excellent  of 
all  your  performances,  The  Rambler ,  the  pleasure 
which  I  have  been  accustomed  to  find  in  it  will 
be  much  diminished  by  the  reflection  that  the 
writer  of  so  moral,  so  elegant,  and  so  valuable 
a  work,  was  capable  of  prostituting  his  talents 
in  such  productions  as  The  False  Alarm ,  the 
Thoughts  on  the  Transactions  respecting  Falkland's 
Islands ,  and  The  Patriot .” 

I  am  willing  to  do  justice  to  the  merit  of  Dr. 
Towers,  of  whom  I  will  say,  that  although  I 
abhor  his  Whiggish  democratical  notions  and 
propensities,  (for  I  will  not  call  them  principles,) 
I  esteem  him  as  an  ingenious,  knowing,  and 
very  convivial  man. 

The  other  instance  was  a  paragraph  of  a  let¬ 
ter  to  me,  from  my  old  and  most  intimate  friend, 
the  Reverend  Mr.  Temple,  who  wrote  the  char¬ 
acter  of  Gray,  which  has  had  the  honour  to  be 
adopted  both  by  Mr.  Mason  and  Dr.  Johnson 
in  their  accounts  of  that  poet.  The  words  were, 
— “How  can  your  great,  I  will  not  say  your 
pious ,  but  your  moral  friend,  support  the  barba¬ 
rous  measures  of  administration, which  they  have 
not  the  face  to  ask  even  their  infidel  pensioner 
Hume  to  defend.” 

However  confident  of  the  rectitude  of  his  own 
mind,  Johnson  may  have  felt  sincere  uneasiness 
that  his  conduct  should  be  erroneously  imputed 
to  unworthy  motives,  by  good  men;  and  that 
the  influence  of  his  valuable  writings  should  on 
that  account  be  in  any  degree  obstructed  or 
lessened. 

He  complained  to  a  Right  Honourable  friend 
of  distinguished  talents  and  very  elegant  man¬ 
ners,  with  whom  he  maintained  a  long  intimacy, 
and  whose  generosity  towards  him  will  after¬ 
wards  appear,  that  his  pension  having  been  giv¬ 
en  to  him  as  a  literary  character,  he  had  been 
applied  to  by  administration  to  write  political 


[  1775 

pamphlets;  and  he  was  even  so  much  irritated, 
that  he  declared  his  resolution  to  resign  his  pen¬ 
sion.  His  friend  shewed  him  the  impropriety  of 
such  a  measure,  and  he  afterwards  expressed  his 
gratitude,  and  said  he  had  received  good  advice. 
To  that  friend  he  once  signified  a  wish  to  have 
his  pension  secured  to  him  for  his  life;  but  he 
neither  asked  nor  received  from  government  any 
reward  whatsoever  for  his  political  labours. 

On  Friday,  March  24,  I  met  him  at  the  Lit¬ 
erary  Club,  where  were  Mr.  Beauclerk,  Mr. 
Langton,  Mr.  Colman,  Dr.  Percy,  Mr.  Vesey, 
Sir  Charles  Bunbury,  Dr.  George  Fordyce,  Mr. 
Steevens,  and  Mr.  Charles  Fox.  Before  he  came 
in,  we  talked  of  his  Journey  to  the  Western  Islands , 
and  of  his  coming  away  “willing  to  believe  the 
second  sight,”1  which  seemed  to  excite  some  rid¬ 
icule.  I  was  then  so  impressed  with  the  truth  of 
many  of  the  stories  of  it  which  I  had  been  told, 
that  I  avowed  my  conviction,  saying,  “He  is  on¬ 
ly  willing  to  believe:  I  do  believe.  The  evidence 
is  enough  for  me,  though  not  for  his  great  mind. 
What  will  not  fill  a  quart  bottle  will  fill  a  pint 
bottle.  I  am  filled  with  belief.”  “Are  you?  (said 
Colman,)  then  cork  it  up.” 

I  found  his  Journey  the  common  topick  of  con¬ 
versation  in  London  at  this  time,  wherever  I 
happened  to  be.  At  one  of  Lord  Mansfield’s  for¬ 
mal  Sunday  evening  conversations,  strangely 
called  Levees ,  his  Lordship  addressed  me,  “We 
have  all  been  reading  your  travels,  Mr.  Boswell.” 
I  answered,  “I  was  but  the  humble  attendant  of 
Dr.  Johnson.”  The  Chief  Justice  replied,  with 
that  air  and  manner  which  none,  who  ever  saw 
and  heard  him,  can  forget,  “He  speaks  ill  of  no¬ 
body  but  Ossian.” 

Johnson  was  in  high  spirits  this  evening  at  the 
club,  and  talked  with  great  animation  and  suc¬ 
cess.  He  attacked  Swift,  as  he  used  to  do  upon 
all  occasions.  The  Tale  of  a  Tub  is  so  much  su- 
periour  to  his  other  writings,  that  one  can  hard¬ 
ly  believe  he  was  the  authour  of  it:2  “there  is  in 

Johnson’s  Journey  to  the  Western  Islands  of  Scot¬ 
land ,  ed.  1785,  p.  256. 

2This  doubt  has  been  much  agitated  on  both 
sides,  I  think  without  good  reason.  See  Addison’s 
Freeholder ,  May  4,  1714; — An  Apology  for  the  Tale  of 
a  Tub; — Dr.  Hawkesworth’s  Preface  to  Swift’s 
Works,  and  Swift’s  Letter  to  Tooke  the  Printer, 
and  Tooke’s  Answer,  in  that  collection; — Sheri¬ 
dan’s  Life  of  Swift; — Mr.  Courtenay’s  note  on  p.  3 
of  his  Poetical  Review  of  the  Literary  and  Moral  Char¬ 
acter  of  Dr.  Johnson;  and  Mr.  Cooksey’s  Essay  on  the 
Life  and  Character  of  John  Lord  Somers ,  Baron  of  Eve¬ 
sham. 

Dr.  Johnson  here  speaks  only  to  the  internal  evi¬ 
dence.  I  take  leave  to  differ  from  him,  having  a  very 
high  estimation  of  the  powers  of  Dr.  Swift.  His 
Sentiments  of  a  Church-of-England-man ,  his  Sermon  on 


1 775  ] 

it  such  a  vigour  of  mind,  such  a  swarm  of 
thoughts,  so  much  of  nature,  and  art,  and  life.35 
I  wondered  to  hear  him  say  of  Gulliver's  Travels , 
“When  once  you  have  thought  of  big  men  and 
little  men,  it  is  very  easy  to  do  all  the  rest.55 1  en¬ 
deavoured  to  make  a  stand  for  Swift,  and  tried 
to  rouse  those  who  were  much  more  able  to  de¬ 
fend  him;  but  in  vain.  Johnson  at  last,  of  his 
own  accord,  allowed  very  great  merit  to  the  in¬ 
ventory  of  articles  found  in  the  pocket  of  the 
Man  Mountain ,  particularly  the  description  of  his 
watch,  which  it  was  conjectured  was  his  God, 
as  he  consulted  it  upon  all  occasions.  He  ob¬ 
served,  that  “Swift  put  his  name  to  but  two 
things,  (after  he  had  a  name  to  put,)  The  Plan 
for  the  Improvement  of  the  English  Language ,  and 
the  last  Drapier's  Letter." 

From  Swift,  there  was  an  easy  transition  to 
Mr.  Thomas  Sheridan. — Johnson.  “Sheridan  is 
a  wonderful  admirer  of  the  tragedy  of  Douglas , 
and  presented  its  authour  with  a  gold  medal. 
Some  years  ago,  at  a  coffee-house  in  Oxford,  I 
called  to  him,  ‘Mr.  Sheridan,  Mr.  Sheridan,  how 
came  you  to  give  a  gold  medal  to  Home,  for 
writing  that  foolish  play?5  This,  you  see,  was 
wanton  and  insolent;  but  I  meant  to  be  wanton 
and  insolent.  A  medal  has  no  value  but  as  a 
stamp  of  merit.  And  was  Sheridan  to  assume  to 
himself  the  right  of  giving  that  stamp?  If  Sheri¬ 
dan  was  magnificent  enough  to  bestow  a  gold 
medal  as  an  honorary  reward  of  dramatick  ex¬ 
cellence,  he  should  have  requested  one  of  the 
Universities  to  choose  the  person  on  whom  it 
should  be  conferred.  Sheridan  had  no  right  to 
give  a  stamp  of  merit:  it  was  counterfeiting 
Apollo’s  coin.55 

On  Monday,  March  27,  I  breakfasted  with 
him  at  Mr.  Strahan5s.  He  told  us,  that  he  was 
engaged  to  go  that  evening  to  Mrs.  Abington’s 
benefit.  “She  was  visiting  some  ladies  whom  I 
was  visiting,  and  begged  that  I  would  come  to 
her  benefit.  I  told  her  I  could  not  hear:  but  she 
insisted  so  much  on  my  coming,  that  it  would 
have  been  brutal  to  have  refused  her.55  This  was 
a  speech  quite  characteristical.  He  loved  to  bring 
forward  his  having  been  in  the  gay  circles  of  life; 
and  he  was,  perhaps,  a  little  vain  of  the  solicita- 

the  Trinity ,  and  other  serious  pieces,  prove  his  learn¬ 
ing  as  well  as  his  acuteness  in  logick  and  meta- 
physicks;  and  his  various  compositions  of  a  differ¬ 
ent  cast  exhibit  not  only  wit,  humour,  and  ridi¬ 
cule;  but  a  knowledge  “of  nature,  and  art,  and 
life”:  a  combination  therefore  of  those  powers, 
when  (as  the  Apology  says,)  “the  authour  was 
young,  his  invention  at  the  heighth,  and  his  read¬ 
ing  fresh  in  his  head,”  might  surely  produce  The 
Tale  of  a  Tub . 


245 

tions  of  this  elegant  and  fashionable  actress.  He 
told  us,  the  play  was  to  be  The  Hypocrite ,  altered 
from  Cibber’s  Nonjuror ,  so  as  to  satirize  the  Meth¬ 
odists.  “I  do  not  think  (said  he,)  the  character  of 
The  Hypocrite  justly  applicable  to  the  Method¬ 
ists,  but  it  was  very  applicable  to  the  Nonjurors. 
I  once  said  to  Dr.  Madan,  a  clergyman  of  Ire¬ 
land,  who  was  a  great  Whig,  that  perhaps  a  Non¬ 
juror  would  have  been  less  criminal  in  taking 
the  oaths  imposed  by  the  ruling  power,  than  re¬ 
fusing  them;  because  refusing  them,  necessarily 
laid  him  under  almost  an  irresistible  temptation 
to  be  more  criminal;  for,  a  man  must  live,  and  if 
he  precludes  himself  from  the  support  furnished 
by  the  establishment,  will  probably  be  reduced 
to  very  wicked  shifts  to  maintain  himself.551  Bos¬ 
well.  “I  should  think,  Sir,  that  a  man  who  took 
the  oaths  contrary  to  his  principles,  was  a  deter¬ 
mined  wicked  man,  because  he  was  sure  he  was 
committing  perjury;  whereas  a  Nonjuror  might 
be  insensibly  led  to  do  what  was  wrong,  without 
being  so  directly  conscious  of  it . 5  5  Johnson.  ‘  ‘Why, 
Sir,  a  man  who  goes  to  bed  to  his  patron’s  wife 
is  pretty  sure  that  he  is  committing  wickedness.55 
Boswell.  “Did  the  nonjuring  clergymen  do  so, 
Sir?55  Johnson.  “I  am  afraid  many  of  them  did.55 

I  was  startled  at  his  argument,  and  could  by 
no  means  think  it  convincing.  Had  not  his  own 

JThis  was  not  merely  a  cursory  remark;  for  in 
his  Life  of  Fenton  he  observes,  “With  many  other 
wise  and  virtuous  men,  who  at  that  time  of  discord 
and  debate  (about  the  beginning  of  this  century) 
consulted  conscience  [whether]  well  or  ill  informed, 
more  than  interest,  he  doubted  the  legality  of  the 
government;  and  refusing  to  qualify  himself  for 
publick  employment,  by  taking  the  oaths  required, 
left  the  University  without  a  degree.”  This  con¬ 
duct  Johnson  calls  “perverseness  of  integrity.” 

The  question  concerning  the  morality  of  taking 
oaths,  of  whatever  kind,  imposed  by  the  prevailing 
power  at  the  time,  rather  than  to  be  excluded  from 
all  consequence,  or  even  any  considerable  useful¬ 
ness  in  society,  has  been  agitated  with  all  the  acute¬ 
ness  of  casuistry.  It  is  related,  that  he  who  devised 
the  oath  of  abjuration,  profligately  boasted  that  he 
had  framed  a  test  which  should  “damn  one  half  of 
the  nation,  and  starve  the  other.”  Upon  minds  not 
exalted  to  inflexible  rectitude,  or  minds  in  which 
zeal  for  a  party  is  predominant  to  excess,  taking 
that  oath  against  conviction  may  have  been  pal¬ 
liated  under  the  plea  of  necessity,  or  ventured  upon 
in  heat,  as  upon  the  whole  producing  more  good 
than  evil. 

At  a  county  election  in  Scotland,  many  years 
ago,  when  there  was  a  warm  contest  between  the 
friends  of  the  Hanoverian  succession,  and  those 
against  it,  the  oath  of  abjuration  having  been  de¬ 
manded,  the  freeholders  upon  one  side  rose  to  go 
away.  Upon  which  a  very  sanguine  gentleman, 
one  of  their  number,  ran  to  the  door  to  stop  them, 
calling  out  with  much  earnestness,  “Stay,  stay,  my 
friends,  and  let  us  swear  the  rogues  out  of  it  I” 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


BOSWELL 


246 

father  complied  with  the  requisition  of  govern¬ 
ment,  (as  to  which  he  once  observed  to  me,  when 
I  pressed  him  upon  it,  “That,  Sir,  he  was  to  set¬ 
tle  with  himself,”)  he  would  probably  have 
thought  more  unfavourably  of  a  Jacobite  who 
took  the  oaths: 

- had  he  not  resembled 

My  father  as  he  swore - . 

Mr.  Strahan  talked  of  launching  into  the  great 
ocean  of  London,  in  order  to  have  a  chance  for 
rising  into  eminence;  and,  observing  that  many 
men  were  kept  back  from  trying  their  fortunes 
there,  because  they  were  born  to  a  competency, 
said,  “Small  certainties  are  the  banc  of  men 
of  talents”;  which  Johnson  confirmed.  Mr. 
Strahan  put  Johnson  in  mind  of  a  remark 
which  he  had  made  to  him;  “There  are  few 
ways  in  which  a  man  can  be  more  innocently 
employed  than  in  getting  money.”  “The  more 
one  thinks  of  this,  (said  Strahan,)  the  juster  it 
will  appear.” 

Mr.  Strahan  had  taken  a  poor  boy  from  the 
country  as  an  apprentice,  upon  Johnson’s  rec¬ 
ommendation.  Johnson  having  enquired  after 
him,  said,  “Mr.  Strahan,  let  me  have  five  guin¬ 
eas  on  account,  and  I’ll  give  this  boy  one.  Nay, 
if  a  man  recommends  a  boy,  and  does  nothing 
for  him,  it  is  sad  work.  Call  him  down.” 

I  followed  him  into  the  court-yard,  behind 
Mr.  Strahan’s  house;  and  there  I  had  a  proof  of 
what  I  had  heard  him  profess,  that  he  talked 
alike  to  all.  “Some  people  tell  you  that  they  let 
themselves  down  to  the  capacity  of  their  hear¬ 
ers.  I  never  do  that.  I  speak  uniformly,  in  as  in¬ 
telligible  a  manner  as  I  can.” 

“Well,  my  boy,  how  do  you  go  on?” — “Pretty 
well,  Sir;  but  they  are  afraid  I  an’t  strong  enough 
for  some  parts  of  the  business.”  Johnson.  “Why 
I  shall  be  sorry  for  it;  for  when  you  consider  with 
how  little  mental  power  and  corporeal  labour  a 
printer  can  get  a  guinea  a  week,  it  is  a  very  de¬ 
sirable  occupation  for  you.  Do  you  hear, — take 
all  the  pains  you  can;  and  if  this  does  not  do,  we 
must  think  of  some  other  way  of  life  for  you. 
There’s  a  guinea.” 

Here  was  one  of  the  many,  many  instances  of 
his  active  benevolence.  At  the  same  time,  the 
slow  and  sonorous  solemnity  with  which,  while 
he  bent  himself  down,  he  addressed  a  little  thick 
short-legged  boy,  contrasted  with  the  boy’s  auk- 
wardness  and  awe,  could  not  but  excite  some 
ludicrous  emotions. 

I  met  him  at  Drury-lane  play-house  in  the 
evening.  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  at  Mrs.  Abington’s 
request,  had  promised  to  bring  a  body  of  wits  to 


[  1775 

her  benefit;  and  having  secured  forty  places  in 
the  front  boxes,  had  done  me  the  honour  to  put 
me  in  the  group.  Johnson  sat  on  the  seat  direct¬ 
ly  behind  me;  and  as  he  could  neither  see  nor 
hear  at  such  a  distance  from  the  stage,  he  was 
wrapped  up  in  grave  abstraction,  and  seemed 
quite  a  cloud,  amidst  all  the  sunshine  of  glitter 
and  gaiety.  I  wondered  at  his  patience  in  sitting 
out  a  play  of  five  acts,  and  a  farce  of  two.  He 
said  very  little;  but  after  the  prologue  to  Bon  Ton 
had  been  spoken,  which  he  could  hear  pretty 
well  from  the  more  slow  and  distinct  utterance, 
he  talked  of  prologue-writing,  and  observed, 
“Dryden  has  written  prologues  superiour  to  any 
that  David  Garrick  has  written;  but  David  Gar¬ 
rick  has  written  more  good  prologues  than  Dry- 
den  has  done.  It  is  wonderful  that  he  has  been 
able  to  write  such  variety  of  them.” 

At  Mr.  Beauclerk’s,  where  I  supped,  was  Mr. 
Garrick,  whom  I  made  happy  with  Johnson’s 
praise  of  his  prologues;  and  I  suppose,  in  grat¬ 
itude  to  him,  he  took  up  one  of  his  favourite  top- 
icks,  the  nationality  of  the  Scotch,  which  he 
maintained  in  a  pleasant  manner,  with  the  aid 
of  a  little  poetical  fiction.  “Come,  come,  don’t 
deny  it:  they  are  really  national.  Why,  now  the 
Adams  are  as  liberal-minded  men  as  any  in  the 
world:  but,  I  don’t  know  how  it  is,  all  their 
workmen  are  Scotch.  You  are,  to  be  sure,  won¬ 
derfully  free  from  that  nationality:  but  so  it 
happens,  that  you  employ  the  only  Scotch  shoe¬ 
black  in  London.”  He  imitated  the  manner 
of  his  old  master  with  ludicrous  exaggeration; 
repeating,  with  pauses  and  half-whistlings  in¬ 
terjected. 

Os  homini  sublime  dedit ,  — ceelumque  tueri 

Jussit ,  — et  erectos  ad  sidera — to  Here  vultus: 

looking  downwards  all  the  time,  and,  while  pro¬ 
nouncing  the  four  last  words,  absolutely  touch¬ 
ing  the  ground  with  a  kind  of  contorted  gestic¬ 
ulation. 

Garrick,  however,  when  he  pleased,  could  im¬ 
itate  Johnson  very  exactly;  for  that  great  actor, 
with  his  distinguished  powers  of  expression  which 
were  so  universally  admired,  possessed  also  an 
admirable  talent  of  mimickry.  He  was  always 
jealous  that  Johnson  spoke  lightly  of  him.  I 
recollect  his  exhibiting  him  to  me  one  day, 
as  if  saying,  “Davy  has  some  convivial  pleas¬ 
antry  about  him,  but  ’tis  a  futile  fellow”;  which 
he  uttered  perfectly  with  the  tone  and  air  of 
Johnson. 

I  cannot  too  frequently  request  of  my  readers, 
while  they  peruse  my  account  of  Johnson’s  con¬ 
versation,  to  endeavour  to  keep  in  mind  his  de- 


1775]  LIFE  OF 

liberate  and  strong  utterance.  His  mode  of  speak¬ 
ing  was  indeed  very  impressive;1  and  I  wish  it 
could  be  preserved  as  musick  is  written,  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  very  ingenious  method  of  Mr.  Steele, 2 
who  has  shewn  how  the  recitation  of  Mr.  Gar¬ 
rick,  and  other  eminent  speakers,  might  be  trans¬ 
mitted  to  posterity  in  score.* 

Next  day  I  dined  with  Johnson  at  Mr.  Thrale’s. 
He  attacked  Gray,  calling  him  “a  dull  fellow.55 
Boswell.  “I  understand  he  was  reserved,  and 
might  appear  dull  in  company;  but  surely  he  was 
not  dull  in  poetry.55  Johnson.  “Sir,  he  was  dull 
in  company,  dull  in  his  closet,  dull  every  where. 
He  was  dull  in  a  new  way,  and  that  made  many 
people  think  him  great.  He  was  a  mechanical 
poet.55  He  then  repeated  some  ludicrous  lines, 
which  have  escaped  my  memory,  and  said, “Is 
not  that  great,  like  his  Odes?55  Mrs.  Thrale 
maintained  that  his  Odes  were  melodious;  up¬ 
on  which  he  exclaimed, 

“  Weave  the  warp ,  and  weave  the  woof; — 55 
I  added,  in  a  solemn  tone, 

“  The  winding-sheet  of  Edward's  race . 

“  There  is  a  good  line.55  ccAy,  (said  he,)  and  the 
next  line  is  a  good  one,  (pronouncing  it  con¬ 
temptuously;) 

“  Give  ample  verge  and  room  enough . 

“No,  Sir,  there  are  but  two  good  stanzas  in 
Gray’s  poetry,  which  are  in  his  Elegy  in  a  Coun¬ 
try  Church-yard He  then  repeated  the  stanza, 

For  who  to  dumb  forgetfulness  a  prey ,  &  c. 

*My  noble  friend  Lord  Pembroke  said  once  to 
me  at  Wilton,  with  a  happy  pleasantry  and  some 
truth,  that  “Dr.  Johnson’s  sayings  would  not  ap¬ 
pear  so  extraordinary,  were  it  not  for  his  bow-wow 
way."  The  sayings  themselves  are  generally  of  ster¬ 
ling  merit;  but,  doubtless,  his  manner  was  an  addi¬ 
tion  to  their  effect;  and  therefore  should  be  attend¬ 
ed  to  as  much  as  may  be.  It  is  necessary,  however, 
to  guard  those  who  were  not  acquainted  with  him, 
against  overcharged  imitations  or  caricatures  of  his 
manner,  which  are  frequently  attempted,  and 
many  of  which  are  second-hand  copies  from  the 
late  Mr.  Henderson  the  actor,  who,  though  a  good 
mimick  of  some  persons,  did  not  represent  Johnson 
correctly. 

2See  Prosodia  Rationalis;  or ,  an  Essay  towards  es¬ 
tablishing  the  Melody  and  Measure  of  Speech ,  to  be  ex¬ 
pressed  and  perpetuated  by  peculiar  Symbols .  London, 

*779- 

3I  use  the  phrase  in  score ,  as  Dr.  Johnson  has  ex¬ 
plained  it  in  his  Dictionary: — “ A  song  in  Score, 
the  words  with  the  musical  notes  of  a  song  an¬ 
nexed.”  But  I  understand  that  in  scientifick  pro¬ 
priety  it  means  all  the  parts  of  a  musical  compo¬ 
sition  noted  down  in  the  characters  by  which  it  is 
exhibited  to  the  eye  of  the  skilful. 


JOHNSON  247 

mistaking  one  word ;  for  instead  of  precincts  he  said 
confines.  He  added,  “The  other  stanza  I  forget.55 

A  young  lady  who  had  married  a  man  much 
her  inferiour  in  rank  being  mentioned,  a  ques¬ 
tion  arose  how  a  woman’s  relations  should  be¬ 
have  to  her  in  such  a  situation;  and,  while  I  re¬ 
capitulate  the  debate,  and  recollect  what  has 
since  happened,  I  cannot  but  be  struck  in  a  man¬ 
ner  that  delicacy  forbids  me  to  express.  While  I 
contended  that  she  ought  to  be  treated  with  an 
inflexible  steadiness  of  displeasure,  Mrs.  Thrale 
was  all  for  mildness  and  forgiveness,  and,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  vulgar  phrase,  “making  the  best 
of  a  bad  bargain.55  Johnson.  “Madam,  we  must 
distinguish.  Were  I  a  man  of  rank,  I  would  not 
let  a  daughter  starve  who  had  made  a  mean 
marriage;  but  having  voluntarily  degraded 
herself  from  the  station  which  she  was  orig¬ 
inally  entitled  to  hold,  I  would  support  her 
only  in  that  which  she  herself  had  chosen;  and 
would  not  put  her  on  a  level  with  my  other 
daughters.  You  are  to  consider,  Madam,  that 
it  is  our  duty  to  maintain  the  subordination 
of  civilized  society;  and  when  there  is  a  gross 
and  shameful  deviation  from  rank,  it  should 
be  punished  so  as  to  deter  others  from  the  same 
perversion.55 

After  frequently  considering  this  subject,  I  am 
more  and  more  confirmed  in  what  I  then  meant 
to  express,  and  which  was  sanctioned  by  the  au¬ 
thority,  and  illustrated  by  the  wisdom,  of  John¬ 
son;  and  I  think  it  of  the  utmost  consequence  to 
the  happiness  of  Society,  to  which  subordina¬ 
tion  is  absolutely  necessary.  It  is  weak,  and  con¬ 
temptible,  and  unworthy,  in  a  parent  to  relax 
in  such  a  case.  It  is  sacrificing  general  advan¬ 
tage  to  private  feelings.  And  let  it  be  considered, 
that  the  claim  of  a  daughter  who  has  acted  thus, 
to  be  restored  to  her  former  situation,  is  either 
fantastical  or  unjust.  If  there  be  no  value  in  the 
distinction  of  rank,  what  does  she  suffer  by  be¬ 
ing  kept  in  the  situation  to  which  she  has  des¬ 
cended?  If  there  be  a  value  in  that  distinction,  it 
ought  to  be  steadily  maintained.  If  indulgence  be 
shewn  to  such  conduct,  and  the  offenders  know 
that  in  a  longer  or  shorter  time  they  shall  be 
received  as  well  as  if  they  had  not  contaminated 
their  blood  by  a  base  alliance,  the  great  check 
upon  that  inordinate  caprice  which  generally  oc¬ 
casions  low  marriages  will  be  removed,  and  the 
fair  and  comfortable  order  of  improved  life  will 
be  miserably  disturbed. 

Lord  Chesterfield’s  Letters  being  mentioned, 
Johnson  said,  “It  was  not  to  be  wondered  at 
that  they  had  so  great  a  sale,  considering  that 
they  were  the  letters  of  a  statesman,  a  wit,  one 


248 

who  had  been  so  much  in  the  mouths  of 
mankind,  one  long  accustomed  virdm  volitare 
per  ora” 

On  Friday,  March  31,1  supped  with  him  and 
some  friends  at  a  tavern.  One  of  the  company 
attempted,  with  too  much  forwardness,  to  rally 
him  on  his  late  appearance  at  the  theatre;  but 
had  reason  to  repent  of  his  temerity.  “Why,  Sir, 
did  you  go  to  Mrs.  Abington’s  benefit?  Did  you 
see?”  Johnson.  “No,  Sir.”  “Did  you  hear?” 
Johnson.  “No,  Sir.”  “Why,  then,  Sir,  did  you 
go?”  Johnson.  “Because,  Sir,  she  is  a  favourite 
of  the  publick;  and  when  the  publick  cares  the 
thousandth  part  for  you  that  it  does  for  her,  I 
will  go  to  your  benefit  too.” 

Next  morning  I  won  a  small  bet  from  Lady 
Diana  Beauclerk,  by  asking  him  as  to  one  of  his 
particularities,  which  her  Ladyship  laid  I  durst 
not  do.  It  seems  he  had  been  frequently  observed 
at  the  Club  to  put  into  his  pocket  the  Seville  or¬ 
anges,  after  he  had  squeezed  the  juice  of  them 
into  the  drink  which  he  made  for  himself.  Beau- 
clerk  and  Garrick  talked  of  it  to  me,  and  seemed 
to  think  that  he  had  a  strange  unwillingness  to 
be  discovered.  We  could  not  divine  what  he  did 
with  them;  and  this  was  the  bold  question  to  be 
put.  I  saw  on  his  table  the  spoils  of  the  preced¬ 
ing  night,  some  fresh  peels  nicely  scraped  and 
cut  into  pieces.  “O,  Sir,  (said  I,)  I  now  partly 
see  what  you  do  with  the  squeezed  oranges  which 
you  put  into  your  pocket  at  the  Club.”  John¬ 
son.  “I  have  a  great  love  for  them.”  Boswell. 
“And  pray,  Sir,  what  do  you  do  with  them?  You 
scrape  them,  it  seems,  very  neatly,  and  what 
next?”  Johnson.  “Let  them  dry,  Sir.”  Boswell. 
“And  what  next?”  Johnson.  “Nay,  Sir,  you  shall 
know  their  fate  no  further.”  Boswell.  “Then 
the  world  must  be  left  in  the  dark.  It  must  be 
said  (assuming  a  mock  solemnity,)  he  scraped 
them,  and  let  them  dry,  but  what  he  did  with 
them  next,  he  never  could  be  prevailed  upon  to 
tell.”  Johnson.  “Nay,  Sir,  you  should  say  it  more 
emphatically: — he  could  not  be  prevailed  upon, 
even  by  his  dearest  friends,  to  tell.” 

He  had  this  morning  received  his  Diploma  as 
Doctor  of  Laws  from  the  University  of  Oxford. 
He  did  not  vaunt  of  his  new  dignity,  but  I  un¬ 
derstood  he  was  highly  pleased  with  it.  I  shall 
here  insert  the  progress  and  completion  of  that 
high  academical  honour,  in  the  same  manner 
as  I  have  traced  his  obtaining  that  of  Master  of 
Arts. 

To  the  Reverend  Dr .  Fothergill,  Vice-Chancellor 
of  the  University  of  Oxford,  to  be  communi¬ 
cated  to  the  Heads  of  Houses ,  and  proposed  in  Con¬ 
vocation 


[  1775 

Mr.  Vice-Chancellor  and  Gentlemen, 

The  honour  of  the  degree  of  M.A.  by  diplo¬ 
ma,  formerly  conferred  upon  Mr.  Samuel  John¬ 
son,  in  consequence  of  his  having  eminently  dis¬ 
tinguished  himself  by  the  publication  of  a  series 
of  Essays,  excellently  calculated  to  form  the  man¬ 
ners  of  the  people,  and  in  which  the  cause  of  re¬ 
ligion  and  morality  has  been  maintained  and 
recommended  by  the  strongest  powers  of  argu¬ 
ment  and  elegance  of  language,  reflected  an 
equal  degree  of  lustre  upon  the  University  itself. 

The  many  learned  labours  which  have  since 
that  time  employed  the  attention  and  displayed 
the  abilities  of  that  great  man,  so  much  to  the 
advancement  of  literature  and  the  benefit  of  the 
community,  render  him  worthy  of  more  distin¬ 
guished  honours  in  the  Republick  of  letters:  and 
I  persuade  myself,  that  I  shall  act  agreeably  to 
the  sentiments  of  the  whole  University,  in  desir¬ 
ing  that  it  may  be  proposed  in  Convocation  to 
confer  on  him  the  degree  of  Doctor  in  Civil  Law 
by  diploma,  to  which  I  readily  give  my  consent; 
and  am,  Mr.  Vice-Chancellor  and  Gentlemen, 
your  affectionate  friend  and  servant, 

North1 

Downing-street,  March  23,  1775 
Diploma 

CANCELLARIUS,  Magistri ,  et  Scholar es  Univer - 
sitatis  Oxoniensis  omnibus  ad  quos  presentes  Literce 
pervenerint ,  salutem  in  Domino  Sempiternam. 

Sciatis,  virum  illustrem ,  Samuelem  John¬ 
son,  in  omni  humaniorum  liter  arum  genere  eruditum , 
omniumque  scientiarum  comprehensione  felicissimum , 
scriptis  suis,  ad  popularium  mores  formandos  summa 
verborum  elegantid  ac  sententiarum  gravitate  compo¬ 
site,  ita  olim  inclaruisse ,  ut  dignus  videretur  cui  ab 
Academia  sud  eximia  qucedam  laudis  prcemia  defer- 
entur  [ deferrentur ]  quique  [iri\  venerabilem  Magistro- 
rum  Ordinem  summa  cum  dignitate  cooptaretur: 

Cum  verb  eundem  clarissimum  virum  tot  posted 
tantique  labores ,  in  patria  prcesertim  lingua  ornanda 
et  stabiliendd  feliciter  impensi ,  ita  insigniverint ,  ut  in 
Literarum  Republicd  Princeps  jam  et  Primarius 
jure  habeatur;  Nos  Can  cell  arius,  Magistri ,  et 
Scholares  Universitatis  Oxoniensis ,  quo  talis  viri  me- 
rita  pari  honoris  remuneratione  excequentru ,  et  per- 
petuum  suce  simul  laudis ,  nostrceque  erga  literas  pro- 
pensissimce  voluntatis  extet  monumentum ,  in  solenni 
Convocatione  Doctor  um  et  Magistrorum  Re  gentium,  et 
non  Regentium,  prcedictum  Samuelem  Johnson 
Doctor em  in  Jure  Civili  renunciavimus  et  constitui- 
mus,  eumque  virtute  prcesentis  Diplomatis  singulis  jur- 
ibus,  privilegiis  et  honoribus,  ad  istum  gradum  quaqua 
pertinentibus,  frui  et  gaudere  jussimus.  In  cujus  rei 
testimonium  commune  Universitatis  Oxoniensis  sigil- 
lum  pmsentibus  apponi  fecimus. 

Extracted  from  the  Convocation  Register,  Ox- 
ford. 


BOSWELL 


1775]  LIFE  OF 

Datum  in  Domo  nostra  Convocationis  die  tricesi- 
mo  Mensis  Martii ,  Anno  Domini  Millesimo  septin- 
gentesimo,  septuagesimo  quinto.1 

Viro  Reverendo  Thom^  Fothergill,  S.T.P. 

Universitatis  Oxoniensis  Vice-Cancellario. 

S.  P .  D. 

Sam.  Johnson 

MULTIS  non  est  opus ,  ut  testimonium  quo ,  te 
pr aside,  Oxonienses  nomen  meum  posteris  commenda - 
runt,  quali  animo  acceperim  compertum  faciam.  Nemo 
sibi  placens  non  Icetatur;  nemo  sibi  non  placet,  qui 
vobis,  literarum  arbitris,  placere  potuit.  Hoc  tamen 
habet  incommodi  tantum  beneficium,  quod  mihi  nun- 
quam  posthac  sine  vestrce  famce  detrimento  vel  labi 
liceat  vel  cess  are;  semper  que  sit  timendum,  ne  quod  mi¬ 
hi  tarn  eximice  laudi  est,  vobis  aliquando  fiat  oppro - 
brio.  Vale.2 

7  Id.  Apr.,  1775 

He  revised  some  sheets  of  Lord  Hailes’s  An¬ 
nals  of  Scotland,  and  wrote  a  few  notes  on  the 
margin  with  red  ink,  which  he  bade  me  tell  his 
Lordship  did  not  sink  into  the  paper,  and  might 
be  wiped  off  with  a  wet  sponge,  so  that  he  did 
not  spoil  his  manuscript.  I  observed  to  him  that 
there  were  very  few  of  his  friends  so  accurate  as 
that  I  could  venture  to  put  down  in  writing 
what  they  told  me  as  his  sayings.  Johnson.  “Why 
should  you  write  down  my  sayings?”  Boswell. 
“I  write  them  when  they  are  good.”  Johnson. 
“Nay,  you  may  as  well  write  down  the  sayings 
of  any  one  else  that  are  good.”  But  where,  I  might 

xThe  original  is  in  my  possession.  He  shewed  me 
the  Diploma,  and  allowed  me  to  read  it,  but  would 
not  consent  to  my  taking  a  copy  of  it,  fearing  per¬ 
haps  that  I  should  blaze  it  abroad  in  his  life-time. 
His  objection  to  this  appears  from  his  99th  letter 
to  Mrs.  Thrale,  whom  in  that  letter  he  thus  scolds 
for  the  grossness  of  her  flattery  of  him: — “The  oth¬ 
er  Oxford  news  is,  that  they  have  sent  me  a  degree 
of  Doctor  of  Laws,  with  such  praises  in  the  Di¬ 
ploma  as  perhaps  ought  to  make  me  ashamed: 
they  are  very  like  your  praises.  I  wonder  whether 
I  shall  ever  shew  it  to  you.” 

It  is  remarkable  that  he  never,  so  far  as  I  know, 
assumed  his  title  of  Doctor,  but  called  himself  Mr. 
Johnson,  as  appears  from  many  of  his  cards  or 
notes  to  myself;  and  I  have  seen  many  from  him  to 
other  persons,  in  which  he  uniformly  takes  that 
designation.  I  once  observed  on  his  table  a  letter 
directed  to  him  with  the  addition  of  Esquire,  and 
objected  to  it  as  being  a  designation  inferiour  to 
that  of  Doctor;  but  he  checked  me,  and  seemed 
pleased  with  it,  because,  as  I  conjectured,  he  liked 
to  be  sometimes  taken  out  of  the  class  of  literary 
men,  and  to  be  merely  genteel, — un gentilhomme  comme 
un  autre . 

2The  original  is  in  the  hands  of  Dr.  Fothergill, 
then  Vice-Chancellor,  who  made  this  transcript. 
T.  Warton. 


JOHNSON  249 

with  great  propriety  have  added,  can  I  find 
such? 

I  visited  him  by  appointment  in  the  evening, 
and  we  drank  tea  with  Mrs.  Williams.  He  told 
me  that  he  had  been  in  the  company  of  a  gentle¬ 
man  whose  extraordinary  travels  had  been  much 
the  subject  of  conversation.  But  I  found  that  he 
had  not  listened  to  him  with  that  full  confidence, 
without  which  there  is  little  satisfaction  in  the  so¬ 
ciety  of  travellers.  I  was  curious  to  hear  what 
opinion  so  able  a  judge  as  Johnson  had  formed 
of  his  abilities,  and  I  asked  if  he  was  not  a  man 
of  sense.  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  he  is  not  a  dis¬ 
tinct  relater;  and  I  should  say,  he  is  neither 
abounding  nor  deficient  in  sense.  I  did  not  per¬ 
ceive  any  superiority  of  understanding.”  Bos¬ 
well.  “But  will  you  not  allow  him  a  nobleness  of 
resolution,  in  penetrating  into  distant  regions?” 
Johnson.  “That,  Sir,  is  not  to  the  present  pur¬ 
pose.  We  are  talking  of  his  sense.  A  fighting  cock 
has  a  nobleness  of  resolution.” 

Next  day,  Sunday,  April  2,  I  dined  with  him 
at  Mr.  Hoole’s.  We  talked  of  Pope.  Johnson. 
“He  wrote  his  Dunciad  for  fame.  That  was  his 
primary  motive.  Had  it  not  been  for  that,  the 
dunces  might  have  railed  against  him  till  they 
were  weary,  without  his  troubling  himself  about 
them.  He  delighted  to  vex  them,  no  doubt;  but 
he  had  more  delight  in  seeing  how  well  he  could 
vex  them.” 

The  Odes  to  Obscurity  and  Oblivion,  in  ridicule 
of  “cool  Mason  and  warm  Gray,”  being  men¬ 
tioned,  Johnson  said,  “They  are  Colman’s  best 
things.”  Upon  its  being  observed  that  it  was  be¬ 
lieved  these  Odes  were  made  by  Colman  and 
Lloyd  jointly;— Johnson.  “Nay,  Sir,  how  can 
two  people  make  an  Ode?  Perhaps  one  made 
one  of  them,  and  one  the  other.”  I  observed 
that  two  people  had  made  a  play,  and  quoted 
the  anecdote  of  Beaumont  and  Fletcher,  who 
were  brought  under  suspicion  of  treason,  be¬ 
cause  while  concerting  the  plan  of  a  tragedy 
when  sitting  together  at  a  tavern,  one  of  them 
was  overheard  saying  to  the  other,  “I’ll  kill 
the  King.”  Johnson.  “The  first  of  these  Odes 
is  the  best:  but  they  are  both  good.  They  ex¬ 
posed  a  very  bad  kind  of  writing.”  Boswell. 
“Surely,  Sir,  Mr.  Mason’s  Elfrida  is  a  fine 
Poem:  at  least  you  will  allow  there  are  some 
good  passages  in  it.”  Johnson.  “There  are  now 
and  then  some  good  imitations  of  Milton’s  bad 
manner.” 

I  often  wondered  at  his  low  estimation  of  the 
writings  of  Gray  and  Mason.  Of  Gray’s  poetry 
I  have  in  a  former  part  of  this  work  expressed 
my  high  opinion;  and  for  that  of  Mr.  Mason  I 


BOSWELL 


250 

have  ever  entertained  a  warm  admiration.  His 
Etfrida  is  exquisite,  both  in  poetical  description 
and  moral  sentiment;  and  his  Caractacus  is  a  no¬ 
ble  drama.  Nor  can  I  omit  paying  my  tribute  of 
praise  to  some  of  his  smaller  poems,  which  I 
have  read  with  pleasure,  and  which  no  criticism 
shall  persuade  me  not  to  like.  If  I  wondered  at 
Johnson’s  not  tasting  the  works  of  Mason  and 
Gray,  still  more  have  I  wondered  at  their  not 
tasting  his  works;  that  they  should  be  insensible 
to  his  energy  of  diction,  to  his  splendour  of  im¬ 
ages,  and  comprehension  of  thought.  Tastes  may 
differ  as  to  the  violin,  the  flute,  the  hautboy,  in 
short  all  the  lesser  instruments:  but  who  can  be 
insensible  to  the  powerful  impressions  of  the  ma- 
jestick  organ? 

His  Taxation  no  Tyranny  being  mentioned,  he 
said,  CT  think  I  have  not  been  attacked  enough 
for  it.  Attack  is  the  re-action;  I  never  think  I 
have  hit  hard,  unless  it  rebounds.”  Boswell.  “I 
don’t  know,  Sir,  what  you  would  be  at.  Five  or 
six  shots  of  small  arms  in  every  newspaper,  and 
repeated  cannonading  in  pamphlets,  might,  I 
think,  satisfy  you.  But,  Sir,  you’ll  never  make 
out  this  match,  of  which  we  have  talked,  with  a 
certain  political  lady,  since  you  are  so  severe 
against  her  principles.”  Johnson.  “Nay,  Sir,  I 
have  the  better  chance  for  that.  She  is  like  the 
Amazons  of  old;  she  must  be  courted  by  the 
sword.  But  I  have  not  been  severe  upon  her.” 
Boswell.  “Yes,  Sir,  you  have  made  her  ridicu¬ 
lous.”  Johnson.  “That  was  already  done,  Sir. 
To  endeavour  to  make  her  ridiculous,  is  like 
blacking  the  chimney.” 

I  put  him  in  mind  that  the  landlord  at  Ellon 
in  Scotland  said,  that  he  heard  he  was  the  great¬ 
est  man  in  England, — next  to  Lord  Mansfield. 
“Ay,  Sir,  (said  he,)  the  exception  defined  the 
idea.  A  Scotchman  could  go  no  farther: 

The force  of  Nature  could  no  farther  go .” 

Lady  Miller’s  collection  of  verses  by  fashion¬ 
able  people,  which  were  put  into  her  Vase  at 
Batheaston  villa,  near  Bath,  in  competition  for 
honorary  prizes,  being  mentioned,  he  held  them 
very  cheap:  “ Bouts  rimes  (said  he,)  is  a  mere  con¬ 
ceit,  and  an  old  conceit  now ;  I  wonder  how  peo¬ 
ple  were  persuaded  to  write  in  that  manner  for 
this  lady.”  I  named  a  gentleman  of  his  acquaint¬ 
ance  who  wrote  for  the  Vase.  Johnson.  “He  was 
a  blockhead  for  his  pains.”  Boswell.  “The  Duch¬ 
ess  of  Northumberland  wrote.”  Johnson.  “Sir, 
the  Duchess  of  Northumberland  may  do  what 
she  pleases:  nobody  will  say  anything  to  a  lady 
of  her  high  rank.  But  I  should  be  apt  to  throw 
******,s  verses  fas  face.” 


[ 1 775 

I  talked  of  the  cheerfulness  of  Fleet-street,  ow¬ 
ing  to  the  constant  quick  succession  of  people 
which  we  perceive  passing  through  it.  Johnson. 
“Why,  Sir,  Fleet-street  has  a  very  animated  ap¬ 
pearance;  but  I  think  the  full  tide  of  human  ex¬ 
istence  is  at  Charing-cross.” 

He  made  the  common  remark  on  the  unhap¬ 
piness  which  men  who  have  led  a  busy  life  ex¬ 
perience,  when  they  retire  in  expectation  of  en¬ 
joying  themselves  at  ease,  and  that  they  gener¬ 
ally  languish  for  want  of  their  habitual  occupa¬ 
tion,  and  wish  to  return  to  it.  He  mentioned  as 
strong  an  instance  of  this  as  can  well  be  imag¬ 
ined.  “An  eminent  tallow-chandler  in  London, 
who  had  acquired  a  considerable  fortune,  gave 
up  the  trade  in  favour  of  his  foreman,  and  went 
to  live  at  a  country-house  near  town.  He  soon 
grew  weary,  and  paid  frequent  visits  to  his  old 
shop,  where  he  desired  they  might  let  him  know 
their  melting-days ,  and  he  would  come  and  assist 
them;  which  he  accordingly  did.  Here,  Sir,  was 
a  man,  to  whom  the  most  disgusting  circum¬ 
stance  in  the  business  to  which  he  had  been  used 
was  a  relief  from  idleness.” 

On  Wednesday,  April  5,  I  dined  with  him  at 
Messieurs  Dilly’s,  with  Mr.  John  Scott  of  Am- 
well,  the  Quaker,  Mr.  Langton,  Mr.  Miller, 
(now  Sir  John,)  and  Dr.  Thomas  Campbell,  an 
Irish  clergyman,  whom  I  took  the  liberty  of  in¬ 
viting  to  Mr.  Dilly’s  table,  having  seen  him  at 
Mr.  Thrale’s,  and  been  told  that  he  had  come 
to  England  chiefly  with  a  view  to  see  Dr.  John¬ 
son,  for  whom  he  entertained  the  highest  ven¬ 
eration.  He  has  since  published  A  Philosophical 
Survey  of  the  South  of  Ireland ,  a  very  entertaining 
book,  which  has,  however,  one  fault; — that  it 
assumes  the  fictitious  character  of  an  English¬ 
man. 

We  talked  of  publick  speaking. — Johnson. 
“We  must  not  estimate  a  man’s  powers  by  his 
being  able  or  not  able  to  deliver  his  sentiments 
in  publick.  Isaac  Hawkins  Browne,  one  of  the 
first  wits  of  this  country,  got  into  Parliament, 
and  never  opened  his  mouth.  For  my  own  part, 
I  think  it  is  more  disgraceful  never  to  try  to 
speak,  than  to  try  it  and  fail;  as  it  is  more  dis¬ 
graceful  not  to  fight,  than  to  fight  and  be  beat¬ 
en.”  This  argument  appeared  to  me  fallacious; 
for  if  a  man  has  not  spoken,  it  may  be  said  that 
he  would  have  done  very  well  if  he  had  tried; 
whereas,  if  he  has  tried  and  failed,  there  is  noth¬ 
ing  to  be  said  for  him.  “Why  then,  (I  asked,)  is 
it  thought  disgraceful  for  a  man  not  to  fight,  and 
not  disgraceful  not  to  speak  in  publick?”  John¬ 
son.  “Because  there  may  be  other  reasons  for  a 
man’s  not  speaking  in  publick  than  want  of  res- 


1775]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  251 


olution:  he  may  have  nothing  to  say,  (laughing.) 
Whereas,  Sir,  you  know  courage  is  reckoned  the 
greatest  of  all  virtues;  because,  unless  a  man  has 
that  virtue,  he  has  no  security  for  preserving 
any  other.” 

He  observed,  that  “the  statutes  against  brib¬ 
ery  were  intended  to  prevent  upstarts  with  mon¬ 
ey  from  getting  into  Parliament”;  adding,  that 
“if  he  were  a  gentleman  of  landed  property,  he 
would  turn  out  all  his  tenants  who  did  not  vote 
for  the  candidate  whom  he  supported.”  Lang- 
ton.  “Would  not  that,  Sir,  be  checking  the  free¬ 
dom  of  election?”  Johnson.  “Sir,  the  law  does 
not  mean  that  the  privilege  of  voting  should  be 
independent  of  old  family  interest;  of  the  per¬ 
manent  property  of  the  country.” 

On  Thursday,  April  6,  I  dined  with  him  at 
Mr.  Thomas  Davies’s,  with  Mr.  Hicky,  the  paint¬ 
er,  and  my  old  acquaintance  Mr.  Moody,  the 
player. 

Dr.  Johnson,  as  usual,  spoke  contemptuously 
of  Colley  Cibber.  “It  is  wonderful  that  a  man, 
who  for  forty  years  had  lived  with  the  great  and 
the  witty,  should  have  acquired  so  ill  the  talents 
of  conversation:  and  he  had  but  half  to  furnish; 
for  one  half  of  what  he  said  was  oaths.”  He, 
however,  allowed  considerable  merit  to  some  of 
his  comedies,  and  said  there  was  no  reason  to 
believe  that  the  Careless  Husband  was  not  written 
by  himself.  Davies  said,  he  was  the  first  dramat- 
ick  writer  who  introduced  genteel  ladies  upon 
the  stage.  Johnson  refuted  this  observation  by 
instancing  several  such  characters  in  comedies 
before  his  time.  Davies,  (trying  to  defend  him¬ 
self  from  a  charge  of  ignorance,)  “I  mean  gen¬ 
teel  moral  characters.”  “I  think  (said  Hicky), 
gentility  and  morality  are  inseparable.”  Bos¬ 
well.  “By  no  means,  Sir.  The  genteelest  char¬ 
acters  are  often  the  most  immoral.  Does  not 
Lord  Chesterfield  give  precepts  for  uniting  wick¬ 
edness  and  the  graces?  A  man,  indeed,  is  not 
genteel  when  he  gets  drunk;  but  most  vices  may 
be  committed  very  genteelly:  a  man  may  de¬ 
bauch  his  friend’s  wife  genteelly:  he  may  cheat 
at  cards  genteelly.”  Hicky.  “I  do  not  think  that 
is  genteel.”  Boswell.  “Sir,  it  may  not  be  like  a 
gentleman,  but  it  may  be  genteel.”  Johnson. 
“You  are  meaning  two  different  things.  One 
means  exteriour  grace;  the  other  honour.  It  is 
certain  that  a  man  may  be  very  immoral  with 
exteriour  grace.  Lovelace,  in  Clarissa ,  is  a  very 
genteel  and  a  very  wicked  character.  Tom  Her- 
vey,  who  died  t’other  day,  though  a  vicious  man, 
was  one  of  the  genteelest  men  that  ever  lived.” 
Tom  Davies  instanced  Charles  the  Second.  John¬ 
son  (taking  fire  at  any  attack  upon  that  Prince, 


for  whom  he  had  an  extraordinary  partiality,) 
“Charles  the  Second  was  licentious  in  his  prac¬ 
tice;  but  he  always  had  a  reverence  for  what  was 
good.  Charles  the  Second  knew  his  people,  and 
rewarded  merit.  The  Church  was  at  no  time  bet¬ 
ter  filled  than  in  his  reign.  He  was  the  best  King 
we  have  had  from  his  time  till  the  reign  of  his 
present  Majesty,  except  James  the  Second,  who 
was  a  very  good  King,  but  unhappily  believed 
that  it  was  necessary  for  the  salvation  of  his  sub¬ 
jects  that  they  should  be  Roman  Catholicks.  He 
had  the  merit  of  endeavouring  to  do  what  he 
thought  was  for  the  salvation  of  the  souls  of  his 
subjects,  till  he  lost  a  great  Empire.  We,  who 
thought  that  we  should  not  be  saved  if  we  were 
Roman  Catholicks,  had  the  merit  of  maintain¬ 
ing  our  religion,  at  the  expence  of  submitting 
ourselves  to  the  government  of  King  William, 
(for  it  could  not  be  done  otherwise,) — to  the 
government  of  one  of  the  most  worthless  scoun¬ 
drels  that  ever  existed.  No;  Charles  the  Second 

was  not  such  a  man  as - ,  (naming  another 

King).  He  did  not  destroy  his  father’s  will.  He 
took  money,  indeed,  from  France:  but  he  did 
not  betray  those  over  whom  he  ruled :  he  did  not 
let  the  French  fleet  pass  ours.  George  the  First 
knew  nothing,  and  desired  to  know  nothing;  did 
nothing,  and  desired  to  do  nothing:  and  the  on¬ 
ly  good  thing  that  is  told  of  him  is,  that  he  wished 
to  restore  the  crown  to  its  hereditary  successor.” 
He  roared  with  prodigious  violence  against 
George  the  Second.  When  he  ceased,  Moody 
interjected,  in  an  Irish  tone,  and  with  a  comick 
look,  “Ah!  poor  George  the  Second.” 

I  mentioned  that  Dr.  Thomas  Campbell  had 
come  from  Ireland  to  London,  principally  to  see 
Dr.  Johnson.  He  seemed  angry  at  this  observa¬ 
tion.  Davies.  “Why,  you  know,  Sir,  there  came 
a  man  from  Spain  to  see  Livy;1  and  Corelli  came 
to  England  to  see  Purcell,  and  when  he  heard 
he  was  dead,  went  directly  back  again  to  Italy.” 
Johnson.  “I  should  not  have  wished  to  be  dead 
to  disappoint  Campbell,  had  he  been  so  foolish 
as  you  represent  him;  but  I  should  have  wished 
to  have  been  a  hundred  miles  off.”  This  was  ap¬ 
parently  perverse;  and  I  do  believe  it  was  not 
his  real  way  of  thinking:  he  could  not  but  like  a 
man  who  came  so  far  to  see  him.  He  laughed 
with  some  complacency,  when  I  told  him  Camp¬ 
bell’s  odd  expression  to  me  concerning  him: 
“That  having  seen  such  a  man,  was  a  thing  to 
talk  of  a  century  hence,” — as  if  he  could  live  so 
long. 

We  got  into  an  argument  whether  the  Judges 
who  went  to  India  might  with  propriety  engage 

1Pliny,  Epist .,  book  ii,  ep.  3. 


252 

in  trade.  Johnson  warmly  maintained  that  they 
might.  “For  why  (he  urged,)  should  not  Judges 
get  riches,  as  well  as  those  who  deserve  them  less?” 

I  said,  they  should  have  sufficient  salaries,  and 
have  nothing  to  take  off  their  attention  from  the 
affairs  of  the  publick.  Johnson.  “No  Judge,  Sir, 
can  give  his  whole  attention  to  his  office;  and  it 
is  very  proper  that  he  should  employ  what  time 
he  has  to  himself,  to  his  own  advantage,  in  the 
most  profitable  manner.”  “Then,  Sir,  (said  Da¬ 
vies,  who  enlivened  the  dispute  by  making  it 
somewhat  dramatick,)  he  may  become  an  in¬ 
surer;  and  when  he  is  going  to  the  bench,  he 
may  be  stopped,— cYour  Lordship  cannot  go 
yet:  here  is  a  bunch  of  invoices:  several  ships  are 
about  to  sail.5  55  Johnson.  “Sir,  you  may  as  well 
say  a  Judge  should  not  have  a  house;  for  they 
may  come  and  tell  him,  ‘Your  Lordship’s  house 
is  on  fire5;  and  so,  instead  of  minding  the  busi¬ 
ness  of  his  Court,  he  is  to  be  occupied  in  getting 
the  engine  with  the  greatest  speed.  There  is  no 
end  of  this.  Every  Judge  who  has  land,  trades  to 
a  certain  extent  in  corn  or  in  cattle;  and  in  the 
land  itself,  undoubtedly.  His  steward  acts  for 
him,  and  so  do  clerks  for  a  great  merchant.  A 
Judge  may  be  a  farmer;  but  he  is  not  to  geld  his 
own  pigs.  A  Judge  may  play  a  little  at  cards  for 
his  amusement;  but  he  is  not  to  play  at  marbles, 
or  at  chuck-farthing  in  the  Piazza.  No,  Sir;  there 
is  no  profession  to  which  a  man  gives  a  very 
great  proportion  of  his  time.  It  is  wonderful 
when  a  calculation  is  made,  how  little  the  mind 
is  actually  employed  in  the  discharge  of  any  pro¬ 
fession.  No  man  would  be  a  Judge,  upon  the 
condition  of  being  totally  a  Judge.  The  best  em¬ 
ployed  lawyer  has  his  mind  at  work  but  for  a 
small  proportion  of  his  time:  a  great  deal  of  his 
occupation  is  merely  mechanical.  I  once  wrote 
for  a  magazine:  I  made  a  calculation,  that  if  I 
should  write  but  a  page  a  day,  at  the  same  rate, 
I  should,  in  ten  years,  write  nine  volumes  in  folio, 
of  an  ordinary  size  and  print.55  Boswell.  “Such 
as  Carte’s  History?”  Johnson.  “Yes,  Sir.  When  a 
man  writes  from  his  own  mind,  he  writes  very 
rapidly.1  The  greatest  part  of  a  writer’s  time  is 
spent  in  reading,  in  order  to  write:  a  man  will 
turn  over  half  a  library  to  make  one  book.” 

I  argued  warmly  against  the  Judges  trading, 
and  mentioned  Hale  as  an  instance  of  a  perfect 
Judge,  who  devoted  himself  entirely  to  his  office. 
Johnson.  “Hale,  Sir,  attended  to  other  things 
besides  law:  he  left  a  great  estate.”  Boswell. 

^Johnson  certainly  did,  who  had  a  mind  stored 
with  knowledge,  and  teeming  with  imagery:  but 
the  observation  is  not  applicable  to  writers  in  gen¬ 
eral. 


[  1775 

“That  was,  because  what  he  got,  accumulated 
without  any  exertion  and  anxiety  on  his  part.” 

While  the  dispute  went  on,  Moody  once  tried 
to  say  something  upon  our  side.  Tom  Davies 
clapped  him  on  the  back,  to  encourage  him. 
Beauclerk,  to  whom  I  mentioned  this  circum¬ 
stance,  said,  “that  he  could  not  conceive  a  more 
humiliating  situation  than  to  be  clapped  on  the 
back  by  Tom  Davies.” 

We  spoke  of  Rolt,  to  whose  Dictionary  of  Com - 
merce  Dr.  Johnson  wrote  the  Preface.  Johnson. 
“Old  Gardner  the  bookseller  employed  Rolt 
and  Smart  to  write  a  monthly  miscellany,  called 
The  Universal  Visitor.  There  was  a  formal  written 
contract,  which  Allen  the  printer  saw.  Gardner 
thought  as  you  do  of  the  Judge.  They  were  bound 
to  write  nothing  else;  they  were  to  have,  I  think, 
a  third  of  the  profits  of  this  sixpenny  pamphlet; 
and  the  contract  was  for  ninety-nine  years.  I 
wish  I  had  thought  of  giving  this  to  Thurlow,  in 
the  cause  about  Literary  Property.  What  an  ex¬ 
cellent  instance  would  it  have  been  of  the  op¬ 
pression  of  booksellers  towards  poor  authours  !”2 
(smiling.)  Davies,  zealous  for  the  honour  of  the 
Trade ,  said,  Gardner  was  not  properly  a  book¬ 
seller.  Johnson.  “Nay,  Sir;  he  certainly  was  a 
bookseller.  He  had  served  his  time  regularly,  was 
a  member  of  the  Stationers’  company,  kept  a 
shop  in  the  face  of  mankind,  purchased  copy¬ 
right,  and  was  a  bibliopole ,  Sir,  in  every  sense.  I 
wrote  for  some  months  in  The  Universal  Visitor , 
for  poor  Smart,  while  he  was  mad,  not  then 
knowing  the  terms  on  which  he  was  engaged  to 
write,  and  thinking  I  was  doing  him  good.  I 
hoped  his  wits  would  soon  return  to  him.  Mine 
returned  to  me,  and  I  wrote  in  The  Universal  Vis¬ 
iter  no  longer.” 

Friday,  April  7,  I  dined  with  him  at  a  Tav¬ 
ern,  with  a  numerous  company.  Johnson.  “I 
have  been  reading  Twiss’s  Travels  in  Spain ,  which 
are  just  come  out.  They  are  as  good  as  the  first 
book  of  travels  that  you  will  take  up.  They  are 
as  good  as  those  of  Keysler  or  Blainville;  nay,  as 
Addison’s,  if  you  except  the  learning.  They  are 
not  so  good  as  Brydone’s,  but  they  are  better 
than  Pococke’s.  I  have  not,  indeed,  cut  the  leaves 
yet;  but  I  have  read  in  them  where  the  pages 
are  open,  and  I  do  not  suppose  that  what  is  in 
the  pages  which  are  closed  is  worse  than  what  is 
in  the  open  pages.  It  would  seem  (he  added,) 

2There  has  probably  been  some  mistake  as  to 
the  terms  of  this  supposed  extraordinary  contract, 
the  recital  of  which  from  hearsay  afforded  Johnson 
so  much  play  for  his  sportive  acuteness.  Or  if  it  was 
worded  as  he  supposed,  it  is  so  strange  that  I  should 
conclude  it  was  a  joke.  Mr.  Gardner,  I  am  assured, 
was  a  worthy  and  a  liberal  man. 


BOSWELL 


1775] 

that  Addison  had  not  acquired  much  Italian 
learning,  for  we  do  not  find  it  introduced  into 
his  writings.  The  only  instance  that  I  recollect, 
is  his  quoting c Stavo  bene;  per  star  meglio ,  sto  qui .’ 551 

I  mentioned  Addison’s  having  borrowed  many 
of  his  classical  remarks  from  Leandro  Alberti. 
Mr.  Beauclerk  said,  ccIt  was  alledged  that  he 
had  borrowed  also  from  another  Italian  au- 
thour.”  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  all  who  go  to  look 
for  what  the  Classicks  have  said  of  Italy,  must 
find  the  same  passages;  and  I  should  think  it 
would  be  one  of  the  first  things  the  Italians 
would  do  on  the  revival  of  learning,  to  collect 
all  that  the  Roman  authours  have  said  of  their 
country.” 

Ossian  being  mentioned; — Johnson.  “Sup¬ 
posing  the  Irish  and  Erse  languages  to  be  the 
same,  which  I  do  not  believe,  yet  as  there  is  no 
reason  to  suppose  that  the  inhabitants  of  the 
Highlands  and  Hebrides  ever  wrote  their  native 
language,  it  is  not  to  be  credited  that  a  long  po¬ 
em  was  preserved  among  them.  If  we  had  no 
evidence  of  the  art  of  writing  being  practised  in 
one  of  the  counties  of  England,  we  should  not 
believe  that  a  long  poem  was  preserved  there, 
though  in  the  neighbouring  counties,  where  the 
same  language  was  spoken,  the  inhabitants  could 
write.  Beauclerk.  “The  ballad  of  Lilliburlero 
was  once  in  the  mouths  of  all  the  people  of  this 
country,  and  is  said  to  have  had  a  great  effect  in 
bringing  about  the  Revolution.  Yet  I  question 
whether  any  body  can  repeat  it  now;  which 
shews  how  improbable  it  is  that  much  poetry 
should  be  preserved  by  tradition.” 

One  of  the  company  suggested  an  internal  ob¬ 
jection  to  the  antiquity  of  the  poetry  said  to  be 
Ossian’s,  that  we  do  not  find  the  wolf  in  it,  which 
must  have  been  the  case  had  it  been  of  that  age. 

The  mention  of  the  wolf  had  led  Johnson  to 
think  of  other  wild  beasts;  and  while  Sir  Joshua 
Reynolds  and  Mr.  Langton  were  carrying  on  a 
dialogue  about  something  which  engaged  them 
earnestly,  he,  in  the  midst  of  it,  broke  out,  “Pen¬ 
nant  tells  of  Bears — ”  [what  he  added,  I  have 
forgotten.]  They  went  on,  which  he  being  dull 
of  hearing,  did  not  perceive,  or,  if  he  did,  was 
not  willing  to  break  off  his  talk;  so  he  continued 
to  vociferate  his  remarks,  and  Bear  (“like  a  word 
in  a  catch”  as  Beauclerk  said,)  was  repeatedly 
heard  at  intervals,  which  coming  from  him  who, 
by  those  who  did  not  know  him,  had  been  so  of¬ 
ten  assimilated  to  that  ferocious  animal,  while 
we  who  were  sitting  around  could  hardly  stifle 

1  Addison  does  not  mention  where  this  epitaph, 
which  has  eluded  a  very  diligent  inquiry,  is  found. 
[M.] 


253 

laughter,  produced  a  very  ludicrous  effect.  Si¬ 
lence  having  ensued,  he  proceeded:  “We  are 
told,  that  the  black  bear  is  innocent;  but  I  should 
not  like  to  trust  myself  with  him.”  Mr.  Gibbon 
muttered,  in  a  low  tone  of  voice,  “I  should  not 
like  to  trust  myself  with^ow.”  This  piece  of  sar- 
castick  pleasantry  was  a  prudent  resolution,  if 
applied  to  a  competition  of  abilities. 

Patriotism  having  become  one  of  our  topicks, 
Johnson  suddenly  uttered,  in  a  strong  deter¬ 
mined  tone,  an  apophthegm,  at  which  many 
will  start:  “Patriotism  is  the  last  refuge  of  a  scoun¬ 
drel.”  But  let  it  be  considered,  that  he  did  not 
mean  a  real  and  generous  love  of  our  country, 
but  that  pretended  patriotism  which  so  many,  in 
all  ages  and  countries,  have  made  a  cloak  for 
self-interest.  I  maintained,  that  certainly  all  pa¬ 
triots  were  not  scoundrels.  Being  urged,  (not  by 
Johnson,)  to  name  one  exception,  I  mentioned 
an  eminent  person,  whom  we  all  greatly  admired. 
Johnson.  “Sir,  I  do  not  say  that  he  is  not  honest; 
but  we  have  no  reason  to  conclude  from  his  po¬ 
litical  conduct  that  he  is  honest.  Were  he  to  ac¬ 
cept  of  a  place  from  this  ministry,  he  would  lose 
that  character  of  firmness  which  he  has,  and 
might  be  turned  out  of  his  place  in  a  year.  This 
ministry  is  neither  stable,  nor  grateful  to  their 
friends,  as  Sir  Robert  Walpole  was,  so  that  he 
may  think  it  more  for  his  interest  to  take  his 
chance  of  his  party  coming  in.” 

Mrs.  Prichard  being  mentioned,  he  said,  “Her 
playing  was  quite  mechanical.  It  is  wonderful 
how  little  mind  she  had.  Sir,  she  had  never  read 
the  tragedy  of  Macbeth  all  through.  She  no  more 
thought  of  the  play  out  of  which  her  part  was 
taken,  than  a  shoemaker  thinks  of  the  skin,  out 
of  which  the  piece  of  leather,  of  which  he  is  mak¬ 
ing  a  pair  of  shoes,  is  cut.” 

On  Saturday,  May  8, 1  dined  with  him  at  Mr. 
Thrale’s,  where  we  met  the  Irish  Dr.  Campbell. 
Johnson  had  supped  the  night  before  at  Mrs. 
Abington’s,  with  some  fashionable  people  whom 
he  named;  and  he  seemed  much  pleased  with 
having  made  one  in  so  elegant  a  circle.  Nor  did 
he  omit  to  pique  his  mistress  a  little  with  jealousy 
of  her  housewifery;  for  he  said,  (with  a  smile,) 
“Mrs.  Abington’s  jelly,  my  dear  lady,  was  better 
than  yours.” 

Mrs.  Thrale,  who  frequently  practised  a  coarse 
mode  of  flattery,  by  repeating  his  bon-mots  in  his 
hearing,  told  us  that  he  had  said,  a  certain  cele¬ 
brated  actor  was  just  fit  to  stand  at  the  door  of 
an  auction-room  with  a  long  pole,  and  cry  “Pray 
gentlemen,  walk  in” ;  and  that  a  certain  authour, 
upon  hearing  this,  had  said,  that  another  still 
more  celebrated  actor  was  fit  for  nothing  better 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


BOSWELL 


254 

than  that,  and  would  pick  your  pocket  after  you 
caine  out.  Johnson.  “Nay,  my  dear  lady,  there 
is  no  wit  in  what  our  friend  added;  there  is  only 
abuse.  You  may  as  well  say  of  any  man  that  he  will 
pick  a  pocket.  Besides,  the  man  who  is  stationed 
at  the  door  does  not  pick  people’s  pockets;  that 
is  done  within,  by  the  auctioneer.” 

Mrs.  Thrale  told  us,  that  Tom  Davies  repeat¬ 
ed,  in  a  very  bald  manner,  the  story  of  Dr.  John¬ 
son’s  first  repartee  to  me,  which  I  have  related 
exactly.1  He  made  me  say,  “I  was  born  in 
Scotland,”  instead  of  “I  come  from  Scotland”;  so 
that  Johnson  saying,  “That,  Sir,  is  what  a  great 
many  of  your  countrymen  cannot  help,”  had 
no  point,  or  even  meaning:  and  that  upon  this 
being  mentioned  to  Mr.  Fitzherbert,  he  ob¬ 
served,  “It  is  not  every  man  that  can  carry  a  bon 
mot” 

On  Monday,  April  10,  I  dined  with  him  at 
General  Oglethorpe’s,  with  Mr.  Langton  and 
the  Irish  Dr.  Campbell,  whom  the  General  had 
obligingly  given  me  leave  to  bring  with  me. 
This  learned  gentleman  was  thus  gratified  with 
a  very  high  intellectual  feast,  by  not  only  being 
in  company  with  Dr.  Johnson,  but  with  Gener¬ 
al  Oglethorpe,  who  had  been  so  long  a  celebrat¬ 
ed  name  both  at  home  and  abroad.2 

I  must,  again  and  again,  intreat  of  my  read¬ 
ers  not  to  suppose  that  my  imperfect  record  of 
conversation  contains  the  whole  of  what  was 
said  by  Johnson,  or  other  eminent  persons  who 
lived  with  him.  What  I  have  preserved,  however, 
has  the  value  of  the  most  perfect  authenticity. 

He  this  day  enlarged  upon  Pope’s  melancholy 
remark, 

Man  never  is,  but  always  to  be  blest. 

JSee  ante ,  p.  no. 

2Let  me  here  be  allowed  to  pay  my  tribute  of 
most  sincere  gratitude  to  the  memory  of  that  ex¬ 
cellent  person,  my  intimacy  with  whom  was  the 
more  valuable  to  me,  because  my  first  acquaint¬ 
ance  with  him  was  unexpected  and  unsolicited. 
Soon  after  the  publication  of  my  Account  of  Corsica , 
he  did  me  the  honour  to  call  on  me,  and,  approach¬ 
ing  me  with  a  frank  courteous  air,  said,  “My  name, 
Sir,  is  Oglethorpe,  and  I  wish  to  be  acquainted 
with  you.”  I  was  not  a  little  flattered  to  be  thus 
addressed  by  an  eminent  man,  of  whom  I  had  read 
in  Pope,  from  my  early  years, 

Or,  driven  by  strong  benevolence  of  soul. 

Will  fly ,  like  Oglethorpe,  from  pole  to  pole. 

I  was  fortunate  enough  to  be  found  worthy  of  his 
good  opinion,  insomuch,  that  I  not  only  was  in¬ 
vited  to  make  one  in  the  many  respectable  com¬ 
panies  whom  he  entertained  at  his  table,  but  had  a 
cover  at  his  hospitable  board  every  day  when  I 
happened  to  be  disengaged;  and  in  his  society  I 
never  failed  to  enjoy  learned  and  animated  con¬ 
versation,  seasoned  with  genuine  sentiments  of  vir¬ 
tue  and  religion. 


[ 1 775 

He  asserted  that  the  present  was  never  a  happy 
state  to  any  human  being;  but  that,  as  every 
part  of  life,  of  which  we  are  conscious,  was  at 
some  point  of  time  a  period  yet  to  come,  in  which 
felicity  was  expected,  there  was  some  happiness 
produced  by  hope.  Being  pressed  upon  this  sub¬ 
ject,  and  asked  if  he  really  was  of  opinion,  that 
though,  in  general,  happiness  was  very  rare  in 
human  life,  a  man  was  not  sometimes  happy  in 
the  moment  that  was  present,  he  answered, 
“Never,  but  when  he  is  drunk.” 

He  urged  General  Oglethorpe  to  give  the 
world  his  Life.  He  said,  “I  know  no  man  whose 
Life  would  be  more  interesting.  If  I  were  fur¬ 
nished  with  materials,  I  should  be  very  glad  to 
write  it.”3 

Mr.  Scott  of  Amwell’s  Elegies  were  lying  in 
the  room.  Dr.  Johnson  observed,  “They  are  very 
well;  but  such  as  twenty  people  might  write.” 
Upon  this  I  took  occasion  to  controvert  Hor¬ 
ace’s  maxim, 

- mediocribus  esse  poetis 

Non  Di,  non  homines ,  non  concessere  columns. 

For  here,  (I  observed,)  was  a  very  middle-rate 
poet,  who  pleased  many  readers,  and  therefore 
poetry  of  a  middle  sort  was  entided  to  some  es¬ 
teem;  nor  could  I  see  why  poetry  should  not, 
like  every  thing  else,  have  different  gradations 
of  excellence,  and  consequently  of  value.  John¬ 
son  repeated  the  common  remark,  that,  “as 
there  is  no  necessity  for  our  having  poetry  at  all, 
it  being  merely  a  luxury,  an  instrument  of  pleas¬ 
ure,  it  can  have  no  value,  unless  when  exquisite 
in  its  kind.”  I  declared  myself  not  satisfied.  “Why 
then,  Sir,  (said  he,)  Horace  and  you  must  set¬ 
tle  it.”  He  was  not  much  in  the  humour  of  talk¬ 
ing. 

No  more  of  his  conversation  for  some  days  ap¬ 
pears  in  my  journal,  except  that  when  a  gentle¬ 
man  told  him  he  had  bought  a  suit  of  lace  for 
his  lady,  he  said,  “Well,  Sir,  you  have  done  a 
good  thing  and  a  wise  thing.”  “I  have  done  a 
good  thing,  (said  the  gentleman,)  but  I  do  not 
know  that  I  have  done  a  wise  thing.”  Johnson. 
“Yes,  Sir;  no  money  is  better  spent  than  what  is 
laid  out  for  domestick  satisfaction.  A  man  is 

3The  General  seemed  unwilling  to  enter  upon  it 
at  this  time;  but  upon  a  subsequent  occasion  he 
communicated  to  me  a  number  of  particulars, 
which  I  have  committed  to  writing;  but  I  was  not 
sufficiently  diligent  in  obtaining  more  from  him, 
not  apprehending  that  his  friends  were  so  soon  to 
lose  him;  for,  notwithstanding  his  great  age,  he  was 
very  healthy  and  vigorous,  and  was  at  last  carried 
off  by  a  violent  fever,  which  is  often  fatal  at  any 
period  of  life. 


1775]  LIFE  OF 

pleased  that  his  wife  is  drest  as  well  as  other  peo¬ 
ple;  and  a  wife  is  pleased  that  she  is  drest.” 

On  Friday,  April  14,  being  Good-Friday,  I 
repaired  to  him  in  the  morning,  according  to  my 
usual  custom  on  that  day,  and  breakfasted  with 
him.  I  observed  that  he  fasted  so  very  strictly, 
that  he  did  not  even  taste  bread,  and  took  no 
milk  with  his  tea;  I  suppose  because  it  is  a  kind 
of  animal  food. 

He  entered  upon  the  state  of  the  nation,  and 
thus  discoursed:  “Sir,  the  great  misfortune  now 
is,  that  government  has  too  little  power.  All 
that  it  has  to  bestow  must  of  necessity  be  given 
to  support  itself;  so  that  it  cannot  reward  merit. 
No  man,  for  instance,  can  now  be  made  a  Bish¬ 
op  for  his  learning  and  piety;1  his  only  chance 
for  promotion  is  his  being  connected  with  some¬ 
body  who  has  parliamentary  interest.  Our  sev¬ 
eral  ministries  in  this  reign  have  outbid  each 
other  in  concessions  to  the  people.  Lord  Bute, 
though  a  very  honourable  man, — a  man  who 
meant  well, — a  man  who  had  his  blood  full  of 
prerogative, — was  a  theoretical  statesman, — a 
book-minister, — and  thought  this  country  could 
be  governed  by  the  influence  of  the  Crown  alone. 
Then,  Sir,  he  gave  up  a  great  deal.  He  advised 
the  King  to  agree  that  the  Judges  should  hold 
their  places  for  life,  instead  of  losing  them  at  the 
accession  of  a  new  King.  Lord  Bute,  I  suppose, 
thought  to  make  the  King  popular  by  this  con¬ 
cession;  but  the  people  never  minded  it;  and  it 
was  a  most  impolitick  measure.  There  is  no  rea¬ 
son  why  a  Judge  should  hold  his  office  for  life, 
more  than  any  other  person  in  publick  trust.  A 
Judge  may  be  partial  otherwise  than  to  the 
Crown:  we  have  seen  Judges  partial  to  the  pop¬ 
ulace.  A  Judge  may  become  corrupt,  and  yet 
there  may  not  be  legal  evidence  against  him.  A 
Judge  may  become  froward  from  age.  A  Judge 
may  grow  unfit  for  his  office  in  many  ways.  It 
was  desirable  that  there  should  be  a  possibility 
of  being  delivered  from  him  by  a  new  King. 
That  is  now  gone  by  an  act  of  Parliament  ex 
gratia  of  the  Crown.  Lord  Bute  advised  the  King 
to  give  up  a  very  large  sum  of  money, 2  for  which 

Trom  this  too  just  observation  there  are  some 
eminent  exceptions, 

2The  money  arising  from  the  property  of  the 
prizes  taken  before  the  declaration  of  war,  which 
were  given  to  his  Majesty  by  the  peace  of  Paris, 
and  amounted  to  upwards  of  £700,000,  and  from 
the  lands  in  the  ceded  islands,  which  were  esti¬ 
mated  at  £200,000  more.  Surely  there  was  a  noble 
munificence  in  this  gift  from  a  Monarch  to  his 
people.  And  let  it  be  remembered,  that  during  the 
Earl  of  Bute’s  administration,  the  King  was  gra¬ 
ciously  pleased  to  give  up  the  hereditary  revenues 
of  the  Crown,  and  to  accept,  instead  of  them,  of 


JOHNSON  255 

nobody  thanked  him.  It  was  of  consequence  to 
the  King,  but  nothing  to  the  publick,  among 
whom  it  was  divided.  When  I  say  Lord  Bute  ad¬ 
vised,  I  mean,  that  such  acts  were  done  when  he 
was  minister,  and  we  are  to  suppose  that  he  ad¬ 
vised  them. — Lord  Bute  shewed  an  undue  par¬ 
tiality  to  Scotchmen.  He  turned  out  Dr.  Nich¬ 
ols,  a  very  eminent  man,  from  being  physician 
to  the  King,  to  make  room  for  one  of  his  coun¬ 
trymen,  a  man  very  low  in  his  profession.  He 

had  ***********  and  ****  tQ  gQ  Qn  errands 
for  him.  He  had  occasion  for  people  to  go  on  er¬ 
rands  for  him;  but  he  should  not  have  had 
Scotchmen;  and,  certainly,  he  should  not  have 
suffered  them  to  have  access  to  him  before  the 
first  people  in  England.” 

I  told  him,  that  the  admission  of  one  of  them 
before  the  first  people  in  England,  which  had 
given  the  greatest  offence,  was  no  more  than 
what  happens  at  every  minister’s  levee,  where 
those  who  attend  are  admitted  in  the  order  that 
they  haue  come,  which  is  better  than  admitting 
them  according  to  their  rank;  for  if  that  were  to 
be  the  rule,  a  man  who  has  waited  all  the  morn¬ 
ing  might  have  the  mortification  to  see  a  peer, 
newly  come,  go  in  before  him,  and  keep  him 
waiting  still.  Johnson.  “True,  Sir;  but  **** 
should  not  have  come  to  the  levee,  to  be  in  the 
way  of  people  of  consequence.  He  saw  Lord 
Bute  at  all  times;  and  could  have  said  what  he 
had  to  say  at  any  time,  as  well  as  at  the  levee. 
There  is  now  no  Prime  Minister:  there  is  only  an 
agent  for  government  in  the  House  of  Commons. 
We  are  governed  by  the  Cabinet:  but  there  is 
no  one  head  there  since  Sir  Robert  Walpole’s 
time.”  Boswell.  “What  then,  Sir,  is  the  use  of 
Parliament?”  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  Parliament 
is  a  larger  council  to  the  King;  and  the  advant¬ 
age  of  such  a  council  is,  having  a  great  number 
of  men  of  property  concerned  in  the  legislature, 
who,  for  their  own  interest,  will  not  consent  to 
bad  laws.  And  you  must  have  observed,  Sir, 
that  administration  is  feeble  and  timid,  and  can¬ 
not  act  with  that  authority  and  resolution  which 
is  necessary.  Were  I  in  power,  I  would  turn  out 
every  man  who  dared  to  oppose  me.  Govern¬ 
ment  has  the  distribution  of  offices,  that  it  may 
be  enabled  to  maintain  its  authority.” 


the  limited  sum  of  £800,000  a  year;  upon  which 
Blackstone  observes,  that  “The  hereditary  reve¬ 
nues,  being  put  under  the  same  management  as  the 
other  branches  of  the  publick  patrimony,  will  pro¬ 
duce  more,  and  be  better  collected  than  hereto¬ 
fore;  and  the  publick  is  a  gainer  of  upwards  of 
£  1 00,000  per  annum  by  this  disinterested  bounty  of 
his  Majesty.”  Book  i,  Chap.  8,  p.  330. 


BOSWELL 


256 

“Lord  Bute  (he  added,)  took  down  too  fast, 
without  building  up  something  new.”  Boswell. 
“Because,  Sir,  he  found  a  rotten  building.  The 
political  coach  was  drawn  by  a  set  of  bad 
horses:  it  was  necessary  to  change  them.”  John¬ 
son.  “But  he  should  have  changed  them  one  by 
one.” 

I  told  him  that  I  had  been  informed  by  Mr. 
Orme,  that  many  parts  of  the  East-Indies  were 
better  mapped  than  the  Highlands  of  Scotland. 
Johnson.  “That  a  country  may  be  mapped,  it 
must  be  travelled  over.”  “Nay,  (said  I,  mean¬ 
ing  to  laugh  with  him  at  one  of  his  prejudices,) 
can’t  you  say,  it  is  not  worth  mapping?” 

As  we  walked  to  St.  Clement’s  church,  and 
saw  several  shops  open  upon  this  most  solemn 
fast-day  of  the  Christian  world,  I  remarked, 
that  one  disadvantage  arising  from  the  immen¬ 
sity  of  London,  was,  that  nobody  was  heeded  by 
his  neighbour;  there  was  no  fear  of  censure  for 
not  observing  Good-Friday,  as  it  ought  to  be 
kept,  and  as  it  is  kept  in  country-towns.  He  said, 
it  was,  upon  the  whole,  very  well  observed  even 
in  London.  He,  however,  owned,  that  London 
was  too  large;  but  added,  “It  is  nonsense  to  say 
the  head  is  too  big  for  the  body.  It  would  be  as 
much  too  big,  though  the  body  were  ever  so 
large;  that  is  to  say,  though  the  country  were 
ever  so  extensive.  It  has  no  similarity  to  a  head 
connected  with  a  body.” 

Dr.  Wetherell,  Master  of  University  College, 
Oxford,  accompanied  us  home  from  church; 
and  after  he  was  gone,  there  came  two  other 
gentlemen,  one  of  whom  uttered  the  common¬ 
place  complaints,  that  by  the  increase  of  taxes, 
labour  would  be  dear,  other  nations  would  un¬ 
dersell  us,  and  our  commerce  would  be  ruined. 
Johnson  (smiling,)  “Never  fear,  Sir.  Our  com¬ 
merce  is  in  a  very  good  state;  and  suppose  we 
had  no  commerce  at  all,  we  could  live  very  well 
on  the  produce  of  our  own  country.”  I  cannot 
omit  to  mention,  that  I  never  knew  any  man 
who  was  less  disposed  to  be  querulous  than 
Johnson.  Whether  the  subject  was  his  own  situ¬ 
ation,  or  the  state  of  the  publick,  or  the  state  of 
human  nature  in  general,  though  he  saw  the 
evils,  his  mind  was  turned  to  resolution,  and 
never  to  whining  or  complaint. 

We  went  again  to  St.  Clement’s  in  the  after¬ 
noon.  He  had  found  fault  with  the  preacher  in 
the  morning  for  not  choosing  a  text  adapted  to 
the  day.  The  preacher  in  the  afternoon  had 
chosen  one  extremely  proper:  “It  is  finished.” 

After  the  evening  service,  he  said,  “Come, 
you  shall  go  home  with  me,  and  sit  just  an  hour.” 
But  he  was  better  than  his  word;  for  after  we 


[ 1 775 

had  drunk  tea  with  Mrs.  Williams,  he  asked  me 
to  go  up  to  his  study  with  him,  where  we  sat  a 
long  while  together  in  a  serene  undisturbed 
frame  of  mind,  sometimes  in  silence,  and  some¬ 
times  conversing,  as  we  felt  ourselves  inclined, 
or  more  properly  speaking,  as  he  was  inclined; 
for  during  all  the  course  of  my  long  intimacy 
with  him,  my  respectful  attention  never  abated, 
and  my  wish  to  hear  him  was  such,  that  I  con¬ 
stantly  watched  every  dawning  of  communica¬ 
tion  from  that  great  and  illuminated  mind. 

He  observed,  “All  knowledge  is  of  itself  of 
some  value.  There  is  nothing  so  minute  or  in¬ 
considerable,  that  I  would  not  rather  know  it 
than  not.  In  the  same  manner,  all  power,  of 
whatever  sort,  is  of  itself  desirable.  A  man  would 
not  submit  to  learn  to  hem  a  ruffle,  of  his  wife, 
or  his  wife’s  maid;  but  if  a  mere  wish  could  at¬ 
tain  it,  he  would  rather  wish  to  be  able  to  hem 
a  ruffle.” 

He  again  advised  me  to  keep  a  journal  fully 
and  minutely,  but  not  to  mention  such  trifles  as, 
that  meat  was  too  much  or  too  little  done,  or 
that  the  weather  was  fair  or  rainy.  He  had,  till 
very  near  his  death,  a  contempt  for  the  notion 
that  the  weather  affects  the  human  frame. 

I  told  him  that  our  friend  Goldsmith  had  said 
to  me,  that  he  had  come  too  late  into  the  world, 
for  that  Pope  and  other  poets  had  taken  up  the 
places  in  the  Temple  of  Fame;  so  that,  as  but  a 
few  at  any  period  can  possess  poetical  reputa¬ 
tion,  a  man  of  genius  can  now  hardly  acquire  it. 
Johnson.  “That  is  one  of  the  most  sensible 
things  I  have  ever  heard  of  Goldsmith.  It  is  dif¬ 
ficult  to  get  literary  fame,  and  it  is  every  day 
growing  more  difficult.  Ah,  Sir,  that  should  make 
a  man  think  of  securing  happiness  in  another 
world,  which  all  who  try  sincerely  for  it  may 
attain.  In  comparison  of  that,  how  little  are  all 
other  things !  The  belief  of  immortality  is  im¬ 
pressed  upon  all  men,  and  all  men  act  under  an 
impression  of  it,  however  they  may  talk,  and 
though,  perhaps,  they  may  be  scarcely  sensible  of 
it.”  I  said,  it  appeared  to  me  that  some  people 
had  not  the  least  notion  of  immortality;  and  I 
mentioned  a  distinguished  gentleman  of  our  ac¬ 
quaintance.  Johnson.  “Sir,  if  it  were  not  for  the 
notion  of  immortality,  he  would  cut  a  throat  to 
fill  his  pockets.”  When  I  quoted  this  to  Beau- 
clerk,  who  knew  much  more  of  the  gentleman 
than  we  did,  he  said,  in  his  acid  manner,  “He 
would  cut  a  throat  to  fill  his  pockets,  if  it  were 
not  for  fear  of  being  hanged.” 

Dr.  Johnson  proceeded:  “Sir,  there  is  a  great 
cry  about  infidelity;  but  there  are,  in  reality, 
very  few  infidels.  I  have  heard  a  person,  orig- 


1775] 

inally  a  Quaker,  but  now,  I  am  afraid,  a  Deist, 
say,  that  he  did  not  believe  there  were,  in  all 
England,  above  two  hundred  infidels.” 

He  was  pleased  to  say,  “If  you  come  to  settle 
here,  we  will  have  one  day  in  the  week  on  which 
we  will  meet  by  ourselves.  That  is  the  happiest 
conversation  where  there  is  no  competition,  no 
vanity,  but  a  calm  quiet  interchange  of  senti¬ 
ments.”  In  his  private  register  this  evening  is 
thus  marked,  “Boswell  sat  with  me  till  night;  we 
had  some  serious  talk.”1  It  also  appears  from 
the  same  record,  that  after  I  left  him  he  was 
occupied  in  religious  duties,  in  “giving  Francis, 
his  servant,  some  directions  for  preparation  to 
communicate;  in  reviewing  his  life,  and  resolv¬ 
ing  on  better  conduct.”  The  humility  and  piety 
which  he  discovers  on  such  occasions,  is  truely 
edifying.  No  saint,  however,  in  the  course  of  his 
religious  warfare,  was  more  sensible  of  the  un¬ 
happy  failure  of  pious  resolves,  than  Johnson. 
He  said  one  day,  talking  to  an  acquaintance  on 
this  subject,  “Sir,  Hell  is  paved  with  good  in¬ 
tentions.”2 

On  Sunday,  April  16,  being  Easter  Day,  after 
having  attended  the  solemn  service  at  St.  Paul’s, 
I  dined  with  Dr.  Johnson  and  Mrs.  Williams.  I 
maintained  that  Horace  was  wrong  in  placing 
happiness  in  Nil  admirari ,  for  that  I  thought 
admiration  one  of  the  most  agreeable  of  all  our 
feelings;  and  I  regretted  that  I  had  lost  much  of 
my  disposition  to  admire,  which  people  gener¬ 
ally  do  as  they  advance  in  life.  Johnson.  “Sir, 
as  a  man  advances  in  life,  he  gets  what  is  better 
than  admiration — judgement,  to  estimate  things 
at  their  true  value.”  I  still  insisted  that  admira¬ 
tion  was  more  pleasing  than  judgement,  as  love 
is  more  pleasing  than  friendship.  The  feeling  of 
friendship  is  like  that  of  being  comfortably  filled 
with  roast  beef;  love,  like  being  enlivened  with 
champagne.  Johnson.  “No,  Sir;  admiration  and 
love  are  like  being  intoxicated  with  champagne; 
judgement  and  friendship  like  being  enlivened. 
Waller  has  hit  upon  the  same  thought  with 
you:3  but  I  don’t  believe  you  have  borrowed 
from  Waller.  I  wish  you  would  enable  yourself 
to  borrow  more.” 

1  Prayers  and  Meditations ,  p.  138. 

2This  is  a  proverbial  sentence.  “Hell,”  says  Her¬ 
bert,  “is  full  of  good  meanings  and  wishings.” 
Jacula  Prudentum ,  p.  11,  edit.  1651.  [M.] 

3Amoret's  as  sweet  and  good , 

As  the  most  delicious  food ; 

Which  but  tasted  does  impart 
Life  and  gladness  to  the  heart . 

Sacharissa' s  beauty's  wine , 

Which  to  madness  does  incline ; 

Such  a  liquor  as  no  brain 
That  is  mortal  can  sustain . 


257 

He  then  took  occasion  to  enlarge  on  the  ad¬ 
vantages  of  reading,  and  combated  the  idle 
superficial  notion,  that  knowledge  enough  may 
be  acquired  in  conversation.  “The  foundation 
(said  he),  must  be  laid  by  reading.  General 
principles  must  be  had  from  books,  which,  how¬ 
ever,  must  be  brought  to  the  test  of  real  life.  In 
conversation  you  never  get  a  system.  What  is 
said  upon  a  subject  is  to  be  gathered  from  a 
hundred  people.  The  parts  of  a  truth,  which  a 
man  gets  thus,  are  at  such  a  distance  from  each 
other  that  he  never  attains  to  a  full  view.” 

To  Bennet  Langton,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  I  have  enquired  more  minutely 
about  the  medicine  for  the  rheumatism,  which  I 
am  sorry  to  hear  that  you  still  want.  The  receipt 
is  this: 

Take  equal  quantities  of  flour  of  sulphur,  and 
flour  of  mustard-seed,  make  them  an  electuary 
with  honey  or  treacle;  and  take  a  bolus  as  big  as 
a  nutmeg  several  times  a  day,  as  you  can  bear 
it:  drinking  after  it  a  quarter  of  a  pint  of  the  in¬ 
fusion  of  the  root  of  Lovage. 

Lovage,  in  Ray’s  Nomenclature ,  is  Levisticum: 
perhaps  the  Botanists  may  know  the  Latin  name. 

Of  this  medicine  I  pretend  not  to  judge.  There 
is  all  the  appearance  of  its  efficacy,  which  a  sin¬ 
gle  instance  can  afford:  the  patient  was  very 
old,  the  pain  very  violent,  and  the  relief,  I 
think,  speedy  and  lasting. 

My  opinion  of  alterative  medicine  is  not  high, 
but  quid  tentasse  nocebit?  if  it  does  harm,  or  does 
no  good,  it  may  be  omitted;  but  that  it  may  do 
good,  you  have,  I  hope,  reason  to  think  is  de¬ 
sired  by,  Sir,  your  most  affectionate,  humble 
servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

April  17,  1775 

On  Tuesday,  April  18,  he  and  I  were  engaged 
to  go  with  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  to  dine  with  Mr. 
Cambridge,  at  his  beautiful  villa  on  the  banks 
of  the  Thames,  near  Twickenham.  Dr.  John¬ 
son’s  tardiness  was  such,  that  Sir  Joshua,  who 
had  an  appointment  at  Richmond,  early  in  the 
day,  was  obliged  to  go  by  himself  on  horseback, 
leaving  his  coach  to  Johnson  and  me.  Johnson 
was  in  such  good  spirits,  that  every  thing  seemed 
to  please  him  as  we  drove  along. 

Our  conversation  turned  on  a  variety  of  sub¬ 
jects.  He  thought  portrait-painting  an  improper 
employment  for  a  woman.  “Publick  practice  of 
any  art,  (he  observed,)  and  staring  in  men’s 
faces,  is  very  indelicate  in  a  female.”  I  happened 
to  start  a  question,  whether,  when  a  man  knows 
that  some  of  his  intimate  friends  are  invited  to 
the  house  of  another  friend,  with  whom  they 
are  all  equally  intimate,  he  may  join  them  with- 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


BOSWELL 


258 

out  an  invitation.  Johnson  “No,  Sir;  he  is  not  to 
go  when  he  is  not  invited.  They  may  be  invited 
on  purpose  to  abuse  him”  (smiling). 

As  a  curious  instance  how  little  a  man  knows, 
or  wishes  to  know,  his  own  character  in  the 
world,  or,  rather,  as  a  convincing  proof  that 
Johnson’s  roughness  was  only  external,  and  did 
not  proceed  from  his  heart,  I  insert  the  following 
dialogue.  Johnson.  “It  is  wonderful,  Sir,  how 
rare  a  quality  good  humour  is  in  life.  We  meet 
with  very  few  good  humoured  men.”  I  men¬ 
tioned  four  of  our  friends,  none  of  whom  he 
would  allow  to  be  good  humoured.  One  was 
acid,  another  was  muddy ,  and  to  the  others  he 
had  objections  which  have  escaped  me.  Then, 
shaking  his  head  and  stretching  himself  at  ease 
in  the  coach,  and  smiling  with  much  complac¬ 
ency,  he  turned  to  me  and  said,  “I  look  upon 
myself  as  a  good  humoured  fellow.”  The  epithet 
fellow,  applied  to  the  great  Lexicographer,  the 
stately  Moralist,  the  masterly  Critick,  as  if  he 
had  been  Sam  Johnson,  a  mere  pleasant  com¬ 
panion,  was  highly  diverting;  and  this  light 
notion  of  himself  struck  me  with  wonder.  I  an¬ 
swered,  also  smiling,  “No,  no,  Sir;  that  will  not 
do.  You  are  good  natured,  but  not  good  hu¬ 
moured:  you  are  irascible.  You  have  not  pa¬ 
tience  with  folly  and  absurdity.  I  believe  you 
would  pardon  them,  if  there  were  time  to  de¬ 
precate  your  vengeance;  but  punishment  fol¬ 
lows  so  quick  after  sentence,  that  they  cannot 
escape.” 

I  had  brought  with  me  a  great  bundle  of 
Scotch  magazines  and  news-papers,  in  which 
his  Journey  to  the  Western  Islands  was  attacked  in 
every  mode;  and  I  read  a  great  part  of  them  to 
him,  knowing  they  would  afford  him  entertain¬ 
ment.  I  wish  the  writers  of  them  had  been  pres¬ 
ent:  they  would  have  been  sufficiently  vexed. 
One  ludicrous  imitation  of  his  style,  by  Mr. 
Maclaurin,  now  one  of  the  Scotch  Judges,  with 
the  title  of  Lord  Dreghorn,  was  distinguished  by 
him  from  the  rude  mass.  “This  (said  he,)  is  the 
best.  But  I  could  caricature  my  own  style  much 
better  myself.”  He  defended  his  remark  upon 
the  general  insufficiency  of  education  in  Scot¬ 
land;  and  confirmed  to  me  the  authenticity  of 
his  witty  saying  on  the  learning  of  the  Scotch; — 
“Their  learning  is  like  bread  in  a  besieged  town: 
every  man  gets  a  little,  but  no  man  gets  a  full 
meal.”  “There  is  (said  he,)  in  Scotland,  a  dif¬ 
fusion  of  learning,  a  certain  portion  of  it  widely 
and  thinly  spread.  A  merchant  there  has  as 
much  learning  as  one  of  their  clergy.” 

He  talked  of  Isaac  Walton’s  Lives,  which  was 
one  of  his  most  favourite  books.  Dr.  Donne’s 


[  1775 

Life,  he  said,  was  the  most  perfect  of  them.  He 
observed,  that  “it  was  wonderful  that  Walton, 
who  was  in  a  very  low  situation  in  life,  should 
have  been  familiarly  received  by  so  many  great 
men,  and  that  at  a  time  when  the  ranks  of  soci¬ 
ety  were  kept  more  separate  than  they  are  now.” 
He  supposed  that  Walton  had  then  given  up  his 
business  as  a  linendraper  and  sempster,  and  was 
only  an  authour;  and  added,  “that  he  was  a 
great  panegyrist.”  Boswell.  “No  quality  will 
get  a  man  more  friends  than  a  disposition  to 
admire  the  qualities  of  others.  I  do  not  mean 
flattery,  but  a  sincere  admiration.”  Johnson. 
“Nay,  Sir,  flattery  pleases  very  generally.  In  the 
first  place,  the  flatterer  may  think  what  he  says 
to  be  true:  but,  in  the  second  place,  whether  he 
thinks  so  or  not,  he  certainly  thinks  those  whom 
he  flatters  of  consequence  enough  to  be  flat¬ 
tered.” 

No  sooner  had  we  made  our  bow  to  Mr. 
Cambridge,  in  his  library,  than  Johnson  ran 
eagerly  to  one  side  of  the  room,  intent  on  poring 
over  the  backs  of  the  books.  Sir  Joshua  observed, 
(aside,)  “He  runs  to  the  books,  as  I  do  to  the 
pictures:  but  I  have  the  advantage.  I  can  see 
much  more  of  the  pictures  than  he  can  of  the 
books.”  Mr.  Cambridge,  upon  this,  politely 
said,  “Dr.  Johnson,  I  am  going,  with  your  par¬ 
don,  to  accuse  myself,  for  I  have  the  same  cus¬ 
tom  which  I  perceive  you  have.  But  it  seems 
odd  that  one  should  have  such  a  desire  to  look  at 
the  backs  of  books.”  Johnson,  ever  ready  for  con¬ 
test,  instantly  started  from  his  reverie,  wheeled 
about,  and  answered,  “Sir,  the  reason  is  very 
plain.  Knowledge  is  of  two  kinds.  We  know  a 
subject  ourselves,  or  we  know  where  we  can  find 
information  upon  it.  When  we  enquire  into  any 
subject,  the  first  thing  we  have  to  do  is  to  know 
what  books  have  treated  of  it.  This  leads  us  to 
look  at  catalogues,  and  the  backs  of  books  in 
libraries.”  Sir  Joshua  observed  to  me  the  extra¬ 
ordinary  promptitude  with  which  Johnson  flew 
upon  an  argument.  “Yes,  (said  I,)  he  has  no 
formal  preparation,  no  flourishing  with  his 
sword;  he  is  through  your  body  in  an  instant.” 

Johnson  was  here  solaced  with  an  elegant 
entertainment,  a  very  accomplished  family,  and 
much  good  company;  among  whom  was  Mr. 
Harris  of  Salisbury,  who  paid  him  many  com¬ 
pliments  on  his  Journey  to  the  Western  Islands. 

The  common  remark  as  to  the  utility  of  read¬ 
ing  history  being  made; — Johnson.  “We  must 
consider  how  very  little  history  there  is;  I  mean 
real  authentick  history.  That  certain  Kings 
reigned,  and  certain  battles  were  fought,  we  can 
depend  upon  as  true;  but  all  the  colouring,  all 


1775] 

the  philosophy  of  history  is  conjecture.”  Bos¬ 
well.  “Then,  Sir,  you  would  reduce  all  history 
to  no  better  than  an  almanack,  a  mere  chrono¬ 
logical  series  of  remarkable  events.”  Mr.  Gib¬ 
bon,  who  must  at  that  time  have  been  employed 
upon  his  History ,  of  which  he  published  the  first 
volume  in  the  following  year,  was  present;  but 
did  not  step  forth  in  defence  of  that  species  of 
writing.  He  probably  did  not  like  to  trust  him¬ 
self  with  Johnson  I1 

Johnson  observed,  that  the  force  of  our  early 
habits  was  so  great,  that  though  reason  ap¬ 
proved,  nay,  though  our  senses  relished  a  differ¬ 
ent  course,  almost  every  man  returned  to  them. 

I  do  not  believe  there  is  any  observation  upon 
human  nature  better  founded  than  this;  and,  in 
many  cases,  it  is  a  very  painful  truth;  for  where 
early  habits  have  been  mean  and  wretched,  the 
joy  and  elevation  resulting  from  better  modes  of 
life  must  be  damped  by  the  gloomy  conscious¬ 
ness  of  being  under  an  almost  inevitable  doom 
to  sink  back  into  a  situation  which  we  recollect 
with  disgust.  It  surely  may  be  prevented,  by 
constant  attention  and  unremitting  exertion  to 
establish  contrary  habits  of  superiour  efficacy. 

The  Beggar's  Opera ,  and  the  common  question, 
whether  it  was  pernicious  in  its  effects,  having 
been  introduced; — Johnson.  “As  to  this  matter, 
which  has  been  very  much  contested,  I  myself 
am  of  opinion,  that  more  influence  has  been 
ascribed  to  The  Beggar's  Opera ,  than  it  in  reality 
ever  had;  for  I  do  not  believe  that  any  man  was 
ever  made  a  rogue  by  being  present  at  its  repre¬ 
sentation.  At  the  same  time  I  do  not  deny  that 
it  may  have  some  influence,  by  making  the 
character  of  a  rogue  familiar,  and  in  some  degree 
pleasing.”2  Then  collecting  himself  as  it  were, 
to  give  a  heavy  stroke:  “There  is  in  it  such  a 
labefactation  of  all  principles,  as  may  be  injurious 
to  morality.” 

While  he  pronounced  this  response,  we  sat  in 
a  comical  sort  of  restraint,  smothering  a  laugh, 

xSee  ante ,  p.  253. 

2A  very  eminent  physician,  whose  discernment 
is  as  acute  and  penetrating  in  judging  of  the  hu¬ 
man  character  as  it  is  in  his  own  profession,  re¬ 
marked  once  at  a  club  where  I  was,  that  a  lively 
young  man,  fond  of  pleasure,  and  without  money, 
would  hardly  resist  a  solicitation  from  his  mistress 
to  go  upon  the  highway,  immediately  after  being 
present  at  the  representation  of  The  Beggar's  Opera. 
I  have  been  told  of  an  ingenious  observation  by 
Mr.  Gibbon,  that  “ The  Beggar's  Opera  may,  per¬ 
haps,  have  sometimes  increased  the  number  of 
highwaymen;  but  that  it  has  had  a  beneficial  effect 
in  refining  that  class  of  men,  making  them  less 
ferocious,  more  polite,  in  short,  more  like  gentle¬ 
men.”  Upon  this  Mr.  Courtenay  said,  that  “Gay 
was  the  Orpheus  of  highwaymen.” 


259 

which  we  were  afraid  might  burst  out.  In  his 
Life  of  Gay ,  he  has  been  still  more  decisive  as  to 
the  inefficiency  of  The  Beggar's  Opera  in  corrup¬ 
ting  society.  But  I  have  ever  thought  somewhat 
differently;  for,  indeed,  not  only  are  the  gaiety 
and  heroism  of  a  highwayman  very  captivating 
to  a  youthful  imagination,  but  the  arguments 
for  adventurous  depredation  are  so  plausible, 
the  allusions  so  lively,  and  the  contrasts  with  the 
ordinary  and  more  painful  modes  of  acquiring 
property  are  so  artfully  displayed,  that  it  re¬ 
quires  a  cool  and  strong  judgement  imposing 
an  aggregate:  yet,  I  own,  I  should  be  very  sorry 
to  have  The  Beggar's  Opera  suppressed;  for  there 
is  in  it  so  much  of  real  London  life,  so  much  bril¬ 
liant  wit,  and  such  a  variety  of  airs,  which,  from 
early  association  of  ideas,  engage,  soothe,  and 
enliven  the  mind,  that  no  performance  which 
the  theatre  exhibits,  delights  me  more. 

The  late  “ worthy ”  Duke  of  Queensberry,  as 
Thomson,  in  his  Seasons ,  justly  characterises 
him,  told  me,  that  when  Gay  first  shewed  him 
The  Beggar's  Opera ,  his  Grace’s  observation  was, 
“This  is  a  very  odd  thing,  Gay;  I  am  satisfied 
that  it  is  either  a  very  good  thing,  or  a  very  bad 
thing.”  It  proved  the  former,  beyond  the  warm¬ 
est  expectations  of  the  authour  or  his  friends. 
Mr.  Cambridge,  however,  shewed  us  to-day, 
that  there  was  good  reason  enough  to  doubt 
concerning  its  success.  He  was  told  by  Quin, 
that  during  the  first  night  of  its  appearance  it 
was  long  in  a  very  dubious  state;  that  there  was 
a  disposition  to  damn  it,  and  that  it  was  saved 
by  the  song, 

Oh  ponder  well!  be  not  severe ! 

the  audience  being  much  affected  by  the  inno¬ 
cent  looks  of  Polly,  when  she  came  to  those  two 
lines,  which  exhibit  at  once  a  painful  and  ridic¬ 
ulous  image, 

For  on  the  rope  that  hangs  my  Dear , 

Depends  poor  Polly's  life. 

Quin  himself  had  so  bad  an  opinion  of  it,  that 
he  refused  the  part  of  Captain  Macheath,  and 
gave  it  to  Walker,  who  acquired  great  celebrity 
by  his  grave  yet  animated  performance  of  it. 

We  talked  of  a  young  gentleman’s  marriage 
with  an  eminent  singer,  and  his  determination 
that  she  should  no  longer  sing  in  publick,  though 
his  father  was  very  earnest  she  should,  because 
her  talents  would  be  liberally  rewarded,  so  as  to 
make  her  a  good  fortune.  It  was  questioned 
whether  the  young  gentleman,  who  had  not  a 
shilling  in  the  world,  but  was  blest  with  very 
uncommon  talents,  was  not  foolishly  delicate, 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


BOSWELL 


260 

or  foolishly  proud,  and  his  father  truely  rational 
without  being  mean.  Johnson,  with  all  the  high 
spirit  of  a  Roman  senator,  exclaimed,  “He  re¬ 
solved  wisely  and  nobly  to  be  sure.  He  is  a  brave 
man.  Would  not  a  gentleman  be  disgraced  by 
having  his  wife  singing  publickly  for  hire?  No, 
Sir,  there  can  be  no  doubt  here.  I  know  not  if  I 
should  not  prepare  myself  for  a  publick  singer, 
as  readily  as  let  my  wife  be  one.” 

Johnson  arraigned  the  modern  politicks  of 
this  country,  as  entirely  devoid  of  all  principle 
of  whatever  kind.  “Politicks  (said  he,)  are  now 
nothing  more  than  means  of  rising  in  the  world. 
With  this  sole  view  do  men  engage  in  politicks, 
and  their  whole  conduct  proceeds  upon  it.  How 
different  in  that  respect  is  the  state  of  the  nation 
now  from  what  it  was  in  the  time  of  Charles  the 
First,  during  the  Usurpation,  and  after  the  Re¬ 
storation,  in  the  time  of  Charles  the  Second. 
Hudibras  affords  a  strong  proof  how  much  hold 
political  principles  had  then  upon  the  minds  of 
men.  There  is  in  Hudibras  a  great  deal  of  bullion 
which  will  always  last.  But  to  be  sure  the  bright¬ 
est  strokes  of  his  wit  owed  their  force  to  the 
impression  of  the  characters,  which  was  upon 
men’s  minds  at  the  time;  to  their  knowing  them, 
at  table  and  in  the  street;  in  short,  being  famil¬ 
iar  with  them;  and  above  all,  to  his  satire  being 
directed  against  those  whom  a  little  while  be¬ 
fore  they  had  hated  and  feared.  The  nation  in 
general  has  ever  been  loyal,  has  been  at  all  times 
attached  to  the  monarch,  though  a  few  daring 
rebels  have  been  wonderfully  powerful  for  a 
time.  The  murder  of  Charles  the  First  was  un¬ 
doubtedly  not  committed  with  the  approbation 
or  consent  of  the  people.  Had  that  been  the 
case,  Parliament  would  not  have  ventured  to 
consign  the  regicides  to  their  deserved  punish¬ 
ment.  And  we  know  what  exuberance  of  joy 
there  was  when  Charles  the  Second  was  re¬ 
stored.  If  Charles  the  Second  had  bent  all  his 
mind  to  it,  had  made  it  his  sole  object,  he  might 
have  been  as  absolute  as  Louis  the  Fourteenth.” 
A  gentleman  observed  he  would  have  done  no 
harm  if  he  had.  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  absolute 
princes  seldom  do  any  harm.  But  they  who  are 
governed  by  them  are  governed  by  chance. 
There  is  no  security  for  good  government.” 
Cambridge.  “There  have  been  many  sad  vic¬ 
tims  to  absolute  government.”  Johnson.  “So, 
Sir,  have  there  been  to  popular  factions.”  Bos¬ 
well.  “The  question  is,  which  is  worst,  one 
wild  beast  or  many?  ” 

Johnson  praised  The  Spectator,  particularly  the 
character  of  Sir  Roger  de  Coverley.  He  said, 
“Sir  Roger  did  not  die  a  violent  death,  as  has 


[  1775 

been  generally  fancied.  He  was  not  killed;  he 
died  only  because  others  were  to  die,  and  be¬ 
cause  his  death  afforded  an  opportunity  to 
Addison  for  some  very  fine  writing.  We  have 
the  example  of  Cervantes  making  Don  Quixote 
die. — I  never  could  see  why  Sir  Roger  is  repre¬ 
sented  as  a  little  cracked.  It  appears  to  me  that 
the  story  of  the  widow  was  intended  to  have 
something  superinduced  upon  it:  but  the  super¬ 
structure  did  not  come.” 

Somebody  found  fault  with  writing  verses  in 
a  dead  language,  maintaining  that  they  were 
merely  arrangements  of  so  many  words,  and 
laughed  at  the  Universities  of  Oxford  and  Cam¬ 
bridge,  for  sending  forth  collections  of  them  not 
only  in  Greek  and  Latin,  but  even  in  Syriac, 
Arabick,  and  other  more  unknown  tongues. 
Johnson.  “I  would  have  as  many  of  these  as 
possible;  I  would  have  verses  in  every  language 
that  there  are  the  means  of  acquiring.  Nobody 
imagines  that  an  University  is  to  have  at  once 
two  hundred  poets;  but  it  should  be  able  to 
show  two  hundred  scholars.  Pieresc’s  death  was 
lamented,  I  think,  in  forty  languages.  And  I 
would  have  had  at  every  coronation,  and  every 
death  of  a  King,  every  Gaudium ,  and  every  Luc- 
tus ,  University  verses,  in  as  many  languages  as 
can  be  acquired.  I  would  have  the  world  to  be 
thus  told,  ‘Here  is  a  school  where  every  thing 
may  be  learnt.’  ” 

Having  set  out  next  day  on  a  visit  to  the  Earl 
of  Pembroke,  at  Wilton,  and  to  my  friend,  Mr. 
Temple,1  at  Mamhead,  in  Devonshire,  and  not 
having  returned  to  town  till  the  second  of  May, 
I  did  not  see  Dr.  Johnson  for  a  considerable 
time,  and  during  the  remaining  part  of  my  stay 
in  London,  kept  very  imperfect  notes  of  his  con¬ 
versation,  which  had  I  according  to  my  usual 
custom  written  out  at  large  soon  after  the  time, 
much  might  have  been  preserved,  which  is  now 
irretrievably  lost.  I  can  now  only  record  some 
particular  scenes,  and  a  few  fragments  of  his 
memorabilia.  But  to  make  some  amends  for  my 
relaxation  of  diligence  in  one  respect,  I  have  to 
present  my  readers  with  arguments  upon  two 
law  cases,  with  which  he  favoured  me. 

On  Saturday,  the  sixth  of  May,  we  dined  by 
ourselves  at  the  Mitre,  and  he  dictated  to  me 
what  follows,  to  obviate  the  complaint  already 
mentioned,2  which  had  been  made  in  the  form 
of  an  action  in  the  Court  of  Session,  by  Dr. 
Memis,  of  Aberdeen,  that  in  the  same  transla¬ 
tion  of  a  charter  in  which  physicians  were  men¬ 
tioned,  he  was  called  Doctor  of  Medicine. 

JSee  ante ,  p.  244. 

2See  ante ,  p.  235. 


1775]  LIFE  Of  JOHNSON  261 


“There  are  but  two  reasons  for  which  a  phys¬ 
ician  can  decline  the  title  of  Doctor  of  Medicine , 
because  he  supposes  himself  disgraced  by  the 
doctorship,  or  supposes  the  doctorship  disgraced 
by  himself.  To  be  disgraced  by  a  title  which  he 
shares  in  common  with  every  illustrious  name 
of  his  profession,  with  Boerhaave,  with  Arbuth- 
not,  and  with  Cullen,  can  surely  diminish  no 
man’s  reputation.  It  is,  I  suppose,  to  the  doc¬ 
torate,  from  which  he  shrinks,  that  he  owes  his 
right  of  practising  physick.  A  doctor  of  Medicine 
is  a  physician  under  the  protection  of  the  laws, 
and  by  the  stamp  of  authority.  The  physician, 
who  is  not  a  Doctor,  usurps  a  profession,  and  is 
authorised  only  by  himself  to  decide  upon  health 
and  sickness,  and  life  and  death.  That  this  gen¬ 
tleman  is  a  Doctor,  his  diploma  makes  evident; 
a  diploma  not  obtruded  upon  him,  but  ob¬ 
tained  by  solicitation,  and  for  which  fees  were 
paid.  With  what  countenance  any  man  can  re¬ 
fuse  the  title  which  he  has  either  begged  or 
bought,  is  not  easily  discovered. 

“All  verbal  injury  must  comprise  in  it  either 
some  false  position,  or  some  unnecessary  decla¬ 
ration  of  defamatory  truth.  That  in  calling  him 
Doctor,  a  false  appellation  was  given  him,  he 
himself  will  not  pretend,  who  at  the  same  time 
that  he  complains  of  the  title,  would  be  of¬ 
fended  if  we  supposed  him  to  be  not  a  Doctor. 
If  the  title  of  Doctor  be  a  defamatory  truth,  it  is 
time  to  dissolve  our  colleges;  for  why  should  the 
publick  give  salaries  to  men  whose  approba¬ 
tion  is  reproach?  It  may  likewise  deserve  the 
notice  of  the  publick  to  consider  what  help  can 
be  given  to  the  professors  of  physick,  who  all 
share  with  this  unhappy  gentleman  the  igno¬ 
minious  appellation,  and  of  whom  the  very 
boys  in  the  street  are  not  afraid  to  say,  There  goes 
the  Doctor. 

“What  is  implied  by  the  term  Doctor  is  well 
known.  It  distinguishes  him  to  whom  it  is 
granted,  as  a  man  who  has  attained  such  knowl¬ 
edge  of  his  profession  as  qualifies  him  to  instruct 
others.  A  Doctor  of  Laws  is  a  man  who  can 
form  lawyers  by  his  precepts.  A  Doctor  of  Med¬ 
icine  is  a  man  who  can  teach  the  art  of  curing 
diseases.  There  is  an  old  axiom  which  no  man 
has  yet  thought  fit  to  deny,  Nil  dat  quod  non 
habet.  Upon  this  principle  to  be  Doctor  implies 
skill,  for  nemo  docet  quod  non  didicit .  In  England, 
whoever  practises  physick,  not  being  a  Doctor, 
must  practise  by  a  licence:  but  the  doctorate 
conveys  a  licence  in  itself. 

“By  what  accident  it  happened  that  he  and 
the  other  physicians  were  mentioned  in  different 
terms,  where  the  terms  themselves  were  equiva¬ 


lent,  or  where  in  effect  that  which  was  applied 
to  him  was  the  most  honourable,  perhaps  they 
who  wrote  the  paper  cannot  now  remember. 
Had  they  expected  a  lawsuit  to  have  been  the 
consequence  of  such  petty  variation,  I  hope 
they  would  have  avoided  it.1  But,  probably,  as 
they  meant  no  ill,  they  suspected  no  danger, 
and,  therefore,  consulted  only  what  appeared 
to  them  propriety  or  convenience.” 

A  few  days  afterwards  I  consulted  him  upon 
a  cause,  Paterson  and  others  against  Alexander  and 
others ,  which  had  been  decided  by  a  casting  vote 
in  the  Court  of  Session,  determining  that  the 
Corporation  of  Stirling  was  corrupt,  and  setting 
aside  the  election  of  some  of  their  officers,  be¬ 
cause  it  was  proved  that  three  of  the  leading 
men  who  influenced  the  majority  had  entered 
into  an  unjustifiable  compact,  of  which,  how¬ 
ever,  the  majority  were  ignorant.  He  dictated 
to  me,  after  a  little  consideration,  the  following 
sentences  upon  the  subject: 

“There  is  a  difference  between  majority  and 
superiority;  majority  is  applied  to  number,  and 
superiority  to  power;  and  power,  like  many 
other  things,  is  to  be  estimated  non  numero  sed 
pondere.  Now  though  the  greater  number  is  not 
corrupt,  the  greater  weight  is  corrupt,  so  that 
corruption  predominates  in  the  borough,  taken 
collectively ,  though,  perhaps,  taken  numerically , 
the  greater  part  may  be  uncorrupt.  That  bor¬ 
ough,  which  is  so  constituted  as  to  act  corruptly, 
is  in  the  eye  of  reason  corrupt,  whether  it  be  by 
the  uncontrollable  power  of  a  few,  or  by  an 
accidental  pravity  of  the  multitude.  The  objec¬ 
tion,  in  which  is  urged  the  injustice  of  making 
the  innocent  suffer  with  the  guilty,  is  an  objec¬ 
tion  not  only  against  society,  but  against  the 
possibility  of  society.  All  societies,  great  and 
small,  subsist  upon  this  condition;  that  as  the 
individuals  derive  advantages  from  union,  they 
may  likewise  suffer  inconveniences;  that  as  those 
who  do  nothing,  and  sometimes  those  who  do 
ill,  will  have  the  honours  and  emoluments  of 
general  virtue  and  general  prosperity,  so  those 
likewise  who  do  nothing,  or  perhaps  do  well, 
must  be  involved  in  the  consequences  of  pre¬ 
dominant  corruption.” 

This  in  my  opinion  was  a  very  nice  case; 
but  the  decision  was  affirmed  in  the  House  of 
Lords. 

On  Monday,  May  8,  we  went  together  and 
visited  the  mansions  of  Bedlam.  I  had  been  in- 

JIn  justice  to  Dr.  Memis,  though  I  was  against 
him  as  an  Advocate,  I  must  mention,  that  he  ob¬ 
jected  to  the  variation  very  earnestly,  before  the 
translation  was  printed  off. 


BOSWELL 


262 

formed  that  he  had  once  been  there  before  with 
Mr.  Wedderburne,  (now  Lord  Loughborough,) 
Mr.  Murphy,  and  Mr.  Foote;  and  I  had  heard 
Foote  give  a  very  entertaining  account  of  John¬ 
son’s  happening  to  have  his  attention  arrested 
by  a  man  who  was  very  furious,  and  who,  while 
beating  his  straw,  supposed  it  was  William  Duke 
of  Cumberland,  whom  he  was  punishing  for  his 
cruelties  in  Scotland,  in  1746.1  There  was  noth¬ 
ing  peculiarly  remarkable  this  day;  but  the  gen¬ 
eral  contemplation  of  insanity  was  very  affect¬ 
ing.  I  accompanied  him  home,  and  dined  and 
drank  tea  with  him. 

Talking  of  an  acquaintance  of  ours,  distin¬ 
guished  for  knowing  an  uncommon  variety  of 
miscellaneous  articles  both  in  antiquities  and 
polite  literature,  he  observed,  “You  know,  Sir, 
he  runs  about  with  little  weight  upon  his  mind.” 
And  talking  of  another  very  ingenious  gentle¬ 
man,  who  from  the  warmth  of  his  temper  was  at 
variance  with  many  of  his  acquaintance,  and 
wished  to  avoid  them,  he  said,  “Sir,  he  leads  the 
life  of  an  outlaw.” 

On  Friday,  May  12,  as  he  had  been  so  good 
as  to  assign  me  a  room  in  his  house,  where  I 
might  sleep  occasionally,  when  I  happened  to 
sit  with  him  to  a  late  hour,  I  took  possession  of 
it  this  night,  found  every  thing  in  excellent  or¬ 
der,  and  was  attended  by  honest  Francis  with  a 
most  civil  assiduity.  I  asked  Johnson  whether  I 
might  go  to  a  consultation  with  another  lawyer 
upon  Sunday,  as  that  appeared  to  me  to  be  do¬ 
ing  work  as  much  in  my  way,  as  if  an  artisan 
should  work  on  the  day  appropriated  for  reli¬ 
gious  rest.  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  when  you  are  of 
consequence  enough  to  oppose  the  practice  of 
consulting  upon  Sunday,  you  should  do  it:  but 
you  may  go  now.  It  is  not  criminal,  though  it  is 
not  what  one  should  do,  who  is  anxious  for  the 
preservation  and  increase  of  piety,  to  which  a 
peculiar  observance  of  Sunday  is  a  great  help. 
The  distinction  is  clear  between  what  is  of 
moral  and  what  is  of  ritual  obligation.” 

On  Saturday,  May  13, 1  breakfasted  with  him 
by  invitation,  accompanied  by  Mr.  Andrew 
Crosbie,  a  Scotch  Advocate,  whom  he  had  seen 
at  Edinburgh,  and  the  Hon.  Colonel  (now  Gen¬ 
eral)  Edward  Stopford,  brother  to  Lord  Cour- 
town,  who  was  desirous  of  being  introduced  to 
him.  His  tea  and  rolls  and  butter,  and  whole 
breakfast  apparatus  were  all  in  such  decorum, 
and  his  behaviour  was  so  courteous,  that  Col- 

2My  very  honourable  friend  General  Sir  George 
Howard,  who  served  in  the  Duke  of  Cumberland’s 
army,  has  assured  me  that  the  cruelties  were  not 
imputable  to  his  Royal  Highness. 


[ 1 775 

onel  Stopford  was  quite  surprized,  and  wonder¬ 
ed  at  his  having  heard  so  much  said  of  Johnson’s 
slovenliness  and  roughness.  I  have  preserved 
nothing  of  what  passed,  except  that  Crosbie 
pleased  him  much  by  talking  learnedly  of  al- 
chymy,  as  to  which  Johnson  was  not  a  positive 
unbeliever,  but  rather  delighted  in  considering 
what  progress  had  actually  been  made  in  the 
transmutation  of  metals,  what  near  approaches 
there  had  been  to  the  making  of  gold;  and  told 
us  that  it  was  affirmed,  that  a  person  in  the  Rus¬ 
sian  dominions  had  discovered  the  secret,  but 
died  without  revealing  it,  as  imagining  it  would 
be  prejudicial  to  society.  He  added,  that  it  was 
not  impossible  but  it  might  in  time  be  generally 
known. 

It  being  asked  whether  it  was  reasonable  for 
a  man  to  be  angry  at  another  whom  a  woman 
had  preferred  to  him; — Johnson.  “I  do  not  see, 
Sir,  that  it  is  reasonable  for  a  man  to  be  angry 
at  another,  whom  a  woman  has  preferred  to 
him:  but  angry  he  is,  no  doubt;  and  he  is  loath 
to  be  angry  at  himself.” 

Before  setting  out  for  Scotland  on  the  23rd,  I 
was  frequently  in  his  company  at  different  places, 
but  during  this  period  have  recorded  only  two 
remarks:  one  concerning  Garrick:  “He  has  not 
Latin  enough.  He  finds  out  the  Latin  by  the 
meaning  rather  than  the  meaning  by  the  Latin.” 
And  another  concerning  writers  of  travels,  who, 
he  observed,  “were  more  defective  than  any 
other  writers.” 

I  passed  many  hours  with  him  on  the  1 7th,  of 
which  I  find  all  my  memorial  is,  “much  laugh¬ 
ing.”  It  should  seem  he  had  that  day  been  in  a 
humour  for  jocularity  and  merriment,  and  up¬ 
on  such  occasions  I  never  knew  a  man  laugh 
more  heartily.  We  may  suppose,  that  the  high 
relish  of  a  state  so  different  from  his  habitual 
gloom,  produced  more  than  ordinary  exertions 
of  that  distinguishing  faculty  of  man,  which  has 
puzzled  philosophers  so  much  to  explain.  John¬ 
son’s  laugh  was  as  remarkable  as  any  circum¬ 
stance  in  his  manner.  It  was  a  kind  of  good  hu¬ 
moured  growl.  Tom  Davies  described  it  drolly 
enough:  “He  laughs  like  a  rhinoceros.” 

To  Bennet  Langton,  Esq,. 

Dear  Sir,  I  have  an  old  amanuensis  in  great 
distress.  I  have  given  what  I  think  I  can  give, 
and  begged  till  I  cannot  tell  where  to  beg  again. 
I  put  into  his  hands  this  morning  four  guineas. 
If  you  could  collect  three  guineas  more,  it  would 
clear  him  from  his  present  difficulty.  I  am,  Sir, 
your  most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

May  21,  1775 


1775]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  263 


To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  I  make  no  doubt  but  you  are  now 
safely  lodged  in  your  own  habitation,  and  have 
told  all  your  adventures  to  Mrs.  Boswell  and 
Miss  Veronica.  Pray  teach  Veronica  to  love  me. 
Bid  her  not  mind  mamma. 

Mrs.  Thrale  has  taken  cold,  and  been  very 
much  disordered,  but  I  hope  is  grown  well.  Mr. 
Langton  went  yesterday  to  Lincolnshire,  and 
has  invited  Nicolaida1  to  follow  him.  Beauclerk 
talks  of  going  to  Bath.  I  am  to  set  out  on  Mon¬ 
day;  so  there  is  nothing  but  dispersion. 

I  have  returned  Lord  Hailes’s  entertaining 
sheets,  but  must  stay  till  I  come  back  for  more, 
because  it  will  be  inconvenient  to  send  them  af¬ 
ter  me  in  my  vagrant  state. 

I  promised  Mrs.  Macaulay2  that  I  would  try 
to  serve  her  son  at  Oxford.  I  have  not  forgotten 
it,  nor  am  unwilling  to  perform  it.  If  they  desire 
to  give  him  an  English  education,  it  should  be 
considered  whether  they  cannot  send  him  for  a 
year  or  two  to  an  English  school.  If  he  comes  im¬ 
mediately  from  Scotland,  he  can  make  no  figure 
in  our  Universities.  The  schools  in  the  north,  I 
believe,  are  cheap;  and,  when  I  was  a  young 
man,  were  eminently  good. 

There  are  two  little  books  published  by  the 
Foulis,  Telemachus  and  Collins’s  Poems ,  each  a 
shilling:  I  would  be  glad  to  have  them. 

Make  my  compliments  to  Mrs.  Boswell,  though 
she  does  not  love  me.  You  see  what  perverse 
things  ladies  are,  and  how  little  fit  to  be  trusted 
with  feudal  estates.  When  she  mends  and 
loves  me,  there  may  be  more  hope  of  her 
daughters. 

I  will  not  send  compliments  to  my  friends  by 
name,  because  I  would  be  loath  to  leave  any  out 
in  the  enumeration.  Tell  them,  as  you  see  them, 
how  well  I  speak  of  Scotch  politeness,  and  Scotch 
hospitality,  and  Scotch  beauty,  and  of  every 
thing  Scotch,  but  Scotch  oat-cakes,  and  Scotch 
prejudices. 

Let  me  know  the  answer  of  Rasay,  and  the  de¬ 
cision  relating  to  Sir  Allan.3  I  am,  my  dearest 
Sir,  with  great  affection,  your  most  obliged,  and 
most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

May  27,  1775 

After  my  return  to  Scotland,  I  wrote  three 
letters  to  him,  from  which  I  extract  the  follow¬ 
ing  passages: 

“I  have  seen  Lord  Hailes  since  I  came  down. 
He  thinks  it  wonderful  that  you  are  pleased  to 
take  so  much  pains  in  revising  his  Annals .  I  told 
him  that  you  said  you  were  well  rewarded  by 

*A  learned  Greek. 

2 Wife  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  Kenneth  Macauley,  au- 
thour  of  The  History  of  St.  Kilda. 

3A  law-suit  carried  on  by  Sir  Allan  Maclean, 
Chief  of  his  Clan,  to  recover  certain  parts  of  his 
family  estates  from  the  Duke  of  Argyle. 


the  entertainment  which  you  had  in  reading 
them.” 

“There  has  been  a  numerous  flight  of  Hebri¬ 
deans  in  Edinburgh  this  summer,  whom  I  have 
been  happy  to  entertain  at  my  house.  Mr.  Don¬ 
ald  Macqueen4  and  Lord  Monboddo  supped 
with  me  one  evening.  They  joined  in  controvert¬ 
ing  your  proposition,  that  the  Gaelick  of  the 
Highlands  and  Isles  of  Scotland  was  not  writ¬ 
ten  till  of  late.” 

“My  mind  has  been  somewhat  dark  this  sum¬ 
mer.  I  have  need  of  your  warming  and  vivify¬ 
ing  rays;  and  I  hope  I  shall  have  them  frequent¬ 
ly.  I  am  going  to  pass  some  time  with  my  father 
at  Auchinleck.” 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  I  am  returned  from  the  annual 
ramble  into  the  middle  counties.  Having  seen 
nothing  I  had  not  seen  before,  I  have  nothing  to 
relate.  Time  has  left  that  part  of  the  island  few 
antiquities;  and  commerce  has  left  the  people 
no  singularities.  I  was  glad  to  go  abroad,  and, 
perhaps,  glad  to  come  home;  which  is,  in  other 
words,  I  was,  I  am  afraid,  weary  of  being  at 
home,  and  weary  of  being  abroad.  Is  not  this 
the  state  of  life?  But,  if  we  confess  this  weariness, 
let  us  not  lament  it,  for  all  the  wise  and  all  the 
good  say,  that  we  may  cure  it. 

For  the  black  fumes  which  rise  in  your  mind, 
I  can  prescribe  nothing  but  that  you  disperse 
them  by  honest  business  or  innocent  pleasure, 
and  by  reading,  sometimes  easy  and  sometimes 
serious.  Change  of  place  is  useful;  and  I  hope 
that  your  residence  at  Auchinleck  will  have 
many  good  effects.  .  .  . 

That  I  should  have  given  pain  to  Rasay,  I  am 
sincerely  sorry;  and  am  therefore  very  much 
pleased  that  he  is  no  longer  uneasy.  He  still 
thinks  that  I  have  represented  him  as  personally 
giving  up  the  Chieftainship.  I  meant  only  that 
it  was  no  longer  contested  between  the  two 
houses,  and  supposed  it  settled,  perhaps,  by  the 
cession  of  some  remote  generation,  in  the  house 
of  Dunvegan.  I  am  sorry  the  advertisement  was 
not  continued  for  three  or  four  times  in  the 
paper. 

That  Lord  Monboddo  and  Mr.  Macqueen 
should  controvert  a  position  contrary  to  the 
imaginary  interest  of  literary  or  national  preju¬ 
dice,  might  be  easily  imagined;  but  of  a  stand¬ 
ing  fact  there  ought  to  be  no  controversy:  If 
there  are  men  with  tails,  catch  an  homo  caudatus; 
if  there  was  writing  of  old  in  the  Highlands  or 
Hebrides,  in  the  Erse  language,  produce  the 
manuscripts.  Where  men  write,  they  will  write 
to  one  another,  and  some  of  their  letters,  in 

4A  very  learned  minister  in  the  Isle  of  Sky,  whom 
both  Dr.  Johnson  and  I  have  mentioned  with  re¬ 
gard. 


264 

families  studious  of  their  ancestry,  will  be  kept. 
In  Wales  there  are  many  manuscripts. 

I  have  now  three  parcels  of  Lord  Hailes’s  his¬ 
tory,  which  I  purpose  to  return  all  the  next 
week:  that  his  respect  for  my  little  observations 
should  keep  his  work  in  suspense,  makes  one  of 
the  evils  of  my  journey.  It  is  in  our  language, 
I  think,  a  new  mode  of  history,  which  tells  all 
that  is  wanted,  and,  I  suppose,  all  that  is  known 
without  laboured  splendour  of  language,  or  af¬ 
fected  subtilty  of  conjecture  The  exactness  of 
his  dates  raises  my  wonder.  He  seems  to  have 
the  closeness  of  Henault  without  his  constraint. 

Mrs.  Thrale  was  so  entertained  with  your 
Journal J  that  she  almost  read  herself  blind.  She 
has  a  great  regard  for  you. 

Of  Mrs.  Boswell,  though  she  knows  in  her 
heart  that  she  does  not  love  me,  I  am  always 
glad  to  hear  any  good,  and  hope  that  she  and 
the  little  dear  ladies  will  have  neither  sickness 
nor  any  other  affliction.  But  she  knows  that  she 
does  not  care  what  becomes  of  me,  and  for  that 
she  may  be  sure  that  I  think  her  very  much  to 
blame. 

Never,  my  dear  Sir,  do  you  take  it  into  your 
head  to  think  that  I  do  not  love  you;  you  may 
settle  yourself  in  full  confidence  both  of  my  love 
and  my  esteem;  I  love  you  as  a  kind  man,  I 
value  you  as  a  worthy  man,  and  hope  in  time  to 
reverence  you  as  a  man  of  exemplary  piety.  I 
hold  you,  as  Hamlet  has  it,  “in  my  heart  of 
hearts,”  and  therefore,  it  is  little  to  say,  that  I 
am,  Sir,  your  affectionate  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

London,  Aug.  27,  1775 

To  the  Same 

Sir,  If  in  these  papers2  there  is  little  altera¬ 
tion  attempted,  do  not  suppose  me  negligent. 
I  have  read  them  perhaps  more  closely  than 
the  rest;  but  I  find  nothing  worthy  of  an  ob¬ 
jection. 

Write  to  me  soon,  and  write  often,  and  tell  me 
all  your  honest  heart.  I  am,  Sir,  yours  affec¬ 
tionately. 

Sam.  Johnson 

Aug.  30,  1775 

To  the  Same 

My  Dear  Sir,  I  now  write  to  you,  lest  in 
some  of  your  freaks  and  humours  you  should 
fancy  yourself  neglected.  Such  fancies  I  must 
entreat  you  never  to  admit,  at  least  never  to  in¬ 
dulge:  for  my  regard  for  you  is  so  radicated  and 
fixed,  that  it  is  become  part  of  my  mind,  and 
cannot  be  effaced  but  by  some  cause  uncom¬ 
monly  violent;  therefore,  whether  I  write  or  not, 
set  your  thoughts  at  rest.  I  now  write  to  tell  you 

*My  Journal  of  a  Tour  to  the  Hebrides ,  which  that 
lady  read  in  the  original  manuscript. 

2Another  parcel  of  Lord  Hailes’s  Annals  of  Scot - 
land. 


[  1775 

that  I  shall  not  very  soon  write  again,  for  I  am 
to  set  out  to-morrow  on  another  journey.  .  .  . 

Your  friends  are  all  well  at  Streatham,  and  in 
Leicesterfields.3  Make  my  compliments  to  Mrs. 
Boswell,  if  she  is  in  good  humour  with  me.  I  am, 
Sir,  &c. 

Sam.  Johnson 

September  14,  1775 

What  he  mentions  in  such  light  terms  as,  “I 
am  to  set  out  to-morrow  on  another  journey,”  I 
soon  afterwards  discovered  was  no  less  than  a 
tour  to  France  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Thrale.  This 
was  the  only  time  in  his  life  that  he  went  upon 
the  Continent. 

To  Mr.  Robert  Levet 

Sept.  18,  1775.  Calais 

Dear  Sir,  We  are  here  in  France,  after  a  very 
pleasing  passage  of  no  more  than  six  hours.  I 
know  not  when  I  shall  write  again,  and  there¬ 
fore  I  write  now,  though  you  cannot  suppose 
that  I  have  much  to  say.  You  have  seen  France 
yourself.  From  this  place  we  are  going  to  Rouen, 
and  from  Rouen  to  Paris,  where  Mr.  Thrale  de¬ 
signs  to  stay  about  five  or  six  weeks.  We  have  a 
regular  recommendation  to  the  English  resi¬ 
dent,  so  we  shall  not  be  taken  for  vagabonds. 
We  think  to  go  one  way  and  return  another, 
and  for  [?  see]  as  much  as  we  can.  I  will  try  to 
speak  a  little  French;  I  tried  hitherto  but  little, 
but  I  spoke  sometimes.  If  I  heard  better,  I  sup¬ 
pose  I  should  learn  faster.  I  am,  Sir,  your  hum¬ 
ble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

To  the  Same 

Paris,  Oct.  22,  1775 

Dear  Sir,  We  are  still  here,  commonly  very 
busy  in  looking  about  us.  We  have  been  to-day 
at  Versailles.  You  have  seen  it,  and  I  shall  not 
describe  it.  We  came  yesterday  from  Fontain- 
bleau,  where  the  Court  is  now.  We  went  to  see 
the  King  and  Queen  at  dinner,  and  the  Queen 
was  so  impressed  by  Miss,4  that  she  sent  one  of 
the  Gentlemen  to  enquire  who  she  was.  I  find 
all  true  that  you  have  ever  told  me  of  Paris.  Mr. 
Thrale  is  very  liberal,  and  keeps  us  two  coaches, 
and  a  very  fine  table;  but  I  think  our  cookery 
very  bad.  Mrs.  Thrale  got  into  a  convent  of 
English  nuns,  and  I  talked  with  her  through  the 
grate,  and  I  am  very  kindly  used  by  the  English 
Benedictine  friars.  But  upon  the  whole  I  cannot 
make  much  acquaintance  here;  and  though  the 
churches,  palaces,  and  some  private  houses  are 
very  magnificent,  there  is  no  very  great  pleasure 
after  having  seen  many,  in  seeing  more;  at  least 
the  pleasure,  whatever  it  be,  must  some  time 
have  an  end,  and  we  are  beginning  to  think 

Where  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  lived. 

4Miss  Thrale. 


BOSWELL 


1775]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  265 


when  we  shall  come  home.  Mr.  Thrale  calculates 
that,  as  we  left  Streatham  on  the  fifteenth  of 
September,  we  shall  see  it  again  about  the  fif¬ 
teenth  of  November. 

I  think  I  had  not  been  on  this  side  of  the  sea 
five  days  before  I  found  a  sensible  improve¬ 
ment  in  my  health.  I  ran  a  race  in  the  rain 
this  day,  and  beat  Baretti.  Baretti  is  a  fine  fel¬ 
low,  and  speaks  French,  I  think,  quite  as  well 
as  English. 

Make  my  compliments  to  Mrs.  Williams;  and 
give  my  love  to  Francis;  and  tell  my  friends  that 
I  am  not  lost.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  affectionate 
humble,  &c. 

Sam.  Johnson 

To  Dr.  Samuel  Johnson 

Edinburgh,  Oct.  24,  1775 

My  Dear  Sir,  If  I  had  not  been  informed 
that  you  were  at  Paris,  you  should  have  had  a 
letter  from  me  by  the  earliest  opportunity,  an¬ 
nouncing  the  birth  of  my  son,  on  the  9th  in¬ 
stant;  I  have  named  him  Alexander,  after  my 
father.  I  now  write,  as  I  suppose  your  fellow 
traveller,  Mr.  Thrale,  will  return  to  London 
this  week,  to  attend  his  duty  in  Parliament,  and 
that  you  will  not  stay  behind  him. 

I  send  another  parcel  of  Lord  Hailes’s  Annals. 
I  have  undertaken  to  solicit  you  for  a  favour  to 
him,  which  he  thus  requests  in  a  letter  to  me:  “I 
intend  soon  to  give  you  The  Life  of  Robert  Bruce , 
which  you  will  be  pleased  to  transmit  to  Dr. 
Johnson.  I  wish  that  you  could  assist  me  in  a 
fancy  which  I  have  taken,  of  getting  Dr.  John¬ 
son  to  draw  a  character  of  Robert  Bruce,  from 
the  account  that  I  give  of  that  prince.  If  he 
finds  materials  for  it  in  my  work,  it  will  be  a 
proof  that  I  have  been  fortunate  in  selecting  the 
most  striking  incidents.” 

I  suppose  by  The  Life  of  Robert  Bruce ,  his 
Lordship  means  that  part  of  his  Annals  which  re¬ 
lates  the  history  of  that  prince,  and  not  a  sepa¬ 
rate  work. 

Shall  we  have  A  Journey  to  Paris  from  you  in 
the  winter?  You  will,  I  hope,  at  any  rate  be 
kind  enough  to  give  me  some  account  of  your 
French  travels  very  soon,  for  I  am  very  impa¬ 
tient.  What  a  different  scene  have  you  viewed 
this  autumn,  from  that  which  you  viewed  in  au¬ 
tumn  1 773 !  I  ever  am,  my  dear  Sir,  your  much 
obliged  and  affectionate  humble  servant, 

James  Boswell 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq,. 

Dear  Sir,  I  am  glad  that  the  young  Laird  is 
born,  and  an  end,  as  I  hope,  put  to  the  only  dif¬ 
ference  that  you  can  ever  have  with  Mrs.  Bos¬ 
well.1  I  know  that  she  does  not  love  me;  but  I 
intend  to  persist  in  wishing  her  well  till  I  get  the 
better  of  her. 

xThis  alludes  to  my  old  feudal  principle  of  pre¬ 
ferring  male  to  female  succession. 


Paris  is,  indeed,  a  place  very  different  from 
the  Hebrides,  but  it  is  to  a  hasty  traveller  not  so 
fertile  of  novelty,  nor  affords  so  many  oppor¬ 
tunities  of  remark.  I  cannot  pretend  to  tell  the 
publick  any  thing  of  a  place  better  known  to 
many  of  my  readers  than  to  myself.  We  can  talk 
of  it  when  we  meet. 

I  shall  go  next  week  to  Streatham,  from  whence 
I  purpose  to  send  a  parcel  of  the  History  every 
post.  Concerning  the  character  of  Bruce,  I  can 
only  say,  that  I  do  not  see  any  great  reason  for 
writing  it;  but  I  shall  not  easily  deny  what  Lord 
Hailes  and  you  concur  in  desiring. 

I  have  been  remarkably  healthy  all  the  jour¬ 
ney,  and  hope  you  and  your  family  have  known 
only  that  trouble  and  danger  which  has  so  hap¬ 
pily  terminated.  Among  all  the  congratulations 
that  you  may  receive,  I  hope  you  believe  none 
more  warm  or  sincere,  than  those  of,  dear  Sir, 
your  most  affectionate, 

Sam.  Johnson 

November  16,  1775 

To  Mrs.  Lucy  Porter,  in  Lichfield2 

Dear  Madam,  This  week  I  came  home  from 
Paris.  I  have  brought  you  a  little  box,  which  I 
thought  pretty;  but  I  know  not  whether  it  is 
properly  a  snuff-box,  or  a  box  for  some  other 
use.  I  will  send  it,  when  I  can  find  an  oppor¬ 
tunity.  I  have  been  through  the  whole  journey 
remarkably  well.  My  fellow-travellers  were  the 
same  whom  you  saw  at  Lichfield,  only  we  took 
Baretti  with  us.  Paris  is  not  so  fine  a  place  as  you 
would  expect.  The  palaces  and  churches,  how¬ 
ever,  are  very  splendid  and  magnificent;  and 
what  would  please  you,  there  are  many  very 
fine  pictures;  but  I  do  not  think  their  way  of  life 
commodious  or  pleasant. 

Let  me  know  how  your  health  has  been  all 
this  while.  I  hope  the  fine  summer  has  given 
you  strength  sufficient  to  encounter  the  win¬ 
ter. 

Make  my  compliments  to  all  my  friends;  and, 
if  your  fingers  will  let  you,  write  to  me,  or  let 
your  maid  write,  if  it  be  troublesome  to  you.  I 
am,  dear  Madam,  your  most  affectionate  hum¬ 
ble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

November  16,  1775 

To  the  Same 

Dear  Madam,  Some  weeks  ago  I  wrote  to 
you,  to  tell  you  that  I  was  just  come  home  from 
a  ramble,  and  hoped  that  I  should  have  heard 
from  you.  I  am  afraid  winter  has  laid  hold  on 
your  fingers,  and  hinders  you  from  writing. 
However,  let  somebody  write,  if  you  cannot, 
and  tell  me  how  you  do,  and  a  little  of  what  has 

2There  can  be  no  doubt  that  many  years  pre¬ 
vious  to  1775  he  corresponded  with  this  lady,  who 
was  his  step-daughter,  but  none  of  his  earlier  let¬ 
ters  to  her  have  been  preserved. 


266  BOSWELL  [  1 775 


happened  at  Lichfield  among  our  friends.  I 
hope  you  are  all  well. 

When  1  was  in  France,  I  thought  myself  grow¬ 
ing  young,  but  am  afraid  that  cold  weather  will 
take  part  of  my  new  vigour  from  me.  Let  us, 
however,  take  care  of  ourselves,  and  lose  no 
part  of  our  health  by  negligence. 

I  never  knew  whether  you  received  the  Com¬ 
mentary  on  the  New  Testament  and  the  Travels , 
and  the  glasses. 

Do,  my  dear  love,  write  to  me;  and  do  not  let 
us  forget  each  other.  This  is  the  season  of  good 
wishes,  and  I  wish  you  all  good.  I  have  not  late¬ 
ly  seen  Mr.  Porter,1  nor  heard  of  him.  Is  he 
with  you? 

Be  pleased  to  make  my  compliments  to  Mrs. 
Adey,  and  Mrs.  Cobb,  and  all  my  friends;  and 
when  I  can  do  any  good,  let  me  know.  I  am, 
dear  Madam,  yours  most  affectionately, 

Sam.  Johnson 

December ,  1775 

It  is  to  be  regretted  that  he  did  not  write  an 
account  of  his  travels  in  France;  for  as  he  is  re¬ 
ported  to  have  once  said,  that  “he  could  write 
the  Life  of  a  Broomstick,”  so,  notwithstanding 
so  many  former  travellers  have  exhausted  al¬ 
most  every  subject  for  remark  in  that  great  king¬ 
dom,  his  very  accurate  observation,  and  pecul¬ 
iar  vigour  of  thought  and  illustration,  would 
have  produced  a  valuable  work.  During  his  vis¬ 
it  to  it,  which  lasted  but  about  two  months,  he 
wrote  notes  or  minutes  of  what  he  saw.  He  prom¬ 
ised  to  show  me  them,  but  I  neglected  to  put 
him  in  mind  of  it;  and  the  greatest  part  of  them 
has  been  lost,  or  perhaps,  destroyed  in  a  precip¬ 
itate  burning  of  his  papers  a  few  days  before  his 
death,  which  must  ever  be  lamented.  One  small 
paper-book,  however,  entitled  “France  II,”  has 
been  preserved,  and  is  in  my  possession.  It  is  a 
diurnal  register  of  his  life  and  observations,  from 
the  10th  of  October  to  the  4th  of  November,  in¬ 
clusive,  being  twenty-six  days,  and  shews  an  ex¬ 
traordinary  attention  to  various  minute  partic¬ 
ulars.  Being  the  only  memorial  of  this  tour  that 
remains,  my  readers,  I  am  confident,  will  pe¬ 
ruse  it  with  pleasure,  though  his  notes  are  very 
short,  and  evidently  written  only  to  assist  his 
own  recollection. 

“Oct.  10.  Tuesday.  We  saw  the  Ecole  Mill - 
taire,  in  which  one  hundred  and  fifty  young  boys 
are  educated  for  the  army.  They  have  arms  of 
different  sizes,  according  to  the  age; — flints  of 
wood.  The  building  is  very  large,  but  nothing 
fine,  except  the  council-room.  The  French  have 
large  squares  in  the  windows; — they  make  good 
iron  palisades.  Their  meals  are  gross. 

^on  of  Mrs.  Johnson,  by  her  first  husband. 


“We  visited  the  Observatory,  a  large  build¬ 
ing  of  a  great  height.  The  upper  stones  of  the 
parapet  very  large,  but  not  cramped  with  iron. 
The  flat  on  the  top  is  very  extensive;  but  on  the 
insulated  part  there  is  no  parapet.  Though  it 
was  broad  enough,  I  did  not  care  to  go  upon  it. 
Maps  were  printing  in  one  of  the  rooms. 

“We  walked  to  a  small  convent  of  the  Fathers 
of  the  Oratory.  In  the  reading-desk  of  the  refec¬ 
tory  lay  the  lives  of  the  Saints. 

“Oct.  11.  Wednesday.  We  went  to  see  Hotel 
de  Chatlois ,  a  house  not  very  large,  but  very  ele¬ 
gant.  One  of  the  rooms  was  gilt  to  a  degree  that 
I  never  saw  before.  The  upper  part  for  servants 
and  their  masters  was  pretty. 

“Thence  we  went  to  Mr.  Monville’s,  a  house 
divided  into  small  apartments,  furnished  with 
effeminate  and  minute  elegance. — Porphyry. 

“Thence  we  went  to  St.  Roque’s  church, 
which  is  very  large; — the  lower  part  of  the  pil¬ 
lars  incrusted  with  marble. — Three  chapels  be¬ 
hind  the  high  altar; — the  last  a  mass  of  low 
arches. — Altars,  I  believe,  all  round. 

“We  passed  through  Place  de  Vendome ,  a  fine 
square,  about  as  big  as  Hanover-square. — In¬ 
habited  by  the  high  families. — Lewis  XIV  on 
horse-back  in  the  middle. 

“Monville  is  the  son  of  a  farmer-general.  In 
the  house  of  Chatlois  is  a  room  furnished  with 
japan,  fitted  up  in  Europe. 

“We  dined  with  Boccage,  the  Marquis  Blan- 
chetti,  and  his  lady. — The  sweetmeats  taken  by 
the  Marchioness  Blanchetti,  after  observing  that 
they  were  dear. — Mr.  Le  Roy,  Count  Manucci, 
the  Abbe,  the  Prior,  and  Father  Wilson,  who 
staid  with  me,  till  I  took  him  home  in  the  coach. 

“Bathiani  is  gone. 

“The  French  have  no  laws  for  the  mainte¬ 
nance  of  their  poor. — Monk  not  necessarily  a 
priest. — Benedictines  rise  at  four;  are  at  church 
an  hour  and  half;  at  church  again  half  an  hour 
before,  half  an  hour  after,  dinner;  and  again 
from  half  an  hour  after  seven  to  eight.  They  may 
sleep  eight  hours. — Bodily  labour  wanted  in 
monasteries. 

“The  poor  taken  to  hospitals,  and  miserably 
kept. — Monks  in  the  convent  fifteen: — account¬ 
ed  poor. 

“Oct.  12.  Thursday.  We  went  to  the  Gobe¬ 
lins. — Tapestry  makes  a  good  picture; — imi¬ 
tates  flesh  exactly. — One  piece  with  a  gold 
ground; — the  birds  not  exactly  coloured. — 
Thence  we  went  to  the  King’s  cabinet; — very 
neat,  not,  perhaps,  perfect. — Gold  ore. — Can- 
dlesofthecandle-tree. — Seeds. — Woods.  Thence 
to  Gagnier’s  house,  where  I  saw  rooms  nine, 


1775]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  267 


furnished  with  a  profusion  of  wealth  and  ele¬ 
gance  which  I  never  had  seen  before. — Vases. 
— Pictures. — The  Dragon  china. — The  lustre 
said  to  be  of  crystal,  and  to  have  cost  3,5001. — 
The  whole  furniture  said  to  have  cost  125,0001. 
— Damask  hangings  covered  with  pictures. — 
Porphyry. — This  house  struck  me. — Then  we 
waited  on  the  ladies  to  Monville’s. — Captain 
Irwin  with  us.1 — Spain.  County  towns  all  beg¬ 
gars. — At  Dijon  he  could  not  find  the  way  to 
Orleans. — Cross  roads  of  France  very  bad. — 
Five  soldiers. — Woman. — Soldiers  escaped. — 
— The  Colonel  would  not  lose  five  men  for  the 
death  of  one  woman. — The  magistrate  cannot 
seize  a  soldier  but  by  the  Colonel’s  permission. 
— Good  inn  at  Nismes. — Moors  of  Barbary  fond 
of  Englishmen. — Gibraltar  eminently  healthy; 
— It  has  beef  from  Barbary; — There  is  a  large 
garden. — Soldiers  sometimes  fall  from  the  rock. 

“Oct.  13.  Friday.  I  staid  at  home  all  day,  on¬ 
ly  went  to  find  the  Prior,  who  was  not  at  home. 
— I  read  something  in  Canus. 2 — Nec  admiror> 
nec  multum  laudo . 

“Oct.  14.  Saturday.  We  went  to  the  house  of 
Mr.  Argenson,  which  was  almost  wainscotted 
with  looking-glasses,  and  covered  with  gold. — 
The  ladies’  closet  wainscotted  with  large  squares 
of  glass  over  painted  paper.  They  always  place 
mirrours  to  reflect  their  rooms. 

“Then  we  went  to  Julien’s,  the  Treasurer  of 
the  Clergy: — 30,0001.  a  year. — The  house  has 
no  very  large  room,  but  is  set  with  mirrours, 
and  covered  with  gold. — Books  of  wood  here, 
and  in  another  library. 

“AtD*******’s  j  looked  into  the  books  in  the 
lady’s  closet,  and,  in  contempt,  shewed  them 
to  Mr.  T. — Prince  Titi ;  Bibl.  des  Fees ,  and  other 
books. — She  was  offended,  and  shut  up,  as  we 
heard  afterwards,  her  apartment. 

“Then  we  went  to  Julien  Le  Roy,  the  King’s 
watchmaker,  a  man  of  character  in  his  business, 
who  shewed  a  small  clock  made  to  find  the  lon¬ 
gitude. — A  decent  man. 

“Afterwards  we  saw  the  Palais  Marchand ,  and 
the  Courts  of  Justice,  civil  and  criminal. — Que¬ 
ries  on  the  Sellette . — This  building  has  the  old 
Gothick  passages,  and  a  great  appearance  of 
antiquity. — Three  hundred  prisoners  sometimes 
in  the  gaol. 

“Much  disturbed;  hope  no  ill  will  be.3 

1The  rest  of  this  paragraph  appears  to  be  a  mi¬ 
nute  of  what  was  told  by  Captain  Irwin. 

2Melchior  Canus,  a  celebrated  Spanish  Domin¬ 
ican,  who  died  at  Toledo,  in  1560.  He  wrote  a 
treatise  De  Locis  Theologicis,  in  twelve  books. 

3This  passage,  which  so  many  think  superstitious, 
reminds  me  of  Archbishop  Laud’s  Diary. 


“In  the  afternoon  I  visited  Mr.  Freron  the 
journalist.  He  spoke  Latin  very  scantily,  but 
seemed  to  understand  me. — His  house  not  splen¬ 
did,  but  of  commodious  size. — His  family,  wife, 
son,  and  daughter,  not  elevated  but  decent. — I 
was  pleased  with  my  reception. — He  is  to  trans¬ 
late  my  books,  which  I  am  to  send  him  with 
notes. 

“Oct.  15.  Sunday.  At  Choisi,  a  royal  palace 
on  the  banks  of  the  Seine,  about  7  m.  from 
Paris. — The  terrace  noble  along  the  river. — 
The  rooms  numerous  and  grand,  but  not  dis¬ 
criminated  from  other  palaces. — The  chapel 
beautiful,  but  small. — China  globes. — Inlaid 
tables.  —  Labyrinth.  —  Sinking  table.  —  Toilet 
tables. 

“Oct.  16.  Monday.  The  Palais  Royal  very 
grand,  large,  and  lofty. — A  very  great  collec¬ 
tion  of  pictures. — Three  of  Raphael. — Two  Ho¬ 
ly  Family. — One  small  piece  of  M.  Angelo. — 
One  room  of  Rubens — I  thought  the  pictures  of 
Raphael  fine. 

“The  Thuilleries. — Statues. — Venus. — iEn. 
and  Anchises  in  his  arms. — Nilus. — Many  more. 
The  walks  not  open  to  mean  persons. — Chairs 
at  night  hired  for  two  sous  apiece. — Pont  tour - 
nant. 

“Austin  Nuns. —Grate. — Mrs.  Fermor,  Ab¬ 
bess. — She  knew  Pope,  and  thought  him  dis¬ 
agreeable. — Mrs.  has  many  books; — has 

seen  life. — Their  frontlet  disagreeable. — Their 
hood. — Their  life  easy. — Rise  about  five;  hour 
and  half  in  chapel. — Dine  at  ten. — Another 
hour  and  half  at  chapel;  half  an  hour  about 
three,  and  half  an  hour  more  at  seven: — four 
hours  in  chapel. — A  large  garden. — Thirteen 
pensioners. — Teacher  complained. 

“At  the  Boulevards  saw  nothing,  yet  was  glad 
to  be  there. — Rope-dancing  and  farce. — Egg 
dance. 

“N.  [Note.]  Near  Paris,  whether  on  week¬ 
days  or  Sundays,  the  roads  empty. 

“Oct.  17.  Tuesday.  At  the  Palais  Marchand 
I  bought 

A  snuff-box,  24  L. 

-  6 

Table  book  15 

Scissars  3  p  [pair]  18 

63 — 2  12  6 

“We  heard  the  lawyers  plead. — N.  As  many 
killed  at  Paris  as  there  are  days  in  the  year. 
Chambre  de  question. — Tournelle  at  the  Palais 
Marchand. — An  old  venerable  building. 

“The  Palais  Bourbon,  belonging  to  the  Prince 
of  Conde.  Only  one  small  wing  shewn; — lofty; 


268  BOSWELL  [1775 


— splendid; — gold  and  glass. — The  battles  of 
the  great  Conde  are  painted  in  one  of  the  rooms. 
The  present  Prince  a  grandsire  at  thirty-nine. 

“The  sight  of  palaces,  and  other  great  build¬ 
ings,  leaves  no  very  distinct  images,  unless  to 
those  who  talk  of  them.  As  I  entered,  my  wife 
was  in  my  mind:1  she  would  have  been  pleased. 
Having  now  nobody  to  please,  I  am  little  pleased. 

“N.  In  France  there  is  no  middle  rank. 

“So  many  shops  open,  that  Sunday  is  little 
distinguished  at  Paris. — The  palaces  of  Louvre 
and  Thuilleries  granted  out  in  lodgings. 

“In  the  Palais  de  Bourbon ,  gilt  globes  of  metal 
at  the  fire-place. 

“The  French  beds  commended. — Much  of 
the  marble,  only  paste. 

“The  Colosseum  a  mere  wooden  building,  at 
least  much  of  it. 

“Oct.  18.  Wednesday.  We  went  to  Fontaine¬ 
bleau,  which  we  found  a  large  mean  town, 
crowded  with  people. — The  forest  thick  with 
woods,  very  extensive. — Manucci  secured  us 
lodgings. — The  appearance  of  the  country  pleas¬ 
ant. — No  hills,  few  streams,  only  one  hedge. — I 
remember  no  chapels  nor  crosses  on  the  road. — 
Pavement  still,  and  rows  of  trees. 

“N.  Nobody  but  mean  people  walk  in  Paris. 

“Oct.  19.  Thursday.  At  Court,  we  saw  the 
apartments; — theKing’sbed-chamberandcoun- 
cil-chamber  extremely  splendid — Persons  of  all 
ranks  in  the  external  rooms  through  which  the 
family  passes: — servants  and  masters. — Brunet 
with  us  the  second  time. 

“The  introductor  came  to  us; — civil  to  me. — 
Presenting. — I  had  scruples. — Not  necessary. — 
We  went  and  saw  the  King  and  Queen  at  din¬ 
ner. — We  saw  the  other  ladies  at  dinner — Ma¬ 
dame  Elizabeth,  with  the  Princess  of  Guimene. 
— At  night  we  went  to  a  comedy.  I  neither  saw 
nor  heard. — Drunken  woman. — Mrs.  Th.  pre¬ 
ferred  one  to  the  other. 

“Oct.  20.  Friday.  We  saw  the  Queen  mount 
in  the  forest. — Brown  habit;  rode  aside:  one 
lady  rode  aside. — The  Queen’s  horse  light  grey; 
martingale. — She  galloped. — We  then  went  to 
the  apartments,  and  admired  them. — Then  wan¬ 
dered  through  the  palace.  —  In  the  passages, 
stalls  and  shops. — Painting  in  Fresco  by  a  great 
master,  worn  out. — We  saw  the  King’s  horses 
and  dogs. — The  dogs  almost  all  English. — De¬ 
generate. 

“The  horses  not  much  commended. — The 
stables  cool;  the  kennel  filthy. 

1His  tender  affection  for  his  departed  wife,  of 
which  there  are  many  evidences  in  his  Prayers  and 
Meditations ,  appears  very  feelingly  in  this  passage. 


“At  night  the  ladies  went  to  the  opera.  I  re¬ 
fused,  but  should  have  been  welcome. 

“The  King  fed  himself  with  his  left  hand 
as  we. 

“Saturday,  21.  In  the  night  I  got  ground. — 
We  came  home  to  Paris. — I  think  we  did  not 
see  the  chapel. — Tree  broken  by  the  wind. — 
The  French  chairs  made  all  of  boards  painted. 

“N.  Soldiers  at  the  court  of  justice. — Soldiers 
not  amenable  to  the  magistrates. — Dijon  wom¬ 
an.2 

“Faggots  in  the  palace. — Every  thing  sloven¬ 
ly,  except  in  the  chief  rooms. — Trees  in  the 
roads,  some  tall,  none  old,  many  very  young 
and  small. 

“Women’s  saddles  seem  ill  made. — Queen’s 
bridle  woven  with  silver. — Tags  to  strike  the 
horse. 

“Sunday,  Oct.  22.  To  Versailles,  a  mean  town. 
Carriages  of  business  passing. — Mean  shops 
against  the  wall. — Our  way  lay  through  Seve, 
where  the  China  manufacture. — Wooden  bridge 
at  Seve,  in  the  way  to  Versailles. — The  palace 
of  great  extent. — The  front  long;  I  saw  it  not 
perfectly. — The  Menagerie.  Cygnets  dark;  their 
black  feet;  on  the  ground;  tame. — Halcyons,  or 
gulls. — Stag  and  hind,  young. — Aviary,  very 
large;  the  net,  wire. — Black  stag  of  China,  small. 
— Rhinoceros,  the  horn  broken  and  pared  away, 
which,  I  suppose,  will  grow;  the  basis,  I  think, 
four  inches  ’cross;  the  skin  folds  like  loose  cloth 
doubled  over  his  body,  and  cross  his  hips;  a  vast 
animal,  though  young;  as  big,  perhaps  as  four 
oxen. — The  young  elephant,  with  his  tusks  just 
appearing. — The  brown  bear  put  out  his  paws; 
— all  very  tame. — The  lion. — The  tigers  I  did 
not  well  view. — The  camel,  or  dromedary  with 
two  bunches  called  the  Huguin,3  taller  than  any 
horse. — Two  camels  with  one  bunch. — Among 
the  birds  was  a  pelican,  who  being  let  out,  went 
to  a  fountain,  and  swam  about  to  catch  fish.  His 
feet  well  webbed :  he  dipped  his  head,  and  turned 
his  long  bill  sidewise.  He  caught  two  or  three 
fish,  but  did  not  eat  them. 

“Trianon  is  a  kind  of  retreat  appendant  to 
Versailles.  It  has  an  open  portico;  the  pavement, 
and,  I  think,  the  pillars,  of  marble.- — There  are 
many  rooms,  which  I  do  not  distinctly  remem¬ 
ber — A  table  of  porphyry,  about  five  feet  long, 
and  between  two  and  three  broad,  given  to  Louis 
XIV  by  the  Venetian  State. — In  the  council- 
room  almost  all  that  was  not  door  or  window, 
was,  I  think,  looking-glass. — Little  Trianon  is  a 

2See  p.  267. 

3This  epithet  should  be  applied  to  this  animal, 
with  one  bunch. 


1775]  LIFE  OF 

small  palace  like  a  gentleman’s  house. — The 
upper  floor  paved  with  brick. — Little  Vienne. 
— The  court  is  ill  paved. — The  rooms  at  the  top 
are  small,  fit  to  sooth  the  imagination  with  pri¬ 
vacy.  In  the  front  of  Versailles  are  small  basons 
of  water  on  the  terrace,  and  other  basons,  I 
think,  below  them.  There  are  little  courts. — 
The  great  gallery  is  wainscotted  with  mirrors, 
not  very  large,  but  joined  by  frames.  I  suppose 
the  large  plates  were  not  yet  made. — The  play¬ 
house  was  very  large. — The  chapel  I  do  not  re¬ 
member  if  we  saw. — We  saw  one  chapel,  but  I 
am  not  certain  whether  there  or  at  Trianon. — 
The  foreign  office  paved  with  bricks. — The  din¬ 
ner  half  a  Louis  each,  and,  I  think,  a  Louis  over. 
— Money  given  at  Menagerie,  three  livres;  at 
palace,  six  livres. 

“Oct.  23.  Monday.  Last  night  I  wrote  to 

Levet. - We  went  to  see  the  looking-glasses 

wrought.  They  come  from  Normandy  in  cast 
plates,  perhaps  the  third  of  an  inch  thick.  At 
Paris  they  are  ground  upon  a  marble  table,  by 
rubbing  one  plate  upon  another  with  grit  be¬ 
tween  them.  The  various  sands,  of  which  there 
are  said  to  be  five,  I  could  not  learn.  The  han¬ 
dle,  by  which  the  upper  glass  is  moved,  has  the 
form  of  a  wheel,  which  may  be  moved  in  all  di¬ 
rections.  The  plates  are  sent  up  with  their  sur¬ 
faces  ground,  but  not  polished,  and  so  continue 
till  they  are  bespoken,  lest  time  should  spoil  the 
surface,  as  we  were  told.  Those  that  are  to  be 
polished,  are  laid  on  a  table,  covered  with  sev¬ 
eral  thick  cloths,  hard  strained,  that  the  resist¬ 
ance  may  be  equal;  they  are  then  rubbed  with 
a  hand  rubber,  held  down  hard  by  a  contriv¬ 
ance  which  I  did  not  well  understand.  The  pow¬ 
der  which  is  used  last  seemed  to  me  to  be  iron 
dissolved  in  aqua  fortis:  they  called  it,  as  Baretti 
said,  marc  de  Veau  forte,  which  he  thought  was 
dregs.  They  mentioned  vitriol  and  saltpetre.  The 
cannon  ball  swam  in  the  quicksilver.  To  silver 
them,  a  leaf  of  beaten  tin  is  laid,  and  rubbed 
with  quicksilver,  to  which  it  unites.  Then  more 
quicksilver  is  poured  upon  it,  which,  by  its  mu¬ 
tual  [attraction]  rises  very  high.  Then  a  paper 
is  laid  at  the  nearest  end  of  the  plate,  over  which 
the  glass  is  slided  till  it  lies  upon  the  plate,  hav¬ 
ing  driven  much  of  the  quicksilver  before  it.  It 
is  then,  I  think,  pressed  upon  cloths,  and  then 
set  sloping  to  drop  the  superfluous  mercury;  the 
slope  is  daily  heightened  towards  a  perpendic¬ 
ular. 

“In  the  way  I  saw  the  Greve,  the  Mayor’s 
house,  and  the  Bastile. 

“We  then  went  to  Sans-terre,  a  brewer.  He 
brews  with  about  as  much  malt  as  Mr.  Thrale, 


JOHNSON  269 

and  sells  his  beer  at  the  same  price,  though  he 
pays  no  duty  for  malt,  and  little  more  than  half 
as  much  for  beer.  Beer  is  sold  retail  at  6d.  a  bot¬ 
tle.  He  brews  4,000  barrels  a  year.  There  are 
seventeen  brewers  in  Paris,  of  whom  none  is 
supposed  to  brew  more  than  he: — reckoning 
them  at  3,000  each,  they  make  51,000  a  year. — 
They  make  their  malt,  for  malting  is  here  no 
trade. 

“The  moat  of  the  Bastile  is  dry. 

“Oct.  24.  Tuesday.  We  visited  the  King’s  li¬ 
brary — I  saw  the  Speculum  humarus  Salvationist 
rudely  printed,  with  ink,  sometimes  pale,  some¬ 
times  black;  part  supposed  to  be  with  wooden 
types,  and  part  with  pages  cut  on  boards. — The 
Bible,  supposed  to  be  older  than  that  of  Mentz, 
in  62  [1462]:  it  has  no  date;  it  is  supposed  to 
have  been  printed  with  wooden  types. — I  am  in 
doubt;  the  print  is  large  and  fair,  in  two  folios. 
— Another  book  was  shewn  me,  supposed  to 
have  been  printed  with  wooden  types; — I  think, 
Durandi  Sanctuarium  in  58  [1458].  This  is  inferred 
from  the  difference  of  form  sometimes  seen  in 
the  same  letter,  which  might  be  struck  with  dif¬ 
ferent  puncheons. — The  regular  similitude  of 
most  letters  proves  better  that  they  are  metal. — 
I  saw  nothing  but  the  Speculum  which  I  had  not 
seen,  I  think,  before. 

“Thence  to  the  Sorbonne. — The  library  very 
large,  not  in  lattices  like  the  King’s.  Marbone 
and  Dur audit  T  collection  14  vol.  Scriptores  de  re¬ 
bus  GalliciSt  many  folios. — Histoire  Genealogique  of 
France ,  9  vol. — Gallia  Christiana,  the  first  edition, 
4to.  the  last,  f.  12  vol. — The  Prior  and  Librar¬ 
ian  dined  [with  us]: — I  waited  on  them  home. 
— Their  garden  pretty,  with  covered  walks,  but 
small;  yet  may  hold  many  students. — The 
Doctors  of  the  Sorbonne  are  all  equal: — 
choose  those  who  succeed  to  vacancies. — Profit 
little. 

“Oct.  25.  Wednesday.  I  went  with  the  Prior 
to  St.  Cloud,  to  see  Dr.  Hooke. — We  walked 
round  the  palace,  and  had  some  talk. — I  dined 
with  our  whole  company  at  the  Monastery. — 
In  the  library,  Beroald , — Cymon , — Titus ,  from 
Boccace. — Oratio  Proverbialis  to  the  Virgin,  from 
Petrarch;  Falkland  to  Sandys;  Dryden’s  Preface 
to  the  third  vol.  of  Miscellanies.1 

“Oct.  26.  Thursday.  We  saw  the  china  at 
Seve,  cut,  glazed,  painted.  Bellevue,  a  pleasing 
house,  not  great:  fine  prospect. — Meudon,  an 
old  palace. — Alexander,  in  Porphyry:  hollow 
between  eyes  and  nose,  thin  cheeks. — Plato  and 
Aristotle — Noble  terrace  overlooks  the  town. — 

JHe  means,  I  suppose,  that  he  read  these  differ¬ 
ent  pieces  while  he  remained  in  the  library. 


BOSWELL 


270 

St.  Cloud. — Gallery  not  very  high,  nor  grand, 
but  pleasing. — In  the  rooms,  Michael  Angelo, 
drawn  by  himself,  Sir  Thomas  More,  Des  Cartes, 
Bochart,  Naudaeus,  Mazarine. — Gilded  wain¬ 
scot,  so  common  that  it  is  not  minded. — Gough 
and  Keene. — Hooke  came  to  us  at  the  inn. — A 
message  from  Drumgold. 

“Oct.  27.  Friday.  I  staid  at  home. — Gough 

and  Keene,  and  Mrs.  S - ’s  friend  dined 

with  us. — This  day  we  began  to  have  a  fire. — 
The  weather  is  grown  very  cold,  and  I  fear,  has 
a  bad  effect  upon  my  breath,  which  has  grown 
much  more  free  and  easy  in  this  country. 

“Sat.,  Oct.  28.  I  visited  the  Grand  Chartreux 
built  by  St.  Louis. — It  is  built  for  forty,  but 
contains  only  twenty-four,  and  will  not  main¬ 
tain  more.  The  friar  that  spoke  to  us  had  a 
pretty  apartment.  —  Mr.  Baretti  says  four 
rooms;  I  remember  but  three.  —  His  books 
seemed  to  be  French. — His  garden  was  neat; 
he  gave  me  grapes. — We  saw  the  Place  de  Vic- 
toire,  with  the  statues  of  the  King,  and  the  cap¬ 
tive  nations. 

“We  saw  the  palace  and  gardens  of  Luxem¬ 
bourg,  but  the  gallery  was  shut. — We  climbed 
to  the  top  stairs. — I  dined  with  Colbrooke,  who 
had  much  company: — Foote,  Sir  George  Rod¬ 
ney,  Motteux,  Udson,  Taaf. — Called  on  the 
Prior,  and  found  him  in  bed. 

“Hotel — a  guinea  a  day. — Coach,  three  guin¬ 
eas  a  week. — Valet  de  place,  three  1.  a  day. — 
Avantcoureur ,  a  guinea  a  week. — Ordinary  din¬ 
ner,  six  1.  a  head. — Our  ordinary  seems  to  be 
about  five  guineas  a  day. — Our  extraordinary 
expences,  as  diversions,  gratuities,  clothes,  I  can¬ 
not  reckon. — Our  travelling  is  ten  guineas  a  day. 

“White  stockings,  18  1. — Wig. — Hat. 

“Sunday,  Oct.  29.  We  saw  the  boarding- 
school.  — The  Enfans  trouves.  — A  room  with  about 
eighty-six  children  in  cradles,  as  sweet  as  a  par¬ 
lour. — They  lose  a  third;  take  in  to  perhaps  more 
than  seven  [years  old];  put  them  to  trades;  pin  to 
them  the  papers  sent  with  them — Want  nurses. 
— Saw  their  chapel. 

“Went  to  St.  Eustatia;  saw  an  innumerable 
company  of  girls  catechised,  in  many  bodies, 
perhaps  100  to  a  catechist. — Boys  taught  at  one 
time,  girls  at  another. — The  sermon;  the  preach¬ 
er  wears  a  cap,  which  he  takes  off  at  the  name: 
— his  action  uniform,  not  very  violent. 

“Oct.  30.  Monday.  We  saw  the  library  of  St. 
Germain. — A  very  noble  collection. — Codex  Di - 
vinorum  Officiorum ,  1459: — a  letter,  square  like 
that  of  the  Offices ,  perhaps  the  same. — The  Co¬ 
dex ,  by  Fust  and  Gernsheym. — Meursius,  12  v. 
fol. — Amadis ,  in  French,  3  v.  fol. — Catholicon 


[  1775 

sine  colophone ,  but  of  1460. — Two  other  editions,1 
one  by . . .  Augustin,  de  Civitate  Dei ,  without  name, 
date,  or  place,  but  of  Fust’s  square  letter  as  it 
seems. 

“I  dined  with  Col.  Drumgold; — had  a  pleas¬ 
ing  afternoon. 

“Some  of  the  books  of  St.  Germain’s  stand  in 
presses  from  the  wall,  like  those  at  Oxford. 

“Oct.  3 1 .  Tuesday.  I  lived  at  the  Benedictines; 
meagre  day;  soup  meagre,  herrings,  eels,  both 
with  sauce;  fryed  fish;  lentils,  tasteless  in  them¬ 
selves.  In  the  library;  where  I  found  Maffieus's  de 
Ilistoria  Indica:  Promontorium  fleeter e,  to  double  the 
Cape.  I  parted  very  tenderly  from  the  Prior  and 
Friar  Wilkes. 

“ Maitre  des  Arts ,  2  y. — Bacc.  Theol.  3  y. — Li¬ 
centiate ,  2  y. — Doctor  Th.  2  y.  in  all  9  years. — For 
the  Doctorate  three  disputations,  Major ,  Minor , 
Sorbonica. — Several  colleges  suppressed,  and 
transferred  to  that  which  was  the  Jesuits’  Col- 
lege. 

“Nov.  x.  Wednesday.  We  left  Paris. — St.  De¬ 
nis,  a  large  town;  the  church  not  very  large,  but 
the  middle  isle  is  very  lofty  and  aweful. — On  the 
left  are  chapels  built  beyond  the  line  of  the  wall, 
which  destroy  the  symmetry  of  the  sides.  The 
organ  is  higher  above  the  pavement  than  any  I 
have  ever  seen. — The  gates  are  of  brass. — On 
the  middle  gate  is  the  history  of  our  Lord. — The 
painted  windows  are  historical, and  said  to  be  em¬ 
inently  beautiful. — We  were  at  another  church 
belonging  to  a  convent,  of  which  the  portal  is  a 
dome;  we  could  not  enter  further,  and  it  was  al¬ 
most  dark. 

‘  ‘Nov.  2 .  Thursday.  We  came  this  day  to  Chan¬ 
tilly,  a  seat  belonging  to  the  Prince  of  Conde. — 
This  place  is  eminently  beautified  by  all  varie¬ 
ties  of  waters  starting  up  in  fountains,  falling  in 
cascades,  running  in  streams,  and  spread  in  lakes. 
— The  water  seems  to  be  too  near  the  house.  — 
All  this  water  is  brought  from  a  source  or  river 
three  leagues  off,  by  an  artificial  canal,  which 
for  one  league  is  carried  under  ground. — The 
house  is  magnificent. — The  cabinet  seems  well 
stocked:  what  I  remember  was,  the  jaws  of  a 
hippopotamus,  and  a  young  hippopotamus  pre¬ 
served,  which,  however,  is  so  small,  that  I  doubt 

JI  have  looked  in  vain  into  De  Bure,  Meerman, 
Mattaire,  and  other  typographical  books,  for  the 
two  editions  of  the  Catholicon ,  which  Dr.  Johnson 
mentions  here,  with  names  which  I  cannot  make 
out.  I  read  “one  by  Latinius ,  one  by  BoedinusP  I 
have  deposited  the  original  MS.  in  the  British  Mu¬ 
seum,  where  the  curious  may  see  it.  My  grateful 
acknowledgements  are  due  to  Mr.  Planta  for  the 
trouble  he  was  pleased  to  take  in  aiding  my  re¬ 
searches. 


1775]  LIFE  OF 

its  reality. — It  seems  too  hairy  for  an  abortion, 
and  too  small  for  a  mature  birth. — Nothing  was 
in  spirits;  all  was  dry. — The  dog;  the  deer;  the 
ant-bear  with  long  snout. — The  toucan,  long 
broad  beak. — The  stables  were  of  very  great 
length. — The  kennel  had  no  scents. — There  was 
a  mockery  of  a  village. — The  Menagerie  had 
few  animals.1 — Two  faussans,2  or  Brasilian  wea¬ 
sels,  spotted,  very  wild. — There  is  a  forest,  and, 
I  think,  a  park. — I  walked  till  I  was  very  weary, 
and  next  morning  felt  my  feet  battered,  and 
with  pains  in  the  toes. 

“Nov.  3.  Friday.  We  came  to  Compiegne,  a 
very  large  town,  with  a  royal  palace  built  round 
a  pentagonal  court. — The  court  is  raised  upon 
vaults,  and  has,  I  suppose,  an  entry  on  one  side 
by  a  gentle  rise.  — T  alk  of  painting.  — The  church 
is  not  very  large,  but  very  elegant  and  splendid. 
—  I  had  at  first  great  difficulty  to  walk,  but  mo¬ 
tion  grew  continually  easier. — At  night  we  came 
to  Noyon,  an  episcopal  city. — The  cathedral  is 
very  beautiful,  the  pillars  alternately  gothick  and 
Corinthian. — We  entered  a  very  noble  parochial 
church. — Noyon  is  walled,  and  is  said  to  be  three 
miles  round. 

“Nov.  4.  Saturday.  We  rose  very  early,  and 
came  through  St.  Quintin  to  Cambray,  not  long 
after  three. — We  went  to  an  English  nunnery, 
to  give  a  letter  to  Father  Welch,  the  confessor, 
who  came  to  visit  us  in  the  evening. 

“Nov.  5.  Sunday.  We  saw  the  cathedral. — It 
is  very  beautiful,  with  chapels  on  each  side. — 
The  choir  splendid. — The  balustrade  in  one 
part  brass. — The  Neff  very  high  and  grand. — 
The  altar  silver  as  far  as  it  is  seen. — The  vest¬ 
ments  very  splendid. - At  the  Benedictines’ 

church - ” 

Here  his  Journal3  ends  abruptly.  Whether  he 
wrote  any  more  after  this  time,  I  know  not;  but 

JThe  writing  is  so  bad  here,  that  the  names  of 
several  of  the  animals  could  not  be  decyphered 
without  much  more  acquaintance  with  natural 
history  than  I  possess. — Dr.  Blagden,  with  his  us¬ 
ual  politeness,  most  obligingly  examined  the  MS. 
To  that  gentleman,  and  to  Dr.  Gray,  of  the  British 
Museum,  who  also  very  readily  assisted  me,  I  beg 
leave  to  express  my  best  thanks. 

2It  is  thus  written  by  Johnson,  from  the  French 
pronunciation  of  fossane.  It  should  be  observed, 
that  the  person  who  shewed  this  Menagerie  was 
mistaken  in  supposing  the  fossane  and  the  Brasilian 
weasel  to  be  the  same,  the  fossane  being  a  different 
animal,  and  a  native  of  Madagascar.  I  find  them, 
however,  upon  one  plate  in  Pennant’s  Synopsis  of 
Quadrupeds. 

3My  worthy  and  ingenious  friend,  Mr.  Andrew 
Lumisden,  by  his  accurate  acquaintance  with 
France,  enabled  me  to  make  out  many  proper 
names,  which  Dr.  Johnson  had  written  indistinct¬ 
ly,  and  sometimes  spelt  erroneously. 


JOHNSON  271 

probably  not  much,  as  he  arrived  in  England 
about  the  12th  of  November.  These  short  notes 
of  his  tour,  though  they  may  seem  minute  taken 
singly,  make  together  a  considerable  mass  of  in¬ 
formation,  and  exhibit  such  an  ardour  of  en¬ 
quiry  and  acuteness  of  examination,  as,  I  be¬ 
lieve,  are  found  in  but  few  travellers,  especially 
at  an  advanced  age.  They  completely  refute  the 
idle  notion  which  has  been  propagated,  that  he 
could  not  see ;  and,  if  he  had  taken  the  trouble  to 
revise  and  digest  them,  he  undoubtedly  could 
have  expanded  them  into  a  very  entertaining 
narrative. 

When  I  met  him  in  London  the  following  year, 
the  account  which  he  gave  me  of  his  French 
tour,  was,  “Sir,  I  have  seen  all  the  visibilities  of 
Paris,  and  around  it;  but  to  have  formed  an  ac¬ 
quaintance  with  the  people  there,  would  have 
required  more  time  than  I  could  stay.  I  was  just 
beginning  to  creep  into  acquaintance  by  means 
of  Colonel  Drumgold,  a  very  high  man,  Sir,  head 
of  TJEcole  Militaire ,  a  most  complete  character, 
for  he  had  first  been  a  professor  of  rhetorick,  and 
then  became  a  soldier.  And,  Sir,  I  was  very 
kindly  treated  by  the  English  Benedictines, 
and  have  a  cell  appropriated  to  me  in  their 
convent.” 

He  observed,  “The  great  in  France  live  very 
magnificently,  but  the  rest  very  miserably.  There 
is  no  happy  middle  state  as  in  England.  The 
shops  of  Paris  are  mean;  the  meat  in  the  mar¬ 
kets  is  such  as  would  be  sent  to  a  gaol  in  Eng¬ 
land:  and  Mr.  Thrale  justly  observed,  that  the 
cookery  of  the  French  was  forced  upon  them  by 
necessity;  for  they  could  not  eat  their  meat,  un¬ 
less  they  added  some  taste  to  it.  The  French  are 
an  indelicate  people;  they  will  spit  upon  any 

place.  At  Madame - ’s,  a  literary  lady  of 

rank,  the  footman  took  the  sugar  in  his  fingers, 
and  threw  it  into  my  coffee.  I  was  going  to  put 
it  aside;  but  hearing  it  was  made  on  purpose  for 
me,  I  e’en  tasted  Tom’s  fingers.  The  same  lady 
would  needs  make  tea  a  V Angloise.  The  spout 
of  the  tea-pot  did  not  pour  freely;  she  bad  the 
footman  blow  into  it.  France  is  worse  than 
Scotland  in  every  thing  but  climate.  Nature 
has  done  more  for  the  French;  but  they  have 
done  less  for  themselves  than  the  Scotch  have 
done.” 

It  happened  that  Foote  was  at  Paris  at  the 
same  time  with  Dr.  Johnson,  and  his  description 
of  my  friend  while  there,  was  abundantly  ludi¬ 
crous.  He  told  me,  that  the  French  were  quite 
astonished  at  his  figure  and  manner,  and  at  his 
dress,  which  he  obstinately  continued  exactly  as 
in  London; — his  brown  clothes,  black  stockings. 


BOSWELL 


272 

and  plain  shirt.  He  mentioned,  that  an  Irish 
gentleman  said  to  Johnson,  “Sir,  you  have  not 
seen  the  best  French  players.”  Johnson.  “Play¬ 
ers,  Sir !  I  look  on  them  as  no  better  than  crea¬ 
tures  set  upon  tables  and  joint-stools  to  make 
faces  and  produce  laughter,  like  dancing  dogs.” 
—“But,  Sir,  you  will  allow  that  some  players  are 
better  than  others?”  Johnson.  “Yes,  Sir,  as  some 
dogs  dance  better  than  others.” 

While  Johnson  was  in  France,  he  was  generally 
very  resolute  in  speaking  Latin.  It  was  a  maxim 
with  him  that  a  man  should  not  let  himself  down, 
by  speaking  a  language  which  he  speaks  imper¬ 
fectly.  Indeed,  we  must  have  often  observed  how 
inferiour,  how  much  like  a  child  a  man  appears, 
who  speaks  a  broken  tongue.  When  Sir  Joshua 
Reynolds,  at  one  of  the  dinners  of  the  Royal 
Academy,  presented  him  to  a  Frenchman  of  great 
distinction,  he  would  not  deign  to  speak  French, 
but  talked  Latin,  though  his  Excellency  did  not 
understand  it,  owing,  perhaps,  to  Johnson’s  Eng¬ 
lish  pronunciation:  yet  upon  another  occasion 
he  was  observed  to  speak  French  to  a  French¬ 
man  of  high  rank,  who  spoke  English;  and  being 
asked  the  reason,  with  some  expression  of  sur¬ 
prise, — he  answered,  “because  I  think  my  French 
is  as  good  as  his  English.”  Though  Johnson  un¬ 
derstood  French  perfectly,  he  could  not  speak  it 
readily,  as  I  have  observed  at  his  first  interview 
with  General  Paoli,  in  1769;  yet  he  wrote  it,  I 
imagine,  pretty  well,  as  appears  from  some  of 
his  letters  in  Mrs.  Piozzi’s  collection,  of  which  I 
shall  transcribe  one: 

A  Madame  La  Comtesse  de - 

July  16,  1775 

Oui,  Madame ,  le  moment  est  arrive ,  et  il  Jaut  que 
je  parte.  Mais  pourquoi  jaut-il  partir?  Est-ce  que  je 
m' ennuye?  Je  m'ennuyerai  ailleurs.  Est-ce  que  je  cherche 
ou  quelqueplaisir ,  ou  quelque  soulagement?  Je  ne  cherche 
rien,je  rfespere  rien.  Aller  voir  ce  quej'ai  vu ,  etreun 
peu  rejoue ,  un  peu  degoute ,  me  resouvenir  que  la  vie  se 
passe  en  vain ,  me  plaindre  de  moi ,  m'endurcir  aux  de¬ 
hors;  void  le  tout  de  ce  qu’on  compte  pour  les  delices  de 
Vannee.  Que  Dieu  vous  donne ,  Madame ,  tous  les  agre- 
mens  de  la  vie ,  avec  un  esprit  qui  peut  enjouir  sans  s’y 
livrer  trop. 

Here  let  me  not  forget  a  curious  anecdote,  as 
related  to  me  by  Mr.  Beauclerk,  which  I  shall 
endeavour  to  exhibit  as  well  as  I  can  in  that  gen¬ 
tleman’s  lively  manner;  and  in  justice  to  him  it 
is  proper  to  add,  that  Dr.  Johnson  told  me  I 
might  rely  both  on  the  correctness  of  his  mem¬ 
ory,  and  the  fidelity  of  his  narrative.  “When  Ma¬ 
dame  de  Boufflers  was  first  in  England,  (said 
Beauclerk,)  she  was  desirous  to  see  Johnson.  I  ac¬ 
cordingly  went  with  her  to  his  chambers  in  the 


[  1775 

Temple,  where  she  was  entertained  with  his  con¬ 
versation  for  some  time.  When  our  visit  was  ov¬ 
er,  she  and  I  left  him,  and  were  got  into  Inner 
Temple-lane,  when  all  at  once  I  heard  a  noise 
like  thunder.  This  was  occasioned  by  Johnson, 
who  it  seems,  upon  a  little  recollection,  had  tak¬ 
en  it  into  his  head  that  he  ought  to  have  done 
the  honours  of  his  literary  residence  to  a  foreign 
lady  of  quality,  and  eager  to  shew  himself  a  man  of 
gallantry,  was  hurrying  down  the  stair-case  in  vio¬ 
lent  agitation.  He  overtook  us  before  we  reached 
the  Temple-gate,  and  brushing  in  between  me 
and  Madame  de  Boufflers,  seized  her  hand,  and 
conducted  her  to  her  coach.  His  dress  was  a 
rusty  brown  morning  suit,  a  pair  of  old  shoes  by 
way  of  slippers,  a  little  shrivelled  wig  sticking  on 
the  top  of  his  head,  and  the  sleeves  of  his  shirt 
and  the  knees  of  his  breeches  hanging  loose.  A 
considerable  crowd  of  people  gathered  round, 
and  were  not  a  little  struck  by  this  singular  ap¬ 
pearance.” 

He  spoke  Latin  with  wonderful  fluency  and 
elegance.  When  Pere  Boscovich  was  in  England, 
Johnson  dined  in  company  with  him  at  Sir  Josh¬ 
ua  Reynolds’s,  and  at  Dr.  Douglas’s,  now  Bishop 
of  Salisbury.  Upon  both  occasions  that  cele¬ 
brated  foreigner  expressed  his  astonishment 
at  Johnson’s  Latin  conversation.  When  at 
Paris,  Johnson  thus  characterised  Voltaire  to 
Freron  the  Journalist:  “ Vir  est  acerrimi  ingenii  et 
paucarum  liter  arum” 

To  Dr.  Samuel  Johnson 

Edinburgh,  Dec.  5,  1775 

My  Dear  Sir,  Mr.  Alexander  Maclean,  the 
young  Laird  of  Col,  being  to  set  out  to-morrow 
for  London,  I  give  him  this  letter  to  introduce 
him  to  your  acquaintance.  The  kindness  which 
you  and  I  experienced  from  his  brother,  whose 
unfortunate  death  we  sincerely  lament,  will 
make  us  always  desirous  to  shew  attention  to 
any  branch  of  the  family.  Indeed,  you  have  so 
much  of  the  true  Highland  cordiality,  that  I 
am  sure  you  would  have  thought  me  to  blame 
if  I  had  neglected  to  recommend  to  you  this 
Hebridean  prince,  in  whose  island  we  were 
hospitably  entertained.  I  ever  am  with  respect¬ 
ful  attachment,  my  dear  Sir,  your  most  obliged 
and  most  humble  servant, 

James  Boswell 

Mr.  Maclean  returned  with  the  most  agreea¬ 
ble  accounts  of  the  polite  attention  with  which 
he  was  received  by  Dr.  Johnson. 

In  the  course  of  this  year  Dr.  Burney  in¬ 
forms  me  that  “he  very  frequently  met  Dr.  John¬ 
son  at  Mr.  Thrale’s,  at  Streatham,  where  they 
had  many  long  conversations,  often  sitting  up 


1775  1 

as  long  as  the  fire  and  candles  lasted,  and  much 
longer  than  the  patience  of  the  servants  sub¬ 
sisted.” 

A  few  of  Johnson’s  sayings,  which  that  gentle¬ 
man  recollects,  shall  here  be  inserted. 

C£I  never  take  a  nap  after  dinner  but  when  I 
have  had  a  bad  night,  and  then  the  nap  takes 
me.” 

“The  writer  of  an  epitaph  should  not  be  con¬ 
sidered  as  saying  nothing  but  what  is  strictly 
true.  Allowance  must  be  made  for  some  degree 
of  exaggerated  praise.  In  lapidary  inscriptions  a 
man  is  not  upon  oath.” 

“ There  is  now  less  flogging  in  our  great  schools 
than  formerly,  but  then  less  is  learned  there;  so 
that  what  the  boys  get  at  one  end  they  lose  at 
the  other.” 

“More  is  learned  in  publick  than  in  private 
schools,  from  emulation;  there  is  the  collision  of 
mind  with  mind,  or  the  radiation  of  many  minds 
pointing  to  one  centre.  Though  few  boys  make 
their  own  exercises,  yet  if  a  good  exercise  is  given 
up,  out  of  a  great  number  of  boys,  it  is  made  by 
somebody.” 

“I  hate  by-roads  in  education.  Education  is 
as  well  known,  and  has  long  been  as  well  known, 
as  ever  it  can  be.  Endeavouring  to  make  chil¬ 
dren  prematurely  wise  is  useless  labour.  Suppose 
they  have  more  knowledge  at  five  or  six  years 
old  than  other  children,  what  use  can  be  made 
of  it?  It  will  be  lost  before  it  is  wanted,  and  the 
waste  of  so  much  time  and  labour  of  the  teacher 
can  never  be  repaid.  Too  much  is  expected  from 

precocity,  and  too  little  performed.  Miss - was 

an  instance  of  early  cultivation,  but  in  what  did 
it  terminate?  In  marrying  a  little  Presbyterian 
parson,  who  keeps  an  infant  boarding-school,  so 
that  all  her  employment  now  is, 

To  suckle  fools ,  and  chronicle  small-beer . 

She  tells  the  children,  cThis  is  a  cat,  and  that  is  a 
dog,  with  four  legs  and  a  tail;  see  there !  you  are 
much  better  than  a  cat  or  a  dog,  for  you  can 
speak.’  If  I  had  bestowed  such  an  education  on  a 
daughter,  and  had  discovered  that  she  thought 
of  marrying  such  a  fellow,  I  would  have  sent  her 
to  the  Congress .” 

£ ‘After  having  talked  slightingly  of  musick,  he 
was  observed  to  listen  very  attentively  while  Miss 
Thrale  played  on  the  harpsichord,  and  with  ea¬ 
gerness  he  called  to  her,  cWhy  don’t  you  dash 
away  like  Burney?’  Dr.  Burney  upon  this  said  to 
him,  CI  believe,  Sir,  we  shall  make  a  musician  of 
you  at  last.’  Johnson  with  candid  complacency 
replied,  ‘Sir,  I  shall  be  glad  to  have  a  new  sense 
given  to  me.’  ” 


2  73 

“He  had  come  down  one  morning  to  the 
breakfast-room,  and  been  a  considerable  time 
by  himself  before  any  body  appeared.  When, 
on  a  subsequent  day,  he  was  twitted  by  Mrs. 
Thrale  for  being  very  late,  which  he  generally 
was,  he  defended  himself  by  alluding  to  the 
extraordinary  morning,  when  he  had  been  too 
early.  ‘Madam,  I  do  not  like  to  come  down  to 
vacuity 

“Dr.  Burney  having  remarked  that  Mr.  Gar¬ 
rick  was  beginning  to  look  old,  he  said,  ‘Why, 
Sir,  you  are  not  to  wonder  at  that;  no  man’s 
face  has  had  more  wear  and  tear.’” 

Not  having  heard  from  him  for  a  longer  time 
than  I  supposed  he  would  be  silent,  I  wrote  to 
him  December  18,  not  in  good  spirits: 

“Sometimes  I  have  been  afraid  that  the  cold 
which  has  gone  over  Europe  this  year  like  a  sort 
of  pestilence  has  seized  you  severely:  sometimes 
my  imagination,  which  is  upon  occasions  pro- 
lifick  of  evil,  hath  figured  that  you  may  have 
somehow  taken  offence  at  some  part  of  my  con¬ 
duct.” 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  Never  dream  of  any  offence.  How 
should  you  offend  me?  I  consider  your  friend¬ 
ship  as  a  possession,  which  I  intend  to  hold  till 
you  take  it  from  me,  and  to  lament  if  ever  by 
my  fault  I  should  lose  it.  However,  when  such 
suspicions  find  their  way  into  your  mind,  always 
give  them  vent;  I  shall  make  haste  to  disperse 
them;  but  hinder  their  first  ingress  if  you  can. 
Consider  such  thoughts  as  morbid. 

Such  illness  as  may  excuse  my  omission  to 
Lord  Hailes,  I  cannot  honestly  plead.  I  have 
been  hindered,  I  know  not  how,  by  a  succession 
of  petty  obstructions.  I  hope  to  mend  immedi¬ 
ately,  and  to  send  next  post  to  his  Lordship.  Mr. 
Thrale  would  have  written  to  you  if  I  had 
omitted;  he  sends  his  compliments  and  wishes 
to  see  you. 

You  and  your  lady  will  now  have  no  more 
wrangling  about  feudal  inheritance.  How  does 
the  young  Laird  of  Auchinleck?  I  suppose  Miss 
Veronica  is  grown  a  reader  and  discourser. 

I  have  just  now  got  a  cough,  but  it  has  never 
yet  hindered  me  from  sleeping:  I  have  had 
quieter  nights  than  are  common  with  me. 

I  cannot  but  rejoice  that  Joseph1  has  had  the 
wit  to  find  the  way  back.  He  is  a  fine  fellow,  and 
one  of  the  best  travellers  in  the  world. 

Young  Col  brought  me  your  letter.  He  is  a 
very  pleasing  youth.  I  took  him  two  days  ago  to 
the  Mitre,  and  we  dined  together.  I  was  as  civil 
as  I  had  the  means  of  being. 

Joseph  Ritter,  a  Bohemian,  who  was  in  my 
service  many  years,  and  attended  Dr.  Johnson  and 
me  in  our  Tour  to  the  Hebrides.  After  having  left 
me  for  some  time,  he  had  now  returned  to  me. 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


274 

I  have  had  a  letter  from  Rasay,  acknowledg¬ 
ing,  with  great  appearance  of  satisfaction,  the 
insertion  in  the  Edinburgh  paper.  I  am  very 
glad  that  it  was  done. 

My  compliments  to  Mrs.  Boswell,  who  does 
not  love  me;  and  of  all  the  rest,  I  need  only  send 
them  to  those  that  do:  and  I  am  afraid  it  will 
give  you  very  little  trouble  to  distribute  them.  I 
am,  my  dear,  dear  Sir,  your  affectionate  hum¬ 
ble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

December  23,  1775 

1776:  yETAT.  67.] — In  1776,  Johnson  wrote,  so 
far  as  I  can  discover,  nothing  for  the  publick: 
but  that  his  mind  was  still  ardent,  and  fraught 
with  generous  wishes  to  attain  to  still  higher  de¬ 
grees  of  literary  excellence,  is  proved  by  his  pri¬ 
vate  notes  of  this  year,  which  I  shall  insert  in 
their  proper  place. 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  I  have  at  last  sent  you  all  Lord 
Hailes’s  papers.  While  I  was  in  France,  I  looked 
very  often  into  Henault;  but  Lord  Hailes,  in  my 
opinion,  leaves  him  far  and  far  behind.  Why  I 
did  not  dispatch  so  short  a  perusal  sooner,  when 
I  look  back,  I  am  utterly  unable  to  discover: 
but  human  moments  are  stolen  away  by  a  thou¬ 
sand  petty  impediments  which  leave  no  trace 
behind  them.  I  have  been  afflicted,  through  the 
whole  Christmas,  with  the  general  disorder,  of 
which  the  worst  effect  was  a  cough,  which  is 
now  much  mitigated,  though  the  country,  on 
which  I  look  from  a  window  at  Streatham,  is 
now  covered  with  a  deep  snow.  Mrs.  Williams 
is  very  ill:  every  body  else  is  as  usual. 

Among  the  papers,  I  found  a  letter  to  you, 
which  I  think  you  had  not  opened;  and  a  paper 
for  The  Chronicle ,  which  I  suppose  it  not  neces¬ 
sary  now  to  insert.  I  return  them  both. 

I  have,  within  these  few  days,  had  the  honour 
of  receiving  Lord  Hailes’s  first  volume,  for  which 
I  return  my  most  respectful  thanks. 

I  wish  you,  my  dearestfriend,  and  your  haughty 
lady,  (for  I  know  she  does  not  love  me,)  and  the 
young  ladies,  and  the  young  Laird,  all  happi¬ 
ness.  Teach  the  young  gentleman,  in  spite  of  his 
mamma,  to  think  and  speak  well  of,  Sir,  your 
affectionate  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

Jam  10,  1776 

At  this  time  was  in  agitation  a  matter  of  great 
consequence  to  me  and  my  family,  which  I  should 
not  obtrude  upon  the  world,  were  it  not  that  the 
part  which  Dr.  Johnson’s  friendship  for  me  made 
him  take  in  it,  was  the  occasion  of  an  exertion  of 
his  abilities,  which  it  would  be  injustice  to  con¬ 
ceal.  That  what  he  wrote  upon  the  subject  may 
be  understood,  it  is  necessary  to  give  a  state  of 


[  1776 

the  question,  which  I  shall  do  as  briefly  as  I  can. 

In  the  year  1504,  the  barony  or  manour  of 
Auchinleck,  (pronounced  Affleck,)  in  Ayrshire, 
which  belonged  to  a  family  of  the  same  name 
with  the  lands,  having  fallen  to  the  Crown  by 
forfeiture,  James  the  Fourth,  King  of  Scotland, 
granted  it  to  Thomas  Boswell,  a  branch  of  an 
ancient  family  in  the  county  of  Fife,  stiling  him 
in  the  charter,  dilecto  jamiliari  nostro ;  and  assign¬ 
ing,  as  the  cause  of  the  grant,  pro  bono  et  fideli 
servitio  nobis  prcestito.  Thomas  Boswell  was  slain 
in  battle,  fighting  along  with  his  Sovereign,  at 
the  fatal  field  of  Floddon,  in  1513. 

From  this  very  honourable  founder  of  our  fam¬ 
ily,  the  estate  was  transmitted,  in  a  direct  series 
of  male  heirs,  to  David  Boswell,  my  father’s  great 
grand  uncle,  who  had  no  sons,  but  four  daugh¬ 
ters,  who  were  all  respectably  married,  the  eld¬ 
est  to  Lord  Cathcart. 

David  Boswell,  being  resolute  in  the  military 
feudal  principle  of  continuing  the  male  succes¬ 
sion,  passed  by  his  daughters,  and  settled  the  es¬ 
tate  on  his  nephew  by  his  next  brother,  who  ap¬ 
proved  of  the  deed,  and  renounced  any  preten¬ 
sions  which  he  might  possibly  have,  in  prefer¬ 
ence  to  his  son.  But  the  estate  having  been  bur- 
thened  with  large  portions  to  the  daughters,  and 
other  debts,  it  was  necessary  for  the  nephew  to 
sell  a  considerable  part  of  it,  and  what  remained 
was  still  much  encumbered. 

The  frugality  of  the  nephew  preserved,  and, 
in  some  degree,  relieved  the  estate.  His  son,  my 
grandfather,  an  eminent  lawyer,  not  only  re¬ 
purchased  a  great  part  of  what  had  been  sold, 
but  acquired  other  lands;  and  my  father,  who 
was  one  of  the  Judges  of  Scotland,  and  had  add¬ 
ed  considerably  to  the  estate,  now  signified  his 
inclination  to  take  the  privilege  allowed  by  our 
law,1  to  secure  it  to  his  family  in  perpetuity  by  an 
entail,  which,  on  account  of  his  marriage  arti¬ 
cles,  could  not  be  done  without  my  consent. 

In  the  plan  of  entailing  the  estate,  I  heartily 
concurred  with  him,  though  I  was  the  first  to  be 
restrained  by  it;  but  we  unhappily  differed  as  to 
the  series  of  heirs  which  should  be  established, 
or  in  the  language  of  our  law,  called  to  the  suc¬ 
cession.  My  father  had  declared  a  predilection 
for  heirs  general,  that  is,  males  and  females  in¬ 
discriminately.  He  was  willing,  however,  that 
all  males  descending  from  his  grandfather  should 
be  preferred  to  females;  but  would  not  extend 
that  privilege  to  males  deriving  their  descent 
from  a  higher  source.  I,  on  the  other  hand,  had 
a  zealous  partiality  for  male  heirs,  however  re¬ 
mote,  which  I  maintained  by  arguments  which 

JActs  of  Parliament  of  Scotland,  1685,  cap.  22. 


BOSWELL 


1776]  LIFE  OF 

appeared  to  me  to  have  considerable  weight.1 
And  in  the  particular  case  of  our  family,  I  ap¬ 
prehended  that  we  were  under  an  implied  obli¬ 
gation,  in  honour  and  good  faith,  to  transmit 
the  estate  by  the  same  tenure  which  we  held  it, 
which  was  as  male  heirs,  excluding  nearer  fe¬ 
males.  I  therefore,  as  I  thought  conscientiously, 
objected  to  my  father’s  scheme. 

My  opposition  was  very  displeasing  to  my  fa¬ 
ther,  who  was  entitled  to  great  respect  and  def¬ 
erence;  and  I  had  reason  to  apprehend  disa¬ 
greeable  consequences  from  my  non-compliance 
with  his  wishes.  After  much  perplexity  and  un¬ 
easiness,  I  wrote  to  Dr.  Johnson,  stating  the  case, 
with  all  its  difficulties,  at  full  length,  and  earn¬ 
estly  requesting  that  he  would  consider  it  at  lei¬ 
sure,  and  favour  me  with  his  friendly  opinion 
and  advice. 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  I  was  much  impressed  by  your  let¬ 
ter,  and  if  I  can  form  upon  your  case  any  reso- 

1As  first,  the  opinion  of  some  distinguished  nat¬ 
uralists,  that  our  species  is  transmitted  through 
males  only,  the  female  being  all  along  no  more 
than  a  nidus,  or  nurse,  as  Mother  Earth  is  to  plants 
of  every  sort;  which  notion  seems  to  be  confirmed 
by  that  text  of  scripture,  “He  was  yet  in  the  loins  of 
his  father  when  Melchisedeck  met  him”  (Heb. 
vii.  1  o) ;  and  consequently,  that  a  man’s  grandson 
by  a  daughter,  instead  of  being  his  surest  descend¬ 
ant  as  is  vulgarly  said,  has  in  reality  no  connection 
whatever  with  his  blood. — And  secondly,  inde¬ 
pendent  of  this  theory,  (which,  if  true,  should  com¬ 
pletely  exclude  heirs  general,)  that  if  the  prefer¬ 
ence  of  a  male  to  a  female,  without  regard  to  pri¬ 
mogeniture,  (as  a  son,  though  much  younger,  nay, 
even  a  grandson  by  a  son,  to  a  daughter,)  be  once 
admitted,  as  it  universally  is,  it  must  be  equally 
reasonable  and  proper  in  the  most  remote  degree 
of  descent  from  an  original  proprietor  of  an  estate, 
as  in  the  nearest;  because, — however  distant  from 
the  representative  at  the  time, — that  remote  male 
heir,  upon  the  failure  of  those  nearer  to  the  orig¬ 
inal  proprietor  than  he  is,  becomes  in  fact  the  near¬ 
est  male  to  him ,  and  is,  therefore,  preferable  as  his 
representative,  to  a  female  descendant. — A  little 
extension  of  mind  will  enable  us  easily  to  perceive 
that  a  son’s  son,  in  continuation  to  whatever  length 
of  time,  is  preferable  to  a  son’s  daughter,  in  the 
succession  to  an  ancient  inheritance;  in  which  re¬ 
gard  should  be  had  to  the  representation  of  the 
original  proprietor,  and  not  to  that  of  one  of  his 
descendants. 

I  am  aware  of  Blackstone’s  admirable  demon¬ 
stration  of  the  reasonableness  of  the  legal  succes¬ 
sion,  upon  the  principle  of  there  being  the  greatest 
probability  that  the  nearest  heir  of  the  person  who 
last  dies  proprietor  of  an  estate,  is  of  the  blood  of 
the  first  purchaser.  But  supposing  a  pedigree  to  be 
carefully  authenticated  through  all  its  branches, 
instead  of  mere  probability  there  will  be  a  certainty 
that  the  nearest  male  heir,  at  whatever  period,  has  the 
same  right  of  blood  with  the  first  male  heir,  name¬ 
ly,  the  original  purchaser's  eldest  son . 


JOHNSON  275 

lution  satisfactory  to  myself,  will  very  gladly  im¬ 
part  it:  but  whether  I  am  quite  equal  to  it,  I  do 
not  know.  It  is  a  case  compounded  of  law  and 
justice,  and  requires  a  mind  versed  in  juridical 
disquisitions.  Could  not  you  tell  your  whole 
mind  to  Lord  Hailes?  He  is,  you  know,  both  a 
Christian  and  a  Lawyer,  I  suppose  he  is  above 
partiality,  and  above  loquacity;  and,  I  believe, 
he  will  not  think  the  time  lost  in  which  he  may 
quiet  a  disturbed,  or  settle  a  wavering  mind. 
Write  to  me,  as  any  thing  occurs  to  you;  and  if  I 
find  myself  stopped  by  want  of  facts  necessary  to 
be  known,  I  will  make  inquiries  of  you  as  my 
doubts  arise. 

If  your  former  resolutions  should  be  found 
only  fanciful,  you  decide  rightly  in  judging  that 
your  father’s  fancies  may  claim  the  preference; 
but  whether  they  are  fanciful  or  rational,  is  the 
question.  I  really  think  Lord  Hailes  could  help 
us. 

Make  my  compliments  to  dear  Mrs.  Boswell; 
and  tell  her,  that  I  hope  to  be  wanting  in  noth¬ 
ing  that  I  can  contribute  to  bring  you  all  out  of 
your  troubles.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  most  affectionate¬ 
ly,  your  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

London,  Jan.  15,  1776 

To  the  Same 

Dear  Sir,  I  am  going  to  write  upon  a  ques¬ 
tion  which  requires  more  knowledge  of  local 
law,  and  more  acquaintance  with  the  general 
rules  of  inheritance,  than  I  can  claim;  but  I 
write,  because  you  request  it. 

Land  is,  like  any  other  possession,  by  natural 
right  wholly  in  the  power  of  its  present  owner; 
and  may  be  sold,  given,  or  bequeathed,  abso¬ 
lutely  or  conditionally,  as  judgement  shall  di¬ 
rect,  or  passion  incite. 

But  natural  right  would  avail  little  without 
the  protection  of  law;  and  the  primary  notion  of 
law  is  restraint  in  the  exercise  of  natural  right. 
A  man  is  therefore,  in  society,  not  fully  master  of 
what  he  calls  his  own,  but  he  still  retains  all  the 
power  which  law  does  not  take  from  him. 

In  the  exercise  of  the  right  which  law  either 
leaves  or  gives,  regard  is  to  be  paid  to  moral 
obligations. 

Of  the  estate  which  we  are  now  considering, 
your  father  still  retains  such  possession,  with 
such  power  over  it,  that  he  can  sell  it,  and  do 
with  the  money  what  he  will,  without  any  legal 
impediment.  But  when  he  extends  his  power  be¬ 
yond  his  own  life,  by  settling  the  order  of  suc¬ 
cession,  the  law  makes  your  consent  necessary. 

Let  us  suppose  that  he  sells  the  land  to  risk 
the  money  in  some  specious  adventure,  and  in 
that  adventure  loses  the  whole;  his  posterity 
would  be  disappointed;  but  they  could  not  think 
themselves  injured  or  robbed.  If  he  spent  it 
upon  vice  or  pleasure,  his  successors  could  only 
call  him  vicious  and  voluptuous;  they  could  not 
say  that  he  was  injurious  or  unjust. 


276 

He  that  may  do  more  may  do  less.  He  that, 
by  selling,  or  squandering,  may  disinherit  a 
whole  family,  may  certainly  disinherit  part,  by 
a  partial  settlement. 

Laws  are  formed  by  the  manners  and  exi¬ 
gencies  of  particular  times,  and  it  is  but  acciden¬ 
tal  that  they  last  longer  than  their  causes:  the 
limitation  of  feudal  succession  to  the  male  arose 
from  the  obligation  of  the  tenant  to  attend  his 
chief  in  war. 

As  times  and  opinions  are  always  changing,  I 
know  not  whether  it  be  not  usurpation  to  pre¬ 
scribe  rules  to  posterity,  by  presuming  to  judge 
of  what  we  cannot  know:  and  I  know  not 
whether  I  fully  approve  either  your  design  or 
your  father’s,  to  limit  that  succession  which  de¬ 
scended  to  you  unlimited.  If  we  are  to  leave  sar- 
tum  tectum  to  posterity,  what  we  have  without 
any  merit  of  our  own  received  from  our  ances¬ 
tors,  should  not  choice  and  free-will  be  kept  un¬ 
violated?  Is  land  to  be  treated  with  more  rever¬ 
ence  than  liberty?-  If  this  consideration  should 
restrain  your  father  from  disinheriting  some  of 
the  males,  does  it  leave  you  the  power  of  disin¬ 
heriting  all  the  females? 

Can  the  possessor  of  a  feudal  estate  make  any 
will?  Can  he  appoint,  out  of  the  inheritance, 
any  portions  to  his  daughters?  There  seems  to 
be  a  very  shadowy  difference  between  the  pow¬ 
er  of  leaving  land,  and  of  leaving  money  to  be 
raised  from  land;  between  leaving  an  estate  to 
females,  and  leaving  the  male  heir,  in  effect, 
only  their  steward. 

Suppose  at  one  time  a  law  that  allowed  only 
males  to  inherit,  and  during  the  continuance  of 
this  law  many  estates  to  have  descended,  pass¬ 
ing  by  the  females,  to  remoter  heirs.  Suppose 
afterwards  the  law  repealed  in  correspondence 
with  a  change  of  manners,  and  women  made 
capable  of  inheritance;  would  not  then  the  ten¬ 
ure  of  estates  be  changed?  Could  the  women 
have  no  benefit  from  a  law  made  in  their  fa¬ 
vour?  Must  they  be  passed  by  upon  moral  prin¬ 
ciples  for  ever,  because  they  were  once  excluded 
by  a  legal  prohibition?  Or  may  that  which 
passed  only  to  males  by  one  law,  pass  likewise  to 
females  by  another? 

You  mention  your  resolution  to  maintain  the 
right  of  your  brothers:1  I  do  not  see  how  any  of 
their  rights  are  invaded. 

As  your  whole  difficulty  arises  from  the  act  of 
your  ancestor,  who  diverted  the  succession  from 
the  females,  you  enquire,  very  properly,  what 
were  his  motives,  and  what  was  his  intention; 
for  you  certainly  are  not  bound  by  his  act  more 
than  he  intended  to  bind  you,  nor  hold  your 
land  on  harder  or  stricter  terms  than  those  on 
which  it  was  granted. 

Intentions  must  be  gathered  from  acts.  When 
he  left  the  estate  to  his  nephew,  by  excluding 
his  daughters,  wTas  it,  or  was  it  not,  in  his  power 

1Which  term  I  applied  to  all  the  male  heirs. 


[  1776 

to  have  perpetuated  the  succession  to  the  males? 
If  he  could  have  done  it,  he  seems  to  have 
shewn,  by  omitting  it,  that  he  did  not  desire  it 
to  be  done;  and,  upon  your  own  principles,  you 
will  not  easily  prove  your  right  to  destroy  that 
capacity  of  succession  which  your  ancestors  have 
left. 

If  your  ancestor  had  not  the  power  of  making 
a  perpetual  settlement;  and  if,  therefore,  we 
cannot  judge  distinctly  of  his  intentions,  yet  his 
act  can  only  be  considered  as  an  example;  it 
makes  not  an  obligation.  And,  as  you  observe, 
he  set  no  example  of  rigorous  adherence  to  the 
line  of  succession.  He  that  overlooked  a  brother, 
would  not  wonder  that  little  regard  is  shewn  to 
remote  relations. 

As  the  rules  of  succession  are,  in  a  great  part, 
purely  legal,  no  man  can  be  supposed  to  be¬ 
queath  any  thing,  but  upon  legal  terms;  he  can 
grant  no  power  which  the  law  denies;  and  if  he 
makes  no  special  and  definite  limitation,  he  con¬ 
fers  all  the  power  which  the  law  allows. 

Your  ancestor,  for  some  reason,  disinherited 
his  daughters;  but  it  no  more  follows  that  he  in¬ 
tended  this  act  as  a  rule  for  posterity,  than  the 
disinheriting  of  his  brother. 

If,  therefore,  you  ask  by  what  right  your  fa¬ 
ther  admits  daughters  to  inheritance,  ask  your¬ 
self,  first,  by  what  right  you  require  them  to  be 
excluded? 

It  appears,  upon  reflection,  that  your  father 
excludes  nobody;  he  only  admits  nearer  females 
to  inherit  before  males  more  remote;  and  the  ex¬ 
clusion  is  purely  consequential. 

These,  dear  Sir,  are  my  thoughts,  immethodi- 
cal  and  deliberative;  but,  perhaps,  you  may 
find  in  them  some  glimmering  of  evidence. 

I  cannot,  however,  but  again  recommend  to 
you  a  conference  with  Lord  Hailes,  whom  you 
know  to  be  both  a  Lawyer  and  a  Christian. 

Make  my  compliments  to  Mrs.  Boswell,  though 
she  does  not  love  me.  I  am,  Sir,  your  affection¬ 
ate  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

Feb.  3,  1773  [1776] 

I  had  followed  his  recommendation  and  con¬ 
sulted  Lord  Hailes,  who  upon  this  subject  had  a 
firm  opinion  contrary  to  mine.  His  Lordship 
obligingly  took  the  trouble  to  write  me  a  letter, 
in  which  he  discussed  with  legal  and  historical 
learning,  the  points  in  which  I  saw  much  diffi¬ 
culty,  maintaining  that  “the  succession  of  heirs 
general  was  the  succession,  by  the  law  of  Scot¬ 
land,  from  the  throne  to  the  cottage,  as  far  as  we 
can  learn  it  by  record”;  observing  that  the  es¬ 
tate  of  our  family  had  not  been  limited  to  male 
heirs;  and  that  though  a  male  heir  had  in  one 
instance  been  chosen  in  preference  to  nearer  fe¬ 
males,  that  had  been  an  arbitrary  act,  which 
had  seemed  to  be  best  in  the  embarrassed  state 


BOSWELL 


1776]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  277 


of  affairs  at  that  time;  and  the  fact  was,  that 
upon  a  fair  computation  of  the  value  of  land 
and  money  at  the  time,  applied  to  the  estate  and 
the  burthens  upon  it,  there  was  nothing  given  to 
the  male  heir  but  the  skeleton  of  an  estate.  “The 
plea  of  conscience  (said  his  Lordship,)  which  you 
put,  is  a  most  respectable  one,  especially  when 
conscience  and  self  are  on  different  sides.  But  I 
think  that  conscience  is  not  well  informed,  and 
that  self  and  she  ought  on  this  occasion  to  be  of  a 
side.” 

This  letter,  which  had  considerable  influence 
upon  my  mind,  I  sent  to  Dr.  Johnson,  begging 
to  hear  from  him  again,  upon  this  interesting 
question. 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  Having  not  any  acquaintance  with 
the  laws  or  customs  of  Scotland,  I  endeavoured 
to  consider  your  question  upon  general  princi¬ 
ples,  and  found  nothing  of  much  validity  that  I 
could  oppose  to  this  position:  “He  who  inherits  a 
fief  unlimited  by  his  ancestors,  inherits  the  pow¬ 
er  of  limiting  it  according  to  his  own  judgement 
or  opinion.”  If  this  be  true,  you  may  join  with 
your  father. 

Further  consideration  produces  another  con¬ 
clusion:  “He  who  receives  a  fief  unlimited  by 
his  ancestors,  gives  his  heirs  some  reason  to  com¬ 
plain,  if  he  does  not  transmit  it  unlimited  to 
posterity.  For  why  should  he  make  the  state  of 
others  worse  than  his  own,  without  a  reason?”  If 
this  be  true,  though  neither  you  nor  your  father 
are  about  to  do  what  is  quite  right,  but  as  your 
father  violates  (I  think)  the  legal  succession 
least,  he  seems  to  be  nearer  the  right  than  your¬ 
self. 

It  cannot  but  occur  that  “Women  have  natu¬ 
ral  and  equitable  claims  as  well  as  men,  and 
these  claims  are  not  to  be  capriciously  or  lightly 
superseded  or  infringed.”  When  fiefs  implied  mil¬ 
itary  service,  it  is  easily  discerned  why  females 
could  not  inherit  them;  but  that  reason  is  now  at 
an  end.  As  manners  make  laws,  manners  like¬ 
wise  repeal  them. 

These  are  the  general  conclusions  which  I 
have  attained.  None  of  them  are  very  favour¬ 
able  to  your  scheme  of  entail,  nor  perhaps  to 
any  scheme.  My  observation,  that  only  he  who 
acquires  an  estate  may  bequeath  it  capricious¬ 
ly,1  if  it  contains  any  conviction,  includes  this 
position  likewise,  that  only  he  who  acquires  an 
estate  may  entail  it  capriciously.  But  I  think  it 
may  be  safely  presumed,  that  “he  who  inherits 
an  estate,  inherits  all  the  power  legally  concomi¬ 
tant”;  and  that  “He  who  gives  or  leaves  unlim¬ 
ited  an  estate  legally  limitable,  must  be  pre¬ 
sumed  to  give  that  power  of  limitation  which  he 
omitted  to  take  away,  and  to  commit  future 

T  had  reminded  him  of  his  observation  men¬ 
tioned,  ante ,  p.  226. 


contingencies  to  future  prudence.”  In  these  two 
positions  I  believe  Lord  Hailes  will  advise  you 
to  rest;  every  other  notion  of  possession  seems  to 
me  full  of  difficulties  and  embarrassed  with 
scruples. 

If  these  axioms  be  allowed,  you  have  arrived 
now  at  full  liberty  without  the  help  of  particular 
circumstances,  which,  however,  have  in  your 
case  great  weight.  You  very  rightly  observe, 
that  he  who  passing  by  his  brother  gave  the  in¬ 
heritance  to  his  nephew,  could  limit  no  more 
than  he  gave;  and  by  Lord  Hailes’s  estimate  of 
fourteen  years’  purchase,  what  he  gave  was  no 
more  than  you  may  easily  entail  according  to 
your  own  opinion,  if  that  opinion  should  finally 
prevail. 

Lord  Hailes’s  suspicion  that  entails  are  en¬ 
croachments  on  the  dominion  of  Providence, 
may  be  extended  to  all  hereditary  privileges  and 
all  permanent  institutions;  I  do  not  see  why  it 
may  not  be  extended  to  any  provision  for  the 
present  hour,  since  all  care  about  futurity  pro¬ 
ceeds  upon  a  supposition,  that  we  know  at  least 
in  some  degree  what  will  be  future.  Of  the  fu¬ 
ture  we  certainly  know  nothing;  but  we  may 
form  conjectures  from  the  past;  and  the  power 
of  forming  conjectures,  includes,  in  my  opinion, 
the  duty  of  acting  in  conformity  to  that  proba¬ 
bility  which  we  discover.  Providence  gives  the 
power,  of  which  reason  teaches  the  use.  I  am, 
dear  Sir,  your  most  faithful  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

Feb.  9,  1776 

I  hope  I  shall  get  some  ground  now  with  Mrs. 
Boswell;  make  my  compliments  to  her,  and  to 
the  little  people. 

Don’t  burn  papers;  they  may  be  safe  enough 
in  your  own  box, — you  will  wish  to  see  them 
hereafter. 

To  the  Same 

Dear  Sir,  To  the  letters  which  I  have  written 
about  your  great  question  I  have  nothing  to 
add.  If  your  conscience  is  satisfied,  you  have 
now  only  your  prudence  to  consult.  I  long  for  a 
letter,  that  I  may  know  how  this  troublesome 
and  vexatious  question  is  at  last  decided.2  I 
hope  that  it  will  at  last  end  well.  Lord  Hailes’s 
letter  was  very  friendly,  and  very  seasonable, 

2The  entail  framed  by  my  father  with  various 
judicious  clauses,  was  settled  by  him  and  me,  set¬ 
tling  the  estate  upon  the  male  heirs  of  his  grand¬ 
father,  which  I  found  had  been  already  done  by 
my  grandfather,  imperfectly,  but  so  as  to  be  de¬ 
feated  only  by  selling  the  lands.  I  was  freed  by  Dr. 
Johnson  from  scruples  of  conscientious  obligation, 
and  could,  therefore,  gratify  my  father.  But  my 
opinion  and  partiality  for  male  succession,  in  its 
full  extent,  remained  unshaken.  Yet  let  me  not  be 
thought  harsh  or  unkind  to  daughters:  for  my  no¬ 
tion  is,  that  they  should  be  treated  with  great  af¬ 
fection  and  tenderness,  and  always  participate  of 
the  prosperity  of  the  family. 


278  BOSWELL  [1776 

but  I  think  his  aversion  from  entails  has  some-  When  I  wrote  last,  I  sent,  l  think,  ten  pack- 


thing  in  it  like  superstition.  Providence  is  not 
counteracted  by  any  means  which  Providence 
pu  ts  into  our  power.  The  continuance  and  propa¬ 
gation  of  families  makes  a  great  part  of  the  Jew¬ 
ish  law,  and  is  by  no  means  prohibited  in  the 
Christian  institution,  though  the  necessity  of  it 
continues  no  longer.  Hereditary  tenures  are  es¬ 
tablished  in  all  civilized  countries,  and  are  ac¬ 
companied  in  most  with  hereditary  authority. 
Sir  William  Temple  considers  our  constitution 
as  defective,  that  there  is  not  an  unalienable  es¬ 
tate  in  land  connected  with  a  peerage;  and  Lord 
Bacon  mentions  as  a  proof  that  the  Turks  are 
Barbarians,  their  want  of  Stirpes ,  as  he  calls 
them,  or  hereditary  rank.  Do  not  let  your  mind, 
when  it  is  freed  from  the  supposed  necessity  of  a 
rigorous  entail,  be  entangled  with  contrary  ob¬ 
jections,  and  think  all  entails  unlawful,  till  you 
have  cogent  arguments,  which  I  believe  you  will 
never  find.  I  am  afraid  of  scruples. 

I  have  now  sent  all  Lord  Hailes’s  papers;  part 
I  found  hidden  in  a  drawer  in  which  I  had  laid 
them  for  security,  and  had  forgotten  them.  Part 
of  these  are  written  twice:  I  have  returned  both 
the  copies.  Part  I  had  read  before. 

Be  so  kind  as  to  return  Lord  Hailes  my  most 
respectful  thanks  for  his  first  volume;  his  accu¬ 
racy  strikes  me  with  wonder;  his  narrative  is  far 
superiour  to  that  of  Henault,  as  I  have  formerly 
mentioned. 

I  am  afraid  that  the  trouble,  which  my  irreg¬ 
ularity  and  delay  has  cost  him,  is  greater,  far 
greater,  than  any  good  that  I  can  do  him  will 
ever  recompense;  but  if  I  have  any  more  copy, 
I  will  try  to  do  better. 

Pray  let  me  know  if  Mrs.  Boswell  is  friends 
with  me,  and  pay  my  respects  to  Veronica,  and 
Euphemia,  and  Alexander.  I  am,  Sir,  your 
most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

February  15,  1775  [1776] 

Mr.  Boswell  to  Dr.  Johnson 

Edinburgh,  Feb.  20,  1776 

.  .  .  You  have  illuminated  my  mind  and  re¬ 
lieved  me  from  imaginary  shackles  of  conscien¬ 
tious  obligation.  Were  it  necessary,  I  could  im¬ 
mediately  join  in  an  entail  upon  the  series  of 
heirs  approved  by  my  father;  but  it  is  better  not 
to  act  too  suddenly. 

Dr.  Johnson  to  Mr.  Boswell 

Dear  Sir,  I  am  glad  that  what  I  could  think 
or  say  has  at  all  contributed  to  quiet  your 
thoughts.  Your  resolution  not  to  act,  till  your 
opinion  is  confirmed  by  more  deliberation,  is 
very  just.  If  you  have  been  scrupulous,  do  not 
now  be  rash.  I  hope  that  as  you  think  more,  and 
take  opportunities  of  talking  with  men  intelli¬ 
gent  in  questions  of  property,  you  will  be  able 
to  free  yourself  from  every  difficulty. 


ets.  Did  you  receive  them  all? 

You  must  tell  Mrs.  Boswell  that  I  suspected 
her  to  have  written  without  your  knowledge,1 
and  therefore  did  not  return  any  answer,  lest  a 
clandestine  correspondence  should  have  been 
perniciously  discovered.  I  will  write  to  her  soon. 
...  I  am,  dear  Sir,  most  affectionately  yours, 

Sam.  Johnson 

Feb.  24,  1776 

Having  communicated  to  Lord  Hailes  what 
Dr  .Johnson  wrote  concerning  the  quest  ion  which 
perplexed  me  so  much,  his  Lordship  wrote  to 
me:  “Your  scruples  have  produced  more  fruit 
than  I  ever  expected  from  them;  an  excellent 
dissertation  on  general  principles  of  morals  and 
law.” 

I  wrote  to  Dr.  Johnson  on  the  20th  of  Febru¬ 
ary,  complaining  of  melancholy,  and  expressing 
a  strong  desire  to  be  with  him;  informing  him 
that  the  ten  packets  came  all  safe;  that  Lord 
Hailes  was  much  obliged  to  him,  and  said  he 
had  almost  wholly  removed  his  scruples  against 
entails. 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  I  have  not  had  your  letter  half  an 
hour;  as  you  lay  so  much  weight  upon  my  no¬ 
tions,  I  should  think  it  not  just  to  delay  my 
answer. 

I  am  very  sorry  that  your  melancholy  should 
return,  and  should  be  sorry  likewise  if  it  could 
have  no  relief  but  from  company.  My  counsel 
you  may  have  when  you  are  pleased  to  require 
it;  but  of  my  company  you  cannot  in  the  next 
month  have  much,  for  Mr.  Thrale  will  take  me 
to  Italy,  he  says,  on  the  first  of  April. 

Let  me  warn  you  very  earnestly  against  scru¬ 
ples.  I  am  glad  that  you  are  reconciled  to  your 
settlement,  and  think  it  a  great  honour  to  have 
shaken  Lord  Hailes’s  opinion  of  entails.  Do  not, 
however,  hope  wholly  to  reason  away  your 
troubles;  do  not  feed  them  with  attention,  and 
they  will  die  imperceptibly  away.  Fix  your 
thoughts  upon  your  business,  fill  your  intervals 
with  company,  and  sunshine  will  again  break  in 
upon  your  mind.  If  you  will  come  to  me,  you 
must  come  very  quickly;  and  even  then  I  know 
not  but  we  may  scour  the  country  together,  for 
I  have  a  mind  to  see  Oxford  and  Lichfield,  be¬ 
fore  I  set  out  on  this  long  journey.  To  this  I  can 
only  add,  that  I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  most  affec¬ 
tionate  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

March  5,  1776 

To  the  Same 

Dear  Sir,  Very  early  in  April  we  leave  Eng¬ 
land,  and  in  the  beginning  of  the  next  week  I 

lA  letter  to  him  on  the  interesting  subject  of  the 
family  settlement,  which  I  had  read. 


1776]  LIFE  OF 

shall  leave  London  for  a  short  time;  of  this  I 
think  it  necessary  to  inform  you,  that  you  may 
not  be  disappointed  in  any  of  your  enterprises. 
I  had  not  fully  resolved  to  go  into  the  country 
before  this  day. 

Please  to  make  my  compliments  to  Lord 
Hailes;  and  mention  very  particularly  to  Mrs. 
Boswell  my  hope  that  she  is  reconciled  to,  Sir, 
your  faithful  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

March  12,  1776 

Above  thirty  years  ago,  the  heirs  of  Lord  Chan¬ 
cellor  Clarendon  presented  the  University  of  Ox¬ 
ford  with  the  continuation  of  his  History ,  and 
such  other  of  his  Lordship’s  manuscripts  as  had 
not  been  published,  on  condition  that  the  prof¬ 
its  arising  from  their  publication  should  be  ap¬ 
plied  to  the  establishment  of  a  Manege  in  the 
University.  The  gift  was  accepted  in  full  convo¬ 
cation.  A  person  being  now  recommended  to 
Dr.  Johnson,  as  fit  to  superintend  this  proposed 
riding-school,  he  exerted  himself  with  that  zeal 
for  which  he  was  remarkable  upon  every  similar 
occasion.  But,  on  enquiry  into  the  matter,  he 
found  that  the  scheme  was  not  likely  to  be  soon 
carried  into  execution;  the  profits  arising  from 
the  Clarendon  press  being,  from  some  misman¬ 
agement,  very  scanty.  Thishavingbeenexplained 
to  him  by  a  respectable  dignitary  of  the  church, 
who  had  good  means  of  knowing  it,  he  wrote  a 
letter  upon  the  subject,  which  at  once  exhibits 
his  extraordinary  precision  and  acuteness,  and 
his  warm  attachment  to  his  Alma  Mater. 

To  the  Reverend  Dr.  Wetherell,  Master 
of  University  College,  Oxford 

Dear  Sir,  Few  things  are  more  unpleasant 
than  the  transaction  of  business  with  men  who 
are  above  knowing  or  caring  what  they  have  to 
do;  such  as  the  trustees  for  Lord  Corn  bury ’s  in¬ 
stitution  will,  perhaps,  appear,  when  you  have 
read  Dr.  *******’s  letter. 

The  last  part  of  the  Doctor’s  letter  is  of  great 
importance.  The  complaint1  which  he  makes  I 
have  heard  long  ago,  and  did  not  know  but  it  was 
redressed.  It  is  unhappy  that  a  practice  so  erro¬ 
neous  has  not  yet  been  altered;  for  altered  it 
must  be,  or  our  press  will  be  useless,  with  all  its 
privileges.  The  booksellers,  who,  like  all  other 
men,  have  strong  prejudices  in  their  own  fa¬ 
vour,  are  enough  inclined  to  think  the  practice 
of  printing  and  selling  books  by  any  but  them¬ 
selves,  an  encroachment  on  the  rights  of  their 
fraternity;  and  have  need  of  stronger  induce- 

JI  suppose  the  complaint  was,  that  the  trustees 
of  the  Oxford  Press  did  not  allow  the  London  book¬ 
sellers  a  sufficient  profit  upon  vending  their  publi¬ 
cations. 


JOHNSON  279 

ments  to  circulate  academical  publications  than 
those  of  one  another;  for,  of  that  mutual  co-op¬ 
eration  by  which  the  general  trade  is  carried  on, 
the  University  can  bear  no  part.  Of  those  whom 
he  neither  loves  nor  fears,  and  from  whom  he 
expects  no  reciprocation  of  good  offices,  why 
should  any  man  promote  the  interest  but  for 
profit?  I  suppose,  with  all  our  scholastick,  ignor¬ 
ance  of  mankind,  we  are  still  too  knowing  to  ex¬ 
pect  that  the  booksellers  will  erect  themselves 
into  patrons,  and  buy  and  sell  under  the  influ¬ 
ence  of  a  disinterested  zeal  for  the  promotion  of 
learning. 

To  the  booksellers,  if  we  look  for  either  hon¬ 
our  or  profit  from  our  press,  not  only  their  com¬ 
mon  profit,  but  something  more  must  be 
allowed;  and  if  books,  printed  at  Oxford,  are 
expected  to  be  rated  at  a  high  price,  that  price 
must  be  levied  on  the  publick,  and  paid  by  the 
ultimate  purchaser,  not  by  the  intermediate 
agents.  What  price  shall  be  set  upon  the  book, 
is,  to  the  booksellers,  wholly  indifferent,  pro¬ 
vided  that  they  gain  a  proportionate  profit  by 
negotiating  the  sale. 

Why  books  printed  at  Oxford  should  be  par¬ 
ticularly  dear,  I  am,  however,  unable  to  find. 
We  pay  no  rent;  we  inherit  many  of  our  instru¬ 
ments  and  materials;  lodging  and  victuals  are 
cheaper  than  at  London;  and,  therefore,  work¬ 
manship  ought,  at  least,  not  to  be  dearer.  Our 
expences  are  naturally  less  than  those  of  book¬ 
sellers;  and,  in  most  cases,  communities  are  con¬ 
tent  with  less  profit  than  individuals. 

It  is,  perhaps,  not  considered  through  how 
many  hands  a  book  often  passes,  before  it  comes 
into  those  of  the  reader;  or  what  part  of  the 
profit  each  hand  must  retain,  as  a  motive  for 
transmitting  it  to  the  next. 

We  will  call  our  primary  agent  in  London, 
Mr.  Cadell,  who  receives  our  books  from  us, 
gives  them  room  in  his  warehouse,  and  issues 
them  on  demand;  by  him  they  are  sold  to  Mr. 
Dilly  a  wholesale  bookseller,  who  sends  them 
into  the  country;  and  the  last  seller  is  the  coun¬ 
try  bookseller.  Here  are  three  profits  to  be  paid 
between  the  printer  and  the  reader,  or  in  the 
style  of  commerce,  between  the  manufacturer 
and  the  consumer;  and  if  any  of  these  profits  is 
too  penuriously  distributed,  the  process  of  com¬ 
merce  is  interrupted. 

We  are  now  come  to  the  practical  question, 
what  is  to  be  done?  You  will  tell  me,  with  rea¬ 
son,  that  I  have  said  nothing,  till  I  declare  how 
much,  according  to  my  opinion,  of  the  ultimate 
price  ought  to  be  distributed  through  the  whole 
succession  of  sale. 

The  deduction,  I  am  afraid,  will  appear  very 
great:  but  let  it  be  considered  before  it  is  re¬ 
fused.  We  must  allow,  for  profit,  between  thirty 
and  thirty-five  per  cent .,  between  six  and  seven 
shillings  in  the  pound;  that  is,  for  every  book 
which  costs  the  last  buyer  twenty  shillings,  we 


28o 

must  charge  Mr.  Cadell  with  something  less 
than  fourteen.  We  must  set  the  copies  at  four¬ 
teen  shillings  each,  and  superadd  what  is  called 
the  quarterly-book,  or  for  every  hundred  books  so 
charged  we  must  deliver  an  hundred  and  four. 

The  profits  will  then  stand  thus: — 

Mr.  Cadell,  who  runs  no  hazard,  and  gives 
no  credit,  will  be  paid  for  warehouse  room  and 
attendance  by  a  shilling  profit  on  each  book, 
and  his  chance  of  the  quarterly-book. 

Mr.  Dilly,  who  buys  the  book  for  fifteen  shil¬ 
lings,  and  who  will  expect  the  quarterly-book  if 
he  takes  five  and  twenty,  will  send  it  to  his 
country  customer  at  sixteen  and  six,  by  which, 
at  the  hazard  of  loss,  and  the  certainty  of  long 
credit,  he  gains  the  regular  profit  of  ten  per  cent . 
which  is  expected  in  the  wholesale  trade. 

The  country  bookseller,  buying  at  sixteen  and 
sixpence,  and  commonly  trusting  a  considerable 
time,  gains  but  three  and  sixpence,  and  if  he 
trusts  a  year,  not  much  more  than  two  and  six¬ 
pence;  otherwise  than  as  he  may,  perhaps,  take 
as  long  credit  as  he  gives. 

With  less  profit  than  this,  and  more  you  see 
he  cannot  have,  the  country  bookseller  cannot 
live;  for  his  receipts  are  small,  and  his  debts 
sometimes  bad. 

Thus,  dear  Sir,  I  have  been  incited  by  Dr. 
*******jg  ]etter  to  give  you  a  detail  of  the  cir¬ 
culation  of  books,  which,  perhaps,  every  man 
has  not  had  opportunity  of  knowing;  and  which 
those  who  know  it,  do  not,  perhaps,  always  dis¬ 
tinctly  consider.  I  am,  &c. 

Sam.  Johnson1 

March  12,  1776 

Having  arrived  in  London  late  on  Friday,  the 
15th  of  March,  I  hastened  next  morning  to  wait 
on  Dr.  Johnson,  at  his  house;  but  found  he  was 
removed  from  Johnson’s-court,  No.  7?  to  Bolt- 
court,  No.  8,  still  keeping  to  his  favourite  Fleet- 
street.  My  reflection  at  the  time  upon  this  change 
as  marked  in  my  Journal,  is  as  follows:  “I  felt  a 
foolish  regret  that  he  had  left  a  court  which  bore 
his  name;2  but  it  was  not  foolish  to  be  affected 
with  some  tenderness  of  regard  for  a  place  in 
which  I  had  seen  him  a  great  deal,  from  whence 
I  had  often  issued  a  better  and  a  happier  man 
than  when  I  went  in,  and  which  had  often  ap¬ 
peared  to  my  imagination  while  I  trod  its  pave¬ 
ments,  in  the  solemn  darkness  of  the  night,  to  be 
sacred  to  wisdom  and  piety.”  Being  informed 

JI  am  happy  in  giving  this  full  and  clear  state¬ 
ment  to  the  publick,  to  vindicate,  by  the  authority 
of  the  greatest  authour  of  his  age,  that  respectable 
body  of  men,  the  Booksellers  of  London,  from  vul¬ 
gar  reflections,  as  if  their  profits  were  exorbitant, 
when,  in  truth,  Dr.  Johnson  has  here  allowed  them 
more  than  they  usually  demand. 

2He  said,  when  in  Scotland,  that  he  was  Johnson 
of  that  Ilk . 


[  1776 

that  he  was  at  Mr.  Thrale’s,  in  the  Borough,  I 
hastened  thither,  and  found  Mrs.  Thrale  and 
him  at  breakfast.  I  was  kindly  welcomed.  In  a 
moment  he  was  in  a  full  glow  of  conversation, 
and  I  felt  myself  elevated  as  if  brought  into 
another  state  of  being.  Mrs.  Thrale  and  I  looked 
to  each  other  while  he  talked,  and  our  looks  ex¬ 
pressed  our  congenial  admiration  and  affection 
for  him.  I  shall  ever  recollect  this  scene  with  great 
pleasure.  I  exclaimed  to  her,  “I  am  now,  intel¬ 
lectually,  Hermippus  redivivus ,  I  am  quite  restored 
by  him,  by  transfusion  of  mind”z  “There  are 
many  (she  replied)  who  admire  and  respect  Mr. 
Johnson;  but  you  and  I  love  him.” 

He  seemed  very  happy  in  the  near  prospect 
of  going  to  Italy  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Thrale.  “But, 
(said  he,)  before  leaving  England  I  am  to  take  a 
jaunt  to  Oxford,  Birmingham,  my  native  city 
Lichfield,  and  my  old  friend,  Dr.  Taylor’s,  at 
Ashbourn,  in  Derbyshire.  I  shall  go  in  a  few  days, 
and  you,  Boswell,  shall  go  with  me.”  I  was  ready 
to  accompany  him;  being  willing  even  to  leave 
London  to  have  the  pleasure  of  his  conversation. 

I  mentioned  with  much  regret  the  extrava¬ 
gance  of  the  representative  of  a  great  family  in 
Scotland,  by  which  there  was  danger  of  its  be¬ 
ing  ruined;  and  as  Johnson  respected  it  for  its 
antiquity,  he  joined  with  me  in  thinking  it  would 
be  happy  if  this  person  should  die.  Mrs.  Thrale 
seemed  shocked  at  this,  as  feudal  barbarity;  and 
said,  “I  do  not  understand  this  preference  of  the 
estate  to  its  owner;  of  the  land  to  the  man  who 
walks  upon  that  land.”  Johnson.  “Nay  Madam, 
it  is  not  a  preference  of  the  land  to  its  owner, 
it  is  the  preference  of  a  family  to  an  individ¬ 
ual.  Here  is  an  establishment  in  a  country,  which 
is  of  importance  for  ages,  not  only  to  the  chief 
but  to  his  people;  an  establishment  which  ex¬ 
tends  upwards  and  downwards;  that  this  should 
be  destroyed  by  one  idle  fellow  is  a  sad  thing.” 

He  said,  “Entails  are  good,  because  it  is  good 
to  preserve  in  a  country,  series  of  men,  to  whom 
the  people  are  accustomed  to  look  up  as  to  their 
leaders.  But  I  am  for  leaving  a  quantity  of  land 
in  commerce,  to  excite  industry,  and  keep  money 
in  the  country;  for  if  no  land  were  to  be  bought 
in  the  country,  there  would  be  no  encourage¬ 
ment  to  acquire  wealth,  because  a  family  could 
not  be  founded  there;  or  if  it  were  acquired,  it 
must  be  carried  away  to  another  country  where 
land  may  be  bought.  And  although  the  land  in 
every  country  will  remain  the  same,  and  be  as 
fertile  where  there  is  no  money,  as  where  there 
is,  yet  all  that  portion  of  the  happiness  of  civil 
life,  which  is  produced  by  money  circulating  in 

3See  ante ,  p.  1 1 8. 


BOSWELL 


28i 


1776  ]  LIFE  OF 

a  country,  would  be  lost.”  Boswell.  “Then, 
Sir,  would  it  be  for  the  advantage  of  a  country 
that  all  its  lands  were  sold  at  once?”  Johnson. 
“So  far,  Sir,  as  money  produces  good,  it  would 
be  an  advantage;  for,  then  that  country  would 
have  as  much  money  circulating  in  it  as  it  is 
worth.  But  to  be  sure  this  would  be  counterbal¬ 
anced  by  disadvantages  attending  a  total  change 
of  proprietors.” 

I  expressed  my  opinion  that  the  power  of  en¬ 
tailing  should  be  limited  thus:  “That  there  should 
be  one  third,  or  perhaps  one  half  of  the  land  of  a 
country  kept  free  for  commerce;  that  the  pro¬ 
portion  allowed  to  be  entailed,  should  be  par¬ 
celled  out  so  that  no  family  could  entail  above  a 
certain  quantity.  Let  a  family  according  to  the 
abilities  of  its  representatives,  be  richer  or  poor¬ 
er  in  different  generations,  or  always  rich  if  its 
representatives  be  always  wise:  but  let  its  abso¬ 
lute  permanency  be  moderate.  In  this  way  we 
should  be  certain  of  there  being  always  a  num¬ 
ber  of  established  roots;  and  as  in  the  course  of 
nature,  there  is  in  every  age  an  extinction  of 
some  families,  there  would  be  continual  open¬ 
ings  for  men  ambitious  of  perpetuity,  to  plant  a 
stock  in  the  entail  ground.”1  Johnson.  “Why, 
Sir,  mankind  will  be  better  able  to  regulate  the 
system  of  entails,  when  the  evil  of  too  much  land 
being  locked  up  by  them  is  felt,  than  we  can  do 
at  present  when  it  is  not  felt.” 

I  mentioned  Dr.  Adam  Smith’s  book  on  The 
Wealth  of  Nations,  which  was  just  published,  and 
that  Sir  John  Pringle  had  observed  to  me,  that 
Dr.  Smith,  who  had  never  been  in  trade,  could 
not  be  expected  to  write  well  on  that  subject 
any  more  than  a  lawyer  upon  physick.  Johnson. 
“He  is  mistaken,  Sir:  a  man  who  has  never  been 
engaged  in  trade  himself  may  undoubtedly  write 
well  upon  trade,  and  there  is  nothing  which  re¬ 
quires  more  to  be  illustrated  by  philosophy  than 
trade  does.  As  to  mere  wealth,  that  is  to  say, 
money,  it  is  clear  that  one  nation  or  one  indi¬ 
vidual  cannot  increase  its  store  but  by  making 
another  poorer:  but  trade  procures  what  is  more 
valuable,  the  reciprocation  of  the  peculiar  ad¬ 
vantages  of  different  countries.  A  merchant  sei¬ 
che  privilege  of  perpetuating  in  a  family  an  es¬ 
tate  and  arms  indefeasibly  from  generation  to  gen¬ 
eration,  is  enjoyed  by  none  of  his  Majesty’s  subjects 
except  in  Scotland,  where  the  legal  fiction  of  fine 
and  recovery  is  unknown.  It  is  a  privilege  so  proud, 
that  I  should  think  it  would  be  proper  to  have  the 
exercise  of  it  dependent  on  the  royal  prerogative.  It 
seems  absurd  to  permit  the  power  of  perpetuating 
their  representation,  to  men,  who  having  had  no 
eminent  merit,  have  truly  no  name.  The  King,  as 
the  impartial  father  of  his  people,  would  never  re¬ 
fuse  to  grant  the  privilege  to  those  who  deserved  it. 


JOHNSON 

dom  thinks  but  of  his  own  particular  trade.  To 
write  a  good  book  upon  it,  a  man  must  have  ex¬ 
tensive  views.  It  is  not  necessary  to  have  prac¬ 
tised,  to  write  well  upon  a  subject.”  I  mentioned 
law  as  a  subject  on  which  no  man  could  write 
well  without  practice.  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  in 
England,  where  so  much  money  is  to  be  got  by 
the  practice  of  the  law,  most  of  our  writers  upon 
it  have  been  in  practice;  though  Blackstone  had 
not  been  much  in  practice  when  he  published 
his  Commentaries.  But  upon  the  Continent,  the 
great  writers  on  law  have  not  all  been  in  prac¬ 
tice:  Grotius,  indeed,  was;  but  Puffendorf  was 
not,  Burlamaqui  was  not.” 

When  we  had  talked  of  the  great  consequence 
which  a  man  acquired  by  being  employed  in  his 
profession,  I  suggested  a  doubt  of  the  justice  of 
the  general  opinion,  that  it  is  improper  in  a  law¬ 
yer  to  solicit  employment;  for  why,  I  urged, 
should  it  not  be  equally  allowable  to  solicit  that 
as  the  means  of  consequence,  as  it  is  to  solicit 
votes  to  be  elected  a  member  of  Parliament?  Mr. 
Strahan  had  told  me  that  a  countryman  of  his 
and  mine,  who  had  risen  to  eminence  in  the  law, 
had,  when  first  making  his  way,  solicited  him  to 
get  him  employed  in  city  causes.  Johnson.  “Sir, 
it  is  wrong  to  stir  up  law-suits;  but  when  once  it 
is  certain  that  a  law-suit  is  to  go  on,  there  is 
nothing  wrong  in  a  lawyer’s  endeavouring  that 
he  shall  have  the  benefit,  rather  than  another.” 
Boswell.  “You  would  not  solicit  employment, 
Sir,  if  you  were  a  lawyer.”  Johnson.  “No,  Sir, 
but  not  because  I  should  think  it  wrong,  but  be¬ 
cause  I  should  disdain  it.”  This  was  a  good  dis¬ 
tinction,  which  will  be  felt  by  men  of  just  pride. 
He  proceeded:  “However,  I  would  not  have  a 
lawyer  to  be  wanting  to  himself  in  using  fair 
means.  I  would  have  him  to  inject  a  little  hint 
now  and  then,  to  prevent  his  being  overlooked.” 

Lord  Mountstuart’s  bill  for  a  Scotch  Militia, 
in  supporting  which  his  Lordship  had  made  an 
able  speech  in  the  House  of  Commons,  was  now 
a  pretty  general  topick  of  conversation.  John¬ 
son.  “As  Scotland  contributes  so  little  land-tax 
towards  the  general  support  of  the  nation,  it 
ought  not  to  have  a  militia  paid  out  of  the  gen¬ 
eral  fund,  unless  it  should  be  thought  for  the 
general  interest,  that  Scotland  should  be  pro¬ 
tected  from  an  invasion,  which  no  man  can 
think  will  happen;  for  what  enemy  would  in¬ 
vade  Scotland,  where  there  is  nothing  to  be  got? 
No,  Sir;  now  that  the  Scotch  have  not  the  pay 
of  English  soldiers  spent  among  them,  as  so 
many  troops  are  sent  abroad,  they  are  trying  to 
get  money  another  way,  by  having  a  militia 
paid.  If  they  are  afraid,  and  seriously  desire  to 


282  BOSWELL  [17  76 


have  an  armed  force  to  defend  them,  they  should 
pay  for  it.  Your  scheme  is  to  retain  a  part  of 
your  land-tax,  by  making  us  pay  and  clothe 
your  militia.”  Boswell.  “You  should  not  talk 
of  we  and  you,  Sir:  there  is  now  an  Union”  John¬ 
son.  “There  must  be  a  distinction  of  interest, 
while  the  proportions  of  land-tax  are  so  unequal. 
If  Yorkshire  should  say,  ‘Instead  of  paying  our 
land-tax,  we  will  keep  a  greater  number  of  mili¬ 
tia/  it  would  be  unreasonable.”  In  this  argu¬ 
ment  my  friend  was  certainly  in  the  wrong.  The 
land-tax  is  as  unequally  proportioned  between 
different  parts  of  England,  as  between  England 
and  Scotland;  nay,  it  is  considerably  unequal  in 
Scotland  itself.  But  the  land-tax  is  but  a  small 
part  of  the  numerous  branches  of  publick  reve¬ 
nue,  all  of  which  Scotland  pays  precisely  as 
England  does.  A  French  invasion  made  in  Scot¬ 
land  would  soon  penetrate  into  England. 

He  thus  discoursed  upon  supposed  obligation 
in  settling  estates: — “Where  a  man  gets  the  un¬ 
limited  property  of  an  estate,  there  is  no  obliga¬ 
tion  upon  him  injustice  to  leave  it  to  one  person 
rather  than  to  another.  There  is  a  motive  of 
preference  from  kindness ,  and  this  kindness  is 
generally  entertained  for  the  nearest  relation.  If 
I  owe  a  particular  man  a  sum  of  money,  I  am 
obliged  to  let  that  man  have  the  next  money  I 
get,  and  cannot  in  justice  let  another  have  it: 
but  if  I  owe  money  to  no  man,  I  may  dispose  of 
what  I  get  as  I  please.  There  is  not  a  debitum 
justitice  to  a  man’s  next  heir;  there  is  only  a 
debitum  caritatis.  It  is  plain,  then,  that  I  have 
morally  a  choice,  according  to  my  liking.  If  I 
have  a  brother  in  want,  he  has  a  claim  from 
affection  to  my  assistance;  but  if  I  have  also  a 
brother  in  want,  whom  I  like  better,  he  has  a 
preferable  claim.  The  right  of  an  heir  at  law  is 
only  this,  that  he  is  to  have  the  succession  to  an 
estate,  in  case  no  other  person  is  appointed  to  it 
by  the  owner.  His  right  is  merely  preferable  to 
that  of  the  King.” 

We  got  into  a  boat  to  cross  over  to  Black- 
friars;  and  as  we  moved  along  the  Thames,  I 
talked  to  him  of  a  little  volume,  which,  alto¬ 
gether  unknown  to  him,  was  advertised  to  be 
published  in  a  few  days,  under  the  title  of  John - 
soniana ,  or  Bon- Mots  of  Dr.  Johnson.  Johnson. 
“Sir,  it  is  a  mighty  impudent  thing.”  Boswell. 
“Pray,  Sir,  could  you  have  no  redress  if  you  were 
to  prosecute  a  publisher  for  bringing  out,  under 
your  name,  what  you  never  said,  and  ascribing 
to  you  dull  stupid  nonsense,  or  making  you 
swear  profanely,  as  many  ignorant  relaters  of 
your  bon-mots  do?”  Johnson.  “No,  Sir;  there  will 
always  be  some  truth  mixed  with  the  falsehood. 


and  how  can  it  be  ascertained  how  much  is  true 
and  how  much  is  false?  Besides,  Sir,  what  dam¬ 
ages  would  a  jury  give  me  for  having  been  rep¬ 
resented  as  swearing?”  Boswell.  “I  think,  Sir, 
you  should  at  least  disavow  such  a  publication, 
because  the  world  and  posterity  might  with 
much  plausible  foundation  say,  ‘Here  is  a  vol¬ 
ume  which  was  publickly  advertised  and  came 
out  in  Dr.  Johnson’s  own  time,  and,  by  his 
silence,  was  admitted  by  him  to  be  genuine.’  ” 
Johnson.  “I  shall  give  myself  no  trouble  about 
the  matter.” 

He  was,  perhaps,  above  suffering  from  such 
spurious  publications;  but  I  could  not  help 
thinking,  that  many  men  would  be  much  in¬ 
jured  in  their  reputation,  by  having  absurd  and 
vicious  sayings  imputed  to  them;  and  that  re¬ 
dress  ought  in  such  cases  to  be  given. 

He  said,  “The  value  of  every  story  depends 
on  its  being  true.  A  story  is  a  picture  either  of  an 
individual  or  of  human  nature  in  general:  if  it 
be  false,  it  is  a  picture  of  nothing.  For  instance: 
suppose  a  man  should  tell  that  Johnson,  before 
setting  out  for  Italy,  as  he  had  to  cross  the  Alps, 
sat  down  to  make  himself  wings.  This  many 
people  would  believe;  but  it  would  be  a  picture 
of  nothing.  ********  (naming  a  worthy  friend 
of  ours),  used  to  think  a  story,  a  story,  till  I 
shewed  him  that  truth  was  essential  to  it.”  I 
observed,  that  Foote  entertained  us  with  stories 
which  were  not  true;  but  that,  indeed,  it  was 
properly  not  as  narratives  that  Foote’s  stories 
pleased  us,  but  as  collections  of  ludicrous  images. 
Johnson.  “Foote  is  quite  impartial,  for  he  tells 
lies  of  every  body.” 

The  importance  of  strict  and  scrupulous  ver¬ 
acity  cannot  be  too  often  inculcated.  Johnson 
was  known  to  be  so  rigidly  attentive  to  it,  that 
even  in  his  common  conversation  the  slightest 
circumstance  was  mentioned  with  exact  preci¬ 
sion.  The  knowledge  of  his  having  such  a  prin¬ 
ciple  and  habit  made  his  friends  have  a  perfect 
reliance  on  the  truth  of  every  thing  that  he  told, 
however  it  might  have  been  doubted  if  told  by 
many  others.  As  an  instance  of  this,  I  may  men¬ 
tion  an  odd  incident  which  he  related  as  having 
happened  to  him  one  night  in  Fleet-street.  “A 
gentlewoman  (said  he),  begged  I  would  give  her 
my  arm  to  assist  her  in  crossing  the  street,  which 
I  accordingly  did;  upon  which  she  offered  me  a 
shilling,  supposing  me  to  be  the  watchman.  I 
perceived  that  she  was  somewhat  in  liquor.” 
This,  if  told  by  most  people,  would  have  been 
thought  an  invention;  when  told  by  Johnson,  it 
was  believed  by  his  friends  as  much  as  if  they 
had  seen  what  passed. 


1776]  LIFE  OF 

We  landed  at  the  Temple-stairs,  where  we 
parted. 

I  found  him  in  the  evening  in  Mrs.  Williams’s 
room.  We  talked  of  religious  orders.  He  said, 
“It  is  as  unreasonable  for  a  man  to  go  into  a 
Carthusian  convent  for  fear  of  being  immoral, 
as  for  a  man  to  cut  off  his  hands  for  fear  he 
should  steal.  There  is,  indeed,  great  resolution  in 
the  immediate  act  of  dismembering  himself;  but 
when  that  is  once  done,  he  has  no  longer  any 
merit:  for  though  it  is  out  of  his  power  to  steal, 
yet  he  may  all  his  life  be  a  thief  in  his  heart.  So 
when  a  man  has  once  become  a  Carthusian,  he 
is  obliged  to  continue  so,  whether  he  chooses  it 
or  not.  Their  silence,  too,  is  absurd.  We  read  in 
the  Gospel  of  the  apostles  being  sent  to  preach, 
but  not  to  hold  their  tongues.  All  severity  that 
does  not  tend  to  increase  good,  or  prevent  evil, 
is  idle.  I  said  to  the  Lady  Abbess  of  a  convent, 
‘Madam,  you  are  here,  not  for  the  love  of  virtue, 
but  the  fear  of  vice.’  She  said,  ‘She  should  re¬ 
member  this  as  long  as  she  lived.’  ”  I  thought  it 
hard  to  give  her  this  view  of  her  situation,  when 
she  could  not  help  it;  and,  indeed,  I  wondered 
at  the  whole  of  what  he  now  said;  because,  both 
in  his  Rambler  and  Idler ,  he  treats  religious  aus¬ 
terities  with  much  solemnity  of  respect. 

Finding  him  still  persevering  in  his  abstinence 
from  wine,  I  ventured  to  speak  to  him  of  it. — 
Johnson.  “Sir,  I  have  no  objection  to  a  man’s 
drinking  wine,  if  he  can  do  it  in  moderation.  I 
found  myself  apt  to  go  to  excess  in  it,  and  there¬ 
fore,  after  having  been  for  some  time  without  it, 
on  account  of  illness,  I  thought  it  better  not  to 
return  to  it.  Every  man  is  to  judge  for  himself, 
according  to  the  effects  which  he  experiences. 
One  of  the  fathers  tells  us,  he  found  fasting  made 
him  so  peevish  that  he  did  not  practise  it.” 

Though  he  often  enlarged  upon  the  evil  of 
intoxication,  he  was  by  no  means  harsh  and  un¬ 
forgiving  to  those  who  indulged  in  occasional 
excess  in  wine.  One  of  his  friends,  I  well  remem¬ 
ber,  came  to  sup  at  a  tavern  with  him  and  some 
other  gentlemen,  and  too  plainly  discovered 
that  he  had  drunk  too  much  at  dinner.  When 
one  who  loved  mischief,  thinking  to  produce  a 
severe  censure,  asked  Johnson,  a  few  days  after¬ 
wards,  “Well,  Sir,  what  did  your  friend  say  to 
you,  as  an  apology  for  being  in  such  a  situa¬ 
tion?”  Johnson  answered,  “Sir,  he  said  all  that 
a  man  should  say:  he  said  he  was  sorry  for  it.” 

I  heard  him  once  give  a  very  judicious  prac¬ 
tical  advice  upon  this  subject:  “A  man,  who  has 
been  drinking  wine  at  all  freely,  should  never 
go  into  a  new  company.  With  those  who  have 
partaken  of  wine  with  him,  he  may  be  pretty 


JOHNSON  283 

well  in  unison;  but  he  will  probably  be  offen¬ 
sive,  or  appear  ridiculous,  to  other  people.” 

He  allowed  very  great  influence  to  education. 
“I  do  not  deny,  Sir,  but  there  is  some  original 
difference  in  minds;  but  it  is  nothing  in  compar¬ 
ison  of  what  is  formed  by  education.  We  may 
instance  the  science  of  numbers ,  which  all  minds 
are  equally  capable  of  attaining;  yet  we  find  a 
prodigious  difference  in  the  powers  of  different 
men,  in  that  respect,  after  they  are  grown  up, 
because  their  minds  have  been  more  or  less 
exercised  in  it:  and  I  think  the  same  cause  will 
explain  the  difference  of  excellence  in  other 
things,  gradations  admitting  always  some  dif¬ 
ference  in  the  first  principles.” 

This  is  a  difficult  subject;  but  it  is  best  to  hope 
that  diligence  may  do  a  great  deal.  We  are  sure 
of  what  it  can  do,  in  increasing  our  mechanical 
force  and  dexterity. 

I  again  visited  him  on  Monday.  He  took 
occasion  to  enlarge,  as  he  often  did,  upon  the 
wretchedness  of  a  sea-life.  “A  ship  is  worse  than 
a  gaol.  There  is,  in  a  gaol,  better  air,  better 
company,  better  conveniency  of  every  kind; 
and  a  ship  has  the  additional  disadvantage  of 
being  in  danger.  When  men  come  to  like  a  sea- 
life,  they  are  not  fit  to  live  on  land.” — “Then 
(said  I)  it  would  be  cruel  in  a  father  to  breed 
his  son  to  the  sea.”  Johnson.  “It  would  be  cruel 
in  a  father  who  thinks  as  I  do.  Men  go  to  sea, 
before  they  know  the  unhappiness  of  that  way 
of  life;  and  when  they  have  come  to  know  it, 
they  cannot  escape  from  it,  because  it  is  then 
too  late  to  choose  another  profession;  as  indeed 
is  generally  the  case  with  men,  when  they  have 
once  engaged  in  any  particular  way  of  life.” 

On  Tuesday,  March  ig,  which  was  fixed  for 
our  proposed  jaunt,  we  met  in  the  morning  at 
the  Somerset  coffee-house  in  the  Strand,  where 
we  were  taken  up  by  the  Oxford  coach.  He  was 
accompanied  by  Mr.  Gwyn,  the  architect;  and  a 
gentleman  of  Merton  College,  whom  we  did  not 
know,  had  the  fourth  seat.  We  soon  got  into 
conversation;  for  it  was  very  remarkable  of 
Johnson,  that  the  presence  of  a  stranger  had  no 
restraint  upon  his  talk.  I  observed  that  Garrick, 
who  was  about  to  quit  the  stage,  would  soon 
have  an  easier  life.  Johnson.  “I  doubt  that,  Sir.” 
Boswell.  “Why,  Sir,  he  will  be  Atlas  with  the 
burthen  off  his  back.”  Johnson.  “But  I  know 
not,  Sir,  if  he  will  be  so  steady  without  his  load. 
However,  he  should  never  play  any  more,  but 
be  entirely  the  gentleman,  and  not  partly  the 
player:  he  should  no  longer  subject  himself  to 
be  hissed  by  a  mob,  or  to  be  insolently  treated 
by  performers,  whom  he  used  to  rule  with  a 


BOSWELL 


284 

high  hand,  and  who  would  gladly  retaliate.” 
Boswell.  “I  think  he  should  play  once  a  year 
for  the  benefit  of  decayed  actors,  as  it  has  been 
said  he  means  to  do.”  Johnson.  “Alas,  Sir!  he 
will  soon  be  a  decayed  actor  himself.” 

Johnson  expressed  his  disapprobation  of  orna¬ 
mental  architecture,  such  as  magnificent  col¬ 
umns  supporting  a  portico,  or  expensive  pilas¬ 
ters  supporting  merely  their  own  capitals,  “be¬ 
cause  it  consumes  labour  disproportionate  to  its 
utility.”  For  the  same  reason  he  satyrised  statu¬ 
ary.  “Painting  (said  he)  consumes  labour  not 
disproportionate  to  its  effect;  but  a  fellow  will 
hack  half  a  year  at  a  block  of  marble  to  make 
something  in  stone  that  hardly  resembles  a  man. 
The  value  of  statuary  is  owing  to  its  difficulty. 
You  would  not  .value  the  finest  head  cut  upon  a 
carrot.”  Here  he  seemed  to  me  to  be  strangely 
deficient  in  taste;  for  surely  statuary  is  a  noble 
art  of  imitation,  and  preserves  a  wonderful  ex¬ 
pression  of  the  varieties  of  the  human  frame; 
and  although  it  must  be  allowed  that  the  cir¬ 
cumstances  of  difficulty  enhance  the  value  of  a 
marble  head,  we  should  consider,  that  if  it  re¬ 
quires  a  long  time  in  the  performance,  it  has  a 
proportionate  value  in  durability. 

Gwyn  was  a  fine  lively  rattling  fellow.  Dr. 
Johnson  kept  him  in  subjection,  but  with  a 
kindly  authority.  The  spirit  of  the  artist,  how¬ 
ever,  rose  against  what  he  thought  a  Gothick 
attack,  and  he  made  a  brisk  defence.  “What, 
Sir,  will  you  allow  no  value  to  beauty  in  archi¬ 
tecture  or  in  statuary?  Why  should  we  allow  it 
then  in  writing?  Why  do  you  take  the  trouble 
to  give  us  so  many  fine  allusions,  and  bright  im¬ 
ages,  and  elegant  phrases?  You  might  convey 
all  your  instruction  without  these  ornaments.” 
Johnson  smiled  with  complacency;  but  said, 
“Why,  Sir,  all  these  ornaments  are  useful,  be¬ 
cause  they  obtain  an  easier  reception  for  truth; 
but  a  building  is  not  at  all  more  convenient  for 
being  decorated  with  superfluous  carved  work.” 

Gwyn  at  last  was  lucky  enough  to  make  one 
reply  to  Dr.  Johnson,  which  he  allowed  to  be 
excellent.  Johnson  censured  him  for  taking  down 
a  church  which  might  have  stood  many  years, 
and  building  a  new  one  at  a  different  place,  for 
no  other  reason  but  that  there  might  be  a  direct 
road  to  a  new  bridge;  and  his  expression  was, 
“You  are  taking  a  church  out  of  the  way,  that 
the  people  may  go  in  a  straight  line  to  the 
bridge.” — “No,  Sir,  (said  Gwyn,)  I  am  putting 
the  church  in  the  way,  that  the  people  may  not 
go  out  of  the  way”  Johnson,  (with  a  hearty  loud 
laugh  of  approbation),  “Speak  no  more.  Rest 
your  colloquial  fame  upon  this.” 


[  1776 

Upon  our  arrival  at  Oxford,  Dr.  Johnson  and 
I  went  directly  to  University  College,  but  were 
disappointed  on  finding  that  one  of  the  fellows, 
his  friend  Mr.  Scott,  who  accompanied  him 
from  Newcastle  to  Edinburgh,  was  gone  to  the 
country.  We  put  up  at  the  Angel  inn,  and  passed 
the  evening  by  ourselves  in  easy  and  familiar 
conversation.  Talking  of  constitutional  melan¬ 
choly,  he  observed,  “A  man  so  afflicted,  Sir, 
must  divert  distressing  thoughts,  and  not  com¬ 
bat  with  them.”  Boswell.  “May  not  he  think 
them  down,  Sir?”  Johnson.  “No,  Sir.  To  at¬ 
tempt  to  think  them  down  is  madness.  He  should 
have  a  lamp  constantly  burning  in  his  bed¬ 
chamber  during  the  night,  and  if  wakefully  dis¬ 
turbed,  take  a  book,  and  read,  and  compose 
himself  to  rest.  To  have  the  management  of  the 
mind  is  a  great  art,  and  it  may  be  attained  in  a 
considerable  degree  by  experience  and  habitual 
exercise.”  Boswell.  “Should  not  he  provide 
amusements  for  himself?  Would  it  not,  for  in¬ 
stance,  be  right  for  him  to  take  a  course  of 
chymistry?”  Johnson.  “Let  him  take  a  course 
of  chymistry,  or  a  course  of  rope-dancing,  or  a 
course  of  any  thing  to  which  he  is  inclined  at 
the  time.  Let  him  contrive  to  have  as  many  re¬ 
treats  for  his  mind  as  he  can,  as  many  things  to 
which  it  can  fly  from  itself.  Burton’s  Anatomy  of 
Melancholy  is  a  valuable  work.  It  is,  perhaps, 
overloaded  with  quotation.  But  there  is  great 
spirit  and  great  power  in  what  Burton  says, 
when  he  writes  from  his  own  mind.” 

Next  morning  we  visited  Dr.  Wetherell,  Mas¬ 
ter  of  University  College,  with  whom  Dr.  John¬ 
son  conferred  on  the  most  advantageous  mode 
of  disposing  of  the  books  printed  at  the  Claren¬ 
don  press,  on  which  subject  his  letter  has  been 
inserted  in  a  former  page.  I  often  had  occasion 
to  remark,  Johnson  loved  business,  loved  to  have 
his  wisdom  actually  operate  on  real  life.  Dr. 
Wetherell  and  I  talked  of  him  without  reserve 
in  his  own  presence.  Wetherell.  “I  would 
have  given  him  a  hundred  guineas  if  he  would 
have  written  a  preface  to  his  Political  Tracts ,  by 
way  of  a  Discourse  on  the  British  Constitution.” 
Boswell.  “Dr.  Johnson,  though  in  his  writings, 
and  upon  all  occasions  a  great  friend  to  the  con¬ 
stitution  both  in  church  and  state,  has  never 
written  expressly  in  support  of  either.  There  is 
really  a  claim  upon  him  for  both.  I  am  sure  he 
could  give  a  volume  of  no  great  bulk  upon  each, 
which  would  comprise  all  the  substance,  and 
with  his  spirit  would  effectually  maintain  them. 
He  should  erect  a  fort  on  the  confines  of  each.” 
I  could  perceive  that  he  was  displeased  with 
this  dialogue.  He  burst  out,  “Why  should  I  be 


1776]  LIFE  OF 

always  writing? 53  I  hoped  he  was  conscious  that 
the  debt  was  just,  and  meant  to  discharge  it, 
though  he  disliked  being  dunned. 

We  then  went  to  Pembroke  College,  and 
waited  on  his  old  friend  Dr.  Adams,  the  master 
of  it,  whom  I  found  to  be  a  most  polite,  pleasing, 
communicative  man.  Before  his  advancement  to 
the  headship  of  his  college,  I  had  intended  to  go 
and  visit  him  at  Shrewsbury,  where  he  was  rector 
of  St.  Chad’s,  in  order  to  get  from  him  what  par¬ 
ticulars  he  could  recollect  of  Johnson’s  academ¬ 
ical  life.  He  now  obligingly  gave  me  part  of  that 
authentick  information,  which,  with  what  I 
afterwards  owed  to  his  kindness,  will  be  found 
incorporated  in  its  proper  place  in  this  work. 

Dr.  Adams  had  distinguished  himself  by  an 
able  answer  to  David  Hume’s  Essay  on  Miracles . 
He  told  me  he  had  once  dined  in  company  with 
Hume  in  London;  that  Hume  shook  hands  with 
him  and  said,  “You  have  treated  me  much  bet¬ 
ter  than  I  deserve”;  and  that  they  exchanged 
visits.  I  took  the  liberty  to  object  to  treating  an 
infidel  writer  with  smooth  civility.  Where  there 
is  a  controversy  concerning  a  passage  in  a  class- 
ick  authour,  or  concerning  a  question  in  antiq¬ 
uities,  or  any  other  subject  in  which  human 
happiness  is  not  deeply  interested,  a  man  may 
treat  his  antagonist  with  politeness  and  even 
respect.  But  where  the  controversy  is  concerning 
the  truth  of  religion,  it  is  of  such  vast  import¬ 
ance  to  him  who  maintains  it,  to  obtain  the  vic¬ 
tory,  that  the  person  of  an  opponent  ought  not 
to  be  spared.  If  a  man  firmly  believes  that  reli¬ 
gion  is  an  invaluable  treasure,  he  will  consider  a 
writer  who  endeavours  to  deprive  mankind  of  it 
as  a  robber ;  he  will  look  upon  him  as  odious, 
though  the  infidel  might  think  himself  in  the 
right.  A  robber  who  reasons  as  the  gang  do  in 
the  Beggar’s  Opera ,  who  call  themselves  practical 
philosophers,  and  may  have  as  much  sincerity 
as  pernicious  speculative  philosophers,  is  not  the 
less  an  object  of  just  indignation.  An  abandoned 
profligate  may  think  that  it  is  not  wrong  to  de¬ 
bauch  my  wife,  but  shall  I,  therefore,  not  detest 
him?  And  if  I  catch  him  in  making  an  attempt, 
shall  I  treat  him  with  politeness?  No,  I  will  kick 
him  down  stairs,  or  run  him  through  the  body; 
that  is,  if  I  really  love  my  wife,  or  have  a  true 
rational  notion  of  honour.  An  infidel  then  shall 
not  be  treated  handsomely  by  a  Christian,  merely 
because  he  endeavours  to  rob  with  ingenuity.  I 
do  declare,  however,  that  I  am  exceedingly  un¬ 
willing  to  be  provoked  to  anger,  and  could  I  be 
persuaded  that  truth  would  not  suffer  from  a 
cool  moderation  in  its  defenders,  I  should  wish 
to  preserve  good  humour,  at  least,  in  every  con- 


JOHNSON  285 

troversy;  nor,  indeed,  do  I  see  why  a  man 
should  lose  his  temper  while  he  does  all  he  can 
to  refute  an  opponent.  I  think  ridicule  may  be 
fairly  used  against  an  infidel;  for  instance,  if  he 
be  an  ugly  fellow,  and  yet  absurdly  vain  of  his 
person,  we  may  contrast  his  appearance  with 
Cicero’s  beautiful  image  of  Virtue,  could  she  be 
seen.  Johnson  coincided  with  me  and  said, 
“When  a  man  voluntarily  engages  in  an  im¬ 
portant  controversy,  he  is  to  do  all  he  can  to 
lessen  his  antagonist,  because  authority  from 
personal  respect  has  much  weight  with  most 
people,  and  often  more  than  reasoning.  If  my 
antagonist  writes  bad  language,  though  that 
may  not  be  essential  to  the  question,  I  will  at¬ 
tack  him  for  his  bad  language.”  Adams.“You 
would  not  jostle  a  chimney-sweeper.”  Johnson. 
“Yes,  Sir,  if  it  were  necessary  to  jostle  him  down.” 

Dr.  Adams  told  us,  that  in  some  of  the  Col¬ 
leges  at  Oxford,  the  fellows  had  excluded  the 
students  from  social  intercourse  with  them  in 
the  common  room.  Johnson.  “They  are  in  the 
right,  Sir:  there  can  be  no  real  conversation,  no 
fair  exertion  of  mind  amongst  them,  if  the  young 
men  are  by;  for  a  man  who  has  a  character  does 
not  choose  to  stake  it  in  their  presence.”  Bos¬ 
well.  “But,  Sir,  may  there  not  be  very  good 
conversation  without  a  contest  for  superiority?” 
Johnson.  “No  animated  conversation,  Sir,  for  it 
cannot  be  but  one  or  other  will  come  off  supe- 
riour.  I  do  not  mean  that  the  victor  must  have 
the  better  of  the  argument,  for  he  may  take  the 
weak  side;  but  his  superiority  of  parts  and 
knowledge  will  necessarily  appear:  and  he  to 
whom  he  thus  shews  himself  superiour  is  less¬ 
ened  in  the  eyes  of  the  young  men.  You  know  it 
was  said,  ‘ Mallem  cum  Scaligero  err  are  quam  cum 
Clavio  recte  sapere .’  In  the  same  manner  take 
Bentley’s  and  Jason  de  Nores’  Comments  upon 
Horace,  you  will  admire  Bentley  more  when 
wrong,  than  Jason  when  right.” 

We  walked  with  Dr.  Adams  into  the  master’s 
garden,  and  into  the  common  room.  Johnson 
(after  a  reverie  of  meditation,)  “Ay!  Here  I 
used  to  play  at  draughts  with  Phil.  Jones  and 
Fludyer.  Jones  loved  beer,  and  did  not  get  very 
forward  in  the  church.  Fludyer  turned  out  a 
scoundrel,  a  Whig,  and  said  he  was  ashamed  of 
having  been  bred  at  Oxford.  He  had  a  living  at 
Putney,  and  got  under  the  eye  of  some  retainers 
to  the  court  at  that  time,  and  so  became  a  vio¬ 
lent  Whig:  but  he  had  been  a  scoundrel  all 
along  to  be  sure.”  Boswell.  “Was  he  a  scoun¬ 
drel,  Sir,  in  any  other  way  than  that  of  being  a 
political  scoundrel?  Did  he  cheat  at  draughts?” 
Johnson.  “Sir,  we  never  played  for  money.” 


286 


BOSWELL 


He  then  carried  me  to  visit  Dr.  Bentham, 
Canon  of  Christ-Church,  and  Divinity  Profes¬ 
sor,  with  whose  learned  and  lively  conversation 
we  were  much  pleased.  He  gave  us  an  invitation 
to  dinner,  which  Dr.  Johnson  told  me  was  a  high 
honour.  “Sir,  it  is  a  great  thing  to  dine  with  the 
Canons  of  Christ-Church.”  We  could  not  ac¬ 
cept  his  invitation,  as  we  were  engaged  to  dine 
at  University  College.  We  had  an  excellent  din¬ 
ner  there,  with  the  Master  and  Fellows,  it  being 
St.  Cuthbert’s  day,  which  is  kept  by  them  as  a 
festival,  as  he  was  a  saint  of  Durham,  with 
which  this  college  is  much  connected. 

We  drank  tea  with  Dr.  Horne,  late  President 
of  Magdalen  College,  and  Bishop  of  Norwich, 
of  whose  abilities,  in  different  respects,  the  pub- 
lick  has  had  eminent  proofs,  and  the  esteem 
annexed  to  whose  character  was  increased  by 
knowing  him  personally.  He  had  talked  of  pub¬ 
lishing  an  edition  of  Walton’s  Lives ,  but  had  laid 
aside  that  design,  upon  Dr.  Johnson’s  telling 
him,  from  mistake,  that  Lord  Hailes  intended 
to  do  it.  I  had  wished  to  negotiate  between  Lord 
Hailes  and  him,  that  one  or  other  should  per¬ 
form  so  good  a  work.  Johnson.  “In  order  to  do 
it  well,  it  will  be  necessary  to  collect  all  the  edi¬ 
tions  of  Walton’s  Lives.  By  way  of  adapting  the 
book  to  the  taste  of  the  present  age,  they  have, 
in  a  later  edition,  left  out  a  vision  which  he 
relates  Dr.  Donne  had,  but  it  should  be  re¬ 
stored;  and  there  should  be  a  critical  catalogue 
given  of  the  works  of  the  different  persons  whose 
lives  were  written  by  Walton,  and  therefore 
their  works  must  be  carefully  read  by  the  editor.” 

We  then  went  to  Trinity  College,  where  he 
introduced  me  to  Mr.  Thomas  War  ton,  with 
whom  we  passed  a  part  of  the  evening.  We 
talked  of  biography. — Johnson.  “It  is  rarely 
well  executed.  They  only  who  live  with  a  man 
can  write  his  life  with  any  genuine  exactness 
and  discrimination;  and  few  people  who  have 
lived  with  a  man  know  what  to  remark  about 
him.  The  chaplain  of  a  late  Bishop,  whom  I  was 
to  assist  in  writing  some  memoirs  of  his  Lordship, 
could  tell  me  scarcely  any  thing.”1 

I  said,  Mr.  Robert  Dodsley’s  life  should  be 
written,  as  he  had  been  so  much  connected  with 
the  wits  of  his  time,  and  by  his  literary  merit 
had  raised  himself  from  the  station  of  a  foot¬ 
man.  Mr.  Warton  said,  he  had  published  a  little 

*It  has  been  mentioned  to  me  by  an  accurate 
English  friend,  that  Dr.  Johnson  could  never  have 
used  the  phrase  almost  nothing ,  as  not  being  English ; 
and  therefore  I  have  put  another  in  its  place.  At  the 
same  time,  I  am  not  quite  convinced  it  is  not  good 
English.  For  the  best  writers  use  the  phrase  “ Little 
or  nothing i.e.  almost  so  little  as  to  be  nothing. 


[  1776 

volume  under  the  title  of  The  Muse  in  Livery. 
Johnson.  “I  doubt  whether  Dodsley’s  brother 
would  thank  a  man  who  should  write  his  life: 
yet  Dodsley  himself  was  not  unwilling  that  his 
original  low  condition  should  be  recollected. 
When  Lord  Lyttelton’s  Dialogues  of  the  Dead 
came  out,  one  of  which  is  between  Apicius,  an 
ancient  epicure,  and  Dartineuf,  a  modern  epi¬ 
cure,  Dodsley  said  to  me,  T  knew  Dartineuf 
well,  for  I  was  once  his  footman.’  ” 

Biography  led  us  to  speak  of  Dr.  John  Camp¬ 
bell,  who  had  written  a  considerable  part  of  the 
Biographia  Britannica.  Johnson,  though  he  valued 
him  highly,  was  of  opinion  that  there  was  not  so 
much  in  his  great  work,  A  Political  Survey  of  Great 
Britain ,  as  the  world  had  been  taught  to  expect;2 
and  had  said  to  me,  that  he  believed  Campbell’s 
disappointment,  on  account  of  the  bad  success 
of  that  work,  had  killed  him.  He  this  evening 
observed  of  it,  “That  work  was  his  death.”  Mr. 
Warton,  not  adverting  to  his  meaning,  answered, 
“I  believe  so;  from  the  great  attention  he  be¬ 
stowed  on  it.”  Johnson.  “Nay,  Sir,  he  died  of 
want  of  attention,  if  he  died  at  all  by  that  book.” 

We  talked  of  a  work  much  in  vogue  at  that 
time,  written  in  a  very  mellifluous  style,  but 
which,  under  pretext  of  another  subject,  con¬ 
tained  much  artful  infidelity.  I  said  it  was  not 
fair  to  attack  us  thus  unexpectedly;  he  should 
have  warned  us  of  our  danger,  before  we  en¬ 
tered  his  garden  of  flowery  eloquence,  by  ad¬ 
vertising,  “Spring-guns  and  men-traps  set  here.” 
The  authour  had  been  an  Oxonian,  and  was 
remembered  there  for  having  “turned  Papist.” 
I  observed,  that  as  he  had  changed  several 
times — from  the  Church  of  England  to  the 
Church  of  Rome, — from  the  Church  of  Rome 
to  infidelity, — I  did  not  despair  yet  of  seeing 
him  a  methodist  preacher.  Johnson  (laughing,) 
“It  is  said,  that  his  range  has  been  more  exten¬ 
sive,  and  that  he  has  once  been  Mahometan. 
However,  now  that  he  has  published  his  infidel¬ 
ity,  he  will  probably  persist  in  it.”  Boswell.  “I 
am  not  quite  sure  of  that,  Sir.” 

I  mentioned  Sir  Richard  Steele  having  pub¬ 
lished  his  Christian  Hero ,  with  the  avowed  pur¬ 
pose  of  obliging  himself  to  lead  a  religious  life; 
yet,  that  his  conduct  was  by  no  means  strictly 
suitable.  Johnson.  “Steele,  I  believe,  practised 
the  lighter  vices.” 

Mr.  Warton,  being  engaged,  could  not  sup 
with  us  at  our  inn;  we  had  therefore  another 
evening  by  ourselves.  I  asked  Johnson,  whether 

Wet  surely  it  is  a  very  useful  work,  and  of  won¬ 
derful  research  and  labour  for  one  man  to  have 
executed. 


1776]  LIFE  OF 

a  man’s  being  forward  to  make  himself  known  to 
eminent  people,  and  seeing  as  much  of  life,  and 
getting  as  much  information  as  he  could  in  every 
way,  was  not  yet  lessening  himself  by  his  forward¬ 
ness.  Johnson.  “No,  Sir;  a  man  always  makes 
himself  greater  as  he  increases  his  knowledge.” 

I  censured  some  ludicrous  fantastick  dialogues 
between  two  coach-horses  and  other  such  stuff, 
which  Baretti  had  lately  published.  He  joined 
with  me,  and  said,  “Nothing  odd  will  do  long. 
Tristram  Shandy  did  not  last.”  I  expressed  a  de¬ 
sire  to  be  acquainted  with  a  lady  who  had  been 
much  talked  of,  and  universally  celebrated  for 
extraordinary  address  and  insinuation.  John¬ 
son.  “Never  believe  extraordinary  characters 
which  you  hear  of  people.  Depend  upon  it,  Sir, 
they  are  exaggerated.  You  do  not  see  one  man 
shoot  a  great  deal  higher  than  another.”  I  men¬ 
tioned  Mr.  Burke.  Johnson.  “Yes;  Burke  is  an 
extraordinary  man.  His  stream  of  mind  is  per¬ 
petual.”  It  is  very  pleasing  to  me  to  record,  that 
Johnson’s  high  estimation  of  the  talents  of  this 
gentleman  was  uniform  from  their  early  ac¬ 
quaintance.  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  informs  me, 
that  when  Mr.  Burke  was  first  elected  a  member 
of  Parliament,  and  Sir  John  Hawkins  expressed 
a  wonder  at  his  attaining  a  seat,  Johnson  said, 
“Now  we  who  know  Mr.  Burke,  know,  that  he 
will  be  one  of  the  first  men  in  this  country.” 
And  once,  when  Johnson  was  ill,  and  unable  to 
exert  himself  as  much  as  usual  without  fatigue, 
Mr.  Burke  having  been  mentioned,  he  said, 
“That  fellow  calls  forth  all  my  powers.  Were  I 
to  see  Burke  now  it  would  kill  me.”  So  much 
was  he  accustomed  to  consider  conversation  as 
a  contest,  and  such  was  his  notion  of  Burke  as 
an  opponent. 

Next  morning,  Thursday,  March  21,  we  set 
out  in  a  postchaise  to  pursue  our  ramble.  It  was 
a  delightful  day,  and  we  rode  through  Blenheim 
park.  When  I  looked  at  the  magnificent  bridge 
built  by  John,  Duke  of  Marlborough,  over  a  small 
rivulet,  and  recollected  the  Epigram  made  upon 

The  lofty  arch  his  high  ambition  shows , 

The  stream ,  an  emblem  of  his  bounty  flows . 

and  saw  that  now,  by  the  genius  of  Brown,  a 
magnificent  body  of  water  was  collected,  I  said, 
“They  have  drowned  the  Epigram.”  I  observed 
to  him,  while  in  the  midst  of  the  noble  scene 
around  us,  “You  and  I,  Sir,  have,  I  think,  seen 
together  the  extremes  of  what  can  be  seen  in 
Britain: — the  wild  rough  island  of  Mull,  and 
Blenheim  park.” 

We  dined  at  an  excellent  inn  at  Chapel-house, 
where  he  expatiated  on  the  felicity  of  England 


JOHNSON  287 

in  its  taverns  and  inns,  and  triumphed  over  the 
French  for  not  having,  in  any  perfection,  the  tav¬ 
ern  life.  “There  is  no  private  house,  (said  he,) 
in  which  people  can  enjoy  themselves  so  well,  as 
at  a  capital  tavern.  Let  there  be  ever  so  great 
plenty  of  good  things,  ever  so  much  grandeur, 
ever  so  much  elegance,  ever  so  much  desire  that 
every  body  should  be  easy;  in  the  nature  of  things 
it  cannot  be:  there  must  always  be  some  degree 
of  care  and  anxiety.  The  master  of  the  house  is 
anxious  to  entertain  his  guests ;  the  guests  are  anx¬ 
ious  to  be  agreeable  to  him:  and  no  man,  but  a 
very  impudent  dog  indeed,  can  as  freely  com¬ 
mand  what  is  in  another  man’s  house,  as  if  it 
were  his  own.  Whereas,  at  a  tavern,  there  is  a 
general  freedom  from  anxiety.  You  are  sure  you 
are  welcome:  and  the  more  noise  you  make,  the 
more  trouble  you  give,  the  more  good  things  you 
call  for,  the  welcomer  you  are.  No  servants  will 
attend  you  with  the  alacrity  which  waiters  do, 
who  are  incited  by  the  prospect  of  an  immediate 
reward  in  proportion  as  they  please.  No,  Sir; 
there  is  nothing  which  has  yet  been  contrived  by 
man,  by  which  so  much  happiness  is  produced 
as  by  a  good  tavern  or  inn.”1  He  then  repeated, 
with  great  emotion,  Shenstone’s  lines: 

Whoe'er  has  travelled  life's  dull  rounds 
Where'er  his  stages  may  have  been , 

May  sigh  to  think  he  still  has found 
The  warmest  welcome  at  an  inn ? 

My  illustrious  friend,  I  thought,  did  not  suffi¬ 
ciently  admire  Shenstone.  That  ingenious  and 
elegant  gentleman’s  opinion  of  Johnson  appears 
in  one  of  his  letters  to  Mr.  Graves,  dated  Feb.  9, 

^ir  John  Hawkins  has  preserved  very  few  Memo¬ 
rabilia  of  Johnson.  There  is,  however,  to  be  found, 
in  his  bulky  tome  [p.  87],  a  very  excellent  one  upon 
this  subject: — “In  contradiction  to  those,  who,  hav¬ 
ing  a  wife  and  children,  prefer  domestick  enjoy¬ 
ments  to  those  which  a  tavern  affords,  I  have  heard 
him  assert,  that  a  tavern  chair  was  the  throne  of  human 
felicity. — ‘As  soon,’  said  he,  ‘as  I  enter  the  door  of  a 
tavern,  I  experience  an  oblivion  of  care,  and  a  free¬ 
dom  from  solicitude:  when  I  am  seated,  I  find  the 
master  courteous,  and  the  servants  obsequious  to 
my  call;  anxious  to  know  and  ready  to  supply  my 
wants:  wine  there  exhilarates  my  spirits,  and 
promps  me  to  free  conversation  and  an  interchange 
of  discourse  with  those  whom  I  most  love :  I  dog¬ 
matise  and  am  contradicted,  and  in  this  conflict  of 
opinions  and  sentiments  I  find  delight.’  ” 

2We  happened  to  lie  this  night  at  the  inn  at 
Henley,  where  Shenstone  wrote  these  lines.  I  give 
them  as  they  are  found  in  the  corrected  edition  of 
his  Works,  published  after  his  death.  In  Dodsley’s 
collection  the  stanza  ran  thus: 

Whoe'er  has  travell'd  life's  dull  roundy 
Whate'er  his  various  tour  has  been , 

May  sigh  to  think  how  oft  he  found 
His  warmest  welcome  at  an  Inn . 


BOSWELL 


288 

1760.  “I  have  lately  been  reading  one  or  two 
volumes  of  The  Rambler;  who,  excepting  against 
some  few  hardnesses1  in  his  manner,  and  the 
want  of  more  examples  to  enliven,  is  one  of  the 
most  nervous,  most  perspicuous,  most  concise, 
[and]  most  harmonious  prose  writers  I  know.  A 
learned  diction  improves  by  time.” 

In  the  afternoon,  as  we  were  driven  rapidly 
along  in  the  post-chaise,  he  said  to  me  “Life  has 
not  many  things  better  than  this.” 

We  stopped  at  Stratford-upon-Avon,  and 
drank  tea  and  coffee;  and  it  pleased  me  to  be 
with  him  upon  the  classick  ground  of  Shaks- 
peare’s  native  place. 

He  spoke  slightingly  of  Dyer’s  Fleece. — “The 
subject,  Sir,  cannot  be  made  poetical.  How  can 
a  man  write  poetically  of  serges  and  druggets? 
Yet  you  will  hear  many  people  talk  to  you  gravely 
of  that  excellent  poem,  The  Fleece .”  Having  talked 
of  Grainger’s  Sugar-Cane ,  I  mentioned  to  him 
Mr.  Langton’s  having  told  me,  that  this  poem, 
when  read  in  manuscript  at  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds’s 
had  made  all  the  assembled  wits  burst  into  a 
laugh,  when,  after  much  blank-verse  pomp,  the 
poet  began  a  new  paragraph  thus: — 

Now ,  Muse ,  let's  sing  of  rats. 

And  what  increased  the  ridicule  was,  that  one  of 
the  company,  who  slily  overlooked  the  reader, 
perceived  that  the  word  had  been  originally  mice , 
and  had  been  altered  to  rats ,  as  more  dignified.2 

1<£He  too  often  makes  use  of  the  abstract  for  the 
concrete .”  Shenstone. 

2Such  is  this  little  laughable  incident,  which  has 
been  often  related.  Dr.  Percy,  the  Bishop  of  Dro- 
more,  who  was  an  intimate  friend  of  Dr.  Grainger, 
and  has  a  particular  regard  for  his  memory,  has 
communicated  to  me  the  following  explanation:  — 

“The  passage  in  question  was  originally  not  lia¬ 
ble  to  such  a  perversion;  for  the  authour  having 
occasion  in  that  part  of  his  work  to  mention  the 
havock  made  by  rats  and  mice,  had  introduced 
the  subject  in  a  kind  of  mock  heroick,  and  a  par¬ 
ody  of  Homer’s  battle  of  the  frogs  and  mice,  invok¬ 
ing  the  Muse  of  the  old  Grecian  bard  in  an  elegant 
and  well-turned  manner.  In  that  state  I  had  seen 
it;  but  afterwards,  unknown  to  me  and  other 
friends,  he  had  been  persuaded,  contrary  to  his 
own  better  judgement,  to  alter  it,  so  as  to  produce 
the  unlucky  effect  above-mentioned.” 

The  above  was  written  by  the  Bishop  when  he 
had  not  the  Poem  itself  to  recur  to;  and  though  the 
account  given  was  true  of  it  at  one  period,  yet  as 
Dr.  Grainger  afterwards  altered  the  passage  in 
question,  the  remarks  in  the  text  do  not  now  apply 
to  the  printed  poem. 

The  Bishop  gives  this  character  of  Dr.  Grainger: 
— “He  was  not  only  a  man  of  genius  and  learning, 
but  had  many  excellent  virtues;  being  one  of  the 
most  generous,  friendly,  and  benevolent  men  I  ever 
knew.” 


[  1776 

This  passage  does  not  appear  in  the  printed 
work.  Dr.  Grainger,  or  some  of  his  friends,  it 
should  seem,  having  become  sensible  that  intro¬ 
ducing  even  Rats  in  a  grave  poem,  might  be  li¬ 
able  to  banter.  He,  however,  could  not  bring 
himself  to  relinquish  the  idea;  for  they  are  thus, 
in  a  still  more  ludicrous  manner,  periphrastical- 
ly  exhibited  in  his  poem  as  it  now  stands: 

Nor  with  less  waste  the  whisker' d  vermin  race 
A  countless  clan  despoil  the  lowland  cane. 

Johnson  said,  that  Dr.  Grainger  was  an  agree¬ 
able  man;  a  man  who  would  do  any  good  that 
was  in  his  power.  His  translation  of  Tibullus ,  he 
thought,  was  very  well  done ;  but  The  Sugar-Cane , 
a  poem,  did  not  please  him;3  for,  he  exclaimed, 
“What  could  he  make  of  a  sugar-cane?  One 
might  as  well  write  the  £ParsIey-bed,  a  Poem’; 
or  ‘The  Cabbage-garden,  a  Poem.’  ”  Boswell. 
“You  must  then  pickle  your  cabbage  with  the  sal 
atticumN  Johnson.  “You  know  there  is  already 
‘The  Hop-Garden,  a  Poem’:  and,  I  think,  one 
could  say  a  great  deal  about  cabbage.  The  poem 
might  begin  with  the  advantages  of  civilized  so¬ 
ciety  over  a  rude  state,  exemplified  by  the  Scotch, 
who  had  no  cabbages  till  Oliver  Cromwell’s  sol¬ 
diers  introduced  them;  and  one  might  thus  shew 
how  arts  are  propagated  by  conquest,  as  they 
were  by  the  Roman  arms.”  He  seemed  to  be 
much  diverted  with  the  fertility  of  his  own  fancy. 

I  told  him,  that  I  heard  Dr.  Percy  was  writ¬ 
ing  the  history  of  the  wolf  in  Great-Britain.  John¬ 
son.  “The  wolf,  Sir!  why  the  wolf?  Why  does 
he  not  write  of  the  bear,  which  we  had  formerly? 
Nay,  it  is  said  we  had  the  beaver.  Or  why  does 
he  not  write  of  the  grey  rat,  the  Hanover  rat,  as 
it  is  called,  because  it  is  said  to  have  come  into 
this  country  about  the  time  that  the  family  of 
Hanover  came?  I  should  like  to  see  The  History 
of  the  Grey  Rat ,  by  Thomas  Percy ,  D.D.,  Chaplain  in 
Ordinary  to  His  Majesty ,”  (laughing  immoderate¬ 
ly).  Boswell.  “I  am  afraid  a  court  chaplain 
could  not  decently  write  of  the  grey  rat.”  John¬ 
son.  “Sir,  he  need  not  give  it  the  name  of  the 
Hanover  rat.”  Thus  could  he  indulge  a  luxuri¬ 
ant  sportive  imagination,  when  talking  of  a  friend 
whom  he  loved  and  esteemed. 

He  mentioned  to  me  the  singular  history  of  an 
ingenious  acquaintance.  “He  had  practised  phy- 
sick  in  various  situations  with  no  great  emolu¬ 
ment.  A  West-India  gentleman,  whom  he  de¬ 
lighted  by  his  conversation,  gave  him  a  bond 
for  a  handsome  annuity  during  his  life,  on  the 

3Dr.  Johnson  said  to  me,  “Percy,  Sir,  was  angry 
with  me  for  laughing  at  The  Sugar-Cane:  for  he  had 
a  mind  to  make  a  great  thing  of  Grainger’s  rats.” 


1776]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  289 


condition  of  his  accompanying  him  to  the  West- 
Indies,  and  living  with  him  there  for  two  years. 
He  accordingly  embarked  with  the  gentleman; 
but  upon  the  voyage  fell  in  love  with  a  young 
woman  who  happened  to  be  one  of  the  passen¬ 
gers,  and  married  the  wench.  From  the  impru¬ 
dence  of  his  disposition  he  quarrelled  with  the 
gentleman,  and  declared  he  would  have  no  con¬ 
nection  with  him.  So  he  forfeited  the  annuity. 
He  settled  as  a  physician  in  one  of  the  Leeward 
Islands.  A  man  was  sent  out  to  him  merely  to 
compound  his  medicines.  This  fellow  set  up  as  a 
rival  to  him  in  his  practice  of  physick,  and  got  so 
much  the  better  of  him  in  the  opinion  of  the 
people  of  the  island  that  he  carried  away  all  the 
business,  upon  which  he  returned  to  England, 
and  soon  after  died.” 

On  Friday,  March  22,  having  set  out  early 
from  Henley,  where  we  had  lain  the  preceding 
night,  we  arrived  at  Birmingham  about  nine 
o’clock,  and,  after  breakfast,  went  to  call  on  his  old 
schoolfellow  Mr.  Hector.1  A  very  stupid  maid, 
who  opened  the  door,  told  us,  that  “her  master 
was  gone  out;  he  was  gone  to  the  country;  she 
could  not  tell  when  he  would  return.”  In  short, 
she  gave  us  a  miserable  reception;  and  Johnson 
observed,  “She  would  have  behaved  no  better 
to  people  who  wanted  him  in  the  way  of  his  pro¬ 
fession.”  He  said  to  her,  “My  name  is  Johnson; 
tell  him  I  called.  Will  you  remember  the  name?” 
She  answered  with  rustick  simplicity,  in  the  War¬ 
wickshire  pronunciation,  “I  don’t  understand 
you,  Sir.” — “Blockhead,  (said  he,)  I’ll  write.”  I 
never  heard  the  word  blockhead  applied  to  a  wom¬ 
an  before,  though  I  do  not  see  why  it  should  not, 
when  there  is  evident  occasion  for  it.2  He,  how- 

LMr.  Hector’s  house  was  in  the  Square — now 
known  as  the  Old  Square.  It  afterwards  formed 
part  of  the  Stork  Hotel,  but  it  was  pulled  down 
when  Corporation  Street  was  made.  A  marble  tab¬ 
let  had  been  placed  on  the  house  at  the  suggestion 
of  the  late  Mr.  George  Dawson,  marking  the  spot 
where  “Edmund  Hector  was  the  host,  Samuel  John¬ 
son  the  guest.”  This  tablet,  together  with  the  wains¬ 
coting,  the  door,  and  the  mantelpiece  of  one  of  the 
rooms,  was  set  up  in  Aston  Hall,  at  the  Johnson 
Centenary,  in  a  room  that  is  to  be  known  as  Dr. 
Johnson’s  Room. 

2My  worthy  friend  Mr.  Langton,  to  whom  I  am 
under  innumerable  obligations  in  the  course  of  my 
Johnsonian  History,  has  furnished  me  with  a  droll 
illustration  of  this  question.  An  honest  carpenter, 
after  giving  some  anecdote  in  his  presence  of  the 
ill-treatment  which  he  had  received  from  a  clergy¬ 
man’s  wife,  who  was  a  noted  termagant,  and  whom 
he  accused  of  unjust  dealing  in  some  transaction 
with  him,  added,  “I  took  care  to  let  her  know 
what  I  thought  of  her.”  And  being  asked,  “What 
did  you  say?”  answered,  “I  told  her  she  was  a 
scoundrel .” 


ever,  made  another  attempt  to  make  her  under¬ 
stand  him,  and  roared  loud  in  her  ear,  “John¬ 
son,”  and  then  she  catched  the  sound. 

We  next  called  on  Mr.  Lloyd,  one  of  the  peo¬ 
ple  called  Quakers.  He  too  was  not  at  home;  but 
Mrs.  Lloyd  was,  and  received  us  courteously, 
and  asked  us  to  dinner.  Johnson  said  to  me, 
“After  the  uncertainty  of  all  human  things  at 
Hector’s,  this  invitation  came  very  well.”  We 
walked  about  the  town,  and  he  was  pleased  to 
see  it  increasing. 

I  talked  of  legitimation  by  subsequent  mar¬ 
riage,  which  obtained  in  the  Roman  law,  and 
still  obtains  in  the  law  of  Scotland.  Johnson.  “I 
think  it  a  bad  thing;  because  the  chastity  of 
women  being  of  the  utmost  importance,  as  all 
property  depends  upon  it,  they  who  forfeit  it 
should  not  have  any  possibility  of  being  restored 
to  good  character;  nor  should  the  children,  by 
an  illicit  connection,  attain  the  full  right  of  law¬ 
ful  children,  by  the  posteriour  consent  of  the  of¬ 
fending  parties.”  His  opinion  upon  this  subject 
deserves  consideration.  Upon  his  principle  there 
may,  at  times,  be  a  hardship,  and  seemingly  a 
strange  one,  upon  individuals;  but  the  general 
good  of  society  is  better  secured.  And,  after  all, 
it  is  unreasonable  in  an  individual  to  repine  that 
he  has  not  the  advantage  of  a  state  which  is 
made  different  from  his  own,  by  the  social  insti¬ 
tution  under  which  he  is  born.  A  woman  does 
not  complain  that  her  brother,  who  is  younger 
than  her,  gets  their  common  father’s  estate.  Why 
then  should  a  natural  son  complain  that  a  young¬ 
er  brother,  by  the  same  parents  lawfully  begot¬ 
ten,  gets  it?  The  operation  of  law  is  similar  in 
both  cases.  Besides,  an  illegitimate  son,  who  has  a 
younger  legitimate  brother  by  the  same  father 
and  mother,  has  no  stronger  claim  to  the  father’s 
estate,  than  if  that  legitimate  brother  had  only 
the  same  father,  from  whom  alone  the  estate 
depends. 

Mr.  Lloyd  joined  us  in  the  street;  and  in  a  lit¬ 
tle  while  we  met  Friend  Hector,  as  Mr.  Lloyd 
called  him.  It  gave  me  pleasure  to  observe  the 
joy  which  Johnson  and  he  expressed  on  seeing 
each  other  again.  Mr.  Lloyd  and  I  left  them  to¬ 
gether,  while  he  obligingly  shewed  me  some  of 
the  manufactures  of  this  very  curious  assem¬ 
blage  of  artificers.  We  all  met  at  dinner  at  Mr. 
Lloyd’s,  where  we  were  entertained  with  great 
hospitality.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Lloyd  had  been  mar¬ 
ried  the  same  year  with  their  Majesties,  and  like 
them,  had  been  blessed  with  a  numerous  family 
of  fine  children,  their  numbers  being  exactly  the 
same.  Johnson  said,  “Marriage  is  the  best  state 
for  a  man  in  general;  and  every  man  is  a  worse 


BOSWELL 


290 

man,  in  proportion  as  he  is  unfit  for  the  mar¬ 
ried  state.” 

I  have  always  loved  the  simplicity  of  man¬ 
ners,  and  the  spiritual-mindedness  of  the  Quak¬ 
ers;  and  talking  with  Mr.  Lloyd,  I  observed,  that 
the  essential  part  of  religion  was  piety,  a  devout 
intercourse  with  the  Divinity;  and  that  many  a 
man  was  a  Quaker  without  knowing  it. 

As  Dr.  Johnson  had  said  to  me  in  the  morn¬ 
ing,  while  we  walked  together,  that  he  liked 
individuals  among  the  Quakers,  but  not  the  sect; 
when  we  were  at  Mr.  Lloyd’s,  I  kept  clear  of  in¬ 
troducing  any  questions  concerning  the  peculi¬ 
arities  of  their  faith.  But  I  having  asked  to  look 
at  Baskerville’s  edition  of  Barclays  Apology,  John¬ 
son  laid  hold  of  it;  and  the  chapter  on  baptism 
happening  to  open,  Johnson  remarked,  “He  says 
there  is  neither  precept  nor  practice  for  bap¬ 
tism,  in  the  scriptures;  that  is  false.”  Here  he 
was  the  aggressor,  by  no  means  in  a  gentle  man¬ 
ner;  and  the  good  Quakers  had  the  advantage 
of  him;  for  he  had  read  negligently,  and  had  not 
observed  that  Barclay  speaks  of  infant  baptism; 
which  they  calmly  made  him  perceive  .Mr.  Lloyd, 
however,  was  in  as  great  a  mistake;  for  when  in¬ 
sisting  that  the  rite  of  baptism  by  water  was  to 
cease,  when  the  spiritual  administration  of  Christ 
began,  he  maintained,  that  John  the  Baptist 
said,  “My  baptism  shall  decrease,  but  his  shall  in¬ 
crease.”  Whereas  the  words  are,  “He  must  in¬ 
crease,  but  I  must  decrease.”1 

One  of  them  having  objected  to  the  “observ¬ 
ance  of  days,  and  months,  and  years,”  Johnson 
answered,  ‘The  Church  does  not  superstitiously 
observe  days,  merely  as  days,  but  as  memorials 
of  important  facts.  Christmas  might  be  kept  as 
well  upon  one  day  of  the  year  as  another;  but 
there  should  be  a  stated  day  for  commemorating 
the  birth  of  our  Saviour,  because  there  is  dan¬ 
ger  that  what  may  be  done  on  any  day,  will  be 
neglected.’ 

He  said  to  me  at  another  time,  “Sir,  the  holi¬ 
days  observed  by  our  church  are  of  great  use  in 
religion.”  There  can  be  no  doubt  of  this,  in  a 
limited  sense,  I  mean  if  the  number  of  such  con¬ 
secrated  portions  of  time  be  not  too  extensive. 
The  excellent  Mr.  Nelson’s  Festivals  and  Fasts , 
which  has,  I  understand,  the  greatest  sale  of  any 
book  ever  printed  in  England,  except  the  Bible, 
is  a  most  valuable  help  to  devotion;  and  in  addi¬ 
tion  to  it  I  would  recommend  two  sermons  on 
the  same  subject,  by  Mr.  Pott,  Archdeacon  of 
St.  Alban’s,  equally  distinguished  for  piety  and 
elegance.  I  am  sorry  to  have  it  to  say,  that  Scot¬ 
land  is  the  only  Christian  country,  Catholick  or 

lJokn,  3.  30. 


[  1776 

Protestant,  where  the  great  events  of  our  reli¬ 
gion  are  not  solemnly  commemorated  by  its  ec¬ 
clesiastical  establishment,  on  days  set  apart  for 
the  purpose. 

Mr.  Hector  was  so  good  as  to  accompany  me 
to  see  the  great  works  of  Mr.  Bolton,  at  a  place 
which  he  has  called  Soho,  about  two  miles  from 
Birmingham,  which  the  very  ingenious  proprie¬ 
tor  shewed  me  himself  to  the  best  advantage.  I 
wish  Johnson  had  been  with  us:  for  it  was  a 
scene  which  I  should  have  been  glad  to  contem¬ 
plate  byhislight.The  vastness  andthecontrivance 
of  some  of  the  machinery  would  have  “matched 
his  mighty  mind.”  I  shall  never  forget  Mr.  Bol¬ 
ton’s  expression  to  me:  “I  sell  here,  Sir,  what  all 
the  world  desires  to  have— Power.”  He  had  about 
seven  hundred  people  at  work.  I  contemplated 
him  as  an  iron  chief  tain,  and  he  seemed  to  be  a  fa¬ 
ther  to  his  tribe.  One  of  them  came  to  him,  com¬ 
plaining  grievously  of  his  landlord  for  having 
distrained  his  goods.  “Your  landlord  is  in  the 
right,  Smith,  (said  Bolton).  But  I’ll  tell  you 
what:  find  you  a  friend  who  will  lay  down  one 
half  of  your  rent,  and  I’ll  lay  down  the  other 
half;  and  you  shall  have  your  goods  again.” 

From  Mr.  Hector  I  now  learnt  many  particu¬ 
lars  of  Dr.  Johnson’s  early  life,  which,  with  oth¬ 
ers  that  he  gave  me  at  different  times  since,  have 
contributed  to  the  formation  of  this  work. 

Dr.  Johnson  said  to  me  in  the  morning,  “You 
will  see,  Sir,  at  Mr.  Hector’s,  his  sister,  Mrs. 
Careless,  a  clergyman’s  widow.  She  was  the  first 
woman  with  whom  I  was  in  love.  It  dropt  out  of 
my  head  imperceptibly;  but  she  and  I  shall  al¬ 
ways  have  a  kindness  for  each  other.”  He  laugh¬ 
ed  at  the  notion  that  a  man  never  can  be  really 
in  love  but  once,  and  considered  it  as  a  mere 
romantick  fancy. 

On  our  return  from  Mr.  Bolton’s,  Mr.  Hector 
took  me  to  his  house,  where  we  found  Johnson 
sitting  placidly  at  tea,  with  his  first  love;  who, 
though  now  advanced  in  years,  was  a  genteel 
woman,  very  agreeable,  and  well-bred. 

Johnson  lamented  to  Mr.  Hector  the  state  of 
one  of  their  school-fellows,  Mr.  Charles  Con¬ 
greve,  a  clergyman,  which  he  thus  described: 
“He  obtained,  I  believe,  considerable  preferment 
in  Ireland,  but  now  lives  in  London,  quite  as  a 
valetudinarian,  afraid  to  go  into  any  house  but 
his  own.  He  takes  a  short  airing  in  his  post-chaise 
every  day.  He  has  an  elderly  woman,  whom  he 
calls  cousin,  who  lives  with  him,  and  jogs  his  el¬ 
bow  when  his  glass  has  stood  too  long  empty, 
and  encourages  him  in  drinking,  in  which  he  is 
very  willing  to  be  encouraged;  not  that  he  gets 
drunk,  for  he  is  a  very  pious  man,  but  he  is  al- 


i776  ]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  291 


ways  muddy.  He  confesses  to  one  bottle  of  port 
every  day,  and  he  probably  drinks  more.  He  is 
quite  unsocial;  his  conversation  is  quite  mono- 
syllabi  cal:  and  when,  at  my  last  visit,  I  asked 
him  what  a  clock  it  was?  that  signal  of  my  de¬ 
parture  had  so  pleasing  an  effect  on  him,  that 
he  sprung  up  to  look  at  his  watch,  like  a  grey¬ 
hound  bounding  at  a  hare.”  When  Johnson  took 
leave  of  Mr.  Hector,  he  said,  “Don’t  grow  like 
Congreve;  nor  let  me  grow  like  him,  when  you 
are  near  me.” 

When  he  again  talked  of  Mrs.  Careless  to¬ 
night,  he  seemed  to  have  had  his  affection  re¬ 
vived;  for  he  said,  “If  I  had  married  her,  it 
might  have  been  as  happy  for  me.”  Boswell. 
“Pray,  Sir,  do  you  not  suppose  that  there  are 
fifty  women  in  the  world,  with  any  one  of  whom 
a  man  may  be  as  happy,  as  with  any  one  woman 
in  particular?”  Johnson.  “Ay,  Sir,  fifty  thou¬ 
sand.”  Boswell.  “Then,  Sir,  you  are  not  of  opin¬ 
ion  with  some  who  imagine  that  certain  men 
and  certain  women  are  made  for  each  other; 
and  that  they  cannot  be  happy  if  they  miss  their 
counterparts?”  Johnson.  “To  be  sure  not,  Sir. 
I  believe  marriages  would  in  general  be  as  hap¬ 
py,  and  often  more  so,  if  they  were  all  made  by 
the  Lord  Chancellor,  upon  a  due  consideration 
of  characters  and  circumstances,  without  the 
parties  having  any  choice  in  the  matter.” 

I  wished  to  have  staid  at  Birmingham  to-night, 
to  have  talked  more  with  Mr.  Hector;  but  my 
friend  was  impatient  to  reach  his  native  city;  so 
we  drove  on  that  stage  in  the  dark,  and  were 
long  pensive  and  silent.  When  we  came  within 
the  focus  of  the  Lichfield  lamps,  “Now  (said  he,) 
we  are  getting  out  of  a  state  of  death.”  We  put 
up  at  the  Three  Crowns,  not  one  of  the  great 
inns,  but  a  good  old  fashioned  one,  which  was 
kept  by  Mr.  Wilkins,  and  was  the  very  next 
house  to  that  in  which  Johnson  was  born  and 
brought  up,  and  which  was  still  his  own  proper¬ 
ty.1  We  had  a  comfortable  supper,  and  got  into 
high  spirits.  I  felt  all  my  Toryism  glow  in  this 
old  capital  of  Staffordshire.  I  could  have  offered 
incense  genio  loci;  and  I  indulged  in  libations  of 
that  ale,  which  Boniface,  in  The  Beaux  Stratagem , 
recommends  with  such  an  eloquent  jollity. 

Next  morning  he  introduced  me  to  Mrs.  Lucy 
Porter,  his  step-daughter.  She  was  now  an  old 
maid,  with  much  simplicity  of  manner.  She  had 
never  been  in  London.  Her  brother,  a  Captain 

XI  went  through  the  house  where  my  illustrious 
friend  was  born,  with  a  reverence  with  which  it 
doubtless  will  long  be  visited.  An  engraved  view  of 
it,  with  the  adjacent  buildings,  is  in  The  Gentleman's 
Magazine  for  Feb.,  1785. 


in  the  navy,  had  left  her  a  fortune  of  ten  thou¬ 
sand  pounds;  about  a  third  of  which  she  had 
laid  out  in  building  a  stately  house,  and  making 
a  handsome  garden,  in  an  elevated  situation  in 
Lichfield.  Johnson,  when  here  by  himself,  used 
to  live  at  her  house.  She  reverenced  him,  and  he 
had  a  parental  tenderness  for  her. 

We  then  visited  Mr.  Peter  Garrick,  who  had 
that  morning  received  a  letter  from  his  brother 
David,  announcing  our  coming  to  Lichfield.  He 
was  engaged  to  dinner,  but  asked  us  to  tea,  and 
to  sleep  at  his  house.  Johnson,  however,  would 
not  quit  his  old  acquaintance  Wilkins,  of  the 
Three  Crowns.  The  family  likeness  of  the  Gar¬ 
ricks  was  very  striking;  and  Johnson  thought 
that  David’s  vivacity  was  not  so  peculiar  to  him¬ 
self  as  was  supposed.  “Sir,  (said  he,)  I  don’t 
know  but  if  Peter  had  cultivated  all  the  arts  of 
gaiety  as  much  as  David  has  done,  he  might 
have  been  as  brisk  and  lively.  Depend  upon  it, 
Sir,  vivacity  is  much  an  art,  and  depends  great¬ 
ly  on  habit.”  I  believe  there  is  a  good  deal  of 
truth  in  this,  notwithstanding  a  ludicrous  story 
told  me  by  a  lady  abroad,  of  a  heavy  German 
baron,  who  had  lived  much  with  the  young  Eng¬ 
lish  at  Geneva,  and  was  ambitious  to  be  as  lively 
as  they;  with  which  view,  he,  with  assiduous  ex¬ 
ertion,  was  jumping  over  the  tables  and  chairs 
in  his  lodgings;  and  when  the  people  of  the  house 
ran  in  and  asked,  with  surprize,  what  was  the 
matter,  he  answered,  “£7z’  apprens  fetrefij .” 

We  dined  at  our  inn,  and  had  with  us  a  Mr. 
Jackson,  one  of  Johnson’s  schoolfellows,  whom 
he  treated  with  much  kindness,  though  he  seemed 
to  be  a  low  man,  dull  and  untaught.  Fie  had  a 
coarse  grey  coat,  black  waistcoat,  greasy  leather 
breeches,  and  a  yellow  uncurled  wig;  and  his 
countenance  had  the  ruddiness  which  betokens 
one  who  is  in  no  haste  to  “leave  his  can.”  He 
drank  only  ale.  He  had  tried  to  be  a  cutler  at 
Birmingham,  but  had  not  succeeded;  and  now 
he  lived  poorly  at  home,  and  had  some  scheme 
of  dressing  leather  in  a  better  manner  than  com¬ 
mon;  to  his  indistinct  account  of  which,  Dr. 
Johnson  listened  with  patient  attention,  that  he 
might  assist  him  with  his  advice.  Here  was  an 
instance  of  genuine  humanity  and  real  kindness 
in  this  great  man,  who  has  been  most  unjustly 
represented  as  altogether  harsh  and  destitute  of 
tenderness.  A  thousand  such  instances  might 
have  been  recorded  in  the  course  of  his  long  life ; 
though  that  his  temper  was  warm  and  hasty,  and 
his  manner  often  rough,  cannot  be  denied. 

I  saw  here,  for  the  first  time,  oat  ale;  and  oat 
cakes  not  hard  as  in  Scotland,  but  soft  like  a 
Yorkshire  cake,  were  served  at  breakfast.  It  was 


292 

pleasant  to  me  to  find,  that  Oats ,  the  food  of  horses , 
were  so  much  used  as  the  food  of  the  people  in  Dr. 
Johnson’s  own  town.  He  expatiated  in  praise  of 
Lichfield  and  its  inhabitants,  who,  he  said,  were 
“the  most  sober,  decent  people  in  England,  the 
genteelest  in  proportion  to  their  wealth,  and 
spoke  the  purest  English.”  I  doubted  as  to  the 
last  article  of  this  eulogy:  for  they  had  several 
provincial  sounds;  as  there ,  pronounced  like/<?<2r, 
instead  of  like  fair;  once  pronounced  woonse ,  in¬ 
stead  of  wunse,  or  wonse.  Johnson  himself  never 
got  entirely  free  of  those  provincial  accents.  Gar¬ 
rick  sometimes  used  to  take  him  off,  squeezing  a 
lemon  into  a  punch-bowl,  with  uncouth  gesticu¬ 
lations,  looking  round  the  company,  and  calling 
out,  “Who’s  for  poonsh ?” 

Very  little  business  appeared  to  be  going  for¬ 
ward  in  Lichfield.  I  found  however  two  strange 
manufactures  for  so  inland  a  place,  sail-cloth  and 
streamers  for  ships;  and  I  observed  them  mak¬ 
ing  some  saddle-cloths,  and  dressing  sheepskins: 
but  upon  the  whole,  the  busy  hand  of  industry 
seemed  to  be  quite  slackened.  “Surely,  Sir,  (said 
I,)  you  are  an  idle  set  of  people.”  “Sir,  (said 
Johnson,)  we  are  a  city  of  philosophers,  we  work 
with  our  heads,  and  make  the  boobies  of  Birm¬ 
ingham  work  for  us  with  their  hands.” 

There  was  at  this  time  a  company  of  players 
performing  at  Lichfield.  The  manager,  Mr.  Stan¬ 
ton,  sent  his  compliments,  and  begged  leave  to 
wait  on  Dr.  Johnson.  Johnson  received  him  very 
courteously,  and  he  drank  a  glass  of  wine  with 
us.  He  was  a  plain  decent  well-behaved  man, 
and  expressed  his  gratitude  to  Dr.  Johnson  for 
having  once  got  him  permission  from  Dr.  Taylor 
at  Ashbourne  to  play  there  upon  moderate 
terms.  Garrick’s  name  was  soon  introduced. 
Johnson.  “Garrick’s  conversation  is  gay  and  gro¬ 
tesque.  It  is  a  dish  of  all  sorts,  but  all  good  things. 
There  is  no  solid  meat  in  it:  there  is  a  want  of 
sentiment  in  it.  Not  but  that  he  has  sentiment 
sometimes,  and  sentiment,  too,  very  powerful 
and  very  pleasing:  but  it  has  not  its  full  propor¬ 
tion  in  his  conversation.” 

When  we  were  by  ourselves  he  told  me,  “For¬ 
ty  years  ago,  Sir,  I  was  in  love  with  an  actress 
here,  Mrs.  Emmet,  who  acted  Flora,  in  Hob  in 
the  Well.”  What  merit  this  lady  had  as  an  ac¬ 
tress,  or  what  was  her  figure,  or  her  manner,  I 
have  not  been  informed:  but,  if  we  may  believe 
Mr.  Garrick,  his  old  master’s  taste  in  theatrical 
merit  was  by  no  means  refined;  he  was  not  an 
elegans  formarum  spectator.  Garrick  used  to  tell, 
that  Johnson  said  of  an  actor,  who  played  Sir 
Harry  Wildair  at  Lichfield,  “There  is  a  courtly 
vivacity  about  the  fellow”;  when  in  fact,  accord¬ 


[  1776 

ing  to  Garrick’s  account,  “he  was  the  most  vul¬ 
gar  ruffian  that  ever  went  upon  boards .” 

We  had  promised  Mr.  Stanton  to  be  at  his 
theatre  on  Monday.  Dr.  Johnson  jocularly  pro¬ 
posed  me  to  write  a  Prologue  for  the  occasion: 
“A  Prologue,  by  James  Boswell,  Esq.  from  the 
Hebrides.”  I  was  really  inclined  to  take  the  hint. 
Methought,  “Prologue,  spoken  before  Dr.  Sam¬ 
uel  Johnson,  at  Lichfield,  1776”;  would  have 
sounded  as  well  as,  “Prologue,  spoken  before  the 
Duke  of  York,  at  Oxford,”  in  Charles  the  Sec¬ 
ond’s  time.  Much  might  have  been  said  of  what 
Lichfield  had  done  for  Shakspeare,  by  produc¬ 
ing  Johnson  and  Garrick.  But  I  found  he  was 
averse  to  it. 

We  went  and  viewed  the  museum  of  Mr. 
Richard  Green,  apothecary  here,  who  told  me 
he  was  proud  of  being  a  relation  of  Dr.  Johnson’s. 
It  was,  truely,  a  wonderful  collection,  both  of 
antiquities  and  natural  curiosities,  and  ingeni¬ 
ous  works  of  art.  He  had  all  the  articles  accurately 
arranged,  with  their  names  upon  labels,  printed 
at  his  own  little  press;  and  on  the  staircase  lead¬ 
ing  to  it  was  a  board,  with  the  names  of  con¬ 
tributors  marked  in  gold  letters.  A  printed  cata¬ 
logue  of  the  collection  was  to  be  had  at  a  book¬ 
seller’s.  Johnson  expressed  his  admiration  of  the 
activity  and  diligence  and  good  fortune  of  Mr. 
Green,  in  getting  together,  in  his  situation,  so 
great  a  variety  of  things;  and  Mr.  Green  told  me 
that  Johnson  once  said  to  him,  “Sir,  I  should  as 
soon  have  thought  of  building  a  man  of  war,  as 
of  collecting  such  a  museum.”  Mr.  Green’s  oblig¬ 
ing  alacrity  in  shewing  it  was  very  pleasing.  His 
engraved  portrait,  with  which  he  has  favoured 
me,  has  a  motto  truely  characteristical  of  his 
disposition,  Nemo  sibi  vivat. 

A  physician  being  mentioned  who  had  lost 
his  practice,  because  his  whimsically  changing 
his  religion  had  made  people  distrustful  of  him, 
I  maintained  that  this  was  unreasonable,  as  re¬ 
ligion  is  unconnected  with  medical  skill.  John¬ 
son.  “Sir,  it  is  not  unreasonable;  for  when  peo¬ 
ple  see  a  man  absurd  in  what  they  understand, 
they  may  conclude  the  same  of  him  in  what  they 
do  not  understand.  If  a  physician  were  to  take  to 
eating  of  horse-flesh,  nobody  would  employ  him; 
though  one  may  eat  horse-flesh,  and  be  a  very 
skilful  physician.  If  a  man  were  educated  in  an 
absurd  religion,  his  continuing  to  profess  it  would 
not  hurt  him,  though  his  changing  to  it  would.” 

We  drank  tea  and  coffee  at  Mr.  Peter  Gar¬ 
rick’s,  where  was  Mrs.  Aston,  one  of  the  maiden 
sisters  of  Mrs.  Walmsley,  wife  of  Johnson’s  first 
friend,  and  sister  also  of  the  lady  of  whom  John¬ 
son  used  to  speak  with  the  warmest  admiration, 


BOSWELL 


1776] 

by  the  name  of  Molly  Aston,  who  was  after¬ 
wards  married  to  Captain  Brodie  of  the  navy. 

On  Sunday,  March  24,  we  breakfasted  with 
Mrs.  Cobb,  a  widow  lady,  who  lived  in  an  agree¬ 
able  sequestered  place  close  by  the  town,  called 
the  Friary,  it  having  been  formerly  a  religious 
house.  She  and  her  niece,  Miss  Adey,  were  great 
admirers  of  Dr.  Johnson;  and  he  behaved  to 
them  with  a  kindness  and  easy  pleasantry,  such 
as  we  see  between  old  and  intimate  acquaint¬ 
ance.  He  accompanied  Mrs.  Cobb  to  St.  Mary’s 
church,  and  I  went  to  the  cathedral,  where  I 
was  very  much  delighted  with  the  musick,  find¬ 
ing  it  to  be  peculiarly  solemn  and  accordant 
with  the  words  of  the  service. 

We  dined  at  Mr.  Peter  Garrick’s,  who  was  in 
a  very  lively  humour,  and  verified  Johnson’s  say¬ 
ing,  that  if  he  had  cultivated  gaiety  as  much  as 
his  brother  David,  he  might  have  equally  ex¬ 
celled  in  it.  He  was  to-day  quite  a  London  nar¬ 
rator,  telling  us  a  variety  of  anecdotes  with  that 
earnestness  and  attempt  at  mimicry  which  we 
usually  find  in  the  wits  of  the  metropolis.  Dr. 
Johnson  went  with  me  to  the  cathedral  in  the 
afternoon.  It  was  grand  and  pleasing  to  contem¬ 
plate  this  illustrious  writer,  now  full  of  fame, 
worshipping  in  the  “solemn  temple”  of  his  na¬ 
tive  city. 

I  returned  to  tea  and  coffee  at  Mr.  Peter  Gar¬ 
rick’s,  and  then  found  Dr.  Johnson  at  the  Rev¬ 
erend  Mr.  Seward’s  Canon  Residentiary,  who  in¬ 
habited  the  Bishop’s  palace,  in  which  Mr.  Walm- 
sley  lived,  and  which  had  been  the  scene  of 
many  happy  hours  in  Johnson’s  early  life.  Mr. 
Seward  had,  with  ecclesiastical  hospitality  and 
politeness,  asked  me  in  the  morning,  merely  as  a 
stranger,  to  dine  with  him;  and  in  the  afternoon, 
when  I  was  introduced  to  him,  he  asked  Dr. 
Johnson  and  me  to  spend  the  evening  and  sup 
with  him.  He  was  a  genteel  well-bred  dignified 
clergyman,  had  travelled  with  Lord  Charles  Fitz- 
roy,  uncle  of  the  present  Duke  of  Grafton,  who 
died  when  abroad,  and  he  had  lived  much  in 
the  great  world.  He  was  an  ingenious  and  liter¬ 
ary  man,  had  published  an  edition  of  Beaumont 
and  Fletcher,  and  written  verses  in  Dodsley’s  col¬ 
lection.  His  lady  was  the  daughter  of  Mr.  Hunt¬ 
er,  Johnson’s  first  schoolmaster.  And  now,  for 
the  first  time,  I  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  his  cele¬ 
brated  daughter.  Miss  Anna  Seward,  to  whom 
I  have  since  been  indebted  for  many  civilities, 
as  well  as  some  obliging  communications  con¬ 
cerning  Johnson. 

Mr.  Seward  mentioned  to  us  the  observations 
which  he  had  made  upon  the  strata  of  earth  in 
volcanos,  from  which  it  appeared,  that  they  were 


293 

so  very  different  in  depth  at  different  periods, 
that  no  calculation  whatever  could  be  made  as 
to  the  time  required  for  their  formation.  This 
fully  refuted  an  antimosaical  remark  introduced 
into  Captain  Brydone’s  entertaining  tour,  I  hope 
heedlessly,  from  a  kind  of  vanity  which  is  too 
common  in  those  who  have  not  sufficiently  stud¬ 
ied  the  most  important  of  all  subjects.  Dr.  John¬ 
son,  indeed,  had  said  before  independent  of  this 
observation,  “Shall  all  the  accumulated  evidence 
of  the  history  of  the  world; — shall  the  authority 
of  what  is  unquestionably  the  most  ancient  writ¬ 
ing,  be  overturned  by  an  uncertain  remark  such 
as  this?” 

On  Monday,  March  25,  we  breakfasted  at 
Mrs.  Lucy  Porter’s.  Johnson  had  sent  an  express 
to  Dr.  Taylor’s  acquainting  him  of  our  being  at 
Lichfield,  and  Taylor  had  returned  an  answer 
that  his  postchaise  should  come  for  us  this  day. 
While  we  sat  at  breakfast,  Dr.  Johnson  received 
a  letter  by  the  post,  which  seemed  to  agitate  him 
very  much.  When  he  had  read  it,  he  exclaimed, 
“One  of  the  most  dreadful  things  that  has  hap¬ 
pened  in  my  time.”  The  phrase  my  time ,  like  the 
word  age ,  is  usually  understood  to  refer  to  an 
event  of  a  publick  or  general  nature.  I  imagined 
something  like  an  assassination  of  the  King — 
like  a  gunpowder  plot  carried  into  execution — 
or  like  another  fire  of  London.  When  asked, 
“What  is  it,  Sir?”  he  answered,  “Mr.  Thrale  has 
lost  his  only  son!”  This  was,  no  doubt,  a  very 
great  affliction  to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Thrale,  which 
their  friends  would  consider  accordingly;  but 
from  the  manner  in  which  the  intelligence  of  it 
was  communicated  by  Johnson,  it  appeared  for 
the  moment  to  be  comparatively  small.  I,  how¬ 
ever,  soon  felt  a  sincere  concern,  and  was  curi¬ 
ous  to  observe,  how  Dr.  Johnson  would  be  af¬ 
fected.  He  said,  “This  is  a  total  extinction  to 
their  family,  as  much  as  if  they  were  sold  into 
captivity.”  Upon  my  mentioning  thatMr.  Thrale 
had  daughters,  who  might  inherit  his  wealth; — 
“Daughters,  (said  Johnson,  warmly,)  he’ll  no 
more  value  his  daughters  than — ”  I  was.  going 
to  speak. — “Sir,  (said  he,)  don’t  you  know  how 
you  yourself  think?  Sir,  he  wishes  to  propagate 
his  name.”  In  short,  I  saw  male  succession  strong 
in  his  mind,  even  where  there  was  no  name,  no 
family  of  any  long  standing.  I  said,  it  was  lucky 
he  was  not  present  when  this  misfortune  hap¬ 
pened.  Johnson.  “It  is  lucky  for  me.  People  in 
distress  never  think  that  you  feel  enough.”  Bos¬ 
well.  “And  Sir,  they  will  have  the  hope  of  see¬ 
ing  you,  which  will  be  a  relief  in  the  mean  time; 
and  when  you  get  to  them,  the  pain  will  be  so 
far  abated,  that  they  will  be  capable  of  being 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


BOSWELL 


294 

consoled  by  you,  which,  in  the  first  violence  of 
it,  I  believe,  would  not  be  the  case.”  Johnson. 
“No,  Sir;  violent  pain  of  mind,  like  violent  pain 
of  body,  must  be  severely  felt.”  Boswell.  “I  own, 
Sir,  I  have  not  so  much  feeling  for  the  distress  of 
others,  as  some  people  have,  or  pretend  to  have: 
but  I  know  this,  that  I  would  do  all  in  my  power 
to  relieve  them.”  Johnson.  “Sir,  it  is  affectation  to 
pretend  to  feel  the  distress  of  others,  as  much  as 
they  do  themselves.  It  is  equally  so,  as  if  one 
should  pretend  tofeelasmuch  painwhileafriend’s 
leg  is  cutting  off,  as  he  does.  No  Sir;  you  have 
expressed  the  rational  and  just  nature  of  sym¬ 
pathy.  I  would  have  gone  to  the  extremity  of 
the  earth  to  have  preserved  this  boy.” 

He  was  soon  quite  calm.  The  letter  was  from 
Mr.  Thrale’s  clerk,  and  concluded,  “I  need  not 
say  how  much  they  wish  to  see  you  in  London.” 
He  said,  “We  shall  hasten  back  from  Taylor’s.” 

Mrs.  Lucy  Porter  and  some  other  ladies  of  the 
place  talked  a  great  deal  of  him  when  he  was 
out  of  the  room,  not  only  with  veneration  but 
affection.  It  pleased  me  to  find  that  he  was  so 
much  beloved  in  his  native  city. 

Mrs.  Aston,  whom  I  had  seen  the  preceding 
night,  and  her  sister,  Mrs.  Gastrel,  a  widow  la¬ 
dy,  had  each  a  house  and  garden,  and  pleasure- 
ground,  prettily  situated  upon  Stowhill,  a  gentle 
eminence,  adjoining  to  Lichfield.  Johnson  walk¬ 
ed  away  to  dinner  there,  leaving  me  by  myself 
without  any  apology;  I  wondered  at  this  want 
of  that  facility  of  manners,  from  which  a  man 
has  no  difficulty  in  carrying  a  friend  to  a  house 
where  he  is  intimate;  I  felt  it  very  unpleasant  to 
be  thus  left  in  solitude  in  a  country  town,  where 
I  was  an  entire  stranger,  and  began  to  think  my¬ 
self  unkindly  deserted:  but  I  was  soon  relieved, 
and  convinced  that  my  friend,  instead  of  being 
deficient  in  delicacy,  had  conducted  the  matter 
with  perfect  propriety,  for  I  received  the  follow¬ 
ing  note  in  his  handwriting:  “Mrs.  Gastrel,  at 
the  lower  house  on  Stowhill,  desires  Mr.  Bos¬ 
well’s  company  to  dinner  at  two.”  I  accepted  of 
the  invitation,  and  had  here  another  proof  how 
amiable  his  character  was  in  the  opinion  of  those 
who  knew  him  best.  I  was  not  informed,  till  aft¬ 
erwards,  that  Mrs.  Gastrel’s  husband  was  the 
clergyman  who,  while  he  lived  at  Stratford  upon 
Avon,  where  he  was  proprietor  of  Shakspeare’s 
garden,  with  Gothick  barbarity  cut  down  his 
mulberry-tree,1  and,  as  Dr.  Johnson  told  me,  did 

^ee  an  accurate  and  animated  statement  of  Mr. 
Gastrel’s  barbarity,  by  Mr.  Malone,  in  a  note  on 
Some  account  of  the  Life  of  William  Shakspeare ,  pre¬ 
fixed  to  his  admirable  edition  of  that  poet’s  works, 
vol.  1,  p.  118. 


[  *7/6 

it  to  vex  his  neighbours.  His  lady,  I  have  rea¬ 
son  to  believe,  on  the  same  authority,  partici¬ 
pated  in  the  guilt  of  what  the  enthusiasts  for 
our  immortal  bard  deem  almost  a  species  of 
sacrilege. 

After  dinner  Dr.  Johnson  wrote  a  letter  to  Mrs. 
Thrale  on  the  death  of  her  son.  I  said  it  would 
be  very  distressing  to  Thrale,  but  she  would  soon 
forget  it,  as  she  had  so  many  things  to  think  of. 
Johnson.  “No,  Sir,  Thrale  will  forget  it  first. 
She  has  many  things  that  she  may  think  of.  He 
has  many  things  that  he  must  think  of.”  This 
was  a  very  just  remark  upon  the  different  eff  ect 
of  those  light  pursuits  which  occupy  a  vacant 
and  easy  mind,  and  those  serious  engagements 
which  arrest  attention,  and  keep  us  from  brood¬ 
ing  over  grief. 

He  observed  of  Lord  Bute,  “It  was  said  of  Au¬ 
gustus,  that  it  would  have  been  better  for  Rome 
that  he  had  never  been  born,  or  had  never  died. 
So  it  would  have  been  better  for  this  nation  if 
Lord  Bute  had  never  been  minister,  or  had  never 
resigned.” 

In  the  evening  we  went  to  the  Town-hall, 
which  was  converted  into  a  temporary  theatre, 
and  saw  Theodosius ,  with  The  Stratford  Jubilee.  I 
was  happy  to  see  Dr.  Johnson  sitting  in  a  con¬ 
spicuous  part  of  the  pit,  and  receiving  affection¬ 
ate  homage  from  all  his  acquaintance.  We  were 
quite  gay  and  merry.  I  afterwards  mentioned  to 
him  that  I  condemned  myself  for  being  so,  when 
poor  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Thrale  were  in  such  distress. 
Johnson.  “You  are  wrong,  Sir;  twenty  years 
hence  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Thrale  will  not  suffer  much 
pain  from  the  death  of  their  son.  Now,  Sir,  you 
are  to  consider,  that  distance  of  place,  as  well 
as  distance  of  time,  operates  upon  the  human 
feelings.  I  would  not  have  you  be  gay  in  the 
presence  of  the  distressed,  because  it  would 
shock  them;  but  you  may  be  gay  at  a  dis¬ 
tance.  Pain  for  the  loss  of  a  friend,  or  of  a  relation 
whom  we  love,  is  occasioned  by  the  want 
which  we  feel.  In  time  the  vacuity  is  filled  with 
something  else;  or  sometimes  the  vacuity  closes 
up  of  itself.” 

Mr.  Seward  and  Mr.  Pearson,  another  clergy¬ 
man  here,  supt  with  us  at  our  inn,  and  after 
they  left  us,  we  sat  up  late  as  we  used  to  do  in 
London. 

Here  I  shall  record  some  fragments  of  my 
friend’s  conversation  during  this  jaunt. 

“Marriage,  Sir,  is  much  more  necessary  to  a 
man  than  to  a  woman;  for  he  is  much  less  able  to 
supply  himself  with  domestick  comforts.  Y  ou  will 
recollect  my  saying  to  some  ladies  the  other  day, 
that  I  had  often  wondered  why  young  women 


1776]  LIFE  OF 

should  marry,  as  they  have  so  much  more  free¬ 
dom,  and  so  much  more  attention  paid  to  them 
while  unmarried,  than  when  married.  I  indeed 
did  not  mention  the  strong  reason  for  their  mar¬ 
rying — the  mechanical  reason.5’  Boswell.  “Why, 
that  is  a  strong  one.  But  does  not  imagination 
make  it  much  more  important  than  it  is  in  re¬ 
ality?  Is  it  not,  to  a  certain  degree,  a  delusion  in 
us  as  well  as  in  women?55  Johnson.  “Why  yes, 
Sir;  but  it  is  a  delusion  that  is  always  beginning 
again.”  Boswell.  “I  don’t  know  but  there  is 
upon  the  whole  more  misery  than  happiness 
produced  by  that  passion.”  Johnson.  “I  don’t 
think  so,  Sir.” 

“Never  speak  of  a  man  in  his  own  presence. 
It  is  always  indelicate,  and  may  be  offensive.” 

“Questioning  is  not  the  mode  of  conversation 
among  gentlemen.  It  is  assuming  a  superiority, 
and  it  is  particularly  wrong  to  question  a  man 
concerning  himself.  There  may  be  parts  of  his 
former  life  which  he  may  not  wish  to  be  made 
known  to  other  persons,  or  even  brought  to  his 
own  recollection.” 

“A  man  should  be  careful  never  to  tell  tales 
of  himself  to  his  own  disadvantage.  People  may 
be  amused  and  laugh  at  the  time,  but  they  will 
be  remembered,  and  brought  out  against  him 
upon  some  subsequent  occasion.” 

“Much  may  be  done  if  a  man  puts  his  whole 
mind  to  a  particular  object.  By  doing  so,  Nor¬ 
ton1  has  made  himself  the  great  lawyer  that  he 
is  allowed  to  be.” 

I  mentioned  an  acquaintance  of  mine,  a  sec¬ 
tary,  who  was  a  very  religious  man,  who  not 
only  attended  regularly  on  publick  worship  with 
those  of  his  communion,  but  made  a  particular 
study  of  the  Scriptures,  and  even  wrote  a  com¬ 
mentary  on  some  parts  of  them,  yet  was  known 
to  be  very  licentious  in  indulging  himself  with 
women;  maintaining  that  men  are  to  be  saved 
by  faith  alone,  and  that  the  Christian  religion 
had  not  prescribed  any  fixed  rule  for  the  inter¬ 
course  between  the  sexes.  Johnson.  “Sir,  there 
is  no  trusting  to  that  crazy  piety.” 

I  observed  that  it  was  strange  how  well  Scotch¬ 
men  were  known  to  one  another  in  their  own 
country,  though  born  in  very  distant  counties; 
for  we  do  not  find  that  the  gentlemen  of  neigh¬ 
bouring  counties  in  England  are  mutually  known 
to  each  other.  Johnson,  with  his  usual  acute¬ 
ness,  at  once  saw  and  explained  the  reason  of 
this;  “Why,  Sir,  you  have  Edinburgh,  where  the 
gentlemen  from  all  your  counties  meet,  and 

^ir  Fletcher  Norton,  afterwards  Speaker  of  the 
House  of  Commons,  and  in  1782  created  Baron 
Grantley.  [M.] 


JOHNSON  295 

which  is  not  so  large  but  they  are  all  known. 
There  is  no  such  common  place  of  collection  in 
England,  except  London,  where  from  its  great 
size  and  diffusion,  many  of  those  who  reside  in 
contiguous  counties  of  England,  may  long  re¬ 
main  unknown  to  each  other.” 

On  Tuesday,  March  26,  there  came  for  us  an 
equipage  properly  suited  to  a  wealthy  well-ben- 
eficed  clergyman; — Dr.  Taylor’s  large  roomy 
post-chaise,  drawn  by  four  stout  plump  horses, 
and  driven  by  two  steady  jolly  postillions,  which 
conveyed  us  to  Ashbourne;  where  I  found  my 
friend’s  schoolfellow  living  upon  an  establish¬ 
ment  perfectly  corresponding  with  his  substan¬ 
tial  creditable  equipag’e :  his  house,  garden,  pleas¬ 
ure-grounds,  table,  in  short  every  thing  good, 
and  no  scantiness  appearing.  Every  man  should 
form  such  a  plan  of  living  as  he  can  execute  com¬ 
pletely.  Let  him  not  draw  an  outline  wider  than 
he  can  fill  up.  I  have  seen  many  skeletons  of 
shew  and  magnificence  which  excite  at  once  rid¬ 
icule  and  pity.  Dr.  Taylor  had  a  good  estate  of 
his  own,  and  good  preferment  in  the  church,  be¬ 
ing  a  prebendary  of  Westminster,  and  rector  of 
Bosworth.  He  was  a  diligent  justice  of  the  peace, 
and  presided  over  the  town  of  Ashbourne,  to  the 
inhabitants  of  which  I  was  told  he  was  very  lib¬ 
eral;  and  as  a  proof  of  this  it  was  mentioned  to 
me,  he  had  the  preceding  winter  distributed  two 
hundred  pounds  among  such  of  them  as  stood 
in  need  of  his  assistance.  He  had  consequently 
a  considerable  political  interest  in  the  county  of 
Derby,  which  he  employed  to  support  the  Dev¬ 
onshire  family;  for  though  the  schoolfellow  and 
friend  of  Johnson,  he  was  a  Whig.  I  could  not 
perceive  in  his  character  much  congeniality  of 
any  sort  with  that  of  Johnson,  who  however, 
said  to  me,  “Sir,  he  has  a  very  strong  under¬ 
standing.”  His  size,  and  figure,  and  countenance, 
and  manner,  were  that  of  a  hearty  English 
’Squire,  with  the  parson  superinduced:  and  I 
took  particular  notice  of  his  upper  servant,  Mr. 
Peters,  a  decent  grave  man,  in  purple  clothes, 
and  a  large  white  wig,  like  the  butler  or  major 
domo  of  a  Bishop. 

Dr.  Johnson  and  Dr.  Taylor  met  with  great 
cordiality;  and  Johnson  soon  gave  him  the  same 
sad  account  of  their  school-fellow,  Congreve, 
that  he  had  given  to  Mr.  Hector;  adding  a  re¬ 
mark  of  such  moment  to  the  rational  conduct  of 
a  man  in  the  decline  of  life,  that  it  deserves  to  be 
imprinted  upon  every  mind:  “There  is  nothing 
against  which  an  old  man  should  be  so  much 
upon  his  guard  as  putting  himself  to  nurse.” 
Innumerable  have  been  the  melancholy  in¬ 
stances  of  men  once  distinguished  for  firmness, 


BOSWELL 


296 

resolution,  and  spirit,  who  in  their  latter  days 
have  been  governed  like  children,  by  interested 
female  artifice. 

Dr.  Taylor  commended  a  physician  who  was 
known  to  him  and  Dr.  Johnson,  and  said,  “I 
fight  many  battles  for  him,  as  many  people  in 
the  country  dislike  him.”  Johnson.  “But  you 
should  consider,  Sir,  that  by  every  one  of  your 
victories  he  is  a  loser;  for,  every  man  of  whom 
you  get  the  better,  will  be  very  angry,  and  re¬ 
solve  not  to  employ  him;  whereas  if  people  get 
the  better  of  you  in  argument  about  him,  they’ll 
think,  c We’ll  send  for  Dr.  ******  neverthe¬ 
less.’  ”  This  was  an  observation  deep  and  sure 
in  human  nature. 

Next  day  we  talked  of  a  book  in  which  an 
eminent  judge  was  arraigned  before  the  bar  of 
the  publick,  as  having  pronounced  an  unjust 
decision  in  a  great  cause.  Dr.  Johnson  main¬ 
tained  that  this  publication  would  not  give  any 
uneasiness  to  the  judge.  “For  (said  he,)  either 
he  acted  honestly,  or  he  meant  to  do  injustice. 
If  he  acted  honestly,  his  own  consciousness  will 
protect  him;  if  he  meant  to  do  injustice,  he  will 
be  glad  to  see  the  man  who  attacks  him,  so  much 
vexed.” 

Next  day,  as  Dr.  Johnson  had  acquainted  Dr. 
Taylor  of  the  reason  for  his  returning  speedily 
to  London,  it  was  resolved  that  we  should  set 
out  after  dinner.  A  few  of  Dr.  Taylor’s  neigh¬ 
bours  were  his  guests  that  day. 

Dr.  Johnson  talked  with  approbation  of  one 
who  had  attained  to  the  state  of  the  philosoph¬ 
ical  wise  man,  that  is,  to  have  no  want  of  any 
thing.  “Then,  Sir,  (said  I,)  the  savage  is  a  wise 
man.”  “Sir,  (said  he,)  I  do  not  mean  simply 
being  without, — but  not  having  a  want.”  I 
maintained,  against  this  proposition,  that  it  was 
better  to  have  fine  clothes,  for  instance,  than 
not  to  feel  the  want  of  them.  Johnson.  “No,  Sir; 
fine  clothes  are  good  only  as  they  supply  the  want 
of  other  means  of  procuring  respect.  Was  Charles 
the  Twelfth,  think  you,  less  respected  for  his 
coarse  blue  coat  and  black  stock?  And  you  find 
the  King  of  Prussia  dresses  plain,  because  the 
dignity  of  his  character  is  sufficient.”  I  here 
brought  myself  into  a  scrape,  for  I  heedlessly 
said,  “Would  not  you,  Sir,  be  the  better  for  vel¬ 
vet  and  embroidery?”  Johnson.  “Sir,  you  put 
an  end  to  all  argument  when  you  introduce 
your  opponent  himself.  Have  you  no  better 
manners?  There  is  your  want”  I  apologised  by 
saying,  I  had  mentioned  him  as  an  instance 
of  one  who  wanted  as  little  as  any  man  in  the 
world,  and  yet,  perhaps,  might  receive  some  ad¬ 
ditional  lustre  from  dress. 


[  1776 

Having  left  Ashbourne  in  the  evening,  we 
stopped  to  change  horses  at  Derby,  and  availed 
ourselves  of  a  moment  to  enjoy  the.  conversation 
of  my  countryman,  Dr.  Butter,  then  physician 
there.  He  was  in  great  indignation  because  Lord 
Mountstuart’s  bill  for  a  Scotch  militia  had  been 
lost.  Dr.  Johnson  was  as  violent  against  it.  “I 
am  glad,  (said  he,)  that  Parliament  has  had  the 
spirit  to  throw  it  out.  You  wanted  to  take  advan¬ 
tage  of  the  timidity  of  our  scoundrels”;  (mean¬ 
ing,  I  suppose,  the  ministry).  It  may  be  ob¬ 
served,  that  he  used  the  epithet  scoundrel  very 
commonly  not  quite  in  the  sense  in  which  it  is 
generally  understood,  but  as  a  strong  term  of 
disapprobation;  as  when  he  abruptly  answered 
Mrs.  Thrale,  who  had  asked  him  how  he  did, 
“Ready  to  become  a  scoundrel,  Madam;  with 
a  little  more  spoiling  you  will,  I  think,  make  me 
a  complete  rascal”:1  he  meant,  easy  to  become 
a  capricious  and  self-indulgent  valetudinarian; 
a  character  for  which  I  have  heard  him  express 
great  disgust. 

Johnson  had  with  him  upon  this  jaunt,  II 
Palmerino  d ’  Inghilterra,  a  romance  praised  by 
Cervantes;  but  did  not  like  it  much.  He  said,  he 
read  it  for  the  language,  by  way  of  preparation 
for  his  Italian  expedition. — We  lay  this  night  at 
Loughborough. 

On  Thursday,  March  28,  we  pursued  our 
journey.  I  mentioned  that  old  Mr.  Sheridan 
complained  of  the  ingratitude  of  Mr.  Wedder- 
burne  and  General  Fraser,  who  had  been  much 
obliged  to  him  when  they  were  young  Scotch¬ 
men  entering  upon  life  in  England.  Johnson. 
“Why,  Sir,  a  man  is  very  apt  to  complain  of  the 
ingratitude  of  those  who  have  risen  far  above 
him.  A  man  when  he  gets  into  a  higher  sphere, 
into  other  habits  of  life,  cannot  keep  up  all  his 
former  connections.  Then,  Sir,  those  who  knew 
him  formerly  upon  a  level  with  themselves,  may 
think  that  they  ought  still  to  be  treated  as  on  a 
level,  which  cannot  be;  and  an  acquaintance  in 
a  former  situation  may  bring  out  things  which 
it  would  be  very  disagreeable  to  have  mentioned 
before  higher  company,  though,  perhaps,  every 
body  knows  of  them.”  He  placed  this  subject  in 
a  new  light  to  me,  and  shewed  that  a  man  who 
has  risen  in  the  world,  must  not  be  condemned 
too  harshly  for  being  distant  to  former  acquaint¬ 
ance,  even  though  he  may  have  been  much 
obliged  to  them.  It  is,  no  doubt,  to  be  wished 
that  a  proper  degree  of  attention  should  be 
shewn  by  great  men  to  their  early  friends.  But  if 
either  from  obtuse  insensibility  to  difference  of 
situation,  or  presumptuous  forwardness,  which 

1  Anecdotes  oj  Johnson ,  p.  1 76. 


1776  ]  LIFE  OF 

will  not  submit  even  to  an  exteriour  observance 
of  it,  the  dignity  of  high  place  cannot  be  pre¬ 
served,  when  they  are  admitted  into  the  com¬ 
pany  of  those  raised  above  the  state  in  which 
they  once  were,  encroachment  must  be  repelled, 
and  the  kinder  feelings  sacrificed.  To  one  of  the 
very  fortunate  persons  whom  I  have  mentioned, 
namely,  Mr.  Wedderburne,  now  Lord  Lough¬ 
borough,  I  must  do  the  justice  to  relate,  that  I 
have  been  assured  by  another  early  acquaint¬ 
ance  of  his,  old  Mr.  Macklin,  who  assisted  in 
improving  his  pronunciation,  that  he  found  him 
very  grateful.  Macklin,  I  suppose,  had  not 
pressed  upon  his  elevation  with  so  much  eager¬ 
ness  as  the  gentleman  who  complained  of  him. 
Dr.  Johnson’s  remark  as  to  the  jealousy  enter¬ 
tained  of  our  friends  who  rise  far  above  us,  is 
certainly  very  just.  By  this  was  withered  the 
early  friendship  between  Charles  Townshend 
and  Akenside;  and  many  similar  instances 
might  be  adduced. 

He  said,  “It  is  commonly  a  weak  man  who 
marries  for  love.”  We  then  talked  of  marrying 
women  of  fortune;  and  I  mentioned  a  common 
remark,  that  a  man  may  be,  upon  the  whole, 
richer  by  marrying  a  woman  with  a  very  small 
portion,  because  a  woman  of  fortune  will  be 
proportionally  expensive;  whereas  a  woman 
who  brings  none  will  be  very  moderate  in  ex¬ 
penses.  Johnson.  “Depend  upon  it,  Sir,  this  is 
not  true.  A  woman  of  fortune  being  used  to  the 
handling  of  money,  spends  it  judiciously:  but  a 
woman  who  gets  the  command  of  money  for  the 
first  time  upon  her  marriage,  has  such  a  gust  in 
spending  it,  that  she  throws  it  away  with  great 
profusion.” 

He  praised  the  ladies  of  the  present  age,  in¬ 
sisting  that  they  were  more  faithful  to  their  hus¬ 
bands,  and  more  virtuous  in  every  respect,  than 
in  former  times,  because  their  understandings 
were  better  cultivated.  It  was  an  undoubted 
proof  of  his  good  sense  and  good  disposition, 
that  he  was  never  querulous,  never  prone  to 
inveigh  against  the  present  times,  as  is  so  com¬ 
mon  when  superficial  minds  are  on  the  fret.  On 
the  contrary,  he  was  willing  to  speak  favourably 
of  his  own  age;  and,  indeed,  maintained  its  su¬ 
periority  in  every  respect,  except  in  its  rever¬ 
ence  for  government;  the  relaxation  of  which  he 
imputed,  as  its  grand  cause,  to  the  shock  which 
our  monarchy  received  at  the  Revolution,  though 
necessary;  and  secondly,  to  the  timid  concessions 
made  to  faction  by  successive  administrations 
in  the  reign  of  his  present  Majesty.  I  am  happy 
to  think,  that  he  lived  to  see  the  Grown  at  last 
recover  its  just  influence. 


JOHNSON  297 

At  Leicester  we  read  in  the  news-paper  that 
Dr.  James  was  dead.  I  thought  that  the  death  of 
an  old  school-fellow,  and  one  with  whom  he 
had  lived  a  good  deal  in  London,  would  have 
affected  my  fellow-traveller  much:  but  he  only 
said,  “Ah!  poor  Jamy.”  Afterwards,  however, 
when  we  were  in  the  chaise,  he  said,  with  more 
tenderness,  “Since  I  set  out  on  this  jaunt,  I  have 
lost  an  old  friend  and  a  young  one; — Dr.  James, 
and  poor  Harry.”  (Meaning  Mr.  Thrale’s  son.) 

Having  lain  at  St.  Alban’s,  on  Thursday, 
March  28,  we  breakfasted  the  next  morning  at 
Barnet.  I  expressed  to  him  a  weakness  of  mind 
which  I  could  not  help;  an  uneasy  apprehension 
that  my  wife  and  children,  who  were  at  a  great 
distance  from  me,  might,  perhaps,  be  ill.  “Sir, 
(said  he,)  consider  how  foolish  you  think  it  in 
them  to  be  apprehensive  that  you  are  ill.”  This 
sudden  turn  relieved  me  for  the  moment;  but  I 
afterwards  perceived  it  to  be  an  ingenious  fal¬ 
lacy.  I  might,  to  be  sure,  be  satisfied  that  they 
had  no  reason  to  be  apprehensive  about  me, 
because  I  knew  that  I  myself  was  well:  but  we 
might  have  a  mutual  anxiety,  without  the 
charge  of  folly;  because  each  was,  in  some  de¬ 
gree,  uncertain  as  to  the  condition  of  the 
other. 

I  enjoyed  the  luxury  of  our  approach  to  Lon¬ 
don,  that  metropolis  which  we  both  loved  so 
much,  for  the  high  and  varied  intellectual  pleas¬ 
ure  which  it  furnishes.  I  experienced  immediate 
happiness  while  whirled  along  with  such  a  com¬ 
panion,  and  said  to  him,  “Sir,  you  observed  one 
day  at  General  Oglethorpe’s,  that  a  man  is  never 
happy  for  the  present,  but  when  he  is  drunk. 
Will  you  not  add, — or  when  driving  rapidly  in 
a  post-chaise?”  Johnson.  “No,  Sir,  you  are 
driving  rapidly  from  something,  or  to  some¬ 
thing.” 

Talking  of  melancholy,  he  said,  “Some  men, 
and  very  thinking  men  too,  have  not  those  vex¬ 
ing  thoughts.1  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  is  the  same 

JThe  phrase  “vexing  thoughts,”  is,  I  think,  very 
expressive.  It  has  been  familiar  to  me  from  my 
childhood;  for  it  is  to  be  found  in  the  Psalms  in 
Metre ,  used  in  the  churches  (I  believe  I  should  say 
kirks)  of  Scotland,  Psalms,  43.  5; 

Why  art  thou  then  cast  down ,  my  soul? 

What  should  discourage  thee? 

And  why  with  vexing  thoughts  art  thou 
Disquieted  in  me? 

Some  allowance  must  no  doubt  be  made  for  early 
prepossession.  But  at  a  maturer  period  of  life;  after 
looking  at  various  metrical  versions  of  the  Psalms , 
I  am  well  satisfied  that  the  version  used  in  Scotland 
is,  upon  the  whole,  the  best;  and  that  it  is  vain  to 
think  of  having  a  better.  It  has  in  general  a  sim¬ 
plicity  and  unction  of  sacred  Poesy;  and  in  many 
parts  its  transfusion  is  admirable. 


BOSWELL 


298 

all  the  year  round.  Beauclerk,  except  when  ill 
and  in  pain,  is  the  same.  But  I  believe  most  men 
have  them  in  the  degree  in  which  they  are  capa¬ 
ble  of  having  them.  If  I  were  in  the  country, 
and  were  distressed  by  that  malady,  I  would 
force  myself  to  take  a  book;  and  every  time  I 
did  it  I  should  find  it  the  easier.  Melancholy, 
indeed,  should  be  diverted  by  every  means  but 
drinking.” 

We  stopped  at  Messieurs  Dillys,  booksellers 
in  the  Poultry;  from  whence  he  hurried  away, 
in  a  hackney  coach,  to  Mr.  Thrale’s,  in  the  Bor¬ 
ough.  I  called  at  his  house  in  the  evening,  hav¬ 
ing  promised  to  acquaint  Mrs.  Williams  of  his 
safe  return;  when,  to  my  surprize,  I  found  him 
sitting  with  her  at  tea,  and,  as  I  thought,  not  in 
a  very  good  humour:  for,  it  seems,  when  he  had 
got  to  Mr.  Thrale’s,  he  found  the  coach  was  at 
the  door  waiting  to  carry  Mrs.  and  Miss  Thrale, 
and  Signor  Baretti,  their  Italian  master,  to  Bath. 
This  was  not  shewing  the  attention  which  might 
have  been  expected  to  the  “Guide,  Philosopher, 
and  Friend,’5  the  Imlac  who  had  hastened  from 
the  country  to  console  a  distressed  mother,  who 
he  understood  was  very  anxious  for  his  return. 
They  had,  I  found,  without  ceremony,  pro¬ 
ceeded  on  their  intended  journey.  I  was  glad 
to  understand  from  him  that  it  was  still  resolved 
that  his  tour  to  Italy  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Thrale 
should  take  place,  of  which  he  had  entertained 
some  doubt,  on  account  of  the  loss  which  they 
had  suffered;  and  his  doubts  afterwards  proved 
to  be  well-founded.  He  observed,  indeed  very 
justly,  that  “their  loss  was  an  additional  reason 
for  their  going  abroad;  and  if  it  had  not  been 
fixed  that  he  should  have  been  one  of  the  par¬ 
ty,  he  would  force  them  out;  but  he  would  not 
advise  them  unless  his  advice  was  asked,  lest 
they  might  suspect  that  he  recommended  what 
he  wished  on  his  own  account.”  I  was  not  pleased 
that  his  intimacy  with  Mr.  Thrale’s  family, 
though  it  no  doubt  contributed  much  to  his 
comfort  and  enjoyment,  was  not  without  some 
degree  of  restraint:  not,  as  has  been  grossly  sug¬ 
gested,  that  it  was  required  of  him  as  a  task  to 
talk  for  the  entertainment  of  them  and  their 
company;  but  that  he  was  not  quite  at  his  ease; 
which,  however,  might  partly  be  owing  to  his 
own  honest  pride — that  dignity  of  mind  which 
is  always  jealous  of  appearing  too  compliant. 

On  Sunday,  March  31,1  called  on  him,  and 
shewed  him  as  a  curiosity  which  I  had  discov¬ 
ered,  his  Translation  of  Lobe? s  Account  of  Abyssinia, 
which  Sir  John  Pringle  had  lent  me,  it  being 
then  little  known  as  one  of  his  works.  He  said, 
“Take  no  notice  of  it,”  or  “don’t  talk  of  it.”  He 


[  1776 

seemed  to  think  it  beneath  him,  though  done  at 
six-and-twenty.  I  said  to  him,  “Your  style,  Sir, 
is  much  improved  since  you  translated  this.” 
He  answered  with  a  sort  of  triumphant  smile, 
“Sir,  I  hope  it  is.” 

On  Wednesday,  April  3,  in  the  morning  I 
found  him  very  busy  putting  his  books  in  order, 
and  as  they  were  generally  very  old  ones,  clouds 
of  dust  were  flying  around  him.  He  had  on  a 
pair  of  large  gloves  such  as  hedgers  use.  His 
present  appearance  put  me  in  mind  of  my 
uncle,  Dr.  Boswell’s  description  of  him,  “A 
robust  genius,  born  to  grapple  with  whole  li¬ 
braries.” 

I  gave  him  an  account  of  a  conversation  which 
had  passed  between  me  and  Captain  Cook,  the 
day  before,  at  dinner  at  Sir  John  Pringle’s;  and 
he  was  much  pleased  with  the  conscientious 
accuracy  of  that  celebrated  circumnavigator, 
who  set  me  right  as  to  many  of  the  exaggerated 
accounts  given  by  Dr.  Hawkesworth  of  his  Voy¬ 
ages.  I  told  him  that  while  I  was  with  the  Cap¬ 
tain,  I  catched  the  enthusiasm  of  curiosity  and 
adventure,  and  felt  a  strong  inclination  to  go 
with  him  on  his  next  voyage.  Johnson.  “Why, 
Sir,  a  man  does  feel  so,  till  he  considers  how  very 
little  he  can  learn  from  such  voyages.”  Boswell. 
“But  one  is  carried  away  with  the  general  grand 
and  indistinct  notion  of  A  Voyage  round  the 
World.”  Johnson.  “Yes,  Sir,  but  a  man  is  to 
guard  himself  against  taking  a  thing  in  general.” 
I  said  I  was  certain  that  a  great  part  of  what  we 
are  told  by  the  travellers  to  the  South  Sea  must 
be  conjecture,  because  they  had  not  enough  of 
the  language  of  those  countries  to  understand  so 
much  as  they  have  related.  Objects  falling  un¬ 
der  the  observation  of  the  senses  might  be  clearly 
known;  but  every  thing  intellectual,  every  thing 
abstract — politicks,  morals,  and  religion,  must 
be  darkly  guessed.  Dr.  Johnson  was  of  the  same 
opinion.  He  upon  another  occasion,  when  a 
friend  mentioned  to  him  several  extraor¬ 
dinary  facts,  as  communicated  to  him  by  the 
circumnavigators,  slily  observed,  “Sir,  I  never 
before  knew  how  much  I  was  respected  by 
these  gentlemen;  they  told  me  none  of  these 
things.” 

He  had  been  in  company  with  Omai,  a  na¬ 
tive  of  one  of  the  South  Sea  Islands,  after  he 
had  been  some  time  in  this  country.  He  was 
struck  with  the  elegance  of  his  behaviour,  and 
accounted  for  it  thus:  “Sir,  he  had  passed  his 
time,  while  in  England,  only  in  the  best  com¬ 
pany;  so  that  all  that  he  had  acquired  of  our 
manners  was  genteel.  As  a  proof  of  this,  Sir, 
Lord  Mulgrave  and  he  dined  one  day  at  Streat- 


1776]  LIFE  OF 

ham;  they  sat  with  their  backs  to  the  light  front¬ 
ing  me,  so  that  I  could  not  see  distinctly;  and 
there  was  so  little  of  the  savage  in  Omai,  that  I 
was  afraid  to  speak  to  either,  least  I  should  mis¬ 
take  one  for  the  other.” 

We  agreed  to  dine  to-day  at  the  Mitre-tavern, 
after  the  rising  of  the  House  of  Lords,  where  a 
branch  of  the  litigation  concerning  the  Douglas 
Estate,  in  which  I  was  one  of  the  counsel,  was  to 
come  on.  I  brought  with  me  Mr.  Murray,  Solic¬ 
itor-General  of  Scotland,  now  one  of  the  Judges 
of  the  Court  of  Session,  with  the  title  of  Lord 
Henderland.  I  mentioned  Mr.  Solicitor’s  rela¬ 
tion,  Lord  Charles  Hay,  with  whom  I  knew  Dr. 
Johnson  had  been  acquainted.  Johnson.  C£I 
wrote  something  for  Lord  Charles;  and  I  thought 
he  had  nothing  to  fear  from  a  court-martial.  I 
suffered  a  great  loss  when  he  died;  he  was  a 
mighty  pleasing  man  in  conversation,  and  a 
reading  man.  The  character  of  a  soldier  is  high. 
They  who  stand  forth  the  foremost  in  danger, 
for  the  community,  have  the  respect  of  man¬ 
kind.  An  officer  is  much  more  respected  than 
any  other  man  who  has  as  little  money.  In  a 
commercial  country,  money  will  always  pur¬ 
chase  respect.  But  you  find,  an  officer,  who  has, 
properly  speaking,  no  money,  is  every  where 
well  received  and  treated  with  attention.  The 
character  of  a  soldier  always  stands  him  in 
stead.”  Boswell.  “Yet,  Sir,  I  think  that  com¬ 
mon  soldiers  are  worse  thought  of  than  other 
men  in  the  same  rank  of  life;  such  as  labourers.” 
Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  a  common  soldier  is  usu¬ 
ally  a  very  gross  man,  and  any  quality  which 
procures  respect  may  be  overwhelmed  by  gross¬ 
ness.  A  man  of  learning  may  be  so  vicious  or  so 
ridiculous  that  you  cannot  respect  him.  A  com¬ 
mon  soldier  too,  generally  eats  more  than  he 
can  pay  for.  But  when  a  common  soldier  is  civil 
in  his  quarters,  his  red  coat  procures  him  a  de¬ 
gree  of  respect.”  The  peculiar  respect  paid  to 
the  military  character  in  France  was  mentioned. 
Boswell.  “I  should  think  that  where  military 
men  are  so  numerous,  they  would  be  less  valued 
as  not  being  rare.”  Johnson.  “Nay,  Sir,  wher¬ 
ever  a  particular  character  or  profession  is  high 
in  the  estimation  of  a  people,  those  who  are  of  it 
will  be  valued  above  other  men.  We  value  an 
Englishman  highly  in  this  country,  and  yet 
Englishmen  are  not  rare  in  it.” 

Mr.  Murray  praised  the  ancient  philosophers 
for  the  candour  and  good  humour  with  which 
those  of  different  sects  disputed  with  each  other. 
Johnson.  “Sir,  they  disputed  with  good  humour, 
because  they  were  not  in  earnest  as  to  religion. 
Had  the  ancients  been  serious  in  their  belief,  we 


JOHNSON  299 

should  not  have  had  their  Gods  exhibited  in  the 
manner  we  find  them  represented  in  the  Poets. 
The  people  would  not  have  suffered  it.  They 
disputed  with  good  humour  upon  their  fanciful 
theories,  because  they  were  not  interested  in  the 
truth  of  them:  when  a  man  has  nothing  to  lose, 
he  may  be  in  good  humour  with  his  opponent. 
Accordingly  you  see  in  Lucian,  the  Epicurean, 
who  argues  only  negatively,  keeps  his  temper; 
the  Stoick,  who  has  something  positive  to  pre¬ 
serve,  grows  angry.  Being  angry  with  one  who 
controverts  an  opinion  which  you  value,  is  a 
necessary  consequence  of  the  uneasiness  which 
you  feel.  Every  man  who  attacks  my  belief, 
diminishes  in  some  degree  my  confidence  in  it, 
and  therefore  makes  me  uneasy;  and  I  am  an¬ 
gry  with  him  who  makes  me  uneasy.  Those  only 
who  believed  in  revelation  have  been  angry  at 
having  their  faith  called  in  question;  because 
they  only  had  something  upon  which  they  could 
rest  as  matter  of  fact.”  Murray.  “It  seems  to 
me  that  we  are  not  angry  at  a  man  for  contro¬ 
verting  an  opinion  which  we  believe  and  value; 
we  rather  pity  him.”  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir;  to  be 
sure  when  you  wish  a  man  to  have  that  belief 
which  you  think  is  of  infinite  advantage,  you 
wish  well  to  him;  but  your  primary  considera¬ 
tion  is  your  own  quiet.  If  a  madman  were  to 
come  into  this  room  with  a  stick  in  his  hand,  no 
doubt  we  should  pity  the  state  of  his  mind;  but 
our  primary  consideration  would  be  to  take  care 
of  ourselves.  We  should  knock  him  down  first, 
and  pity  him  afterwards.  No,  Sir;  every  man 
will  dispute  with  great  good  humour  upon  a 
subject  in  which  he  is  not  interested.  I  will  dis¬ 
pute  very  calmly  upon  the  probability  of  an¬ 
other  man’s  son  being  hanged;  but  if  a  man  zeal¬ 
ously  enforces  the  probability  that  my  own  son 
will  be  hanged,  I  shall  certainly  not  be  in  a  very 
good  humour  with  him.”  I  added  this  illustra¬ 
tion,  “If  a  man  endeavours  to  convince  me  that 
my  wife,  whom  I  love  very  much,  and  in  whom 
I  place  great  confidence,  is  a  disagreeable  wom¬ 
an,  and  is  even  unfaithful  to  me,  I  shall  be  very 
angry,  for  he  is  putting  me  in  fear  of  being  un¬ 
happy.”  Murray.  “But,  Sir,  truth  will  always 
bear  an  examination.”  Johnson.  “Yes,  Sir,  but 
it  is  painful  to  be  forced  to  defend  it.  Consider, 
Sir,  how  should  you  like,  though  conscious  of 
your  innocence,  to  be  tried  before  a  jury  for  a 
capital  crime,  once  a  week.” 

We  talked  of  education  at  great  schools;  the 
advantages  and  disadvantages  of  which  Johnson 
displayed  in  a  luminous  manner;  but  his  argu¬ 
ments  preponderated  so  much  in  favour  of  the 
benefit  which  a  boy  of  good  parts  might  receive 


BOSWELL 


300 

at  one  of  them,  that  I  have  reason  to  believe  Mr. 
Murray  was  very  much  influenced  by  what  he 
had  heard  to-day,  in  his  determination  to  send 
his  own  son  to  Westminster  school. — I  have 
acted  in  the  same  manner  with  regard  to  my 
own  two  sons;  having  placed  the  eldest  at  Eton, 
and  the  second  at  Westminster.  I  cannot  say 
which  is  best.  But  in  justice  to  both  those  noble 
seminaries,  I  with  high  satisfaction  declare,  that 
my  boys  have  derived  from  them  a  great  deal  of 
good,  and  no  evil;  and  I  trust  they  will,  like 
Horace,  be  grateful  to  their  father  for  giving 
them  so  valuable  an  education. 

I  introduced  the  topick,  which  is  often  ignor¬ 
antly  urged,  that  the  Universities  of  England 
are  too  rich;1  so  that  learning  does  not  flourish 
in  them  as  it  would  do,  if  those  who  teach  had 
smaller  salaries,  and  depended  on  their  assiduity 
for  a  great  part  of  their  income.  Johnson.  “Sir, 
the  very  reverse  of  this  is  the  truth;  the  English 
Universities  are  not  rich  enough.  Our  fellow¬ 
ships  are  only  sufficient  to  support  a  man  during 
his  studies  to  fit  him  for  the  world,  and  accord¬ 
ingly  in  general  they  are  held  no  longer  than  till 
an  opportunity  offers  of  getting  away.  Now  and 
then,  perhaps,  there  is  a  fellow  who  grows  old 
in  his  college;  but  this  is  against  his  will,  unless 
he  be  a  man  very  indolent  indeed.  A  hundred  a 
year  is  reckoned  a  good  fellowship,  and  that  is 
no  more  than  is  necessary  to  keep  a  man  de¬ 
cently  as  a  scholar.  We  do  not  allow  our  fellows 
to  marry,  because  we  consider  academical  in¬ 
stitutions  as  preparatory  to  a  settlement  in  the 
world.  It  is  only  by  being  employed  as  a  tutor, 
that  a  fellow  can  obtain  any  thing  more  than  a 
livelihood.  To  be  sure  a  man,  who  has  enough 
without  teaching,  will  probably  not  teach;  for 
we  would  all  be  idle  if  we  could.  In  the  same 
manner,  a  man  who  is  to  get  nothing  by  teach¬ 
ing,  will  not  exert  himself.  Gresham  College  was 
intended  as  a  place  of  instruction  for  London; 
able  professors  were  to  read  lectures  gratis,  they 
contrived  to  have  no  scholars;  whereas,  if  they 
had  been  allowed  to  receive  but  sixpence  a  lec¬ 
ture  from  each  scholar,  they  would  have  been 
emulous  to  have  had  many  scholars.  Every  body 
will  agree  that  it  should  be  the  interest  of  those 
who  teach  to  have  scholars;  and  this  is  the  case 
in  our  Universities.  That  they  are  too  rich  is 
certainly  not  true;  for  they  have  nothing  good 
enough  to  keep  a  man  of  eminent  learning  with 

xDr.  Adam  Smith,  who  was  for  some  time  a  Pro¬ 
fessor  in  the  University  of  Glasgow,  has  uttered,  in 
his  Wealth  of  Nations ,  some  reflections  upon  this 
subject  which  are  certainly  not  well  founded,  and 
seem  to  be  invidious. 


[  1776 

them  for  his  life.  In  the  foreign  Universities  a 
professorship  is  a  high  thing.  It  is  as  much  al¬ 
most  as  a  man  can  make  by  his  learning;  and 
therefore  we  find  the  most  learned  men  abroad 
are  in  the  Universities.  It  is  not  so  with  us.  Our 
Universities  are  impoverished  of  learning,  by 
the  penury  of  their  provisions.  I  wish  there  were 
many  places  of  a  thousand  a-year  at  Oxford,  to 
keep  first-rate  men  of  learning  from  quitting  the 
University.”  Undoubtedly  if  this  were  the  case, 
Literature  would  have  a  still  greater  dignity 
and  splendour  at  Oxford,  and  there  would  be 
grander  living  sources  of  instruction. 

I  mentioned  Mr.  Maclaurin’s  uneasiness  on 
account  of  a  degree  of  ridicule  carelessly  thrown 
on  his  deceased  father,  in  Goldsmith’s  History  of 
Animated  Nature ,  in  which  that  celebrated  mathe¬ 
matician  is  represented  as  being  subject  to  fits 
of  yawning  so  violent  as  to  render  him  incapa¬ 
ble  of  proceeding  in  his  lecture;  a  story  alto¬ 
gether  unfounded,  but  for  the  publication  of 
which  the  law  would  give  no  reparation.2  This 
led  us  to  agitate  the  question,  whether  legal  re¬ 
dress  could  be  obtained,  even  when  a  man’s 
deceased  relation  was  calumniated  in  a  publi¬ 
cation.  Mr.  Murray  maintained  there  should  be 
reparation,  unless  the  authour  could  justify  him¬ 
self  by  proving  the  fact.  Johnson.  “Sir,  it  is  of  so 
much  more  consequence  that  truth  should  be 
told,  than  that  individuals  should  not  be  made 
uneasy,  that  it  is  much  better  that  the  law  does 
not  restrain  writing  freely  concerning  the  char¬ 
acters  of  the  dead.  Damages  will  be  given  to  a 
man  who  is  calumniated  in  his  life-time,  be¬ 
cause  he  may  be  hurt  in  his  worldly  interest,  or 
at  least  hurt  in  his  mind:  but  the  law  does  not 
regard  that  uneasiness  which  a  man  feels  on 
having  his  ancestor  calumniated.  That  is  too 
nice.  Let  him  deny  what  is  said,  and  let  the 
matter  have  a  fair  chance  by  discussion.  But,  if 
a  man  could  say  nothing  against  a  character 
but  what  he  can  prove,  history  could  not  be 
written;  for  a  great  deal  is  known  of  men  of 
which  proof  cannot  be  brought.  A  minister  may 
be  notoriously  known  to  take  bribes,  and  yet 
you  may  not  be  able  to  prove  it.”  Mr.  Murray 
suggested,  that  the  authour  should  be  obliged 
to  shew  some  sort  of  evidence,  though  he  would 
not  require  a  strict  legal  proof:  but  Johnson 
firmly  and  resolutely  opposed  any  restraint 

2Dr.  Goldsmith  was  dead  before  Mr.  Maclaurin 
discovered  the  ludicrous  errour.  But  Mr.  Nourse, 
the  bookseller,  who  was  the  proprietor  of  the  work, 
upon  being  applied  to  by  Sir  John  Pringle,  agreed 
very  handsomely  to  have  the  leaf  on  which  it  was 
contained  cancelled,  and  re-printed  without  it,  at 
his  own  expence. 


1776] 

whatever,  as  adverse  to  a  free  investigation  of 
the  characters  of  mankind.1 

What  Dr.  Johnson  has  here  said,  is  undoubtedly 
good  sense;  yet  I  am  afraid  that  law,  though  de¬ 
fined  by  Lord  Coke  “the  perfection  of  reason,”  is  not 
altogether  with  him ;  for  it  is  held  in  the  books,  that 
an  attack  on  the  reputation  even  of  a  dead  man, 
may  be  punished  as  a  libel,  because  tending  to  a 
breach  of  the  peace.  There  is,  however,  I  believe, 
no  modern  decided  case  to  that  effect.  In  the  King’s 
Bench,  Trinity  Term,  1 790,  the  question  occurred 
on  occasion  of  an  indictment,  The  King  v.  Topham , 
who,  as  a  proprietor  of  a  news-paper  entitled  The 
World ,  was  found  guilty  of  a  libel  against  Earl  Cow- 
per,  deceased,  because  certain  injurious  charges 
against  his  Lordship  were  published  in  that  paper. 
An  arrest  of  Judgement  having  been  moved  for, 
the  case  was  afterwards  solemnly  argued.  My  friend 
Mr.  Const,  whom  I  delight  in  having  an  oppor¬ 
tunity  to  praise,  not  only  for  his  abilities  but  his 
manners ;  a  gentleman  whose  ancient  German  blood 
has  been  mellowed  in  England,  and  who  may  be 
truely  said  to  unite  the  Baron  and  the  Barrister ,  was 
one  of  the  Counsel  for  Mr.  Topham.  He  displayed 
much  learning  and  ingenuity  upon  the  general 
question;  which,  however,  was  not  decided,  as  the 
Court  granted  an  arrest  chiefly  on  the  informality 
of  the  indictment.  No  man  has  a  higher  reverence 
for  the  law  of  England  than  I  have;  but,  with  all 
deference  I  cannot  help  thinking,  that  prosecution 
by  indictment,  if  a  defendant  is  never  to  be  al¬ 
lowed  to  justify,  must  often  be  very  oppressive,  un¬ 
less  Juries,  whom  I  am  more  and  more  confirmed 
in  holding  to  be  judges  of  law  as  well  as  of  fact, 
resolutely  interpose.  Of  late  an  act  of  Parliament 
has  passed  declaratory  of  their  full  right  to  one  as 
well  as  the  other,  in  matter  of  libel;  and  the  bill 
having  been  brought  in  by  a  popular  gentleman, 
many  of  his  party  have  in  most  extravagant  terms 
declaimed  on  the  wonderful  acquisition  to  the  lib¬ 
erty  of  the  press.  For  my  own  part  I  ever  was  clear¬ 
ly  of  opinion  that  this  right  was  inherent  in  the 
very  constitution  of  a  Jury,  and  indeed  in  sense 
and  reason  inseparable  from  their  important  func¬ 
tion.  To  establish  it,  therefore,  by  Statute,  is,  I 
think,  narrowing  its  foundation,  which  is  the  broad 
and  deep  basis  of  Common  Law.  Would  it  not 
rather  weaken  the  right  of  primo-geniture,  or  any 
other  old  and  universally-acknowledged  right, 
should  the  legislature  pass  an  act  in  favour  of  it? 
In  my  Letter  to  the  People  of  Scotland,  against  diminish¬ 
ing  the  number  of  the  Lords  of  Session,  published  in 
1785,  there  is  the  following  passage,  which,  as  a 
concise,  and  I  hope  a  fair  and  rational  state  of  the 
matter,  I  presume  to  quote:  “The  Juries  of  Eng¬ 
land  are  Judges  of  law  as  well  as  of  fact,  in  many 
civil,  and  in  all  criminal  trials.  That  my  principles 
of  resistance  may  not  be  misapprehended  any  more 
than  my  principles  of  submission,  I  protest  that  I 
should  be  the  last  man  in  the  world  to  encourage 
Juries  to  contradict  rashly,  wantonly,  or  perverse¬ 
ly,  the  opinion  of  the  Judges.  On  the  contrary,  I 
would  have  them  listen  respectfully  to  the  advice 
they  receive  from  the  Bench,  by  which  they  may 
be  often  well  directed  in  forming  their  own  opinion; 
which,  £and  not  another’s,’  is  the  opinion  they  are 
to  return  upon  their  oaths .  But  where,  after  due  at¬ 
tention  to  all  that  the  Judge  has  said,  they  are  de¬ 
cidedly  of  a  different  opinion  from  him,  they  have 


301 

On  Thursday,  April  4,  having  called  on  Dr. 
Johnson,  I  said,  it  was  a  pity  that  truth  was  not 
so  firm  as  to  bid  defiance  to  all  attacks,  so  that 
it  might  be  shot  at  as  much  as  people  chose  to 
attempt,  and  yet  remain  unhurt.  Johnson. 
“Then,  Sir,  it  would  not  be  shot  at.  Nobody 
attempts  to  dispute  that  two  and  two  make  four: 
but  with  contests  concerning  moral  truth,  hu¬ 
man  passions  are  generally  mixed,  and  there¬ 
fore  it  must  ever  be  liable  to  assault  and  misrep¬ 
resentation.55 

On  Friday,  April  5,  being  Good  Friday,  after 
having  attended  the  morning  service  at  St. 
Clement’s  Church,  I  walked  home  with  John¬ 
son.  We  talked  of  the  Roman  Catholick  religion. 
Johnson.  “In  the  barbarous  ages,  Sir,  priests 
and  people  were  equally  deceived;  but  after¬ 
wards  there  were  gross  corruptions  introduced 
by  the  clergy,  such  as  indulgencies  to  priests  to 
have  concubines,  and  the  worship  of  images, 
not,  indeed,  inculcated,  but  knowingly  per¬ 
mitted.55  He  strongly  censured  the  licensed  stews 
at  Rome.  Boswell.  “So  then,  Sir,  you  would 
allow  of  no  irregular  intercourse  whatever  be¬ 
tween  the  sexes?”  Johnson.  “To  be  sure  I  would 
not,  Sir.  I  would  punish  it  much  more  than  it  is 
done,  and  so  restrain  it.  In  all  countries  there 
has  been  fornication,  as  in  all  countries  there 
has  been  theft;  but  there  may  be  more  or  less  of 
the  one,  as  well  as  of  the  other,  in  proportion  to 
the  force  of  law.  All  men  will  naturally  commit 
fornication,  as  all  men  will  naturally  steal.  And, 
Sir,  it  is  very  absurd  to  argue,  as  has  been  often 
done,  that  prostitutes  are  necessary  to  prevent 
the  violent  effects  of  appetite  from  violating  the 
decent  order  of  life;  nay,  should  be  permitted, 
in  order  to  preserve  the  chastity  of  our  wives 
and  daughters.  Depend  upon  it,  Sir,  severe  laws, 
steadily  enforced,  would  be  sufficient  against 
those  evils,  and  would  promote  marriage.55 

I  stated  to  him  this  case : — “  Suppose  a  man  has 
a  daughter  who  he  knows  has  been  seduced,  but 
her  misfortune  is  concealed  from  the  world? 
should  he  keep  her  in  his  house?  Would  he  not, 
by  doing  so,  be  accessary  to  imposition?  And,  per¬ 
haps,  a  worthy,  unsuspecting  man  might  come 
and  marry  this  woman,  unless  the  father  inform 
him  of  the  truth.55  Johnson.  “Sir,  he  is  accessary 
to  no  imposition.  His  daughter  is  in  his  house; 
and  if  a  man  courts  her,  he  takes  his  chance.  If 
a  friend,  or,  indeed,  if  any  man  asks  his  opinion 
whether  he  should  marry  her,  he  ought  to  ad¬ 
vise  him  against  it,  without  telling  why,  because 
his  real  opinion  is  then  required.  Or,  if  he  has 

not  only  a  power  and  a  right,  but  they  are  bound  in 
conscience  to  bring  in  a  verdict  accordingly.” 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


BOSWELL 


3°2 

other  daughters  who  know  ofher  frailty,  he  ought 
not  to  keep  her  in  his  house.  You  are  to  consider 
the  state  of  life  is  this;  we  are  to  judge  of  one  an¬ 
other’s  characters  as  well  as  we  can;  and  a  man 
is  not  bound,  in  honesty  or  honour,  to  tell  us  the 
faults  of  his  daughter  or  of  himself.  A  man  who 
has  debauched  his  friend’s  daughter  is  not  obliged 
to  say  to  every  body— ‘Take  care  of  me;  don’t 
let  me  into  your  houses  without  suspicion.  I  once 
debauched  a  friend’s  daughter.  I  may  debauch 
yours.’  ” 

Mr.  Thrale  called  upon  him,  and  appeared 
to  bear  the  loss  of  his  son  with  a  manly  compo¬ 
sure.  There  was  no  affectation  about  him;  and 
he  talked,  as  usual,  upon  indifferent  subjects.  He 
seemed  to  me  to  hesitate  as  to  the  intended  Ital¬ 
ian  tour,  on  which,  I  flattered  myself,  he  and 
Mrs.  Thrale  and  Dr.  Johnson  were  soon  to  set 
out;  and,  therefore,  I  pressed  it  as  much  as  I 
could.  I  mentioned,  that  Mr.  Beauclerk  had  said, 
that  Baretti,  whom  they  were  to  carry  with  them, 
would  keep  them  so  long  in  the  little  towns  of 
his  own  district,  that  they  would  not  have  time 
to  see  Rome.  I  mentioned  this,  to  put  them  on 
their  guard.  Johnson.  “Sir,  we  do  not  thank  Mr. 
Beauclerk  for  supposing  that  we  are  to  be  direct¬ 
ed  by  Baretti.  No,  Sir;  Mr.  Thrale  is  to  go,  by 
my  advice,  to  Mr.  Jackson  (the  all-knowing)1, 
and  get  from  him  a  plan  for  seeing  the  most  that 
can  be  seen  in  the  time  that  we  have  to  travel. 
We  must,  to  be  sure,  see  Rome,  Naples,  Flor¬ 
ence,  and  Venice,  and  as  much  more  as  we  can.” 
(Speaking  with  a  tone  of  animation.) 

When  I  expressed  an  earnest  wish  for  his  re¬ 
marks  on  Italy,  he  said,  “I  do  not  see  that  I 
could  make  a  book  upon  Italy;  yet  I  should  be 
glad  to  get  two  hundred  pounds,  or  five  hundred 
pounds,  by  such  a  work.”  This  shewed  both  that 
a  journal  of  his  Tour  upon  the  Continent  was 
not  wholly  out  of  his  contemplation,  and  that 
he  uniformly  adhered  to  that  strange  opinion, 
which  his  indolent  disposition  made  him  utter: 
“No  man  but  a  blockhead  ever  wrote,  except 
for  money.”  Numerous  instances  to  refute  this 
will  occur  to  all  who  are  versed  in  the  history  of 
literature. 

He  gave  us  one  of  the  many  sketches  of  char¬ 
acter  which  were  treasured  in  his  mind,  and 
which  he  was  wont  to  produce  quite  unexpect¬ 
edly  in  a  very  entertaining  manner.  “I  lately, 
(said  he,)  received  a  letter  from  the  East  Indies, 

1A  gentleman,  who  from  his  extraordinary  stores 
of  knowledge,  has  been  stiled  omniscient.  Johnson,  I 
think  very  properly,  altered  it  to  all-knowing,  as  it 
is  a  verbum  solenne ,  appropriated  to  the  Supreme 
Being. 


[  1776 

from  a  gentleman  whom  I  formerly  knew  very 
well;  he  had  returned  from  that  country  with 
a  handsome  fortune,  as  it  was  reckoned,  before 
means  were  found  to  acquire  those  immense 
sums  which  have  been  brought  from  thence  of 
late;  he  was  a  scholar,  and  an  agreeable  man, 
and  lived  very  prettily  in  London,  till  his  wife 
died.  After  her  death,  he  took  to  dissipation  and 
gaming,  and  lost  all  he  had.  One  evening  he  lost 
a  thousand  pounds  to  a  gentleman  whose  name 
I  am  sorry  I  have  forgotten.  Next  morning  he 
sent  the  gentleman  five  hundred  pounds,  with 
an  apology  that  it  was  all  he  had  in  the  world. 
The  gentleman  sent  the  money  back  to  him,  de¬ 
claring  he  would  not  accept  of  it;  and  adding, 

that  if  Mr. - had  occasion  for  five  hundred 

pounds  more,  he  would  lend  it  to  him.  He  re¬ 
solved  to  go  out  again  to  the  East  Indies,  and 
make  his  fortune  anew.  He  got  a  considerable 
appointment,  and  I  had  some  intention  of  ac¬ 
companying  him.  Had  I  thought  then  as  I  do 
now,  I  should  have  gone:  but,  at  that  time,  I 
had  objections  to  quitting  England.” 

It  was  a  very  remarkable  circumstance  about 
Johnson,  whom  shallow  observers  have  supposed 
to  have  been  ignorant  of  the  world,  that  very 
few  men  had  seen  greater  variety  of  characters; 
and  none  could  observe  them  better,  as  was  evi¬ 
dent  from  the  strong,  yet  nice  portraits  which 
he  often  drew.  I  have  frequently  thought  that  if 
he  had  made  out  what  the  French  call  une  cata¬ 
logue  raisonnee  of  all  the  people  who  had  passed 
under  his  observation,  it  would  have  afforded  a 
very  rich  fund  of  instruction  and  entertainment. 
The  suddenness  with  which  his  accounts  of  some 
of  them  started  out  in  conversation,  was  not  less 
pleasing  than  surprizing.  I  remember  he  once 
observed  to  me,  “It  is  wonderful,  Sir,  what  is  to 
be  found  in  London.  The  most  literary  conver¬ 
sation  that  I  ever  enjoyed,  was  at  the  table  of 
Jack  Ellis,  a  money-scrivener  behind  the  Royal 
Exchange,  with  whom  I  at  one  period  used  to 
dine  generally  once  a  week.”2 

2This  Mr.  Ellis  was,  I  believe,  the  last  of  that 
profession  called  Scriveners ,  which  is  one  of  the  Lon¬ 
don  companies,  but  of  which  the  business  is  no 
longer  carried  on  separately,  but  is  transacted  by 
attornies  and  others.  He  was  a  man  of  literature 
and  talents.  He  was  the  authour  of  a  Hudibrastick 
version  of  Maphaeus’s  Canto,  in  addition  to  the 
ALneid;  of  some  poems  in  Dodsley’s  Collections;  and 
various  other  small  pieces;  but  being  a  very  mod¬ 
est  man,  never  put  his  name  to  anything.  He  shew¬ 
ed  me  a  translation  which  he  had  made  of  Ovid’s 
Epistles ,  very  prettily  done.  There  is  a  good  en¬ 
graved  portrait  of  him  by  Pether,  from  a  picture 
by  Fry,  which  hangs  in  the  hall  of  the  Scriveners’ 
company.  I  visited  him  October  4,  1790,  in  his 
ninety-third  year,  and  found  his  judgement  dis- 


I 

1776]  LIFE  OF 

Volumes  would  be  required  to  contain  a  list 
of  his  numerous  and  various  acquaintance,  none 
of  whom  he  ever  forgot;  and  could  describe  and 
discriminate  them  all  with  precision  and  vivac¬ 
ity.  He  associated  with  persons  the  most  widely 
different  in  manners,  abilities,  rank,  and  accom¬ 
plishments.  He  was  at  once  the  companion  of 
the  brilliant  Colonel  Forrester  of  the  Guards, 
who  wrote  The  Polite  Philosopher ,  and  of  the  auk- 
ward  and  uncouth  Robert  Levet;  of  Lord  Thur- 
low,  and  Mr.  Sastres,  the  Italian  master;  and 
has  dined  one  day  with  the  beautiful,  gay,  and 
fascinating  Lady  Craven,1  and  the  next  with 
good  Mrs.  Gardiner,  the  tallow-chandler,  on 
Snow-hill. 

On  my  expressing  my  wonder  at  his  discover¬ 
ing  so  much  of  the  knowledge  peculiar  to  differ¬ 
ent  professions,  he  told  me,  ££I  learnt  what  I 
know  of  law,  chiefly  from  Mr.  Ballow, 2  a  very 
able  man.  I  learnt  some,  too,  from  Chambers; 
but  was  not  so  teachable  then.  One  is  not  willing 
to  be  taught  by  a  young  man.55  When  I  expressed 
a  wish  to  know  more  about  Mr.  Ballow,  John¬ 
son  said,  “Sir,  I  have  seen  him  but  once  these 
twenty  years.  The  tide  of  life  has  driven  us  dif¬ 
ferent  ways.55 1  was  sorry  at  the  time  to  hear  this; 
but  whoever  quits  the  creeks  of  private  connec¬ 
tions,  and  fairly  gets  into  the  great  ocean  of  Lon¬ 
don,  will,  by  imperceptible  degrees,  unavoid¬ 
ably  experience  such  cessations  of  acquaintance. 

“My  knowledge  of  physick,  (he  added,)  I 
learnt  from  Dr.  James,  whom  I  helped  in  writ¬ 
ing  the  proposals  for  his  Dictionary  and  also  a 
little  in  the  Dictionary  itself. 3  I  also  learnt  from 
Dr.  Lawrence,  but  was  then  grown  more  stub¬ 
born.55 

A  curious  incident  happened  to-day,  while 
Mr.  Thrale  and  I  sat  with  him.  Francis  an¬ 
nounced  that  a  large  packet  was  brought  to  him 

tinct  and  clear,  and  his  memory,  though  faded  so 
as  to  fail  him  occasionally,  yet,  as  he  assured  me, 
and  I  indeed  perceived,  able  to  serve  him  very 
well,  after  a  little  recollection.  It  was  agreeable  to 
observe,  that  he  was  free  from  the  discontent  and 
fretfulness  which  too  often  molest  old  age.  He  in 
the  summer  of  that  year  walked  to  Rotherhithe, 
where  he  dined,  and  walked  home  in  the  evening. 
He  died  on  the  31st  of  December,  1791. 

JLord  Macartney,  who  with  his  other  distin¬ 
guished  qualities,  is  remarkable  also  for  an  elegant 
pleasantry,  told  me,  that  he  met  Johnson  at  Lady 
Craven’s,  and  that  he  seemed  jealous  of  any  inter¬ 
ference:  “So,  (said  his  Lordship,  smiling,)  I  kept 
back.” 

2There  is  an  account  of  him  in  Sir  John  Haw¬ 
kins’s  Life  of  Johnson. 

3I  have  in  vain  endeavoured  to  find  out  what 

parts  Johnson  wrote  for  Dr.  James.  Perhaps  med¬ 
ical  men  may. 


JOHNSON  303 

from  the  post-office,  said  to  have  come  from  Lis¬ 
bon,  and  it  was  charged  seven  pounds  ten  shillings. 
He  would  not  receive  it,  supposing  it  to  be  some 
trick,  nor  did  he  even  look  at  it.  But  upon  en¬ 
quiry  afterwards  he  found  that  it  was  a  real  pack¬ 
et  for  him,  from  that  very  friend  in  the  East 
Indies  of  whom  he  had  been  speaking;  and  the 
ship  which  carried  it  having  come  to  Portugal, 
this  packet,  with  others,  had  been  put  into  the 
post-office  at  Lisbon. 

I  mentioned  a  new  gaming-club,  of  which 
Mr.  Beauclerk  had  given  me  an  account,  where 
the  members  played  to  a  desperate  extent. 
Johnson.  “Depend  upon  it,  Sir,  this  is  mere  talk. 
Who  is  ruined  by  gaming?  You  will  not  find  six 
instances  in  an  age.  There  is  a  strange  rout  made 
about  deep  play:  whereas  you  have  many  more 
people  ruined  by  adventurous  trade,  and  yet  we 
do  not  hear  such  an  outcry  against  it.55  Thrale. 
“There  may  be  few  people  absolutely  ruined  by 
deep  play;  but  very  many  are  much  hurt  in  their 
circumstances  by  it.55  Johnson.  “Yes,  Sir,  and 
so  are  very  many  by  other  kinds  of  expence.55  I 
had  heard  him  talk  once  before  in  the  same  man¬ 
ner;  and  at  Oxford  he  said,  “he  wished  he  had 
learnt  to  play  at  cards.55  The  truth,  however,  is, 
that  he  loved  to  display  his  ingenuity  in  argu¬ 
ment;  and  therefore  would  sometimes  in  con¬ 
versation  maintain  opinions  which  he  was  sen¬ 
sible  were  wrong,  but  in  supporting  which,  his 
reasoning  and  wit  would  be  most  conspicuous. 

He  would  begin  thus:  “Why,  Sir,  as  to  the 
good  or  evil  of  card-playing — 55  “Now,  (said 
Garrick,)  he  is  thinking  which  side  he  shall 
take.55  He  appeared  to  have  a  pleasure  in  con¬ 
tradiction,  especially  when  any  opinion  what¬ 
ever  was  delivered  with  an  air  of  confidence;  so 
that  there  was  hardly  any  topick,  if  not  one  of 
the  great  truths  of  Religion  and  Morality,  that 
he  might  not  have  been  incited  to  argue,  either 
for  or  against.  Lord  Elibank4  had  the  highest  ad¬ 
miration  of  his  powers.  He  once  observed  to  me, 
“Whatever  opinion  Johnson  maintains,  I  will 
not  say  that  he  convinces  me;  but  he  never  fails 
to  shew  me,  that  he  has  good  reasons  for  it.55  I 
have  heard  Johnson  pay  his  Lordship  this  high 
compliment:  “I  never  was  in  Lord  Elibank’s 
company  without  learning  something.55 

We  sat  together  till  it  was  too  late  for  the  af¬ 
ternoon  service.  Thrale  said  he  had  come  with 
intention  to  go  to  church  with  us.  We  went  at 
seven  to  evening  prayers  at  St.  Clement’s  church, 
after  having  drank  coffee;  an  indulgence,  which 
I  understood  Johnson  yielded  to  on  this  occa¬ 
sion,  in  compliment  to  Thrale. 

4Patrick,  Lord  Elibank,  who  died  in  1 778. 


I 


3°4 

On  Sunday,  April  7,  Easter-day,  after  having 
been  at  St.  Paul’s  Cathedral,  I  came  to  Dr.  John¬ 
son,  according  to  my  usual  custom.  It  seemed 
to  me,  that  there  was  always  something  pecul¬ 
iarly  mild  and  placid  in  his  manner  upon  this 
holy  festival,  the  commemoration  of  the  most 
joyful  event  in  the  history  of  our  world,  the  res¬ 
urrection  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour,  who,  hav¬ 
ing  triumphed  over  death  and  the  grave,  pro¬ 
claimed  immortality  to  mankind. 

I  repeated  to  him  an  argument  of  a  lady  of 
my  acquaintance,  who  maintained,  that  her  hus¬ 
band’s  having  been  guilty  of  numberless  infi¬ 
delities,  released  her  from  conjugal  obligations, 
because  they  were  reciprocal.  Johnson.  “This  is 
miserable  stuff,  Sir.  To  the  contract  of  mar¬ 
riage,  besides  the  man  and  wife,  there  is  a  third 
party — Society;  and  if  it  be  considered  as  a  vow — 
God:  and,  therefore,  it  cannot  be  dissolved  by 
their  consent  alone.  Laws  are  not  made  for  par¬ 
ticular  cases,  but  for  men  in  general.  A  woman 
may  be  unhappy  with  her  husband;  but  she  can¬ 
not  be  freed  from  him  without  the  approbation 
of  the  civil  and  ecclesiastical  power.  A  man  may 
be  unhappy,  because  he  is  not  so  rich  as  anoth¬ 
er;  but  he  is  not  to  seize  upon  another’s  prop¬ 
erty  with  his  own  hand.”  Boswell.  “But,  Sir, 
this  lady  does  not  want  that  the  contract  should 
be  dissolved;  she  only  argues  that  she  may  in¬ 
dulge  herself  in  gallantries  with  equal  freedom 
as  her  husband  does,  provided  she  takes  care  not 
to  introduce  a  spurious  issue  into  his  family.  You 
know,  Sir,  what  Macrobius  has  told  us  of  Julia.”1 
Johnson.  “This  lady  of  yours,  Sir,  I  think,  is 
very  fit  for  a  brothel.” 

Mr.  Macbean,  authour  of  the  Dictionary  of 
ancient  Geography ,  came  in.  He  mentioned  that 
he  had  been  forty  years  absent  from  Scotland. 
“Ah,  Boswell!  (said  Johnson,  smiling,)  what 
would  you  give  to  be  forty  years  from  Scot¬ 
land?”  I  said,  “I  should  not  like  to  be  so  long 
absent  from  the  seat  of  my  ancestors.”  This  gen¬ 
tleman,  Mrs.  Williams,  and  Mr.  Levet,  dined 
with  us. 

Dr.  Johnson  made  a  remark,  which  both  Mr. 
Macbean  and  I  thought  new.  It  was  this:  that 
“the  law  against  usury  is  for  the  protection  of 
creditors  as  well  as  of  debtors;  for  if  there  were 
no  such  check,  people  would  be  apt,  from  the 
temptation  of  great  interest,  to  lend  to  desperate 
persons,  by  whom  they  would  lose  their  money. 
Accordingly  there  are  instances  of  ladies  being 
ruined,  by  having  injudiciously  sunk  their  for¬ 
tunes  for  high  annuities,  which,  after  a  few  years, 

lNunquam  enim  nisi  navi  plena  tollo  vector em.  Book 
ii.  chap.  6. 


[  1776 

ceased  to  be  paid,  in  consequence  of  the  ruined 
circumstances  of  the  borrower.” 

Mrs.  Williams  was  very  peevish;  and  I  won¬ 
dered  at  Johnson’s  patience  with  her  now,  as  I 
had  often  done  on  similar  occasions.  The  truth 
is,  that  his  humane  consideration  of  the  forlorn 
and  indigent  state  in  which  this  lady  was  left  by 
her  father,  induced  him  to  treat  her  with  the  ut¬ 
most  tenderness,  and  even  to  be  desirous  of  pro¬ 
curing  her  amusement,  so  as  sometimes  to  in¬ 
commode  many  of  his  friends,  by  carrying  her 
with  him  to  their  houses,  where,  from  her  man¬ 
ner  of  eating,  in  consequence  of  her  blindness, 
she  could  not  but  offend  the  delicacy  of  persons 
of  nice  sensations. 

After  coffee,  we  went  to  afternoon  service  in 
St.  Clement’s  church.  Observing  some  beggars 
in  the  street  as  we  walked  along,  I  said  to  him 
I  supposed  there  was  no  civilized  country  in  the 
world,  where  the  misery  of  want  in  the  lowest 
classes  of  the  people  was  prevented.  Johnson.  “I 
believe,  Sir,  there  is  not;  but  it  is  better  that 
some  should  be  unhappy,  than  that  none  should 
be  happy,  which  would  be  the  case  in  a  general 
state  of  equality.” 

When  the  service  was  ended,  I  went  home 
with  him,  and  we  sat  quietly  by  ourselves.  He 
recommended  Dr.  Cheyne’s  books.  I  said,  I 
thought  Gheyne  had  been  reckoned  whimsical. 
“So  he  was, (said  he,)  in  some  things;  but  there 
is  no  end  of  objections.  There  are  few  books  to 
which  some  objection  or  other  may  not  be  made.” 
He  added,  “I  would  not  have  you  read  anything 
else  of  Gheyne,  but  his  book  on  Health,  and  his 
English  Malady .” 

Upon  the  question  whether  a  man  who  had 
been  guilty  of  vicious  actions  would  do  well  to 
force  himself  into  solitude  and  sadness;  Johnson. 
“No,  Sir,  unless  it  prevent  him  from  being  vi¬ 
cious  again.  With  some  people,  gloomy  peni¬ 
tence  is  only  madness  turned  upside  down.  A 
man  may  be  gloomy,  till,  in  order  to  be  relieved 
from  gloom,  he  has  recourse  again  to  criminal 
indulgences.” 

On  Wednesday,  April  10,  I  dined  with  him 
at  Mr.  Thrale’s,  where  were  Mr.  Murphy  and 
some  other  company.  Before  dinner,  Dr.  John¬ 
son  and  I  passed  some  time  by  ourselves.  I  was 
sorry  to  find  it  was  now  resolved  that  the  pro¬ 
posed  journey  to  Italy  should  not  take  place  this 
year.  He  said,  “I  am  disappointed,  to  be  sure; 
but  it  is  not  a  great  disappointment.”  I  won¬ 
dered  to  see  him  bear,  with  a  philosophical 
calmness,  what  would  have  made  most  people 
peevish  and  fretful.  I  perceived,  however,  that 
he  had  so  warmly  cherished  the  hope  of  enjoy- 


BOSWELL 


1776] 

ing  classical  scenes,  that  he  could  not  easily  part 
with  the  scheme;  for  he  said,  “I  shall  probably 
contrive  to  get  to  Italy  some  other  way.  But  I 
won’t  mention  it  to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Thrale,  as  it 
might  vex  them.”  I  suggested,  that  going  to 
Italy  might  have  done  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Thrale 
good.  Johnson.  “I  rather  believe  not,  Sir.  While 
grief  is  fresh,  every  attempt  to  divert  only  irri¬ 
tates.  You  must  wait  till  grief  be  digested ,  and 
then  amusement  will  dissipate  the  remains 
of  it.” 

At  dinner,  Mr.  Murphy  entertained  us  with 
the  history  of  Mr.  Joseph  Simpson,  a  schoolfel¬ 
low  of  Dr.  Johnson’s,  a  barrister  at  law,  of  good 
parts,  but  who  fell  into  a  dissipated  course  of 
life,  incompatible  with  that  success  in  his  pro¬ 
fession  which  he  once  had,  and  would  otherwise 
have  deservedly  maintained;  yet  he  still  pre¬ 
served  a  dignity  in  his  deportment.  He  wrote  a 
tragedy  on  the  story  of  Leonidas,  entitled  The 
Patriot.  He  read  it  to  a  company  of  lawyers,  who 
found  so  many  faults,  that  he  wrote  it  over  again ; 
so  then  there  were  two  tragedies  on  the  same 
subject  and  with  the  same  title.  Dr.  Johnson  told 
us,  that  one  of  them  was  still  in  his  possession. 
This  very  piece  was,  after  his  death,  published 
by  some  person  who  had  been  about  him,  and, 
for  the  sake  of  a  little  hasty  profit,  was  falla¬ 
ciously  advertised,  so  as  to  make  it  be  believed 
to  have  been  written  by  Johnson  himself. 

I  said,  I  disliked  the  custom  which  some 
people  had  of  bringing  their  children  into  com¬ 
pany,  because  it  in  a  manner  forced  us  to 
pay  foolish  compliments  to  please  their  parents. 
Johnson.  “You  are  right,  Sir.  We  may  be  ex¬ 
cused  for  not  caring  much  about  other  people’s 
children,  for  there  are  many  who  care  very  little 
about  their  own  children.  It  may  be  observed, 
that  men,  who  from  being  engaged  in  business, 
or  from  their  course  in  life  in  whatever  way,  sel¬ 
dom  see  their  children,  do  not  care  much  about 
them.  I  myself  should  not  have  had  much  fond¬ 
ness  for  a  child  of  my  own.”  Mrs.  Thrale.  “Nay, 
Sir,  how  can  you  talk  so?”  Johnson.  “At  least, 
I  never  wished  to  have  a  child.” 

Mr.  Murphy  mentioned  Dr.  Johnson’s  having 
a  design  to  publish  an  edition  of  Cowley.  John¬ 
son  said,  he  did  not  know  but  he  should;  and 
he  expressed  his  disapprobation  of  Dr.  Hurd,  for 
having  published  a  mutilated  edition  under  the 
title  of  Select  Works  of  Abraham  Cowley.  Mr. 
Murphy  thought  it  a  bad  precedent;  observing 
that  any  authour  might  be  used  in  the  same 
manner;  and  that  it  was  pleasing  to  see  the  vari¬ 
ety  of  an  authour’s  compositions,  at  different 
periods. 


305 

We  talked  of  Flatman’s  Poems;  and  Mrs. 
Thrale  observed,  that  Pope  had  partly  borrowed 
from  him  The  dying  Christian  to  his  Soul.  Johnson 
repeated  Rochester’s  verses  upon  Flatman, 
which  I  think  by  much  too  severe: 

Nor  that  slow  drudge  in  swift  Pindarick  strains, 

Flatman ,  who  Cowley  imitates  with  pains. 

And  rides  a  jaded  Muse,  whipt  with  loose  reins. 

I  like  to  recollect  all  the  passages  that  I  heard 
Johnson  repeat:  it  stamps  a  value  on  them. 

He  told  us,  that  the  book  entitled  The  Lives  of 
the  Poets,  by  Mr.  Cibber,  was  entirely  compiled 
by  Mr.  Shiels,  a  Scotchman,  one  of  his  amanu¬ 
enses.  ' £  The  bookseller  (said  he,)  gaveTheophilus 
Cibber,  who  was  then  in  prison,  ten  guineas,  to 
allow  Mr.  Cibber  to  be  put  upon  the  title-page, 
as  the  authour;  by  this,  a  double  imposition  was 
intended:  in  the  first  place,  that  it  was  the  work 
of  a  Cibber  at  all;  and,  in  the  second  place,  that 
it  was  the  work  of  old  Cibber.”1 

Tn  The  Monthly  Review  for  May,  1 792,  there  is 
such  a  correction  of  the  above  passage,  as  I  should 
think  myself  very  culpable  not  to  subjoin.  “This 
account  is  very  inaccurate.  The  following  state¬ 
ment  of  facts  we  know  to  be  true,  in  every  material 
circumstance: — Shiels  was  the  principal  collector 
and  digester  of  the  materials  for  the  work;  but  as 
he  was  very  raw  in  authourship,  an  indifferent 
writer  in  prose,  and  his  language  full  of  Scotti¬ 
cisms,  Cibber,  who  was  a  clever,  lively  fellow,  and 
then  soliciting  employment  among  the  booksellers, 
was  engaged  to  correct  the  style  and  diction  of  the 
whole  work,  then  intended  to  make  only  four  vol¬ 
umes,  with  power  to  alter,  expunge,  or  add,  as  he 
liked.  He  was  also  to  supply  notes,  occasionally,  es¬ 
pecially  concerning  those  dramatick  poets  with 
whom  he  had  been  chiefly  conversant.  He  also  en¬ 
gaged  to  write  several  of  the  Lives;  which,  (as  we 
are  told,)  he,  accordingly,  performed.  He  was  far¬ 
ther  useful  in  striking  out  the  Jacobitical  and  Tory 
sentiments,  which  Shiels  had  industriously  inter¬ 
spersed  wherever  he  could  bring  them  in: — and, 
as  the  success  of  the  work  appeared,  after  all,  very 
doubtful,  he  was  content  with  twenty-one  pounds 
for  his  labour  beside  a  few  sets  of  the  books,  to  dis¬ 
perse  among  his  friends. — Shiels  had  nearly  seven¬ 
ty  pounds,  besides  the  advantage  of  many  of  the 
best  Lives  in  the  work  being  communicated  by 
friends  to  the  undertaking;  and  for  which  Mr. 
Shiels  had  the  same  consideration  as  for  the  rest, 
being  paid  by  the  sheet,  for  the  whole.  He  was, 
however,  so  angry  with  his  Whiggish  supervisor, 
(The.,  like  his  father,  being  a  violent  stickler  for 
the  political  principles  which  prevailed  in  the  Reign 
of  George  the  Second,)  for  so  unmercifully  muti¬ 
lating  his  copy,  and  scouting  his  politicks,  that  he 
wrote  Cibber  a  challenge:  but  was  prevented  from 
sending  it,  by  the  publisher,  who  fairly  laughed 
him  out  of  his  fury.  The  proprietors,  too,  were  dis¬ 
contented,  in  the  end,  on  account  of  Mr.  Cibber’s 
unexpected  industry;  for  his  corrections  and  alter¬ 
ations  in  the  proof-sheets  were  so  numerous  and 
considerable,  that  the  printer  made  for  them  a 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


BOSWELL 


306 

Mr.  Murphy  said,  that  The  Memoirs  of  Grafs 
Life  set  him  much  higher  in  his  estimation  than 
his  poems  did;  for  you  there  saw  a  man  constant¬ 
ly  at  work  in  literature.  Johnson  acquiesced  in 
this;  but  depreciated  the  book,  I  thought,  very 
unreasonably.  For  he  said,  “I  forced  myself  to 
read  it,  only  because  it  was  a  common  topick  of 
conversation.  I  found  it  mighty  dull;  and,  as  to 
the  style,  it  is  fit  for  the  second  table.”  Why  he 
thought  so  I  was  at  a  loss  to  conceive.  He  now 
gave  it  as  his  opinion,  that  “Akenside  was  a  su- 
periour  poet  both  to  Gray  and  Mason.” 

Talking  of  the  Reviews,  Johnson  said,  “I 
think  them  very  impartial:  I  do  not  know  an  in- 


grievous  addition  to  his  bill;  and,  in  fine,  all  par¬ 
ties  were  dissatisfied.  On  the  whole,  the  work  was 
productive  of  no  profit  to  the  undertakers,  who  had 
agreed,  in  case  of  success,  to  make  Cibber  a  pres¬ 
ent  of  some  addition  to  the  twenty  guineas  which 
he  had  received,  and  for  which  his  receipt  is  now 
in  the  booksellers’  hands.  We  are  farther  assured, 
that  he  actually  obtained  an  additional  sum;  when 
he,  soon  after,  (in  the  year  1758,)  unfortunately 
embarked  for  Dublin,  on  an  engagement  for  one  of 
the  theatres  there:  but  the  ship  was  cast  away,  and 
every  person  on  board  perished.  There  were  about 
sixty  passengers,  among  whom  was  the  Earl  of 
Drogheda,  with  many  other  persons  of  consequence 
and  property. 

“As  to  the  alledged  design  of  making  the  com- 
pilement  pass  for  the  work  of  old  Mr.  Cibber ,  the 
charges  seem  to  have  been  founded  on  a  somewhat 
uncharitable  construction.  We  are  assured  that  the 
thought  was  not  harboured  by  some  of  the  pro¬ 
prietors,  who  are  still  living;  and  we  hope  that  it 
did  not  occur  to  the  first  designer  of  the  work,  who 
was  also  the  printer  of  it,  and  who  bore  a  respect¬ 
able  character. 

“We  have  been  induced  to  enter  thus  circum¬ 
stantially  into  the  foregoing  detail  of  facts  relating 
to  The  Lives  of  the  Poets ,  compiled  by  Messrs.  Cib¬ 
ber  and  Shiels,  from  a  sincere  regard  to  that  sacred 
principle  of  Truth,  to  which  Dr.  Johnson  so  rigidly 
adhered,  according  to  the  best  of  his  knowledge; 
and  which  we  believe,  no  consideration  would  have 
prevailed  on  him  to  violate.  In  regard  to  the  mat¬ 
ter,  which  we  now  dismiss,  he  had,  no  doubt,  been 
misled  by  partial  and  wrong  information:  Shiels 
was  the  Doctor’s  amanuensis;  he  had  quarrelled 
with  Cibber;  it  is  natural  to  suppose  that  he  told 
his  story  in  his  own  way;  and  it  is  certain  that  he 
was  not  ca  very  sturdy  moralist.’  ”  This  explanation 
appears  to  me  very  satisfactory.  It  is,  however,  to 
be  observed,  that  the  story  told  by  Johnson  does 
not  rest  solely  upon  my  record  of  his  conversation; 
for  he  himself  has  published  it  in  his  Life  of  Ham¬ 
mond. ,  where  he  says,  “the  manuscript  of  Shiels  is 
now  in  my  possession.”  Very  probably  he  had 
trusted  to  Shiels’s  word,  and  never  looked  at  it  so  as 
to  compare  it  with  The  Lives  of  the  Poets ,  as  pub¬ 
lished  under  Mr.  Cibber’s  name.  What  became  of 
that  manuscript  I  know  not.  I  should  have  liked 
much  to  examine  it.  I  suppose  it  was  thrown  into  the 
fire  in  that  impetuous  combustion  of  papers,  which 
Johnson  I  think  rashly  executed,  when  moribundus. 


[  1776 

stance  of  partiality.”  He  mentioned  what  had 
passed  upon  the  subject  of  the  Monthly  and  Criti¬ 
cal  Reviews ,  in  the  conversation  with  which  his 
Majesty  had  honoured  him.  He  expatiated  a 
little  more  on  them  this  evening.  “The  Monthly 
Reviewers  (said  he,)  are  not  Deists;  but  they  are 
Christians  with  as  little  Christianity  as  may  be; 
and  are  for  pulling  down  all  establishments. 
The  Critical  Reviewers  are  for  supporting  the 
constitution  both  in  church  and  state.  The  Criti¬ 
cal  Reviewers,  I  believe,  often  review  without 
reading  the  books  through;  but  lay  hold  of  a 
topick,  and  write  chiefly  from  their  ow  n  minds. 
The  Monthly  Review  ers  are  duller  men,  and  are 
glad  to  read  the  books  through.” 

He  talked  of  Lord  Lyttelton’s  extreme  anxie¬ 
ty  as  an  authour;  observing,  that  “he  was  thirty 
years  in  preparing  his  History ,  and  that  he  em¬ 
ployed  a  man  to  point  it  for  him;  as  if  (laugh¬ 
ing)  another  man  could  point  his  sense  better 
than  himself.”  Mr.  Murphy  said,  he  understood 
his  history  was  kept  back  several  years  for  fear 
of  Smollet.  Johnson.  “This  seems  strange  to 
Murphy  and  me,  who  never  felt  that  anxiety, 
but  sent  what  we  wrote  to  the  press,  and  let  it 
take  its  chance.”  Mrs.  Thrale.  “The  time  has 
been,  Sir,  when  you  felt  it.”  Johnson.  “Why 
really,  Madam,  I  do  not  recollect  a  time  when 
that  was  the  case.” 

Talking  of  The  Spectator ,  he  said,  “It  is  won¬ 
derful  that  there  is  such  a  proportion  of  bad 
papers,  in  the  half  of  the  work  which  was  not 
written  by  Addison;  for  there  was  all  the  world 
to  write  that  half,  yet  not  a  half  of  that  half  is 
good.  One  of  the  finest  pieces  in  the  English 
language  is  the  paper  on  Novelty,  yet  we  do  not 
hear  it  talked  of.  It  was  written  by  Grove,  a  dis¬ 
senting  teacher .”  He  would  not,  I  perceived,  call 
him  a  clergyman ,  though  he  was  candid  enough 
to  allow  very  great  merit  to  his  composition. 
Mr.  Murphy  said,  he  remembered  when  there 
were  several  people  alive  in  London,  who  en¬ 
joyed  a  considerable  reputation  merely  from 
having  written  a  paper  in  The  Spectator .  He  men¬ 
tioned  particularly  Mr.  I  nee,  who  used  to  fre¬ 
quent  Tom’s  coffee-house.  “But  (said  Johnson,) 
you  must  consider  how  highly  Steele  speaks  of 
Mr.  Ince.”  He  would  not  allow  that  the  paper 
on  carrying  a  boy  to  travel,  signed  Philip  Home¬ 
bred,  which  was  reported  to  be  written  by  the 
Lord  Chancellor  Hardwicke,  had  merit.  He 
said,  “it  was  quite  vulgar,  and  had  nothing  lu¬ 
minous.” 

Johnson  mentioned  Dr.  Barry’s1  System  of 
Physick.  “He  was  a  man  (said  he,)  who  had  ac- 

^ir  Edward  Barry,  Baronet. 


1 7  76  ]  LIFEOF 

quired  a  high  reputation  in  Dublin,  came  over 
to  England,  and  brought  his  reputation  with 
him,  but  had  not  great  success.  His  notion  was, 
that  pulsation  occasions  death  by  attrition;  and 
that,  therefore,  the  way  to  preserve  life  is  to  re¬ 
tard  pulsation.  But  we  know  that  pulsation  is 
strongest  in  infants,  and  that  we  increase  in 
growth  while  it  operates  in  its  regular  course; 
so  it  cannot  be  the  cause  of  destruction.55  Soon 
after  this,  he  said  something  very  flattering  to 
Mrs.  Thrale,  which  I  do  not  recollect;  but  it 
concluded  with  wishing  her  long  life.  “Sir,  (said 
I,)  if  Dr.  Barry’s  system  be  true,  you  have  now 
shortened  Mrs.  Thrale’s  life,  perhaps,  some 
minutes,  by  accelerating  her  pulsation.55 

On  Thursday,  April  1 1 ,  I  dined  with  him  at 
General  Paoli’s,  in  whose  house  I  now  resided, 
and  where  I  had  ever  afterwards  the  honour  of 
being  entertained  with  the  kindest  attention  as 
his  constant  guest,  while  I  was  in  London,  till  I 
had  a  house  of  my  own  there.  I  mentioned  my 
having  that  morning  introduced  to  Mr.  Garrick, 
Count  Neni,  a  Flemish  Nobleman  of  great  rank 
and  fortune,  to  whom  Garrick  talked  of  Abel 
Drugger  as  a  small part\  and  related,  with  pleas¬ 
ant  vanity,  that  a  Frenchman  who  had  seen  him 
in  one  of  his  low  characters,  exclaimed,  “Com- 
ment!  je  ne  le  crois  pas.  Ce  n’est pas  Monsieur  Garrick , 
ce  Grand  Homme/”  Garrick  added,  with  an  ap¬ 
pearance  of  grave  recollection,  “If  I  were  to  be¬ 
gin  life  again,  I  think  I  should  not  play  those 
low  characters.55  Upon  which  I  observed,  “Sir, 
you  would  be  in  the  wrong;  for  your  great  ex¬ 
cellence  is  your  variety  of  playing,  your  repre¬ 
senting  so  well,  characters  so  very  different.55 
Johnson.  “Garrick,  Sir,  was  not  in  earnest  in 
what  he  said;  for,  to  be  sure,  his  peculiar  excel¬ 
lence  is  his  variety:  and,  perhaps,  there  is  not 
any  one  character  which  has  not  been  as  well 
acted  by  somebody  else,  as  he  could  do  it.55 
Boswell.  “Why  then,  Sir,  did  he  talk  so?55 
Johnson.  “  Why,  Sir,  to  make  you  answer  as  you 
did.”  Boswell.  “I  don’t  know,  Sir;  he  seemed 
to  dip  deep  into  his  mind  for  the  reflection.55 
Johnson.  “He  had  not  far  to  dip,  Sir:  he  said 
the  same  thing,  probably,  twenty  times  before.55 

Of  a  nobleman  raised  at  a  very  early  period 
to  high  office,  he  said,  “His  parts,  Sir,  are  pretty 
well  for  a  Lord;  but  would  not  be  distinguished 
in  a  man  who  had  nothing  else  but  his  parts.55 

A  journey  to  Italy  was  still  in  his  thoughts.  He 
said,  “A  man  who  has  not  been  in  Italy,  is  al¬ 
ways  conscious  of  an  inferiority,  from  his  not 
having  seen  what  it  is  expected  a  man  should 
see.  The  grand  object  of  travelling  is  to  see  the 
shores  of  the  Mediterranean.  On  those  shores 


JOHNSON  307 

were  the  four  great  empires  of  the  world;  the 
Assyrian,  the  Persian,  the  Grecian,  and  the 
Roman. — All  our  religion,  almost  all  our  law, 
almost  all  our  arts,  almost  all  that  sets  us  above 
savages,  has  come  to  us  from  the  shores  of  the 
Mediterranean.”  The  General  observed,  that 
“The  Mediterranean  would  be  a  noble  sub¬ 
ject  for  a  poem.55 

We  talked  of  translation.  I  said,  I  could  not 
define  it,  nor  could  I  think  of  a  similitude  to  il¬ 
lustrate  it;  but  that  it  appeared  to  me  the  trans¬ 
lation  of  poetry  could  be  only  imitation.  John¬ 
son.  “You  may  translate  books  of  science  exact¬ 
ly.  You  may  also  translate  history,  in  so  far  as  it 
is  not  embellished  with  oratory,  which  is  poeti¬ 
cal.  Poetry,  indeed,  cannot  be  translated;  and, 
therefore,  it  is  the  poets  that  preserve  languages; 
for  we  would  not  be  at  the  trouble  to  learn  a 
language,  if  we  could  have  all  that  is  written  in 
it  just  as  well  in  a  translation.  But  as  the  beau¬ 
ties  of  poetry  cannot  be  preserved  in  any  lan¬ 
guage  except  that  in  which  it  was  originally 
written,  we  learn  the  language.” 

A  gendeman  maintained  that  the  art  of  print¬ 
ing  had  hurt  real  learning,  by  disseminating  idle 
writings. — Johnson.  “Sir,  if  it  had  not  been  for 
the  art  of  printing,  we  should  now  have  no  learn¬ 
ing  at  all;  for  books  would  have  perished  faster 
than  they  could  have  been  transcribed.”  This 
observation  seems  not  just,  considering  for  how 
many  ages  books  were  preserved  by  writing 
alone. 

The  same  gendeman  maintained,  that  a  gen¬ 
eral  diffusion  of  knowledge  among  a  people  was 
a  disadvantage;  for  it  made  the  vulgar  rise  above 
their  humble  sphere.  Johnson.  “Sir,  while 
knowledge  is  a  distinction,  those  who  are  pos¬ 
sessed  of  it  will  naturally  rise  above  those  who 
are  not.  Merely  to  read  and  write  was  a  distinc¬ 
tion  at  first;  but  we  see  when  reading  and  writ¬ 
ing  have  become  general,  the  common  people 
keep  their  stations.  And  so,  were  higher  attain¬ 
ments  to  become  general  the  effect  would  be  the 
same.55 

“Goldsmith  (he  said,)  referred  every  thing  to 
vanity;  his  virtues,  and  his  vices  too,  were  from 
that  motive.  He  was  not  a  social  man.  He  never 
exchanged  mind  with  you.55 

We  spent  the  evening  at  Mr.  Hoole’s.  Mr. 
Mickle,  the  excellent  translator  of  The  Lusiad , 
was  there.  I  have  preserved  littie  of  the  conver¬ 
sation  of  this  evening.  Dr.  Johnson  said,  “Thom¬ 
son  had  a  true  poetical  genius,  the  power  of 
viewing  every  thing  in  a  poetical  light.  His  fault 
is  such  a  cloud  of  words  sometimes,  that  the 
sense  can  hardly  peep  through.  Shiels,  who  com- 


BOSWELL 


3°8 

piled  Cibber's  Lives  of  the  Poets  f  was  one  day  sit¬ 
ting  with  me.  I  took  down  Thomson,  and  read 
aloud  a  large  portion  of  him,  and  then  asked, — 
Is  not  this  fine?  Shiels  having  expressed  the 
highest  admiration.  Well,  Sir,  (said  I,)  I  have 
omitted  every  other  line.55 

I  related  a  dispute  between  Goldsmith  and 
Mr.  Robert  Dodsley,  one  day  when  they  and  I 
were  dining  at  Tom  Davies’s,  in  1762.  Gold¬ 
smith  asserted,  that  there  was  no  poetry  pro¬ 
duced  in  this  age.  Dodsley  appealed  to  his  own 
Collection ,  and  maintained,  that  though  you 
could  not  find  a  palace  like  Dryden’s  Ode  on  St. 
Cecilia's  Day ,  you  had  villages  composed  of  very 
pretty  houses;  and  he  mentioned  particularly 
The  Spleen.  Johnson.  “I  think  Dodsley  gave  up 
the  question.  He  and  Goldsmith  said  the  same 
thing;  only  he  said  it  in  a  softer  manner  than 
Goldsmith  did;  for  he  acknowledged  that  there 
was  no  poetry,  nothing  that  towered  above  the 
common  mark.  You  may  find  wit  and  humour 
in  verse,  and  yet  no  poetry.  Hudibras  has  a  pro¬ 
fusion  of  these;  yet  it  is  not  to  be  reckoned  a  po¬ 
em.  The  Spleen ,  in  Dodsley’s  Collection ,  on  which 
you  say  he  chiefly  rested,  is  not  poetry.”  Bos¬ 
well.  “Does  not  Gray’s  poetry,  Sir,  tower  above 
the  common  mark?”  Johnson.  “Yes,  Sir;  but  we 
must  attend  to  the  difference  between  what  men 
in  general  cannot  do  if  they  would,  and  what 
every  man  may  do  if  he  would.  Sixteen-string 
Jack2  towered  above  the  common  mark.”  Bos¬ 
well.  “Then,  Sir,  what  is  poetry?”  Johnson. 
“Why,  Sir,  it  is  much  easier  to  say  what  it  is 
not.  We  all  know  what  light  is;  but  it  is  not  easy 
to  tell  what  it  is.” 

On  Friday,  April  12, 1  dined  with  him  at  our 
friend  Tom  Davies’s,  where  we  met  Mr.  Cra- 
dock,  of  Leicestershire,  authour  of  Z°beide ,  a  trag¬ 
edy;  a  very  pleasing  gentleman,  to  whom  my 
friend  Dr.  Farmer’s  very  excellent  Essay  on  the 
Learning  of  Shahs  pear e  is  addressed;  and  Dr.  Har¬ 
wood,  who  has  written  and  published  various 
works;  particularly  a  fantastical  translation  of 
the  New  Testament,  in  modern  phrase,  and 
with  a  Socinian  twist. 

I  introduced  Aristotle’s  doctrine  in  his  Art  of 
Poetry ,  of  “the  KaOapcnsTojv  TraOrjiuaTOjv,  the  purg¬ 
ing  of  the  passions,”  as  the  purpose  of  tragedy. 
“But  how  are  the  passions  to  be  purged  by  terrour 
and  pity?”  (said  I,  with  an  assumed  air  of  ig¬ 
norance,  to  incite  him  to  talk,  for  which  it  was 

2See  ante ,  note,  p.  305. 

2A  noted  highwayman,  who  after  having  been 
several  times  tried  and  acquitted,  was  at  last 
hanged.  He  was  remarkable  for  foppery  in  his  dress, 
and  particularly  for  wearing  a  bunch  of  sixteen 
strings  at  the  knees  of  his  breeches. 


1 1776 

often  necessary  to  employ  some  address).  John¬ 
son.  “Why,  Sir,  you  are  to  consider  what  is  the 
meaning  of  purging  in  the  original  sense.  It  is  to 
expel  impurities  from  the  human  body.  The 
mind  is  subject  to  the  same  imperfection.  The 
passions  are  the  great  movers  of  human  actions; 
but  they  are  mixed  with  such  impurities,  that  it 
is  necessary  they  should  be  purged  or  refined  by 
means  of  terrour  and  pity.  For  instance,  ambi¬ 
tion  is  a  noble  passion;  but  by  seeing  upon  the 
stage,  that  a  man  who  is  so  excessively  ambitious 
as  to  raise  himself  by  injustice,  is  punished,  we 
are  terrified  at  the  fatal  consequences  of  such  a 
passion.  In  the  same  manner  a  certain  degree 
of  resentment  is  necessary;  but  if  we  see  that  a 
man  carries  it  too  far,  we  pity  the  object  of  it, 
and  are  taught  to  moderate  that  passion.”  My 
record  upon  this  occasion  does  great  injustice  to 
Johnson’s  expression,  which  was  so  forcible  and 
brilliant,  that  Mr.  Cradock  whispered  me,  “O 
that  his  words  were  written  in  a  book!” 

I  observed,  the  great  defect  of  the  tragedy  of 
Othello  was,  that  it  had  not  a  moral;  for  that  no 
man  could  resist  the  circumstances  of  suspicion 
which  were  artfully  suggested  to  Othello’s  mind. 
Johnson.  “In  the  first  place,  Sir,  we  learn  from 
Othello  this  very  useful  moral,  not  to  make  an 
unequal  match;  in  the  second  place,  we  learn 
not  to  yield  too  readily  to  suspicion.  The  hand¬ 
kerchief  is  merely  a  trick,  though  a  very  pretty 
trick;  but  there  are  no  other  circumstances  of 
reasonable  suspicion,  except  what  is  related  by 
Iago  of  Cassio’s  warm  expressions  concerning 
Desdemona  in  his  sleep;  and  that  depended  en¬ 
tirely  upon  the  assertion  of  one  man.  No,  Sir,  I 
think  Othello  has  more  moral  than  almost  any 
play.” 

Talking  of  a  penurious  gentleman  of  our  ac¬ 
quaintance,  Johnson  said,  “Sir,  he  is  narrow, 
not  so  much  from  avarice,  as  from  impotence  to 
spend  his  money.  He  cannot  find  in  his  heart  to 
pour  out  a  bottle  of  wine;  but  he  would  not 
much  care  if  it  should  sour.” 

He  said,  he  wished  to  see  John  Dennis’s  Criti¬ 
cal  Works  collected.  Davies  said  they  would  not 
sell.  Dr.  Johnson  seemed  to  think  otherwise. 

Davies  said  of  a  well-known  dramatick  au¬ 
thour,  that  “he  lived  upon  potted  stories ,  and  that 
he  made  his  way  as  Hannibal  did,  by  vinegar; 
having  begun  by  attacking  people;  particularly 
the  players.” 

He  reminded  Dr.  Johnson  of  Mr.  Murphy’s 
having  paid  him  the  highest  compliment  that 
ever  was  paid  to  a  layman,  by  asking  his  pardon 
for  repeating  some  oaths  in  the  course  of  telling 
a  story. 


1776] 

Johnson  and  I  supt  this  evening  at  the  Crown 
and  Anchor  tavern,  in  company  with  Sir  Joshua 
Reynolds,  Mr.  Langton,  Mr.  Nairne,  now  one 
of  the  Scotch  Judges,  with  the  title  of  Lord 
Dunsinan,  and  my  very  worthy  friend,  Sir  Wil¬ 
liam  Forbes,  of  Pitsligo. 

We  discussed  the  question  whether  drinking 
improved  conversation  and  benevolence.  Sir 
Joshua  maintained  it  did.  Johnson.  “No,  Sir: 
before  dinner  men  meet  with  great  inequality 
of  understanding;  and  those  who  are  conscious 
of  their  inferiority,  have  the  modesty  not  to  talk. 
When  they  have  drunk  wine,  every  man  feels 
himself  happy,  and  loses  that  modesty,  and 
grows  impudent  and  vociferous:  but  he  is  not 
improved;  he  is  only  not  sensible  of  his  defects.” 
Sir  Joshua  said  the  Doctor  was  talking  of  the  ef¬ 
fects  of  excess  in  wine;  but  that  a  moderate  glass 
enlivened  the  mind,  by  giving  a  proper  circula¬ 
tion  to  the  blood.  “I  am  (said  he,)  in  very  good 
spirits,  when  I  get  up  in  the  morning.  By  dinner¬ 
time  I  am  exhausted;  wine  puts  me  in  the  same 
state  as  when  I  got  up;  and  I  am  sure  that  mod¬ 
erate  drinking  makes  people  talk  better.”  John¬ 
son.  “No,  Sir,  wine  gives  not  light,  gay,  ideal 
hilarity;  but  tumultuous,  noisy,  clamorous  mer¬ 
riment.  I  have  heard  none  of  those  drunken, — 
nay,  drunken  is  a  coarse  word, — none  of  those 
vinous  flights.”  Sir  Joshua.  “Because  you  have 
sat  by,  quite  sober,  and  felt  an  envy  of  the  hap¬ 
piness  of  those  who  were  drinking.”  Johnson. 
“Perhaps,  contempt. — And,  Sir,  it  is  not  neces¬ 
sary  to  be  drunk  one’s  self,  to  relish  the  wit  of 
drunkenness.  Do  we  not  judge  of  the  drunken 
wit,  of  the  dialogue  between  Iago  and  Cassio, 
the  most  excellent  in  its  kind,  when  we  are  quite 
sober?  Wit  is  wit,  by  whatever  means  it  is  pro¬ 
duced;  and,  if  good,  will  appear  so  at  all  times. 
I  admit  that  the  spirits  are  raised  by  drinking, 
as  by  the  common  participation  of  any  pleasure: 
cock-fighting,  or  bear-baiting,  will  raise  the 
spirits  of  a  company,  as  drinking  does,  though 
surely  they  will  not  improve  conversation.  I 
also  admit,  that  there  are  some  sluggish  men 
who  are  improved  by  drinking;  as  there  are 
fruits  which  are  not  good  till  they  are  rotten. 
There  are  such  men,  but  they  are  medlars.  I  in¬ 
deed  allow  that  there  have  been  a  very  few  men 
of  talents  who  were  improved  by  drinking;  but 
I  maintain  that  I  am  right  as  to  the  effects  of 
drinking  in  general:  and  let  it  be  considered, 
that  there  is  no  position,  however  false  in  its 
universality,  which  is  not  true  of  some  particu¬ 
lar  man.”  Sir  William  Forbes  said,  “Might  not 
a  man  warmed  with  wine  be  like  a  bottle  of 
beer,  which  is  made  brisker  by  being  set  before 


3°9 

the  fire?” — “Nay,  (said  Johnson,  laughing,)  I 
cannot  answer  that:  that  is  too  much  for  me.” 

I  observed,  that  wine  did  some  people  harm, 
by  inflaming,  confusing,  and  irritating  their 
minds;  but  that  the  experience  of  mankind  had 
declared  in  favour  of  moderate  drinking.  John¬ 
son.  “Sir,  I  do  not  say  it  is  wrong  to  produce  self 
complacency  by  drinking;  I  only  deny  that  it 
improves  the  mind.  When  I  drank  wine,  I 
scorned  to  drink  it  when  in  company.  I  have 
drunk  many  a  bottle  by  myself;  in  the  first 
place,  because  I  had  need  of  it  to  raise  my  spir¬ 
its;  in  the  second  place,  because  I  would  have 
nobody  to  witness  its  effects  upon  me.” 

He  told  us,  “almost  all  his  Ramblers  were  writ¬ 
ten  just  as  they  were  wanted  for  the  press;  that 
he  sent  a  certain  portion  of  the  copy  of  an  essay, 
and  wrote  the  remainder,  while  the  former  part 
of  it  was  printing.  When  it  was  wanted,  and  he 
had  fairly  sat  down  to  it,  he  was  sure  it  would 
be  done.” 

He  said,  that  for  general  improvement,  a  man 
should  read  whatever  his  immediate  inclination 
prompts  him  to;  though,  to  be  sure,  if  a  man 
has  a  science  to  learn,  he  must  regularly  and 
resolutely  advance.  He  added,  “what  we  read 
with  inclination  makes  a  much  stronger  impres¬ 
sion.  If  we  read  without  inclination,  half  the 
mind  is  employed  in  fixing  the  attention;  so 
there  is  but  one  half  to  be  employed  on  what  we 
read.”  He  told  us,  he  read  Fielding’s  Amelia 
through  without  stopping.1  He  said,  “if  a  man 
begins  to  read  in  the  middle  of  a  book,  and  feels 
an  inclination  to  go  on,  let  him  not  quit  it,  to  go 
to  the  beginning.  He  may  perhaps  not  feel  again 
the  inclination.” 

Sir  Joshua  mentioned  Mr.  Cumberland’s  Odes , 
which  were  just  published.  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir, 
they  would  have  been  thought  as  good  as  Odes 
commonly  are,  if  Cumberland  had  not  put  his 
name  to  them;  but  a  name  immediately  draws 
censure,  unless  it  be  a  name  that  bears  down 
everything  before  it.  Nay,  Cumberland  has  made 
his  Odes  subsidiary  to  the  fame  of  another  man. 2 
They  might  have  run  well  enough  by  them¬ 
selves;  but  he  has  not  only  loaded  them  with  a 
name,  but  has  made  them  carry  double.” 

We  talked  of  the  Reviews,  and  Dr.  Johnson 
spoke  of  them  as  he  did  at  Thrale’s. 3  Sir  Joshua 
said,  what  I  have  often  thought,  that  he  won- 

xWe  have  here  an  involuntary  testimony  to  the 
excellence  of  this  admirable  writer,  to  whom  we 
have  seen  that  Dr.  Johnson  directly  allowed  so  little 
merit. 

2Mr.  Romney,  the  painter,  who  has  now  de¬ 
servedly  established  a  high  reputation. 

3See  ante ,  p.  306. 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


BOSWELL 


3ro 

dered  to  find  so  much  good  writing  employed 
in  them,  when  the  authors  were  to  remain  un¬ 
known,  and  so  could  not  have  the  motive  of 
fame.  Johnson.  “Nay,  Sir,  those  who  write  in 
them,  write  well,  in  order  to  be  paid  well.” 

Soon  after  this  day,  he  went  to  Bath  with  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Thrale.  I  had  never  seen  that  beauti¬ 
ful  city,  and  wished  to  take  the  opportunity  of 
visiting  it,  while  Johnson  was  there.  Having 
written  to  him,  I  received  the  following  answer. 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  Why  do  you  talk  of  neglect?  When 
did  I  neglect  you?  If  you  will  come  to  Bath,  we 
shall  all  be  glad  to  see  you.  Come,  therefore,  as 
soon  as  you  can. 

But  I  have  a  little  business  for  you  at  London. 
Bid  Francis  look  in  the  paper-drawer  of  the  chest 
of  drawers  in  my  bed-chamber,  for  two  cases; 
one  for  the  Attorney-General,  and  one  for  the 
Solicitor-General.  They  lie,  I  think,  at  the  top 
of  my  papers;  otherwise  they  are  somewhere 
else,  and  will  give  me  more  trouble. 

Please  write  to  me  immediately,  if  they  can  be 
found.  Make  my  compliments  to  all  our  friends, 
round  the  world,  and  to  Mrs.  Williams  at  home. 
I  am,  Sir,  your,  &c. 

Sam  Johnson 

Search  for  the  papers  as  soon  as  you  can,  that, 
if  it  is  necessary,  I  may  write  to  you  again  be¬ 
fore  you  come  down. 

On  the  26th  of  April,  I  went  to  Bath;  and  on 
my  arrival  at  the  Pelican  inn,  found  lying  for 
me  an  obliging  invitation  from  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Thrale,  by  whom  I  was  agreeably  entertained 
almost  constantly  during  my  stay.  They  were 
gone  to  the  rooms;  but  there  was  a  kind  note 
from  Dr.  Johnson,  that  he  should  sit  at  home  all 
the  evening.  I  went  to  him  directly,  and  before 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Thrale  returned,  we  had  by  our¬ 
selves  some  hours  of  tea-drinking  and  talk. 

I  shall  group  together  such  of  his  sayings  as  I 
preserved  during  the  few  days  that  I  was  at  Bath. 

Of  a  person  who  differed  from  him  in  poli¬ 
ticks,  he  said,  “In  private  life  he  is  a  very  honest 
gentleman;  but  I  will  not  allow  him  to  be  so  in 
publick  life.  People  may  be  honest,  though  they 
are  doing  wrong:  that  is,  between  their  Maker 
and  them.  But  we,  who  are  suffering  by  their 
pernicious  conduct,  are  to  destroy  them.  We  are 

sure  that - acts  from  interest.  We  know 

what  his  geniune  principles  were.  They  who 
allow  their  passions  to  confound  the  distinctions 
between  right  and  wrong,  are  criminal.  They 
may  be  convinced;  but  they  have  not  come 
honestly  by  their  conviction.” 

It  having  been  mentioned,  I  know  not  with 
what  truth,  that  a  certain  female  political  writer, 


[  1776 

whose  doctrines  he  disliked,  had  of  late  become 
very  fond  of  dress,  sat  hours  together  at  her 
toilet,  and  even  put  on  rouge: — Johnson.  “She 
is  better  employed  at  her  toilet,  than  using  her 
pen.  It  is  better  she  should  be  reddening  her 
own  cheeks,  than  blackening  other  people’s 
characters.” 

He  told  us  that  “Addison  wrote  BudgelPs 
papers  in  the  Spectator ,  at  least  mended  them  so 
much,  that  he  made  them  almost  his  own;  and 
that  Draper,  Tonson’s  partner,  assured  Mr. 
Johnson,  that  the  much  admired  Epilogue  to 
The  Distressed  Mother ,  which  came  out  in  Bud- 
gell’s  name,  was  in  reality  written  by  Addison.” 

“The  mode  of  government  by  one  may  be  ill 
adapted  to  a  small  society,  but  is  best  for  a  great 
nation.  The  characteristick  of  our  own  govern¬ 
ment  at  present  is  imbecility.  The  magistrate 
dare  not  call  the  guards  for  fear  of  being  hanged. 
The  guards  will  not  come,  for  fear  of  being 
given  up  to  the  blind  rage  of  popular  juries.” 

Of  the  father  of  one  of  our  friends,  he  ob¬ 
served, “He  never  clarified  his  notions,  by  filtrat¬ 
ing  them  through  other  minds.  He  had  a  canal 
upon  his  estate,  where  at  one  place  the  bank 
was  too  low. — I  dug  the  canal  deeper,  said  he.” 

He  told  me  that  “so  long  ago  as  1748  he  had 
read  The  Grave ,  a  Poem,1  but  did  not  like  it 
much.”  I  differed  from  him,  for  though  it  is  not 
equal  throughout,  and  is  seldom  elegantly  cor¬ 
rect,  it  abounds  in  solemn  thought,  and  poetical 
imagery  beyond  the  common  reach.  The  world 
has  differed  from  him;  for  the  poem  has  passed 
through  many  editions,  and  is  still  much  read 
by  people  of  a  serious  cast  of  mind. 

A  literary  lady  of  large  fortune  was  mentioned, 
as  one  who  did  good  to  many,  but  by  no  means 
“by  stealth,”  and  instead  of  “blushing  to  find  it 
fame,”  acted  evidently  from  vanity.  Johnson. 
“I  have  seen  no  beings  who  do  as  much  good 
from  benevolence,  as  she  does,  from  whatever 
motive.  If  there  are  such  under  the  earth,  or  in 
the  clouds,  I  wish  they  would  come  up,  or  come 
down.  What  Soame  Jenyns  says  upon  this  sub¬ 
ject  is  not  to  be  minded;  he  is  a  wit.  No,  Sir;  to 
act  from  pure  benevolence  is  not  possible  for 

*1  am  sorry  that  there  are  no  memoirs  of  the 
Reverend  Robert  Blair,  the  authour  of  this  poem. 
He  was  the  representative  of  the  ancient  family  of 
Blair,  of  Blair,  in  Ayrshire,  but  the  estate  had  de¬ 
scended  to  a  female,  and  afterwards  passed  to  the 
son  of  her  husband  by  another  marriage.  He  was 
minister  of  the  parish  of  Athelstanford,  where  Mr. 
John  Home  was  his  successor;  so  that  it  may  truely 
be  called  classick  ground.  His  son,  who  is  of  the 
same  name,  and  a  man  eminent  for  talents  and 
learning,  is  now,  with  universal  approbation,  So¬ 
licitor-General  of  Scotland. 


1776]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  311 


finite  beings.  Human  benevolence  is  mingled 
with  vanity,  interest,  or  some  other  motive.55 

He  would  not  allow  me  to  praise  a  lady  then  at 
Bath;  observing,  “She  does  not  gain  upon  me, 
Sir;  I  think  her  empty-headed.55  He  was,  indeed, 
a  stern  critick  upon  characters  and  manners. 
Even  Mrs.  Thrale  did  not  escape  his  friendly 
animadversion  at  times.  When  he  and  I  were 
one  day  endeavouring  to  ascertain,  article  by 
article,  how  one  of  our  friends  could  possibly 
spend  as  much  money  in  his  family  as  he  told  us 
he  did,  she  interrupted  us  by  a  lively  extrava¬ 
gant  sally,  on  the  expence  of  clothing  his  chil¬ 
dren,  describing  it  in  a  very  ludicrous  and  fan¬ 
ciful  manner.  Johnson  looked  a  little  angry,  and 
said,  “Nay,  Madam,  when  you  are  declaiming, 
declaim;  and  when  you  are  calculating,  calcu¬ 
late.55  At  another  time,  when  she  said,  perhaps 
affectedly,  “I  don’t  like  to  fly.55  Johnson.  “With 
your  wings,  Madam,  you  must  fly:  but  have  a 
care,  there  are  clippers  abroad.55  How  very  well 
was  this  said,  and  how  fully  has  experience 
proved  the  truth  of  it !  But  have  they  not  clipped 
rather  rudely ,  and  gone  a  great  deal  closer  than 
was  necessary? 

A  gentleman  expressed  a  wish  to  go  and  live 
three  years  at  Otaheite,  or  New-Zealand,  in 
order  to  obtain  a  full  acquaintance  with  people, 
so  totally  different  from  all  that  we  have  ever 
known,  and  be  satisfied  what  pure  nature  can 
do  for  man.  Johnson.  “What  could  you  learn, 
Sir?  What  can  savages  tell,  but  what  they  them¬ 
selves  have  seen?  Of  the  past,  or  the  invisible, 
they  can  tell  nothing.  The  inhabitants  of  Ota¬ 
heite  and  New-Zealand  are  not  in  a  state  of 
pure  nature;  for  it  is  plain  they  broke  off  from 
some  other  people.  Had  they  grown  out  of  the 
ground,  you  might  have  judged  of  a  state  of 
pure  nature.  Fanciful  people  may  talk  of  a 
mythology  being  amongst  them;  but  it  must  be 
invention.  They  have  once  had  religion,  which 
has  been  gradually  debased.  And  what  account 
of  their  religion  can  you  suppose  to  be  learnt 
from  savages?  Only  consider,  Sir,  our  own  state: 
our  religion  is  in  a  book;  we  have  an  order  of 
men  whose  duty  it  is  to  teach  it;  we  have  one 
day  in  the  week  set  apart  for  it,  and  this  is  in 
general  pretty  well  observed:  yet  ask  the  first 
ten  gross  men  you  meet,  and  hear  what  they 
can  tell  of  their  religion.55 

On  Monday,  April  29,  he  and  I  made  an 
excursion  to  Bristol,  where  I  was  entertained 
with  seeing  him  enquire  upon  the  spot,  into  the 
authenticity  of  “Rowley’s  Poetry,55  as  I  had 
seen  him  enquire  upon  the  spot  into  the  authen¬ 
ticity  of  “Ossian’s  Poetry.”  George  Catcot,  the 


pewterer,  who  was  as  zealous  for  Rowley  as  Dr. 
Hugh  Blair  was  for  Ossian,  (I  trust  my  Rever¬ 
end  friend  will  excuse  the  comparison,)  at¬ 
tended  us  at  our  inn,  and  with  a  triumphant  air 
of  lively  simplicity  called  out,  “I’ll  make  Dr. 
Johnson  a  convert.”  Dr.  Johnson,  at  his  desire, 
read  aloud  some  of  Chatterton’s  fabricated 
verses,  while  Catcot  stood  at  the  back  of  his 
chair,  moving  himself  like  a  pendulum,  and 
beating  time  with  his  feet,  and  now  and  then 
looking  into  Dr.  Johnson’s  face,  wondering  that 
he  was  not  yet  convinced.  We  called  on  Mr. 
Barret,  the  surgeon,  and  saw  some  of  the  origi¬ 
nals  as  they  were  called,  which  were  executed 
very  artificially;  but  from  a  careful  inspection 
of  them,  and  a  consideration  of  the  circum¬ 
stances  with  which  they  were  attended,  we 
were  quite  satisfied  of  the  imposture,  which,  in¬ 
deed,  has  been  clearly  demonstrated  from  in¬ 
ternal  evidence,  by  several  able  criticks.1 

Honest  Catcot  seemed  to  pay  no  attention 
whatever  to  any  objections,  but  insisted,  as  an 
end  of  all  controversy,  that  we  should  go  with 
him  to  the  tower  of  the  church  of  St.  Mary,  Red- 
cliff,  and  view  with  our  own  eyes  the  ancient  chest 
in  which  the  manuscripts  were  found.  To  this, 
Dr.  Johnson  good-naturedly  agreed;  and  though 
troubled  with  a  shortness  of  breathing,  laboured 
up  a  long  flight  of  steps,  till  we  came  to  the 
place  where  the  wonderous  chest  stood.  “  There , 
(said  Catcot,  with  a  bouncing  confident  cred¬ 
ulity,)  there  is  the  very  chest  itself.”  After  this 
ocular  demonstration ,  there  was  no  more  to  be  said. 
He  brought  to  my  recollection  a  Scotch  High¬ 
lander,  a  man  of  learning  too,  and  who  had 
seen  the  world,  attesting,  and  at  the  same  time 
giving  his  reasons  for  the  authenticity  of  Fin- 
gal: — “  I  have  heard  all  that  poem  when  I  wras 
young.” — “Have  you,  Sir?  Pray  what  have  you 
heard?” — “I  have  heard  Ossian,  Oscar,  and  every 
one  of  them” 

Johnson  said  of  Chatterton,  “This  is  the  most 
extraordinary  young  man  that  has  encountered 
my  knowledge.  It  is  wonderful  how  the  whelp 
has  written  such  things.” 

We  were  by  no  means  pleased  with  our  inn  at 
Bristol.  “Let  us  see  now,  (said  I,)  how  we  should 
describe  it. 55  Johnson  was  ready  with  his  raillery. 
“Describe  it,  Sir? — Why,  it  was  so  bad  that 
Boswell  wished  to  be  in  Scotland !” 

After  Dr.  Johnson’s  return  to  London,  I  was 
several  times  with  him  at  his  house,  where  I  oc¬ 
casionally  slept,  in  the  room  that  had  been  as¬ 
signed  to  me.  I  dined  with  him  at  Dr.  Taylor’s, 
at  General  Oglethorpe’s,  and  at  General  Paoli’s. 

1Mr.  Tyrwhitt,  Mr.  Warton,  Mr.  Malone. 


312 

To  avoid  a  tedious  minuteness,  I  shall  group  to¬ 
gether  what  I  have  preserved  of  his  conversa¬ 
tion  during  this  period  also,  without  specifying 
each  scene  where  it  passed,  except  one,  which 
will  be  found  so  remarkable  as  certainly  to  de¬ 
serve  a  very  particular  relation.  Where  the  place 
or  the  persons  do  not  contribute  to  the  zest  of 
the  conversation,  it  is  unnecessary  to  encumber 
ny  page  with  mentioning  them.  To  know  of 
vhat  vintage  our  wine  is,  enables  us  to  judge  of 
its  value,  and  to  drink  it  with  more  relish:  but  to 
have  the  produce  of  each  vine  of  one  vineyard, 
in  the  same  year,  kept  separate,  would  serve  no 
purpose.  To  know  that  our  wine,  (to  use  an  ad¬ 
vertising  phrase,)  is  “of  the  stock  of  an  Ambas- 
sadour  lately  deceased,”  heightens  its  flavour: 
but  it  signifies  nothing  to  know  the  bin  where 
each  bottle  was  once  deposited. 

“Garrick  (he  observed,)  does  not  play  the 
part  of  Archer  in  The  Beaux  Stratagem  well.  The 
gentleman  should  break  out  through  the  foot¬ 
man,  which  is  not  the  case  as  he  does  it.” 

“Where  there  is  no  education,  as  in  savage 
countries,  men  will  have  the  upper  hand  of  wo¬ 
men.  Bodily  strength,  no  doubt,  contributes  to 
this;  but  it  would  be  so,  exclusive  of  that;  for  it 
is  mind  that  always  governs.  When  it  comes  to 
dry  understanding,  man  has  the  better.” 

“The  little  volumes  entitled  Respublicce,  which 
are  very  well  done,  were  a  bookseller’s  work.” 

“There  is  much  talk  of  the  misery  which  we 
cause  to  the  brute  creation;  but  they  are  recom¬ 
pensed  by  existence.  If  they  were  not  useful 
to  man,  and  therefore  protected  by  him,  they 
would  not  be  nearly  so  numerous.”  This  argu¬ 
ment  is  to  be  found  in  the  able  and  benignant 
Hutchinson’s  Moral  Philosophy.  But  the  question 
is,  whether  the  animals  who  endure  such  suffer¬ 
ings  of  various  kinds,  for  the  service  and  enter¬ 
tainment  of  man,  would  accept  of  existence  up¬ 
on  the  terms  on  which  they  have  it.  Madame 
Sevigne,  who,  though  she  had  many  enjoyments, 
felt  with  delicate  sensibility  the  prevalence  of 
misery,  complains  of  the  task  of  existence  hav¬ 
ing  been  imposed  upon  her  without  her  consent. 

“That  man  is  never  happy  for  the  present  is 
so  true,  that  all  his  relief  from  unhappiness  is 
only  forgetting  himself  for  a  little  while.  Life  is 
a  progress  from  want  to  want,  not  from  enjoy¬ 
ment  to  enjoyment” 

“Though  many  men  are  nominally  entrusted 
with  the  administration  of  hospitals  and  other 
publick  institutions,  almost  all  the  good  is  done 
by  one  man,  by  whom  the  rest  are  driven  on; 
owing  to  confidence  in  him,  and  indolence  in 
them.” 


[  1776 

“Lord  Chesterfield’s  Letters  to  his  Son,  I  think, 
might  be  made  a  very  pretty  book.  Take  out  the 
immorality,  and  it  should  be  put  into  the  hands 
of  every  young  gentleman.  An  elegant  manner 
and  easiness  of  behaviour  are  acquired  gradu¬ 
ally  and  imperceptibly.  No  man  can  say  ‘I’ll  be 
genteel.’  There  are  ten  genteel  women  for  one 
genteel  man,  because  they  are  more  restrained. 
A  man  without  some  degree  of  restraint  is  in¬ 
sufferable;  but  we  are  all  less  restrained  than 
women.  Were  a  woman  sitting  in  company  to 
put  out  her  legs  before  her  as  most  men  do,  we 
should  be  tempted  to  kick  them  in.” 

No  man  was  a  more  attentive  and  nice  ob¬ 
server  of  behaviour  in  those  in  whose  company 
he  happened  to  be,  than  Johnson;  or,  however 
strange  it  may  seem  to  many,  had  a  higher  esti¬ 
mation  of  its  refinements.  Lord  Eliot  informs  me, 
that  one  day  when  Johnson  and  he  were  at  din¬ 
ner  at  a  gentleman’s  house  in  London,  upon 
Lord  Chesterfield’s  Letters  being  mentioned, 
Johnson  surprized  the  company  by  this  sentence: 
“Every  man  of  any  education  would  rather  be 
called  a  rascal,  than  accused  of  deficiency  in  the 
graces .”  Mr.  Gibbon,  who  was  present,  turned  to  a 
lady  who  knew  Johnson  well,  and  lived  much  with 
him,  and  in  his  quaint  manner,  tapping  his  box, 
addressed  her  thus:  “Don’t  you  think,  Madam, 
(looking  towards  Johnson,)  that  among  all  your 
acquaintance,  you  could  find  one  exception?” 
The  lady  smiled,  and  seemed  to  acquiesce. 

“I  read  (said  he,)  Sharpe’s  letters  on  Italy 
over  again,  when  I  was  at  Bath.  There  is  a  great 
deal  of  matter  in  them.” 

“Mrs.  Williams  was  angry  that  Thrale’s  fam¬ 
ily  did  not  send  regularly  to  her  every  time  they 
heard  from  me  while  I  was  in  the  Hebrides. 
Little  people  are  apt  to  be  jealous:  but  they 
should  not  be  jealous;  for  they  ought  to  consid¬ 
er,  that  superiour  attention  will  necessarily  be 
paid  to  superiour  fortune  or  rank.  Two  persons 
may  have  equal  merit,  and  on  that  account  may 
have  an  equal  claim  to  attention;  but  one  of 
them  may  have  also  fortune  and  rank,  and  so 
may  have  a  double  claim.” 

Talking  of  his  notes  on  Shakspeare,  he  said, 
“I  despise  those  who  do  not  see  that  I  am  right 
in  the  passage  where  as  is  repeated,  and  ‘asses 
of  great  charge’  introduced.  That  on  ‘To  be,  or 
not  to  be,’  is  disputable.”1 

*It  may  be  observed,  that  Mr.  Malone,  in  his 
very  valuable  edition  of  Shakspeare,  has  fully  vin¬ 
dicated  Dr.  Johnson  from  the  idle  censures  which 
the  first  of  these  notes  has  given  rise  to.  The  inter¬ 
pretation  of  the  other  passage,  which  Dr.  Johnson 
allows  to  be  disputable ,  he  has  clearly  shown  to  be 
erroneous. 


BOSWELL 


1776]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


A  gentleman,  whom  I  found  sitting  with  him 
one  morning,  said,  that  in  his  opinion  the  char¬ 
acter  of  an  infidel  was  more  detestable  than  that 
of  a  man  notoriously  guilty  of  an  atrocious  crime. 
I  differed  from  him,  because  we  are  surer  of  the 
odiousness  of  the  one,  than  of  the  errour  of  the 
other.  Johnson.  “Sir,  I  agree  with  him;  for  the 
infidel  would  be  guilty  of  any  crime  if  he  were 
inclined  to  it.” 

“Many  things  which  are  false  are  transmitted 
from  book  to  book,  and  gain  credit  in  the  world. 
One  of  these  is  the  cry  against  the  evil  of  luxury. 
Now  the  truth  is,  that  luxury  produces  much 
good.  Take  the  luxury  of  buildings  in  London. 
Does  it  not  produce  real  advantage  in  the  con- 
veniency  and  elegance  of  accommodation,  and 
this  all  from  the  exertion  of  industry?  People  will 
tell  you,  with  a  melancholy  face,  how  many 
builders  are  in  gaol.  It  is  plain  they  are  in  gaol, 
not  for  building;  for  rents  are  not  fallen. — A  man 
gives  half  a  guinea  for  a  dish  of  green  peas.  How 
much  gardening  does  this  occasion?  how  many 
labourers  must  the  competition  to  have  such 
things  early  in  the  market,  keep  in  employment? 
You  will  hear  it  said,  very  gravely,  Why  was  not 
the  half-guinea,  thus  spent  in  luxury,  given  to 
the  poor?  To  how  many  might  it  have  afforded 
a  good  meal.  Alas !  has  it  not  gone  to  the  industri¬ 
ous  poor,  whom  it  is  better  to  support  than  the 
idle  poor?  You  are  much  surer  that  you  are  do¬ 
ing  good  when  you  pay  money  to  those  who  work, 
as  the  recompence  of  their  labour,  than  when 
you  give  money  merely  in  charity.  Suppose  the 
ancient  luxury  of  a  dish  of  peacock’s  brains  were 
to  be  revived,  how  many  carcases  would  be  left 
to  the  poor  at  a  cheap  rate:  and  as  to  the  rout 
that  is  made  about  people  who  are  ruined  by 
extravagance,  it  is  no  matter  to  the  nation  that 
some  individuals  suffer.  When  so  much  general 
productive  exertion  is  the  consequence  of  lux¬ 
ury,  the  nation  does  not  care  though  there  are 
debtors  in  gaol;  nay,  they  would  not  care  though 
their  creditors  were  there  too.” 

The  uncommon  vivacity  of  General  Ogle¬ 
thorpe’s  mind,  and  variety  of  knowledge,  hav¬ 
ing  sometimes  made  his  conversation  seem  too 
desultory,  Johnson  observed,  “Oglethorpe,  Sir, 
never  completes  what  he  has  to  say.” 

He  on  the  same  account  made  a  similar  re¬ 
mark  on  Patrick,  Lord  Elibank:  “Sir,  there  is 
nothing  conclusive  in  his  talk.” 

When  I  complained  of  having  dined  at  a 
splendid  table  without  hearing  one  sentence  of 
conversation  worthy  of  being  remembered,  he 
said,  “Sir,  there  seldom  is  any  such  conversa¬ 
tion.”  Boswell.  “Why  then  meet  at  table?” 


Johnson.  “Why,  to  eat  and  drink  together,  and 
to  promote  kindness;  and,  Sir,  this  is  better  done 
when  there  is  no  solid  conversation;  for  when 
there  is,  people  differ  in  opinion,  and  get  into 
bad  humour,  or  some  of  the  company  who  are 
not  capable  of  such  conversation,  are  left  out, 
and  feel  themselves  uneasy.  It  was  for  this  rea¬ 
son,  Sir  Robert  Walpole  said,  he  always  talked 
bawdy  at  his  table,  because  in  that  all  could 
join.” 

Being  irritated  by  hearing  a  gentleman  ask 
Mr.  Levett  a  variety  of  questions  concerning 
him,  when  he  was  sitting  by,  he  broke  out,  “Sir, 
you  have  but  two  topicks,  yourself  and  me.  I  am 
sick  of  both.”  “A  man,  (said  he,)  should  not  talk 
of  himself,  nor  much  of  any  particular  person. 
He  should  take  care  not  to  be  made  a  proverb; 
and,  therefore,  should  avoid  having  any  one 
topick  of  which  people  can  say,  ‘We  shall  hear 
him  upon  it.’  There  was  a  Dr.  Oldfield,  who  was 
always  talking  of  the  Duke  of  Marlborough.  He 
came  into  a  coffee-house  one  day,  and  told  that 
his  Grace  had  spoken  in  the  House  of  Lords  for 
half  an  hour.  ‘Did  he  indeed  speak  for  half  an 
hour?’  (said  Belchier,  the  surgeon,) — ‘Yes.’ — 
‘And  what  did  he  say  of  Dr.  Oldfield?’ — ‘Noth¬ 
ing.’ — ‘Why  then,  Sir,  he  was  very  ungrateful; 
for  Dr.  Oldfield  could  not  have  spoken  for  a 
quarter  of  an  hour,  without  saying  something  of 
him.’” 

“Every  man  is  to  take  existence  on  the  terms 
on  which  it  is  given  to  him.  To  some  men  it 
is  given  on  condition  of  not  taking  liberties, 
which  other  men  may  take  without  much 
harm.  One  may  drink  wine,  and  be  nothing 
the  worse  for  it;  on  another,  wine  may  have 
effects  so  inflammatory  as  to  injure  him  both 
in  body  and  mind,  and  perhaps,  make  him 
commit  something  for  which  he  may  deserve 
to  be  hanged.” 

“Lord  Hailes’s  Annals  of  Scotland  have  not  that 
painted  form  which  is  the  taste  of  this  age;  but 
it  is  a  book  which  will  always  sell,  it  has  such  a 
stability  of  dates,  such  a  certainty  of  facts,  and 
such  a  punctuality  of  citation.  I  never  before 
read  Scotch  history  with  certainty.” 

I  asked  him  whether  he  would  advise  me  to 
read  the  Bible  with  a  commentary,  and  what 
commentaries  he  would  recommend.  Johnson. 
“To  be  sure,  Sir,  I  would  have  you  read  the 
Bible  with  a  commentary;  and  I  would  recom¬ 
mend  Lowth  and  Patrick  on  the  Old  Testament, 
and  Hammond  on  the  New.” 

During  my  stay  in  London  this  spring,  I  so¬ 
licited  his  attention  to  another  law  case,  in 
which  I  was  engaged.  In  the  course  of  a  con- 


3X4 

tested  election  for  the  Borough  of  Dumfermline, 
which  I  attended  as  one  of  my  friend  Colonel 
(afterwards  Sir  Archibald)  Campbell’s  counsel; 
one  of  his  political  agents,  who  was  charged  with 
having  been  unfaithful  to  his  employer,  and 
having  deserted  to  the  opposite  party  for  a  pe¬ 
cuniary  reward — attacked  very  rudely  in  a 
news-paper  the  Reverend  Mr.  James  Thomson, 
one  of  the  ministers  of  that  place,  on  account  of 
a  supposed  allusion  to  him  in  one  of  his  sermons. 
Upon  this  the  minister,  on  a  subsequent  Sun¬ 
day,  arraigned  him  by  name  from  the  pulpit  with 
some  severity;  and  the  agent,  after  the  sermon 
was  over,  rose  up  and  asked  the  minister  aloud, 
“What  bribe  he  had  received  for  telling  so  many 
lies  from  the  chair  of  verity.”  I  was  present  at 
this  very  extraordinary  scene.  The  person  ar¬ 
raigned,  and  his  father  and  brother,  who  had 
also  a  share  both  of  the  reproof  from  the  pulpit, 
and  in  the  retaliation,  brought  an  action  against 
Mr.  Thomson,  in  the  Court  of  Session,  for  defa¬ 
mation  and  damages,  and  I  was  one  of  the 
counsel  for  the  reverend  defendant.  The  Liberty 
of  the  Pulpit  was  our  great  ground  of  defence; 
but  we  argued  also  on  the  provocation  of  the 
previous  attack,  and  on  the  instant  retaliation. 
The  Court  of  Session,  however — the  fifteen 
Judges,  who  are  at  the  same  time  the  Jury,  de¬ 
cided  against  the  minister,  contrary  to  my  hum¬ 
ble  opinion;  and  several  of  them  expressed 
themselves  with  indignation  against  him.  He 
was  an  aged  gentleman,  formerly  a  military 
chaplain,  and  a  man  of  high  spirit  and  honour. 
Johnson  was  satisfied  that  the  judgement  was 
wrong,  and  dictated  to  me  the  following  argu¬ 
ment  in  confutation  of  it: — 

“Of  the  censure  pronounced  from  the  pulpit, 
our  determination  must  be  formed,  as  in  other 
cases,  by  a  consideration  of  the  action  itself,  and 
the  particular  circumstances  with  which  it  is  in¬ 
vested. 

“The  right  of  censure  and  rebuke  seems  nec¬ 
essarily  appendant  to  the  pastoral  office.  He,  to 
whom  the  care  of  a  congregation  is  entrusted,  is 
considered  as  the  shepherd  of  a  flock,  as  the 
teacher  of  a  school,  as  the  father  of  a  family.  As 
a  shepherd  tending  not  his  own  sheep  but  those 
of  his  master,  he  is  answerable  for  those  that 
stray,  and  that  lose  themselves  by  straying.  But 
no  man  can  be  answerable  for  losses  which  he 
has  not  power  to  prevent,  or  for  vagrancy  which 
he  has  not  authority  to  restrain. 

“As  a  teacher  giving  instruction  for  wages, 
and  liable  to  reproach,  if  those  whom  he  under¬ 
takes  to  inform  make  no  proficiency,  he  must 
have  the  power  of  enforcing  attendance,  of 


[  1776 

awakening  negligence,  and  repressing  contra¬ 
diction. 

“As  a  father,  he  possesses  the  paternal  au¬ 
thority  of  admonition,  rebuke,  and  punishment. 
He  cannot,  without  reducing  his  office  to  an 
empty  name,  be  hindered  from  the  exercise  of 
any  practice  necessary  to  stimulate  the  idle,  to 
reform  the  vicious,  to  check  the  petulant,  and 
correct  the  stubborn. 

“If  we  enquire  into  the  practice  of  the  primi¬ 
tive  Church,  we  shall,  I  believe,  find  the  min¬ 
isters  of  the  word  exercising  the  whole  authority 
of  this  complicated  character.  We  shall  find  them 
not  only  encouraging  the  good  by  exhortation, 
but  terrifying  the  wicked  by  reproof  and  denun¬ 
ciation.  In  the  earliest  ages  of  the  Church,  while 
religion  was  yet  pure  from  secular  advantages,  the 
punishment  of  sinners  was  publick  censure,  and 
open  penance;  penalties  inflicted  merely  by  ec¬ 
clesiastical  authority,  at  a  time  while  the  Church 
had  yet  no  help  from  the  civil  power;  while  the 
hand  of  the  magistrate  lifted  only  the  rod  of  per¬ 
secution;  and  when  governours  were  ready  to 
afford  a  refuge  to  all  those  who  fled  from  cleri¬ 
cal  authority. 

“That  the  Church,  therefore,  had  once  a  pow¬ 
er  of  publick  censure  is  evident,  because  that 
power  was  frequently  exercised.  That  it  bor¬ 
rowed  not  its  power  from  the  civil  authority,  is 
likewise  certain,  because  civil  authority  was  at 
that  time  its  enemy. 

“The  hour  came  at  length,  when  after  three 
hundred  years  of  struggle  and  distress,  Truth  took 
possession  of  imperial  power,  and  the  civil  laws 
lent  their  aid  to  the  ecclesiastical  constitutions. 
The  magistrate  from  that  time  co-operated  with 
the  priest,  and  clerical  sentences  were  made  ef¬ 
ficacious  by  secular  force.  But  the  State,  when  it 
came  to  the  assistance  of  the  Church,  had  no  in¬ 
tention  to  diminish  its  authority.  Those  rebukes 
and  those  censures  which  were  lawful  before, 
were  lawful  still.  But  they  had  hitherto  operated 
only  upon  voluntary  submission.  The  refractory 
and  contemptuous  were  at  first  in  no  danger  of 
temporal  severities,  except  what  they  might  suf¬ 
fer  from  the  reproaches  of  conscience,  or  the  de¬ 
testation  of  their  fellow  Christians.  When  reli¬ 
gion  obtained  the  support  of  law,  if  admonitions 
and  censures  had  no  effect,  they  were  seconded 
by  the  magistrates  with  coercion  and  punish¬ 
ment. 

“It  therefore  appears  from  ecclesiastical  his¬ 
tory,  that  the  right  of  inflicting  shame  by  pub¬ 
lick  censure,  has  been  always  considered  as  in¬ 
herent  in  the  Church;  and  that  this  right  was 
not  conferred  by  the  civil  power;  for  it  was  exer- 


BOSWELL 


1776  ]  LIFEOF 

cised  when  the  civil  power  operated  against  it. 
By  the  civil  power  it  was  never  taken  away;  for 
the  Christian  magistrate  interposed  his  office, 
not  to  rescue  sinners  from  censure,  but  to  supply 
more  powerful  means  of  reformation;  to  add 
pain  where  shame  was  insufficient;  and  when 
men  were  proclaimed  unworthy  of  the  society  of 
the  faithful,  to  restrain  them  by  imprisonment, 
from  spreading  abroad  the  contagion  of  wicked¬ 
ness. 

“It  is  not  improbable  that  from  this  acknowl¬ 
edged  power  of  publick  censure,  grew  in  time 
the  practice  of  auricular  confession.  Those  who 
dreaded  the  blast  of  publick  reprehension,  were 
willing  to  submit  themselves  to  the  priest,  by  a 
private  accusation  of  themselves;  and  to  obtain 
a  reconciliation  with  the  Church  by  a  kind  of 
clandestine  absolution  and  invisible  penance; 
conditions  with  which  the  priest  would  in  times 
of  ignorance  and  corruption,  easily  comply,  as 
they  increased  his  influence,  by  adding  the 
knowledge  of  secret  sins  to  that  of  notorious  of¬ 
fences,  and  enlarged  his  authority,  by  making 
him  the  sole  arbiter  of  the  terms  of  reconcile¬ 
ment. 

“From  this  bondage  the  Reformation  set  us 
free.  The  minister  has  no  longer  power  to  press 
into  the  retirements  of  conscience,  to  torture  us 
by  interrogatories,  or  put  himself  in  possession 
of  our  secrets  and  our  lives.  But  though  we  have 
thus  controlled  his  usurpations,  his  just  and 
original  power  remains  unimpaired.  He  may 
still  see,  though  he  may  not  pry:  he  may  yet  hear, 
though  he  may  not  question.  And  that  knowl¬ 
edge  which  his  eyes  and  ears  force  upon  him  it 
is  still  his  duty  to  use,  for  the  benefit  of  his  flock. 
A  father  who  lives  near  a  wicked  neighbour,  may 
forbid  a  son  to  frequent  his  company.  A  minis¬ 
ter  who  has  in  his  congregation  a  man  of  open 
and  scandalous  wickedness,  may  warn  his  pa¬ 
rishioners  to  shun  his  conversation  To  warn 
them  is  not  only  lawful,  but  not  to  warn  them 
would  be  criminal.  He  may  warn  them  one  by 
one  in  friendly  converse,  or  by  a  parochial  visi¬ 
tation.  But  if  he  may  warn  each  man  singly, 
what  shall  forbid  him  to  warn  them  altogether? 
Of  that  which  is  to  be  made  known  to  all,  how 
is  there  any  difference  whether  it  be  communi¬ 
cated  to  each  singly,  or  to  all  together?  What  is 
known  to  all,  must  necessarily  be  publick. 
Whether  it  shall  be  publick  at  once,  or  publick 
by  degrees,  is  the  only  question.  And  of  a  sud¬ 
den  and  solemn  publication  the  impression  is 
deeper,  and  the  warning  more  effectual. 

“It  may  easily  be  urged,  if  a  minister  be  thus 
left  at  liberty  to  delate  sinners  from  the  pulpit, 


JOHNSON  315 

and  to  publish  at  will  the  crimes  of  a  parishion¬ 
er,  he  may  often  blast  the  innocent,  and  distress 
the  timorous.  He  may  be  suspicious,  and  con¬ 
demn  without  evidence;  he  may  be  rash,  and 
judge  without  examination;  he  may  be  severe, 
and  treat  slight  offences  with  too  much  harsh¬ 
ness;  he  may  be  malignant  and  partial,  and 
gratify  his  private  interest  or  resentment  under 
the  shelter  of  his  pastoral  character. 

“Of  all  this  there  is  possibility,  and  of  all  this 
there  is  danger.  But  if  possibility  of  evil  be  to 
exclude  good,  no  good  ever  can  be  done.  If  noth¬ 
ing  is  to  be  attempted  in  which  there  is  dan¬ 
ger,  we  must  all  sink  into  hopeless  inactivity. 
The  evils  that  may  be  feared  from  this  practice 
arise  not  from  any  defect  in  the  institution,  but 
from  the  infirmities  of  human  nature.  Power,  in 
whatever  hands  it  is  placed,  will  be  sometimes 
improperly  exerted ;  yet  courts  of  law  must  judge, 
though  they  will  sometimes  judge  amiss.  A  father 
must  instruct  his  children,  though  he  himself 
may  often  want  instruction.  A  minister  must 
censure  sinners,  though  his  censure  may  be  some¬ 
times  erroneous  by  want  of  judgement,  and 
sometimes  unjust  by  want  of  honesty. 

“If  we  examine  the  circumstances  of  the  pres¬ 
ent  case,  we  shall  find  the  sentence  neither  er¬ 
roneous  nor  unjust;  we  shall  find  no  breach  of 
private  confidence,  no  intrusion  into  secret  trans¬ 
actions.  The  fact  was  notorious  and  indubitable; 
so  easy  to  be  proved,  that  no  proof  was  desired. 
The  act  was  base  and  treacherous,  the  perpe¬ 
tration  insolent  and  open,  and  the  example  nat¬ 
urally  mischievous.  The  minister  however,  be¬ 
ing  retired  and  recluse,  had  not  yet  heard  what 
was  publickly  known  throughout  the  parish;  and 
on  occasion  of  a  publick  election,  warned  his 
people,  according  to  his  duty,  against  the  crimes 
which  publick  elections  frequently  produce.  His 
warning  was  felt  by  one  of  his  parishioners,  as 
pointed  particularly  at  himself.  But  instead  of 
producing,  as  might  be  wished,  private  com¬ 
punction  and  immediate  reformation,  it  kindled 
only  rage  and  resentment.  He  charged  his  min¬ 
ister,  in  a  publick  paper,  with  scandal,  defama¬ 
tion,  and  falsehood.  The  minister,  thus  re¬ 
proached,  had  his  own  character  to  vindicate, 
upon  which  his  pastoral  authority  must  neces¬ 
sarily  depend.  To  be  charged  with  a  defamatory 
lie  is  an  injury  which  no  man  patiently  endures 
in  common  life.  To  be  charged  with  polluting 
the  pastoral  office  with  scandal  and  falsehood, 
was  a  violation  of  character  still  more  atrocious, 
as  it  affected  not  only  his  personal  but  his  cleri¬ 
cal  veracity.  His  indignation  naturally  rose  in 
proportion  to  his  honesty,  and  with  all  the  forti- 


316 

tude  of  injured  honesty,  he  dared  this  calumni¬ 
ator  in  the  church,  and  at  once  exonerated  him¬ 
self  from  censure,  and  rescued  his  flock  from  de¬ 
ception  and  from  danger.  The  man  whom  he 
accuses  pretends  not  to  be  innocent;  or  at  least 
only  pretends;  for  he  declines  a  trial.  The  crime 
of  which  he  is  accused  has  frequent  opportuni¬ 
ties  and  strong  temptations.  It  has  already  spread 
far,  with  much  depravation  of  private  morals, 
and  much  injury  to  publick  happiness.  To  warn 
the  people,  therefore,  against  it  was  not  wanton 
and  officious,  but  necessary  and  pastoral. 

“What  then  is  the  fault  with  which  this  worthy 
minister  is  charged?  He  has  usurped  no  domin¬ 
ion  over  conscience.  He  has  exerted  no  authori¬ 
ty  in  support  of  doubtful  and  controverted  opin¬ 
ions.  He  has  not  dragged  into  light  a  bashful 
and  corrigible  sinner.  His  censure  was  directed 
against  a  breach  of  morality,  against  an  act 
which  no  man  justifies.  The  man  who  appropri¬ 
ated  this  censure  to  himself,  is  evidently  and  no¬ 
toriously  guilty.  His  consciousness  of  his  own 
wickedness  incited  him  to  attack  his  faithful  re¬ 
prover  with  open  insolence  and  printed  accusa¬ 
tions.  Such  an  attack  made  defence  necessary; 
and  we  hope  it  will  be  at  last  decided  that  the 
means  of  defence  were  just  and  lawful.” 

When  I  read  this  to  Mr.  Burke,  he  was  highly 
pleased,  and  exclaimed,  “Well;  he  does  his  work 
in  a  workman-like  manner.”1 

Mr.  Thomson  wished  to  bring  the  cause  by 
appeal  before  the  House  of  Lords,  but  was  dis¬ 
suaded  by  the  advice  of  the  noble  person  who 
lately  presided  so  ably  in  that  Most  Honourable 
House,  and  who  was  then  Attorney-General.  As 
my  readers  will  no  doubt  be  glad  also  to  read  the 
opinion  of  this  eminent  man  upon  the  same  sub¬ 
ject,  I  shall  here  insert  it. 

Case 

There  is  herewith  laid  before  you. 

1.  Petition  for  theReverend  Mr.  James  Thom¬ 

son,  minister  of  Dumfermline. 

2.  Answers  thereto. 

3.  Copy  of  the  judgement  of  the  Court  of  Ses¬ 

sion  upon  both. 

4.  Notes  of  the  opinions  of  the  Judges,  being 

the  reasons  upon  which  their  decree  is 

grounded. 

1As  a  proof  of  Dr.  Johnson's  extraordinary  pow¬ 
ers  of  composition,  it  appears  from  the  original 
manuscript  of  this  excellent  dissertation,  of  which 
he  dictated  the  first  eight  paragraphs  on  the  1  oth 
of  May,  and  the  remainder  on  the  1 3th,  that  there 
are  in  the  whole  only  seven  corrections,  or  rather 
variations,  and  those  not  considerable.  Such  were 
at  once  the  vigorous  and  accurate  emanations  of 
his  mind. 


[  1 776 

These  papers  you  will  please  to  peruse,  and 
give  your  opinion, 

Whether  there  is  a  probability  of  the  above 
decree  of  the  Court  of  Session  being  re¬ 
versed,  if  Mr.  Thomson  should  appeal  from 
the  same? 

I  don’t  think  the  appeal  adviseable:  not  only 
because  the  value  of  the  judgement  is  in  no  de¬ 
gree  adequate  to  the  expence;  but  because  there 
are  many  chances,  that  upon  the  general  com¬ 
plexion  of  the  case,  the  impression  will  be  taken 
to  the  disadvantage  of  the  appellant. 

It  is  impossible  to  approve  the  style  of  that 
sermon.  But  the  complaint  was  not  less  ungracious 
from  that  man,  who  had  behaved  so  ill  by  his 
original  libel,  and,  at  the  time,  when  he  received 
the  reproach  he  complains  of.  In  the  last  article, 
all  the  plaintiffs  are  equally  concerned.  It  struck 
me  also  with  some  wonder,  that  the  Judges  should 
think  so  much  fervour  apposite  to  the  occasion 
of  reproving  the  defendant  for  a  little  excess. 

Upon  the  matter,  however,  I  agree  with  them 
in  condemning  the  behaviour  of  the  minister; 
and  in  thinking  it  a  subject  fit  for  ecclesiastical 
censure;  and  even  for  an  action,  if  any  individ¬ 
ual  could  qualify2  a  wrong,  and  a  damage  aris¬ 
ing  from  it.  But  this  I  doubt.  The  circumstance 
of  publishing  the  reproach  in  a  pulpit,  though 
extremely  indecent,  and  culpable  in  another 
view,  does  not  constitute  a  different  sort  of 
wrong,  or  any  other  rule  of  law,  than  would 
have  obtained,  if  the  same  words  had  been  pro¬ 
nounced  elsewhere.  I  don’t  know,  whether  there 
be  any  difference  in  the  law  of  Scotland,  in  the 
definition  of  slander,  before  the  Commissaries, 
or  the  Court  of  Session.  The  common  law  of 
England  does  not  give  way  to  actions  for  every 
reproachful  word.  An  action  cannot  be  brought 
for  general  damages,  upon  any  words  which  im¬ 
port  less  than  an  offence  cognisable  by  law; 
consequently  no  action  could  have  been  brought 
here  for  the  words  in  question.  Both  laws  admit 
the  truth  to  be  a  justification  in  action  for  words; 
and  the  law  of  England  does  the  same  in  ac¬ 
tions  for  libels.  The  judgement,  therefore,  seems 
to  me  to  have  been  wrong,  in  that  the  Court  re¬ 
pelled  that  defence. 

E.  Thurlow 

I  am  now  to  record  a  very  curious  incident  in 
Dr.  Johnson’s  Life,  which  fell  under  my  own  ob¬ 
servation;  of  which  pars  magnafuiy  and  which  I 
am  persuaded  will,  with  the  liberal-minded,  be 
much  to  his  credit. 

My  desire  of  being  acquainted  with  celebrated 
men  of  every  description,  had  made  me,  much 

2It  is  curious  to  observe  that  Lord  Thurlow  has 
here,  perhaps  in  compliment  to  North  Britain, 
made  use  of  a  term  of  the  Scotch  Law,  which  to  an 
English  reader  may  require  explanation.  To  qualify 
a  wrong,  is  to  point  out  and  establish  it. 


BOSWELL 


1776]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  317 


about  the  same  time,  obtain  an  introduction  to 
Dr.  Samuel  Johnson  and  to  John  Wilkes,  Esq. 
Two  men  more  different  could  perhaps  not  be 
selected  out  of  all  mankind.  They  had  even  at¬ 
tacked  one  another  with  some  asperity  in  their 
writings;  yet  I  lived  in  habits  of  friendship  with 
both.  I  could  fully  relish  the  excellence  of  each; 
for  I  have  ever  delighted  in  that  intellectual 
chymistry,  which  can  separate  good  qualities 
from  evil  in  the  same  person. 

Sir  John  Pringle,  “mine  own  friend  and  my 
Father’s  friend,55  between  whom  and  Dr.  John¬ 
son  I  in  vain  wished  to  establish  an  acquaint¬ 
ance,  as  I  respected  and  lived  in  intimacy  with 
both  of  them,  observed  to  me  once,  very  ingeni¬ 
ously,  “It  is  not  in  friendship  as  in  mathemat- 
icks,  where  two  things,  each  equal  to  a  third,  are 
equal  between  themselves.  You  agree  with  John¬ 
son  as  a  middle  quality,  and  you  agree  with  me 
as  a  middle  quality;  but  Johnson  and  I  should 
not  agree.55  Sir  John  was  not  sufficiently  flexible ; 
so  I  desisted;  knowing,  indeed,  that  the  repul¬ 
sion  was  equally  strong  on  the  part  of  Johnson; 
who,  I  know  not  from  what  cause,  unless  his  be¬ 
ing  a  Scotchman,  had  formed  a  very  erroneous 
opinion  of  Sir  John.  But  I  conceived  an  irresisti¬ 
ble  wish,  if  possible,  to  bring  Dr.  Johnson  and 
Mr.  Wilkes  together.  How  to  manage  it,  was  a 
nice  and  difficult  matter. 

My  worthy  booksellers  and  friends,  Messieurs 
Dilly  in  the  Poultry,  at  whose  hospitable  and 
well-covered  table  I  have  seen  a  greater  number 
of  literary  men  than  at  any  other,  except  that 
of  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  had  invited  me  to  meet 
Mr.  Wilkes  and  some  more  gentlemen  on  Wed¬ 
nesday,  May  15.  “Pray  (said  I,)  let  us  have  Dr. 
Johnson.55 — “What  with  Mr.  Wilkes?  not  for  the 
world,  (said  Mr.  Edward  Dilly):  Dr.  Johnson 
would  never  forgive  me.55 — “Come,  (said  I,)  if 
you’ll  let  me  negotiate  for  you,  I  will  be  answer- 
able  that  all  shall  go  well.55  Dilly.  “Nay,  if  you 
will  take  it  upon  you,  I  am  sure  I  shall  be  very 
happy  to  see  them  both  here.55 

Notwithstanding  the  high  veneration  which  I 
entertained  for  Dr.  Johnson,  I  was  sensible  that 
he  was  sometimes  a  little  actuated  by  the  spirit 
of  contradiction,  and  by  means  of  that  I  hoped  I 
should  gain  my  point.  I  was  persuaded  that  if  I 
had  come  upon  him  with  a  direct  proposal,  “Sir, 
will  you  dine  in  company  with  Jack  Wilkes?55  he 
would  have  flown  into  a  passion,  and  would 
probably  have  answered,  “Dine  with  Jack  Wil¬ 
kes,  Sir!  I5d  as  soon  dine  with  Jack  Ketch.551  I 

rFhis  has  been  circulated  as  if  actually  said  by 
Johnson;  when  the  truth  is,  it  was  only  supposed  by 
me. 


therefore,  while  we  were  sitting  quietly  by  our¬ 
selves  at  his  house  in  an  evening,  took  occasion 
to  open  my  plan  thus: — “Mr.  Dilly,  Sir,  sends 
his  respectful  compliments  to  you,  and  would  be 
happy  if  you  would  do  him  the  honour  to  dine 
with  him  on  Wednesday  next  along  with  me,  as 
I  must  soon  go  to  Scotland.55  Johnson.  “Sir,  I 
am  obliged  to  Mr.  Dilly.  I  will  wait  upon  him — 55 
Boswell.  “Provided,  Sir,  I  suppose,  that  the 
company  which  he  is  to  have,  is  agreeable  to 
you.55  Johnson.  “What  do  you  mean,  Sir?  What 
do  you  take  me  for?  Do  you  think  I  am  so  ig¬ 
norant  of  the  world,  as  to  imagine  that  I  am  to 
prescribe  to  a  gentleman  what  company  he  is  to 
have  at  his  table?55  Boswell.  “I  beg  your  pardon, 
Sir,  for  wishing  to  prevent  you  from  meeting 
people  whom  you  might  not  like.  Perhaps  he 
may  have  some  of  what  he  calls  his  patriotick 
friends  with  him.55  Johnson.  “Well,  Sir,  and  what 
then?  What  care  I  for  his  patriotick  friends?  Poh  !55 
Boswell.  “I  should  not  be  surprized  to  find 
Jack  Wilkes  there.55  Johnson.  “And  if  Jack  Wil¬ 
kes  should  be  there,  what  is  that  to  me ,  Sir?  My 
dear  friend,  let  us  have  no  more  of  this.  I  am 
sorry  to  be  angry  with  you;  but  really  it  is  treat¬ 
ing  me  strangely  to  talk  to  me  as  if  I  could  not 
meet  any  company  whatever,  occasionally.55 
Boswell.  “Pray  forgive  me,  Sir:  I  meant  well. 
But  you  shall  meet  whoever  comes,  for  me.55 
Thus  I  secured  him,  and  told  Dilly  that  he  would 
find  him  very  well  pleased  to  be  one  of  his  guests 
on  the  day  appointed. 

Upon  the  much-expected  Wednesday,  I  called 
on  him  about  half  an  hour  before  dinner,  as  I 
often  did  when  we  were  to  dine  out  together,  to 
see  that  he  was  ready  in  time,  and  to  accompany 
him.  I  found  him  buffeting  his  books,  as  upon  a 
former  occasion,2  covered  with  dust,  and  mak¬ 
ing  no  preparation  for  going  abroad.  “How  is 
this,  Sir?  (said  I.)  Don’t  you  recollect  that  you 
are  to  dine  at  Mr.  Dilly’s?”  Johnson.  “Sir,  I  did 
not  think  of  going  to  Dilly’s:  it  went  out  of  my 
head.  I  have  ordered  dinner  at  home  with  Mrs. 
Williams.55  Boswell.  “But,  my  dear  Sir,  you 
know  you  were  engaged  to  Mr.  Dilly,  and  I  told 
him  so.  He  will  expect  you,  and  will  be  much 
disappointed  if  you  don’t  come.”  Johnson.  “You 
must  talk  to  Mrs.  Williams  about  this.” 

Here  was  a  sad  dilemma.  I  feared  that  what  I 
was  so  confident  I  had  secured  would  yet  be 
frustrated.  He  had  accustomed  himself  to  shew 
Mrs.  Williams  such  a  degree  of  humane  atten¬ 
tion,  as  frequently  imposed  some  restraint  upon 
him;  and  I  knew  that  if  she  should  be  obstinate, 
he  would  not  stir.  I  hastened  down  stairs  to  the 

2See  ante ,  p.  298. 


BOSWELL 


318 

blind  lady’s  room,  and  told  her  I  was  in  great 
uneasiness,  for  Dr.  Johnson  had  engaged  to  me 
to  dine  this  day  at  Mr.  Dilly’s,  but  that  he  had 
told  me  he  had  forgotten  his  engagement,  and 
had  ordered  dinner  at  home.  “Yes,  Sir,  (said 
she,  pretty  peevishly,)  Dr.  Johnson  is  to  dine  at 
home.” — “Madam,  (said  I,)  his  respect  for  you 
is  such,  that  I  know  he  will  not  leave  you  unless 
you  absolutely  desire  it.  But  as  you  have  so  much 
of  his  company,  I  hope  you  will  be  good  enough 
to  forego  it  for  a  day;  as  Mr.  Dilly  is  a  very 
worthy  man,  has  frequently  had  agreeable  par¬ 
ties  at  his  house  for  Dr.  Johnson,  and  will  be 
vexed  if  the  Doctor  neglects  him  to-day.  And 
then,  Madam,  be  pleased  to  consider  my  situa¬ 
tion;  I  carried  the  message,  and  I  assured  Mr. 
Dilly  that  Dr.  Johnson  was  to  come,  and  no  doubt 
he  has  made  a  dinner,  and  invited  a  company, 
and  boasted  of  the  honour  he  expected  to  have. 
I  shall  be  quite  disgraced  if  the  Doctor  is  not 
there.”  She  gradually  softened  to  my  solicita¬ 
tions,  which  were  certainly  as  earnest  as  most 
entreaties  to  ladies  upon  any  occasion,  and  was 
graciously  pleased  to  empower  me  to  tell  Dr. 
Johnson,  “Thatallthingsconsidered,  she  thought 
he  should  certainly  go.”  I  flew  back  to  him,  still 
in  dust,  and  careless  of  what  should  be  the  event, 
“indifferent  in  his  choice  to  go  or  stay”;  but  as 
soon  as  I  had  announced  to  him  Mrs.  William’s 
consent,  he  roared,  “Frank,  a  clean  shirt,”  and 
was  very  soon  drest.  When  I  had  him  fairly  seated 
in  a  hackney-coach  with  me,  I  exulted  as  much 
as  a  fortune-hunter  who  has  got  an  heiress  into  a 
post-chaise  with  him  to  set  out  for  Gretna-Green. 

When  we  entered  Mr.  Dilly’s  drawing  room, 
he  found  himself  in  the  midst  of  a  company  he 
did  not  know.  I  kept  myself  snug  and  silent, 
watching  how  he  would  conduct  himself.  I  ob¬ 
served  him  whispering  to  Mr.  Dilly,  “Who  is 
that  gentleman,  Sir?” — “Mr.  Arthur  Lee.” — 
Johnson.  “Too,  too,  too,”  (under  his  breath,) 
which  was  one  of  his  habitual  mutterings.  Mr. 
Arthur  Lee  could  not  but  be  very  obnoxious  to 
Johnson,  for  he  was  not  only  a  patriot  but  an 
American.  He  was  afterwards  minister  from  the 
United  States  at  the  court  of  Madrid.  “And  who 
is  the  gentleman  in  lace?” — “Mr.  Wilkes,  Sir.” 
This  information  confounded  him  still  more;  he 
had  some  difficulty  to  restrain  himself,  and  tak¬ 
ing  up  a  book,  sat  down  upon  a  window-seat 
and  read,  or  at  least  kept  his  eye  upon  it  intently 
for  some  time,  till  he  composed  himself.  His  feel¬ 
ings,  I  dare  say,  were  aukward  enough.  But  he  no 
doubt  recollected  his  having  rated  me  for  sup¬ 
posing  that  he  could  be  at  all  disconcerted  by  any 
company,  and  he,  therefore,  resolutely  set  him¬ 


[  1776 

self  to  behave  quite  as  an  easy  man  of  the  world, 
who  could  adapt  himself  at  once  to  the  disposi¬ 
tion  and  manners  of  those  whom  he  might  chance 
to  meet. 

The  cheering  sound  of  “Dinner  is  upon  the 
table,”  dissolved  his  reverie,  and  we  all  sat  down 
without  any  symptom  of  ill  humour.  There  were 
present,  beside  Mr.  Wilkes,  and  Mr.  Arthur  Lee, 
who  was  an  old  companion  of  mine  when  he 
studied  physick  at  Edinburgh,  Mr.  (now  Sir 
John)  Miller,  Dr.  Lettsom,  and  Mr.  Slater  the 
druggist.  Mr.  Wilkes  placed  himself  next  to  Dr. 
Johnson,  and  behaved  to  him  with  so  much  at¬ 
tention  and  politeness,  that  he  gained  upon  him 
insensibly.  No  man  ate  more  heartily  than  John¬ 
son,  or  loved  better  what  was  nice  and  delicate. 
Mr.  Wilkes  was  very  assiduous  in  helping  him 
to  some  fine  veal.  “Pray  give  me  leave,  Sir: — It 
is  better  here — A  little  of  the  brown — Some  fat. 
Sir — A  little  of  the  stuffing — Some  gravy — Let 
me  have  the  pleasure  of  giving  you  some  butter 
— Allow  me  to  recommend  a  squeeze  of  this 
orange; — or  the  lemon,  perhaps,  may  have  more 
zest.” — “Sir,  Sir,  I  am  obliged  to  you,  Sir,”  cried 
Johnson,  bowing,  and  turning  his  head  to  him 
with  a  look  for  some  time  of  “surly  virtue,”1  but, 
in  a  short  while,  of  complacency. 

Foote  being  mentioned,  Johnson  said,  “He  is 
not  a  good  mimick.”  One  of  the  company  added, 
“A  merry  Andrew,  a  buffoon.”  Johnson.  “But 
he  has  wit  too,  and  is  not  deficient  in  ideas,  or  in 
fertility  and  variety  of  imagery,  and  not  empty 
of  reading;  he  has  knowledge  enough  to  fill  up 
his  part.  One  species  of  wit  he  has  in  an  eminent 
degree,  that  of  escape.  You  drive  him  into  a  cor¬ 
ner  with  both  hands;  but  he’s  gone,  Sir,  when 
you  think  you  have  got  him — like  an  animal  that 
jumps  over  your  head.  Then  he  has  a  great  range 
for  wit;  he  never  lets  truth  stand  between  him 
and  a  jest,  and  he  is  sometimes  mighty  coarse. 
Garrick  is  under  many  restraints  from  which 
Foote  is  free.”  Wilkes.  “Garrick’s  wit  is  more 
like  Lord  Chesterfield’s.”  Johnson.  “The  first 
time  I  was  in  company  with  Foote  was  at  Fitz- 
herbert’s.  Having  no  good  opinion  of  the  fellow, 
I  was  resolved  not  to  be  pleased;  and  it  is  very 
difficult  to  please  a  man  against  his  will.  I  went 
on  eating  my  dinner  pretty  sullenly,  affecting 
not  to  mind  him.  But  the  dog  was  so  very  comi¬ 
cal,  that  I  was  obliged  to  lay  down  my  knife  and 
fork,  throw  myself  back  upon  my  chair,  and  fairly 
laugh  it  out.  No,  Sir,  he  was  irresistible. 2  He  upon 

^Johnson’s  London ,  a  Poem ,  v.  145. 

2Foote  told  me  that  Johnson  said  of  him,  “For 
loud  obstreperous  broad-faced  mirth,  I  know  not 
his  equal.” 


1776]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  319 


one  occasion  experienced,  in  an  extraordinary 
degree,  the  efficacy  of  his  powers  of  entertain¬ 
ing.  Amongst  the  many  and  various  modes  which 
he  tried  of  getting  money,  he  became  a  partner 
with  a  small-beer  brewer,  and  he  was  to  have 
a  share  of  the  profits  for  procuring  customers 
amongst  his  numerous  acquaintance.  Fitzher- 
bert  was  one  who  took  his  small-beer;  but  it  was 
so  bad  that  the  servants  resolved  not  to  drink  it. 
They  were  at  some  loss  how  to  notify  their  reso¬ 
lution,  being  afraid  of  offending  their  master, 
who  they  knew  liked  Foote  much  as  a  compan¬ 
ion.  At  last  they  fixed  upon  a  little  black  boy, 
who  was  rather  a  favourite,  to  be  their  deputy, 
and  deliver  their  remonstrance;  and  having  in¬ 
vested  him  with  the  whole  authority  of  the  kit¬ 
chen,  he  was  to  inform  Mr.  Fitzherbert,  in  all 
their  names,  upon  a  certain  day,  that  they  would 
drink  Foote’s  small-beer  no  longer.  On  that  day 
Foote  happened  to  dine  at  Fitzherbert’s,  and 
this  boy  served  at  table ;  he  was  so  delighted  with 
Foote’s  stories,  and  merriment,  and  grimace, 
that  when  he  went  down  stairs,  he  told  them, 
‘This  is  the  finest  man  I  have  ever  seen.  I  will 
not  deliver  your  message.  I  will  drink  his  small- 
beer.’” 

Somebody  observed  that  Garrick  could  not 
have  done  this.  Wilkes.  “Garrick  would  have 
made  the  small-beer  still  smaller.  He  is  now  leav¬ 
ing  the  stage;  but  he  will  play  Scrub  all  his  life.” 
I  knew  that  Johnson  would  let  nobody  attack 
Garrick  but  himself,  as  Garrick  once  said  to  me, 
and  I  had  heard  him  praise  his  liberality;  so  to 
bring  out  his  commendation  of  his  celebrated 
pupil,  I  said,  loudly,  “I  have  heard  Garrick  is 
liberal.”  Johnson.  “Yes,  Sir,  I  know  that  Gar¬ 
rick  has  given  away  more  money  than  any  man 
in  England  that  I  am  acquainted  with,  and  that 
not  from  ostentatious  views.  Garrick  was  very 
poor  when  he  began  life;  so  when  he  came  to 
have  money,  he  probably  was  very  unskilful  in 
giving  away,  and  saved  when  he  should  not.  But 
Garrick  began  to  be  liberal  as  soon  as  he  could; 
and  I  am  of  opinion,  the  reputation  of  avarice 
which  he  has  had,  has  been  very  lucky  for  him, 
and  prevented  his  having  many  enemies.  You 
despise  a  man  for  avarice,  but  do  not  hate  him. 
Garrick  might  have  been  much  better  attacked 
for  living  with  more  splendour  than  is  suitable 
to  a  player:  if  they  had  had  the  wit  to  have  as¬ 
saulted  him  in  that  quarter,  they  might  have 
galled  him  more.  But  they  have  kept  clamouring 
about  his  avarice,  which  has  rescued  him  from 
much  obloquy  and  envy.” 

Talking  of  the  great  difficulty  of  obtaining  au- 
thentick  information  for  biography,  Johnson  told 


us,  “When  I  was  a  young  fellow  I  wanted  to 
write  the  Life  of  Dry den ,  and  in  order  to  get  ma¬ 
terials,  I  applied  to  the  only  two  persons  then 
alive  who  had  seen  him;  these  were  old  Swin- 
ney,  and  old  Cibber.  Swinney’s  information  was 
no  more  than  this,  ‘That  at  Will’s  coffee-house 
Dryden  had  a  particular  chair  for  himself,  which 
was  set  by  the  fire  in  winter,  and  was  then  called 
his  winter-chair;  and  that  it  was  carried  out  for 
him  to  the  balcony  in  summer,  and  was  then 
called  his  summer-chair.’  Cibber  could  tell  no 
more  but  ‘That  he  remembered  him  a  decent 
old  man,  arbiter  of  critical  disputes  at  Will’s.’ 
You  are  to  consider  that  Cibber  was  then  at  a 
great  distance  from  Dryden,  had  perhaps  one 
leg  only  in  the  room,  and  durst  not  draw  in  the 
other.”  Boswell.  “Yet  Gibber  was  a  man  of  ob¬ 
servation?”  Johnson.  “I  think  not.”  Boswell. 
“You  will  allow  his  Apology  to  be  well  done.” 
Johnson.  “Very  well  done,  to  be  sure,  Sir.  That 
book  is  a  striking  proof  of  the  justice  of  Pope’s 
remark: 

Each  might  his  several  province  well  command ', 

Would  all  but  stoop  to  what  they  understand. 
Boswell.  “And  his  plays  are  good.”  Johnson. 
“Yes;  but  that  was  his  trade;  V esprit  du  corps:  he 
had  been  all  his  life  among  players  and  play- 
writers.  I  wondered  that  he  had  so  little  to  say  in 
conversation,  for  he  had  kept  the  best  company, 
and  learnt  all  that  can  be  got  by  the  ear.  He 
abused  Pindar  to  me,  and  then  shewed  me  an 
Ode  of  his  own,  with  an  absurd  couplet,  making 
a  linnet  soar  on  an  eagle’s  wing.1 1  told  him  that 
when  the  ancients  made  a  simile,  they  always 
made  it  like  something  real.” 

Mr.  Wilkes  remarked,  that  “among  all  the  bold 
flights  of  Shakspeare’s  imagination,  the  boldest 
was  making  Birnam-wood  march  to  Dunsinane; 
creating  a  wood  where  there  never  was  a  shrub; 
a  wood  in  Scotland!  ha!  ha!  ha!”  And  he  also 
observed,  that  “the  clannish  slavery  of  the  High¬ 
lands  of  Scotland  was  the  single  exception  to 
Milton’s  remark  of  ‘The  Mountain  Nymph, 
sweet  Liberty,’  being  worshipped  in  all  hilly 
countries.” — “When  I  was  at  Inverary  (said  he,) 
on  a  visit  to  my  old  friend,  Archibald,  Duke  of 
Argyle,  his  dependents  congratulated  me  on  be¬ 
ing  such  a  favourite  of  his  Grace.  I  said,  ‘It  is 
then,  gentlemen,  truely  lucky  for  me;  for  if  I  had 
displeased  the  Duke,  and  he  had  wished  it,  there 
is  not  a  Campbell  among  you  but  would  have 
been  ready  to  bring  John  Wilkes’s  head  to  him 
in  a  charger.  It  would  have  been  only 

Off  with  his  head!  So  much  for  Aylesbury. 

I  was  then  member  for  Aylesbury.” 

JSee  ante,  113. 


32° 

Dr.  Johnson  and  Mr.  Wilkes  talked  of  the  con¬ 
tested  passage  in  Horace’s  Art  of  Poetry ,  “ Difficile 
est proprie  communia  dicere .”  Mr.  Wilkes  according 
to  my  note,  gave  the  interpretation  thus;  “It 
is  difficult  to  speak  with  propriety  of  common 
things;  as,  if  a  poet  had  to  speak  of  Queen  Caro¬ 
line  drinking  tea,  he  must  endeavour  to  avoid 
the  vulgarity  of  cups  and  saucers.”  But  upon 
reading  my  note,  he  tells  me  that  he  meant  to 
say,  that  “the  word  communia ,  being  a  Roman 
law  term,  signifies  here  things  communis  juris , 
that  is  to  say,  what  have  never  yet  been  treated 
by  any  body;  and  this  appears  clearly  from 
what  followed, 

- Tuque 

Rectiits  Iliacum  carmen  deducis  in  actus , 

Quam  si  prof erres  ignota  indictaque  primus. 

You  will  easier  make  a  tragedy  out  of  the  Iliad 
than  on  any  subject  not  handled  before.”1  John- 

JMy  very  pleasant  friend  himself,  as  well  as  oth¬ 
ers  who  remember  old  stories ,  will  no  doubt  be  sur¬ 
prized,  when  I  observe  that  John  Wilkes  here  shews 
himself  to  be  of  the  Warburtonian  School.  It  is 
nevertheless  true,  as  appears  from  Dr.  Hurd  the 
Bishop  of  Worcester’s  very  elegant  commentary 
and  notes  on  the  Epistola  and  Pisones. 

It  is  necessary  to  a  fair  consideration  of  the  ques¬ 
tion,  that  the  whole  passage  in  which  the  words  oc¬ 
cur  should  be  kept  in  view: 

Si  quid  inexpertum  seems  committis ,  et  audes 
Personam  formare  novam ,  servetur  ad  imum 
Qualis  ab  incepto  processerit ,  et  sibi  constet. 

Difficile  est  proprie  communia  dicere :  tuque 
Rectiiis  Iliacum  carmen  deducis  in  actus , 

Quam  si  prof  erres  ignota  indictaque  primus . 
Publica  materies  privati  juris  erit ,  si 
Non  circa  vilem  patulumque  moraberis  orbem , 

Nec  verbum  verbo  curabis  reddere fidus 
Interpres ;  nec  desilies  imitator  in  artum 
Unde  pedem  proferre  pudor  vetet  aut  operis  lex . 

The  “Commentary”  thus  illustrates  it:  “But  the 
formation  of  quite  new  characters  is  a  work  of  great 
difficulty  and  hazard.  For  here  there  is  no  gener¬ 
ally  received  and  fixed  archetype  to  work  after,  but 
every  on  &  judges  of  common  right,  according  to  the 
extent  and  comprehension  of  his  own  idea;  there¬ 
fore  he  advises  to  labour  and  refit  old  characters  and 
subjects ,  particularly  those  made  known  and  au¬ 
thorised  by  the  practice  of  Homer  and  the  Epick 
writers.” 

The  “Note”  is, 

“ Difficile  est  proprie  communi  adicere.  Lam- 
bin’s  Comment  is,  £  Communia  hoc  loco  appellat  Hora - 
tius  argumenta  fabularum  a  nullo  adhuc  tr aetata:  et  ita, 
qua  cuivis  exposita  sunt  et  in  medio  quodammodo  posita , 
quasi  vacua  et  a.  nemine  occupataV  And  that  this  is  the 
true  meaning  of  communia  is  evidently  fixed  by  the 
words  ignota  indictaque ,  which  are  explanatory  of  it; 
so  that  the  sense  given  it  in  the  commentary  is  un¬ 
questionably  the  right  one.  Yet,  notwithstanding 
the  clearness  of  the  case,  a  late  critick  has  this 
strange  passage:  c Difficile  quidem  esse  proprie  commu¬ 
nia  dicere ,  hoc  est,  materiam  vulgarem ,  notam  et  e  medio 
petitam ,  ita  immutare  atque  exornare,  ut  nova  et  scriptori 


[  1776 

son.  “He  means  that  it  is  difficult  to  appropriate 
to  particular  persons  qualities  which  are  com¬ 
mon  to  all  mankind,  as  Homer  has  done.” 

Wilkes.  “We  have  no  City-Poet  now:  that  is 
an  office  which  has  gone  into  disuse.  The  last 
was  Elkanah  Settle.  There  is  something  in  names 
which  one  cannot  help  feeling.  Now  Elkanah  Set¬ 
tle  sounds  so  queer ,  who  can  expect  much  from 
that  name?  We  should  have  no  hesitation  to 
give  it  for  John  Dryden,  in  preference  to  Elkanah 
Settle,  from  the  names  only,  without  knowing 
their  different  merits.”  Johnson.  “I  suppose,  Sir, 
Settle  did  as  well  for  Aldermen  in  his  time,  as 
John  Home  could  do  now.  Where  did  Beckford 
and  Trecothick  learn  English?” 

propria  videatur,  ultra  concedimus;  et  maximi  procul  du- 
bio  ponderis  ista  est  observatio .  Sed  omnibus  utrinque  col- 
latis ,  et  turn  difficilis,  turn  venusti ,  tamjudicii  quam  inge¬ 
nii  ratione  habita ,  major  videtur  esse  gloria  fabulam  for¬ 
mare  penitus  novam ,  quam  veterem,  utcunque  mutatam ,  de 
novo  exhiberel  (Poet.  Prael.  v.  ii,  p.  164.)  Where, 
having  first  put  a  wrong  construction  on  the  word 
communia ,  he  employs  it  to  introduce  an  imperti¬ 
nent  criticism.  For  where  does  the  poet  prefer  the 
glory  of  refitting  old  subjects  to  that  of  inventing 
new  ones?  The  contrary  is  implied  in  what  he  urges 
about  the  superiour  difficulty  of  the  latter,  from 
which  he  dissuades  his  countrymen,  only  in  re¬ 
spect  of  their  abilities  and  inexperience  in  these 
matters;  and  in  order  to  cultivate  in  them,  which 
is  the  main  view  of  the  Epistle,  a  spirit  of  correct¬ 
ness,  by  sending  them  to  the  old  subjects,  treated 
by  the  Greek  writers.” 

For  my  own  part  (with  all  deference  for  Dr. 
Hurd,  who  thinks  the  case  clear,)  I  consider  the  pas¬ 
sage,  “ Difficile  est  proprie  communia  dicere to  be  a 
crux  for  the  criticks  on  Horace. 

The  explication  which  My  Lord  of  Worcester 
treats  with  so  much  contempt,  is  nevertheless  coun¬ 
tenanced  by  authority  which  I  find  quoted  by  the 
learned  Baxter  in  his  edition  of  Horace:  “ Difficile 
est  proprie  communia  dicere ,  h.  e.  res  vulgares  disertis 
verbis  enarrare,  vel  humile  thema  cum  dignitate 
tractare.  Difficile  est  communes  res  propriis  explicare  ver¬ 
bis.  Vet.  Schol.”  I  was  much  disappointed  to  find 
that  the  great  critick,  Dr.  Bentley,  has  no  note  upon 
this  very  difficult  passage,  as  from  his  vigorous  and 
illuminated  mind  I  should  have  expected  to  re¬ 
ceive  more  satisfaction  than  I  have  yet  had. 

Sanadon  thus  treats  of  it:  “ Proprie  communia  dicere; 
Vest  a  dire ,  qriil  riest  pas  aise  de  former  a  ces  person- 
nages  d'  imagination,  des  caracteres  particuliers  et  cepen- 
dant  vraisemblables.  Comme  Von  a  ete  le  maitre  de  les for¬ 
mer  tels  qrion  a  voulu ,  les  jautes  que  Von  fait  en  cela  sont 
moins  pardonnables .  C'est  pourquoi  Horace  conseille  de 
prendre  toujours  des  sujets  connus  tels  que  sont  par  exem- 
ple  ceux  que  Von  peut  tirer  des  poemes  dl Homer e.” 

And  Dacier  observes  upon  it,  iCApres  avoir  marque 
les  deux  qualites  qriil  faut  donner  aux  personnages  qrion 
invente,  il  conseille  aux  Poetes  tragiques,  de  rinser  pas 
trop  facilement  de  cette  liberte  qriils  ont  d’ en  inventer ,  car 
il  est  tres  difficile  de  reussir  dans  ces  nouveaux  caracteres. 
II  est  mal  aise,  dit  Horace,  de  traiter  proprement,  Vest 
a  dire  convenablement,  des  sujets  communs;  Vest  a 
dire ,  des  sujets  inventes,  et  qui  riont  aucun  fondement  ni 


BOSWELL 


1776]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


Mr.  Arthur  Lee  mentioned  some  Scotch  who 
had  taken  possession  of  a  barren  part  of  Ameri¬ 
ca,  and  wondered  why  they  should  choose  it. 
Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  all  barrenness  is  compara¬ 
tive.  The  Scotch  would  not  know  it  to  be  barren.” 
Boswell.  “Gome,  come,  he  is  flattering  the  Eng¬ 
lish.  You  have  now  been  in  Scotland,  Sir,  and 
say  if  you  did  not  see  meat  and  drink  enough 
there.”  Johnson.  “Why  yes,  Sir;  meat  and  drink 
enough  to  give  the  inhabitants  sufficient  strength 
to  run  away  from  home.”  All  these  quick  and 
lively  sallies  were  said  sportively,  quite  in  jest, 
and  with  a  smile,  which  shewed  that  he  meant 
only  wit.  Upon  this  topick  he  and  Mr.  Wilkes 
could  perfectly  assimilate;  here  was  a  bond  of 
union  between  them,  and  I  was  conscious  that 
as  both  of  them  had  visited  Caledonia,  both 
were  fully  satisfied  of  the  strange  narrow  ignor¬ 
ance  of  those  who  imagine  that  it  is  a  land  of 
famine.  But  they  amused  themselves  with  perse¬ 
vering  in  the  old  jokes.  When  I  claimed  a  su¬ 
periority  for  Scotland  over  England  in  one  re¬ 
spect,  that  no  man  can  be  arrested  there  for  a 
debt  merely  because  another  swears  it  against 
him;  but  there  must  first  be  the  judgement  of  a 
court  of  law  ascertaining  its  justice;  and  that  a 
seizure  of  the  person,  before  judgement  is  ob¬ 
tained,  can  take  place  only,  if  his  creditor  should 
swear  that  he  is  about  to  fly  from  the  country, 
or,  as  it  is  technically  expressed,  is  in  meditatione 
fuga:  Wilkes.  “That,  I  should  think,  may  be 
safely  sworn  of  all  the  Scotch  nation.”  Johnson. 

dans  VHistoire  ni  dans  la  Fable;  et  il  les  appelle  com- 
muns,  parce  qitils  sont  en  disposition  a  tout  le  monde ,  et 
que  tout  le  monde  a  le  droit  de  les  inventer ,  et  qu'ils  sont , 
comme  on  dit ,  au  premier  occupant .”  See  his  observa¬ 
tions  at  large  on  this  expression  and  the  following. 

After  all,  I  cannot  help  entertaining  some  doubt 
whether  the  words,  Difficile  est  proprie  communia  di- 
cere ,  may  not  have  been  thrown  in  by  Horace  to 
form  a  separate  article  in  a  “choice  of  difficulties” 
which  a  poet  has  to  encounter,  who  chooses  a  new 
subject;  in  which  case  it  must  be  uncertain  which 
of  the  various  explanations  is  the  true  one,  and 
every  reader  has  a  right  to  decide  as  it  may  strike 
his  own  fancy.  And  even  should  the  words  be  un¬ 
derstood  as  they  generally  are,  to  be  connected 
both  with  what  goes  before  and  what  comes  after, 
the  exact  sense  cannot  be  absolutely  ascertained; 
for  instance,  whether  proprie  is  meant  to  signify  in 
an  appropriated  manner ,  as  Dr.  Johnson  here  under¬ 
stands  it,  or,  as  it  is  often  used  by  Cicero,  with  pro¬ 
priety ,  or  elegantly .  In  short,  it  is  a  rare  instance  of  a 
defect  in  perspicuity  in  an  admirable  writer,  who 
with  almost  every  species  of  excellence,  is  peculiar¬ 
ly  remarkable  for  that  quality.  The  length  of  this 
note  perhaps  requires  an  apology.  Many  of  my 
readers,  I  doubt  not,  will  admit  that  a  critical  dis¬ 
cussion  of  a  passage  in  a  favourite  classick  is  very 
engaging.  [Boswell’s  French  in  this  note  is  left  as 
he  printed  it.] 


(to  Mr.  Wilkes,)  “You  must  know,  Sir,  I  lately 
took  my  friend  Boswell  and  shewed  him  genuine 
civilised  life  in  an  English  provincial  town.  I 
turned  him  loose  at  Lichfield,  my  native  city, 
that  he  might  see  for  once  real  civility:  for  you 
know  he  lives  among  savages  in  Scotland,  and 
among  rakes  in  London.”  Wilkes.  “Except 
when  he  is  with  grave,  sober,  decent  people  like 
you  and  me.”  Johnson,  (smiling,)  “And  we 
ashamed  of  him.” 

They  were  quite  frank  and  easy.  Johnson  told 
the  story  of  his  asking  Mrs.  Macaulay  to  allow 
her  footman  to  sit  down  with  them,  to  prove  the 
ridiculousness  of  the  argument  for  the  equality 
of  mankind;  and  he  said  to  me  afterwards,  with 
a  nod  of  satisfaction,  “You  saw  Mr.  Wilkes  ac¬ 
quiesced.”  Wilkes  talked  with  all  imaginable 
freedom  of  the  ludicrous  title  given  to  the  At¬ 
torney-General,  Diabolus  Regis;  adding,  “I  have 
reason  to  know  something  about  that  officer;  for 
I  was  prosecuted  for  a  libel.”  Johnson,  who  many 
people  would  have  supposed  must  have  been  furi¬ 
ously  angry  at  hearing  this  talked  of  so  lightly, 
said  not  a  word.  He  was  now,  indeed ,  “a  good- 
humoured  fellow.” 

After  dinner  we  had  an  accession  of  Mrs. 
Knowles,  the  Quaker  lady,  well  known  for  her 
various  talents,  and  of  Mr.  Alderman  Lee.  Amidst 
some  patriotick  groans,  somebody  (I  think  the 
Alderman)  said,  “Poor  old  England  is  lost.” 
Johnson.  “Sir,  it  is  not  so  much  to  be  lamented 
that  Old  England  is  lost,  as  that  the  Scotch  have 
found  it.”1  Wilkes.  “Had  Lord  Bute  governed 
Scotland  only,  I  should  not  have  taken  the  trou¬ 
ble  to  write  his  eulogy,  and  dedicate  Mortimer  to 
him.” 

Mr.  Wilkes  held  a  candle  to  shew  a  fine  print 
of  a  beautiful  female  figure  which  hung  in  the 
room,  and  pointed  out  the  elegant  contour  of 
the  bosom  with  the  finger  of  an  arch  con¬ 
noisseur.  He  afterwards,  in  a  conversation  with 
me,  waggishly  insisted,  that  all  the  time  John¬ 
son  shewed  visible  signs  of  a  fervent  admira¬ 
tion  of  the  corresponding  charms  of  the  fair 
Quaker. 

This  record,  though  by  no  means  so  perfect  as 
I  could  wish,  will  serve  to  give  a  notion  of  a  very 
curious  interview,  which  was  not  only  pleasing 
at  the  time,  but  had  the  agreeable  and  benignant 
effect  of  reconciling  any  animosity,  and  sweet¬ 
ening  any  acidity,  which  in  the  various  bustle  of 
political  contest,  had  been  produced  in  the  minds 
of  two  men,  who  though  widely  different,  had 

JIt  would  not  become  me  to  expatiate  on  this 
strong  and  pointed  remark,  in  which  a  very  great 
deal  of  meaning  is  condensed. 


322  BOSWELL  [  1776 

so  many  things  in  common — classical  learning,  I  admit  that  the  beadle  within  him  was  often  so 


modern  literature,  wit,  and  humour,  and  ready 
repartee — that  it  would  have  been  much  to  be 
regretted  if  they  had  been  for  ever  at  a  distance 
from  each  other. 

Mr.  Burke  gave  me  much  credit  for  this  suc¬ 
cessful  negotiation;  and  pleasantly  said,  that<cthere 
was  nothing  to  equal  it  in  the  whole  history  of 
the  Corps  Diplomatique .” 

I  attended  Dr.  Johnson  home,  and  had  the 
satisfaction  to  hear  him  tell  Mrs.  Williams  how 
much  he  had  been  pleased  with  Mr.  Wilkes’s 
company,  and  what  an  agreeable  day  he  had 
passed. 

I  talked  a  good  deal  to  him  of  the  celebrated 
Margaret  Caroline  Rudd,  whom  I  had  visited, 
induced  by  the  fame  of  her  talents,  address,  and 
irresistible  power  of  fascination.  To  a  lady  who 
disapproved  of  my  visiting  her,  he  said  on  a  for¬ 
mer  occasion,  “Nay,  Madam,  Boswell  is  in  the 
right;  I  should  have  visited  her  myself,  were  it 
not  that  they  have  now  a  trick  of  putting  every 
thing  into  the  news-papers.”  This  evening  he 
exclaimed,  £T  envy  him  his  acquaintance  with 
Mrs.  Rudd.” 

I  mentioned  a  scheme  which  I  had  of  making 
a  tour  to  the  Isle  of  Man,  and  giving  a  full  ac¬ 
count  of  it;  and  that  Mr.  Burke  had  playfully 
suggested  as  a  motto, 

The  proper  study  of  mankind  is  Man. 

Johnson.  “Sir,  you  will  get  more  by  the  book 
than  the  jaunt  will  cost  you;  so  you  will  have 
your  diversion  for  nothing,  and  add  to  your  rep¬ 
utation.” 

On  the  evening  of  the  next  day  I  took  leave  of 
him,  being  to  set  out  for  Scotland.  I  thanked  him 
with  great  warmth  for  all  his  kindness.  “Sir, 
(said  he,)  you  are  very  welcome.  Nobody  repays 
it  with  more.” 

How  very  false  is  the  notion  which  has  gone 
round  the  world  of  the  rough,  and  passionate, 
and  harsh  manners  of  this  great  and  good  man. 
That  he  had  occasional  sallies  of  heat  of  temper, 
and  that  he  was  sometimes,  perhaps,  too  “easily 
provoked”  by  absurdity  and  folly,  and  some¬ 
times  too  desirous  of  triumph  in  colloquial  con¬ 
test,  must  be  allowed.  The  quickness  both  of  his 
perception  and  sensibility  disposed  him  to  sud¬ 
den  explosions  of  satire;  to  which  his  extraordi¬ 
nary  readiness  of  wit  was  a  strong  and  almost 
irresistible  incitement.  To  adopt  one  of  the  finest 
images  in  Mr.  Home’s  Douglas , 

On  each  glance  of  thought 
Decision  followed,  as  the  thunderbolt 
Pursues  the  flash! 


eager  to  apply  the  lash,  that  the  Judge  had  not 
time  to  consider  the  case  with  sufficient  deliber¬ 
ation. 

That  he  was  occasionally  remarkable  for  vio¬ 
lence  of  temper  may  be  granted:  but  let  us  ascer¬ 
tain  the  degree,  and  not  let  it  be  supposed  that 
he  was  in  a  perpetual  rage,  and  never  without  a 
club  in  his  hand,  to  knock  down  every  one  who 
approached  him.  On  the  contrary,  the  truth  is, 
that  by  much  the  greatest  part  of  his  time  he  was 
civil,  obliging,  nay,  polite  in  the  true  sense  of  the 
word;  so  much  so,  that  many  gentlemen,  who 
were  long  acquainted  with  him,  never  received, 
or  even  heard  a  strong  expression  from  him. 

The  following  letters  concerning  an  Epitaph 
which  he  wrote  for  the  monument  of  Dr.  Gold¬ 
smith,  in  Westminster-Abbey,  afford  at  once  a 
proof  of  his  unaffected  modesty,  his  carelessness 
as  to  his  own  writings,  and  of  the  great  respect 
which  he  entertained  for  the  taste  and  judge¬ 
ment  of  the  excellent  and  eminent  person  to 
whom  they  are  addressed: 

To  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds 

Dear  Sir,  I  have  been  kept  away  from  you,  I 
know  not  well  how,  and  of  these  vexatious  hin¬ 
drances  I  know  not  when  there  will  be  an  end.  I 
therefore  send  you  the  poor  dear  Doctor’s  epi¬ 
taph.  Read  it  first  yourself;  and  if  you  then  think 
it  right,  shew  it  to  the  Club.  I  am,  you  know, 
willing  to  be  corrected.  If  you  think  any  thing 
much  amiss,  keep  it  to  yourself,  till  we  come  to¬ 
gether.  I  have  sent  two  copies,  but  prefer  the 
card.  The  dates  must  be  settled  by  Dr.  Percy.  I 
am,  Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

May  16,  1776 

To  the  Same 

Sir,  Miss  Reynolds  has  a  mind  to  send  the 
Epitaph  to  Dr.  Beattie;  I  am  very  willing,  but 
having  no  copy,  cannot  immediately  recollect 
it.  She  tells  me  you  have  lost  it.  Try  to  recollect 
and  put  down  as  much  as  you  retain;  you  per¬ 
haps  may  have  kept  what  I  have  dropped.  The 
lines  for  which  I  am  at  a  loss  are  something  of 
rerum  civilium  sive  naturalium.1  It  was  a  sorry  trick 
to  lose  it;  help  me  if  you  can.  I  am,  Sir,  your 
most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

June  22,  1776 

The  gout  grows  better  but  slowly. 

It  was,  I  think,  after  I  had  left  London  this 
year,  that  this  Epitaph  gave  occasion  to  a  Re¬ 
monstrance  to  the  Monarch  of  Literature,  for 

1These  words  must  have  been  in  the  other  copy. 
They  are  not  in  that  which  was  preferred. 


1 776] 

an  account  of  which  I  am  indebted  to  Sir  Wil¬ 
liam  Forbes,  of  Pitsligo. 

That  my  readers  may  have  the  subject  more 
fully  and  clearly  before  them,  I  shall  first  insert 
the  Epitaph. 

Olivarii  Goldsmith, 

Poetce ,  Physici ,  Historici , 

Qui  nullum  fere  scribendi  genus 
Non  tetigit, 

Nullum  quod  tetigit  non  ornavit: 

Sive  risus  essent  movendi , 

Sive  lacrymce, 

Aflectuum  potens  at  lenis  dominator: 

Ingenio  sublimis,  vividus,  versatilis , 

Oratione  grandis ,  nitidus ,  venustus: 

Hoc  monumento  memoriam  coluit 
Sodalium  amor , 

Amicorum  fides , 

Lector um  verier atio. 

Natus  in  Hibernia  For  nice  Longfordiensis , 

In  loco  cui  nomen  Pallas , 

Nov.  xxix.  mdccxxxi; 

Eb lance  literis  institutus ; 

Obiit  Londini , 

April  iv,  mdcclxxiv. 

Sir  William  Forbes  writes  to  me  thus: 

“I  enclose  the  Round  Robin.  This  jeu  d’ esprit 
took  its  rise  one  day  at  dinner  at  our  friend  Sir 
Joshua  Reynolds’s.  All  the  company  present,  ex¬ 
cept  myself,  were  friends  and  acquaintance  of 
Dr.  Goldsmith.  The  Epitaph,  written  for  him  by 
Dr.  Johnson,  became  the  subject  of  conversation, 
and  various  emendations  were  suggested,  which 
it  was  agreed  should  be  submitted  to  the  Doc¬ 
tor’s  consideration.  But  the  question  was,  who 
should  have  the  courage  to  propose  them  to  him? 
At  last  it  was  hinted,  that  there  could  be  no  way 
so  good  as  that  of  a  Round  Robin ,  as  the  sailors 
call  it,  which  they  make  use  of  when  they  enter 
into  a  conspiracy,  so  as  not  to  let  it  be  known 
who  puts  his  name  first  or  last  to  the  paper.  This 
proposition  was  instantly  assented  to;  and  Dr. 
Barnard,  Dean  of  Derry,  now  Bishop  of  Killaloe, 
drew  up  an  address  to  Dr.  Johnson  on  the  occa¬ 
sion,  replete  with  wit  and  humour,  but  which  it 
was  feared  the  Doctor  might  think  treated  the 
subject  with  too  much  levity.  Mr.  Burke  then  pro¬ 
posed  the  address  as  it  stands  in  the  paper  in  writ¬ 
ing,  to  which  I  had  the  honour  to  officiate  as  clerk. 

“Sir  Joshua  agreed  to  carry  it  to  Dr.  Johnson, 
who  received  it  with  much  good  humour,1  and 
desired  Sir  Joshua  to  tell  the  gentlemen,  that  he 
lHe  however,  upon  seeing  Dr.  Warton’s  name 
to  the  suggestion,  that  the  Epitaph  should  be  in 
English,  observed  to  Sir  Joshua,  “I  wonder  that 
Joe  Warton,  a  scholar  by  profession,  should  be  such 
a  fool.”  He  said  too,  “I  should  have  thought  Mund 
Burke  would  have  had  more  sense.”  Mr.  Langton, 


323 

would  alter  the  Epitaph  in  any  manner  they 
pleased,  as  to  the  sense  of  it;  but  he  would  never 
consent  to  disgrace  the  walls  of  Westminster  Abbey 
with  an  English  inscription. 

eeI  consider  this  Round  Robin  as  a  species  of 
literary  curiosity  worth  preserving,  as  it  marks, 
in  a  certain  degree,  Dr.  Johnson’s  character.” 

My  readers  are  presented  with  a  faithful  tran¬ 
script  of  a  paper,  which  I  doubt  not  of  their  be¬ 
ing  desirous  to  see.2 

Sir  William  Forbes’s  observation  is  very  just. 
The  anecdote  now  related  proves,  in  the  strong¬ 
est  manner,  the  reverence  and  awe  with  which 
Johnson  was  regarded,  by  some  of  the  most  emi¬ 
nent  men  of  his  time,  in  various  departments, 
and  even  by  such  of  them  as  lived  most  with 
him;  while  it  also  confirms  what  I  have  again 
and  again  inculcated,  that  he  was  by  no  means 
of  that  ferocious  and  irascible  character  which 
has  been  ignorantly  imagined. 

This  hasty  composition  is  also  to  be  remarked 
as  one  of  a  thousand  instances  which  evince  the 
extraordinary  promptitude  of  Mr.  Burke;  who 
while  he  is  equal  to  the  greatest  things,  can  adorn 

who  was  one  of  the  company  at  Sir  Joshua’s,  like 
a  sturdy  scholar,  resolutely  refused  to  sign  the 
Round  Robin.  The  Epitaph  is  engraved  upon  Dr. 
Goldsmith’s  monument  without  any  alteration.  At 
another  time,  when  somebody  endeavoured  to  ar¬ 
gue  in  favour  of  its  being  in  English,  Johnson  said, 
“The  language  of  the  country  of  which  a  learned 
man  was  a  native,  is  not  the  language  fit  for  his 
epitaph,  which  should  be  in  ancient  and  perma¬ 
nent  language.  Consider,  Sir;  how  you  should  feel, 
were  you  to  find  at  Rotterdam  an  epitaph  upon 
Erasmus  in  Dutch!”  For  my  own  part  I  think  it 
would  be  best  to  have  Epitaphs  written  both  in  a 
learned  language,  and  in  the  language  of  the  coun¬ 
try;  so  that  they  might  have  the  advantage  of  be¬ 
ing  more  universally  understood,  and  at  the  same 
time  be  secured  of  classical  stability.  I  cannot, 
however,  but  be  of  opinion,  that  it  is  not  sufficient¬ 
ly  discriminative.  Applying  to  Goldsmith  equally 
the  epithets  of  “ Poetce ,  Historici ,  Physici”  is  surely 
not  right;  for  as  to  his  claim  to  the  last  of  those  epi¬ 
thets,  I  have  heard  Johnson  himself  say,  “Gold¬ 
smith,  Sir,  will  give  us  a  very  fine  book  upon  the 
subject;  but  if  he  can  distinguish  a  cow  from  a 
horse,  that  I  believe,  may  be  the  extent  of  his 
knowledge  of  natural  history.”  His  book  is  indeed 
an  excellent  performance,  though  in  some  instances 
he  appears  to  have  trusted  too  much  to  Buffon, 
who,  with  all  his  theoretical  ingenuity  and  extra¬ 
ordinary  eloquence,  I  suspect  had  little  actual  in¬ 
formation  in  the  science  on  which  he  wrote  so  ad¬ 
mirably.  For  instance,  he  tells  us  that  the  cow  sheds 
her  horns  every  two  years;  a  most  palpable  errour, 
which  Goldsmith  has  faithfully  transferred  into  his 
book.  It  is  wonderful  that  Buffon,  who  lived  so 
much  in  the  country,  at  his  noble  seat,  should  have 
fallen  into  such  a  blunder.  I  suppose  he  has  con¬ 
founded  the  cow  with  the  deer. 

2Omitted  in  this  edition . — Ed. 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


324 

the  least;  can,  with  equal  facility,  embrace  the 
vast  and  complicated  speculations  of  politicks,  or 
the  ingenious  topicks  of  literary  investigation.1 

Dr.  Johnson  to  Mrs.  Boswell 

Madam,  You  must  not  think  me  uncivil  in 
omitting  to  answer  the  letter  with  which  you  fa¬ 
voured  me  some  time  ago.  I  imagined  it  to  have 
been  written  without  Mr.  Boswell’s  knowledge, 
and  therefore  supposed  the  answer  to  require, 
what  I  could  not  find,  a  private  conveyance. 

The  difference  with  Lord  Auchinleck  is  now 
over;  and  since  young  Alexander  has  appeared, 
I  hope  no  more  difficulties  will  arise  among 
you;  for  I  sincerely  wish  you  all  happy.  Do  not 
teach  the  young  ones  to  dislike  me,  as  you  dis¬ 
like  me  yourself;  but  let  me  at  least  have  Veron¬ 
ica’s  kindness,  because  she  is  my  acquaintance. 

You  will  now  have  Mr.  Boswell  home,  it  is 
well  that  you  have  him;  he  has  led  a  wild  life.  I 
have  taken  him  to  Lichfield,  and  he  has  fol¬ 
lowed  Mr.  Thrale  to  Bath.  Pray  take  care  of 
him,  and  tame  him.  The  only  thing  in  which  I 
have  the  honour  to  agree  with  you  is,  in  loving 
him;  and  while  we  are  so  much  of  a  mind  in  a 
matter  of  so  much  importance,  our  other  quar¬ 
rels  will,  I  hope,  produce  no  great  bitterness.  I 
am,  Madam,  your  most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

May  1 6,  1776 

Mr.  Boswell  to  Dr.  Johnson 

Edinburgh,  June  25,  1776 

You  have  formerly  complained  that  my  let¬ 
ters  were  too  long.  There  is  no  danger  of  that 
complaint  being  made  at  present;  for  I  find  it 
difficult  for  me  to  write  to  you  at  all.  [Here  an 
account  of  having  been  afflicted  with  a  return 
of  melancholy  or  bad  spirits.] 

The  boxes  of  books2  which  you  sent  to  me  are 
arrived;  but  I  have  not  yet  examined  the  con¬ 
tents.  .  .  . 

I  send  you  Mr.  Maclaurin’s  paper  for  the  ne¬ 
gro,  who  claims  his  freedom  in  the  Court  of 
Session. 

Dr.  Johnson  to  Mr.  Boswell 

Dear  Sir,  These  black  fits,  of  which  you  com¬ 
plain,  perhaps  hurt  your  memory  as  well  as 
your  imagination.  When  did  I  complain  that 
your  letters  were  too  long?3  Your  last  letter,  af¬ 
ter  a  very  long  delay,  brought  very  bad  news. 

Reside  this  Latin  Epitaph,  Johnson  honoured 
the  memory  of  his  friend  Goldsmith  with  a  short 
one  in  Greek.  See  ante,  July  5,  1774. 

2Upon  a  settlement  of  our  account  of  expences 
on  a  Tour  to  the  Hebrides,  there  was  a  balance 
due  to  me,  which  Dr.  Johnson  chose  to  discharge 
by  sending  books. 

3Baretti  told  me  that  Johnson  complained  of  my 
writing  very  long  letters  to  him  when  I  was  upon 
the  continent;  which  was  most  certainly  true;  but 
it  seems  my  friend  did  not  remember  it. 


[  1776 

[Here  a  series  of  reflections  upon  melancholy 
and — what  1  could  not  help  thinking  strangely 
unreasonable  in  him  who  had  suffered  so  much 
from  it  himself, — a  good  deal  of  severity  and  re¬ 
proof,  as  if  it  were  owing  to  my  own  fault,  or 
that  I  was,  perhaps,  affecting  it  from  a  desire  of 
distinction.] 

Read  Cheyne’s  English  Malady ;  but  do  not  let 
him  teach  you  a  foolish  notion  that  melancholy 
is  a  proof  of  acuteness.  .  .  . 

To  hear  that  you  have  not  opened  your  boxes 
of  books  is  very  offensive.  The  examination  and 
arrangement  of  so  many  volumes  might  have 
afforded  you  an  amusement  very  seasonable  at 
present,  and  useful  for  the  whole  of  life.  I  am, 
I  confess,  very  angry  that  you  manage  yourself 
so  ill.  .  .  . 

I  do  not  now  say  any  more,  than  that  I  am, 
with  great  kindness,  and  sincerity,  dear  Sir, 
your  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

July  2,  1776 

It  was  last  year  determined  by  Lord  Mans¬ 
field,  in  the  Court  of  King’s  Bench,  that  a  negro 
cannot  be  taken  out  of  the  kingdom  without  his 
own  consent. 

Dr.  Johnson  to  Mr.  Boswell 

Dear  Sir,  I  make  haste  to  write  again,  lest 
my  last  letter  should  give  you  too  much  pain.  If 
you  are  really  oppressed  with  overpowering  and 
involuntary  melancholy,  you  are  to  be  pitied 
rather  than  reproached.  .  .  . 

Now,  my  dear  Bozzy,  let  us  have  done  with 
quarrels  and  with  censure.  Let  me  know  wheth¬ 
er  I  have  not  sent  you  a  pretty  library.  There 
are,  perhaps,  many  books  among  them  which 
you  never  need  read  through;  but  there  are 
none  which  it  is  not  proper  for  you  to  know,  and 
sometimes  to  consult.  Of  these  books,  of  which 
the  use  is  only  occasional,  it  is  often  sufficient  to 
know  the  contents,  that,  when  any  question 
arises,  you  may  know  where  to  look  for  infor¬ 
mation. 

Since  I  wrote,  I  have  looked  over  Mr.  Mac¬ 
laurin’s  plea,  and  think  it  excellent.  How  is  the 
suit  carried  on?  If  by  subscription,  I  commission 
you  to  contribute,  in  my  name,  what  is  proper. 
Let  nothing  be  wanting  in  such  a  case.  Dr. 
Drummond,4  I  see,  is  superseded.  His  father 
would  have  grieved;  but  he  lived  to  obtain  the 
pleasure  of  his  son’s  election,  and  died  before 
that  pleasure  was  abated. 

Langton’s  lady  has  brought  him  a  girl,  and 
both  are  well;  I  dined  with  him  the  other  day. . . . 

4The  son  of  Johnson’s  old  friend,  Mr.  William 
Drummond.  (See  pp.  151-2.)  He  was  a  young 
man  of  such  distinguished  merit,  that  he  was 
nominated  to  one  of  the  medical  professorships 
in  the  College  of  Edinburgh  without  solicitation 
while  he  was  at  Naples.  Having  other  views,  he  did 
not  accept  of  the  honour,  and  soon  afterwards  died. 


BOSWELL 


1776] 

It  vexes  me  to  tell  you,  that  on  the  evening  of 
the  29th  of  May  I  was  seized  by  the  gout,  and 
am  not  quite  well.  The  pain  has  not  been  vio¬ 
lent,  but  the  weakness  and  tenderness  were  very 
troublesome,  and  what  is  said  to  be  very  uncom¬ 
mon,  it  has  not  alleviated  my  other  disorders. 
Make  use  of  youth  and  health  while  you  have 
them;  make  my  compliments  to  Mrs.  Boswell. 
I  am,  my  dear  Sir,  your  most  affectionate, 

Sam.  Johnson 

July  6,  1776 

Mr.  Boswell  to  Dr.  Johnson 

Edinburgh,  July  18,  1776 

My  Dear  Sir,  Your  letter  of  the  second  of 
this  month  was  rather  a  harsh  medicine;  but  I 
was  delighted  with  that  spontaneous  tenderness, 
which,  a  few  days  afterwards,  sent  forth  such 
balsam  as  your  next  brought  me.  I  found  myself 
for  some  time  so  ill  that  all  I  could  do  was  to 
preserve  a  decent  appearance,  while  all  within 
was  weakness  and  distress.  Like  a  reduced  garri¬ 
son  that  has  some  spirit  left,  I  hung  out  flags, 
and  planted  all  the  force  I  could  muster,  upon 
the  walls.  I  am  now  much  better,  and  I  sincere¬ 
ly  thank  you  for  your  kind  attention  and  friend¬ 
ly  counsel.  .  .  . 

Count  Manucci1  came  here  last  week  from 
travelling  in  Ireland.  I  have  shewn  him  what 
civilities  I  could  on  his  own  account,  on  your’s, 
and  on  that  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Thrale.  He  has  had 
a  fall  from  his  horse,  and  been  much  hurt.  I  re¬ 
gret  this  unlucky  accident,  for  he  seems  to  be  a 
very  amiable  man. 

As  the  evidence  of  what  I  have  mentioned  at 
the  beginning  of  this  year,  I  select  from  his  pri¬ 
vate  register  the  following  passage: 

“July  25,  1776.  O  God,  who  hast  ordained 
that  whatever  is  to  be  desired  should  be  sought 
by  labour,  and  who,  by  thy  blessing,  bringest 
honest  labour  to  good  effect,  look  with  mercy 
upon  my  studies  and  endeavours.  Grant  me,  O 
Lord,  to  design  only  what  is  lawful  and  right; 
and  afford  me  calmness  of  mind,  and  steadiness 
of  purpose,  that  I  may  so  do  thy  will  in  this  short 
life,  as  to  obtain  happiness  in  the  world  to  come, 
for  the  sake  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  Amen.55 

It  appears  from  a  note  subjoined,  that  this  was 
composed  when  he  “purposed  to  apply  vigor¬ 
ously  to  study,  particularly  of  the  Greek  and 
Italian  tongues.55 

Such  a  purpose,  so  expressed,  at  the  age  of 
sixty-seven,  is  admirable  and  encouraging;  and 
it  must  impress  all  the  thinking  part  of  my  read¬ 
ers  with  a  consolatory  confidence  in  habitual 

1A  Florentine  nobleman,  mentioned  by  Johnson 
in  his  Notes  of  his  Tour  in  France.  I  had  the  pleasure 
of  becoming  acquainted  with  him  in  London,  in  the 
spring  of  this  year. 


325 

devotion,  when  they  see  a  man  of  such  enlarged 
intellectual  powers  as  Johnson,  thus  in  the  genu¬ 
ine  earnestness  of  secrecy,  imploring  the  aid  of 
that  Supreme  Being,  “from  whom  cometh  down 
every  good  and  every  perfect  gift.55 

To  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds 

Sir,  A  young  man,  whose  name  is  Paterson, 
offers  himself  this  evening  to  the  Academy.  He 
is  the  son  of  a  man  for  whom  I  have  long  had  a 
kindness,  and  who  is  now  abroad  in  distress.  I 
shall  be  glad  that  you  will  be  pleased  to  shew  him 
any  little  countenance,  or  pay  him  any  small 
distinction.  How  much  it  is  in  your  power  to  fa¬ 
vour  or  to  forward  a  young  man  I  do  not  know; 
nor  do  I  know  how  much  this  candidate  de¬ 
serves  favour  by  his  personal  merit,  or  what 
hopes  his  proficiency  may  now  give  of  future 
eminence.  I  recommend  him  as  the  son  of  my 
friend.  Your  character  and  station  enable  you 
to  give  a  young  man  great  encouragement  by 
very  easy  means.  You  have  heard  of  a  man  who 
asked  no  other  favour  of  Sir  Robert  Walpole, 
than  that  he  would  bow  to  him  at  his  levee.  I 
am,  Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

Aug.  3,  1776 

Mr.  Boswell  to  Dr.  Johnson 

Edinburgh,  August  30,  1776 

[After  giving  him  an  account  of  my  having 
examined  the  chests  of  books  which  he  had  sent 
to  me,  and  which  contained  what  may  be  truely 
called  a  numerous  and  miscellaneous  Stall  Li¬ 
brary ,  thrown  together  at  random: — ] 

Lord  Hailes  was  against  the  decree  in  the  case 
of  my  client,  the  minister;  not  that  he  justified 
the  minister,  but  because  the  parishioner  both 
provoked  and  retorted.  I  sent  his  Lordship  your 
able  argument  upon  the  case  for  his  perusal.  His 
observation  upon  it  in  a  letter  to  me  was,  “Dr. 
Johnson’s  Suasorium  is  pleasantly2  and  artfully 
composed.  I  suspect,  however,  that  he  has  not 
convinced  himself;  for,  I  believe  that  he  is  bet¬ 
ter  read  in  ecclesiastical  history,  than  to  imag¬ 
ine  that  a  Bishop  or  a  Presbyter  has  a  right  to 
begin  censure  or  discipline  e  cathedra .553 

For  the  honour  of  Count  Manucci,  as  well  as 
to  observe  that  exactness  of  truth  which  you 
have  taught  me,  I  must  correct  what  I  said  in  a 
former  letter.  He  did  not  fall  from  his  horse, 
which  might  have  been  an  imputation  on  his 

2Why  his  Lordship  uses  the  epithet  pleasantly , 
when  speaking  of  a  grave  piece  of  reasoning,  I  can¬ 
not  conceive.  But  different  men  have  different  no¬ 
tions  of  pleasantry.  I  happened  to  sit  by  a  gentle¬ 
man  one  evening  at  the  Opera-house  in  London, 
who,  at  the  moment  when  Medea  appeared  to  be 
in  great  agony  at  the  thought  of  killing  her  chil¬ 
dren,  turned  to  me  with  a  smile,  and  said,  “ 'funny 
enough.” 

3Dr.  Johnson  afterwards  told  me,  that  he  was  of 
opinion  that  a  clergyman  had  this  right. 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


326 

skill  as  an  officer  of  cavalry;  his  horse  fell  with 
him. 

I  have,  since  I  saw  you,  read  every  word  of 
Granger’s  Biographical  History.  It  has  entertained 
me  exceedingly,  and  I  do  not  think  him  the 
Whig  that  you  supposed.  Horace  Walpole’s  be¬ 
ing  his  patron  is,  indeed,  no  good  sign  of  his 
political  principles.  But  he  denied  to  Lord 
Mountstuart  that  he  was  a  Whig,  and  said  he 
had  been  accused  by  both  parties  of  partiality. 
It  seems  he  was  like  Pope, 

While  Tories  call  me  a  Whig ,  and  Whigs  a  Tory . 

I  wish  you  would  look  more  into  his  book;  and 
as  Lord  Mountstuart  wishes  much  to  find  a 
proper  person  to  continue  the  work  upon  Gran¬ 
ger’s  plan,  and  has  desired  I  would  mention  it 
to  you;  if  such  a  man  occurs,  please  to  let  me 
know.  His  Lordship  will  give  him  generous  en¬ 
couragement. 

To  Mr.  Robert  Levett 

Dear  Sir,  Having  spent  about  six  weeks  at 
this  place,  we  have  at  length  resolved  upon  re¬ 
turning.  I  expect  to  see  you  all  in  Fleet-street  on 
the  30th  of  this  month. 

I  did  not  go  into  the  sea  till  last  Friday,  but 
think  to  go  most  of  this  week,  though  I  know  not 
that  it  does  me  any  good.  My  nights  are  very 
restless  and  tiresome,  but  I  am  otherwise  well. 

I  have  written  word  of  my  coming  to  Mrs. 
Williams.  Remember  me  kindly  to  Francis  and 
Betsy.  I  am,  Sir,  your  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson1 

Brighthelmstone, 

Oct.  21,  1776 

I  again  wrote  to  Dr.  Johnson  on  the  21st  of 
October,  informing  him,  that  my  father  had,  in 
the  most  liberal  manner,  paid  a  large  debt  for 
me,  and  that  I  had  now  the  happiness  of  being 
upon  very  good  terms  with  him;  to  which  he  re¬ 
turned  the  following  answer. 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  I  had  great  pleasure  in  hearing 
that  you  are  at  last  on  good  terms  with  your 
father.  Cultivate  his  kindness  by  all  honest  and 
manly  means.  Life  is  but  short;  no  time  can  be 
afforded  but  for  the  indulgence  of  real  sorrow, 
or  contests  upon  questions  seriously  momen¬ 
tous.  Let  us  not  throw  away  any  of  our  days 
upon  useless  resentment,  or  contend  who  shall 
hold  out  longest  in  stubborn  malignity.  It  is 
best  not  to  be  angry;  and  best,  in  the  next  place, 
to  be  quickly  reconciled.  May  you  and  your 

Tor  this  and  Dr.  Johnson’s  other  letters  to  Mr. 
Levett,  I  am  indebted  to  my  old  acquaintance  Mr. 
Nathaniel  Thomas,  whose  worth  and  ingenuity 
have  been  long  known  to  a  respectable,  though  not 
a  wide  circle;  and  whose  collection  of  medals  would 
do  credit  to  persons  of  greater  opulence. 


[  1776 

father  pass  the  remainder  of  your  time  in  re¬ 
ciprocal  benevolence !  .  .  . 

Do  you  ever  hear  from  Mr.  Langton?  I  visit 
him  sometimes,  but  he  does  not  talk.  I  do  not 
like  his  scheme  of  life;  but  as  I  am  not  permitted 
to  understand  it,  I  cannot  set  any  thing  right 
that  is  wrong.  His  children  are  sweet  babies. 

I  hope  my  irreconcileable  enemy,  Mrs.  Bos¬ 
well,  is  well.  Desire  her  not  to  transmit  her  ma¬ 
levolence  to  the  young  people.  Let  me  have 
Alexander,  and  Veronica,  and  Euphemia,  for 
my  friends. 

Mrs.  Williams,  whom  you  may  reckon  as  one 
of  your  well-wishers,  is  in  a  feeble  and  languish¬ 
ing  state,  with  little  hope  of  growing  better.  She 
went  for  some  part  of  the  autumn  into  the  coun¬ 
try,  but  is  little  benefited;  and  Dr.  Lawrence 
confesses  that  his  art  is  at  an  end.  Death  is,  how¬ 
ever,  at  a  distance;  and  what  more  than  that 
can  we  say  of  ourselves?  I  am  sorry  for  her  pain, 
and  more  sorry  for  her  decay.  Mr.  Levett  is 
sound,  wind  and  limb. 

I  was  some  weeks  this  autumn  at  Brighthelm¬ 
stone.  The  place  was  very  dull,  and  I  was  not 
well;  the  expedition  to  the  Hebrides  was  the 
most  pleasant  journey  that  I  ever  made.  Such 
an  effort  annually  would  give  the  world  a  little 
diversification. 

Every  year,  however,  we  cannot  wander,  and 
must  therefore  endeavour  to  spend  our  time  at 
home  as  well  as  we  can.  I  believe  it  is  best  to 
throw  life  into  a  method,  that  every  hour  may 
bring  its  employment,  and  every  employment 
have  its  hour.  Xenophon  observes,  in  his  Trea¬ 
tise  of  Oeconomy ,  that  if  every  thing  be  kept  in  a 
certain  place,  when  any  thing  is  worn  out  or 
consumed,  the  vacuity  which  it  leaves  will  shew 
what  is  wanting;  so  if  every  part  of  time  has  its 
duty,  the  hour  will  call  into  remembrance  its 
proper  engagement. 

I  have  not  practised  all  this  prudence  myself, 
but  I  have  suffered  much  for  want  of  it;  and  I 
would  have  you,  by  timely  recollection  and 
steady  resolution,  escape  from  those  evils  which 
have  lain  heavy  upon  me.  I  am,  my  dearest 
Boswell,  your  most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

Bolt-court,  Nov.  16,  1776 

On  the  1 6th  of  November  I  informed  him  that 
Mr.  Strahan  had  sent  me  twelve  copies  of  the 
Journey  to  the  Western  Islands ,  handsomely  bound, 
instead  of  the  twenty  copies  which  were  stipulat¬ 
ed;  but  which,  I  supposed,  were  to  be  only  in 
sheets;  requested  to  know  how  they  should  be 
distributed:  and  mentioned  that  I  had  another 
son  born  to  me,  who  was  named  David,  and 
was  a  sickly  infant. 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  I  have  been  for  some  time  ill  of  a 
cold,  which,  perhaps,  I  made  an  excuse  to  my- 


BOSWELL 


1777  ] 

self  for  not  writing,  when  in  reality  I  knew  not 
what  to  say. 

The  books  you  must  at  last  distribute  as  you 
think  best,  in  my  name,  or  your  own,  as  you  are 
inclined,  or  as  you  judge  most  proper.  Every 
body  cannot  be  obliged;  but  I  wish  that  nobody 
may  be  offended.  Do  the  best  you  can. 

I  congratulate  you  on  the  increase  of  your 
family,  and  hope  that  little  David  is  by  this 
time  well,  and  his  mamma  perfectly  recovered. 
I  am  much  pleased  to  hear  of  the  reestablish¬ 
ment  of  kindness  between  you  and  your  father. 
Cultivate  his  paternal  tenderness  as  much  as 
you  can.  To  live  at  variance  at  all  is  uncomfort¬ 
able;  and  variance  with  a  father  is  still  more  un¬ 
comfortable.  Besides  that,  in  the  whole  dispute 
you  have  the  wrong  side;  at  least  you  gave  the 
first  provocations,  and  some  of  them  very  offen¬ 
sive.  Let  it  now  be  all  over.  As  you  have  no  rea¬ 
son  to  think  that  your  new  mother  has  shewn 
you  any  foul  play,  treat  her  with  respect,  and  with 
some  degree  of  confidence;  this  will  secure  your 
father.  When  once  a  discordant  family  has  felt 
the  pleasure  of  peace,  they  will  not  willingly 
lose  it.  If  Mrs.  Boswell  would  but  be  friends 
with  me,  we  might  now  shut  the  temple  of 
Janus. 

What  came  of  Dr.  Memis’s  cause?  Is  the  ques¬ 
tion  about  the  negro  determined?  Has  Sir  Allan 
any  reasonable  hopes?  What  is  become  of  poor 
Macquarry?  Let  me  know  the  event  of  all  these 
litigations.  I  wish  particularly  well  to  the  negro 
and  Sir  Allan. 

Mrs.  Williams  has  been  much  out  of  order; 
and  though  she  is  something  better,  is  likely,  in 
her  physician’s  opinion,  to  endure  her  malady 
for  life,  though  she  may,  perhaps,  die  of  some 
other.  Mrs.  Thrale  is  big,  and  fancies  that  she 
carries  a  boy;  if  it  were  very  reasonable  to  wish 
much  about  it,  I  should  wish  her  not  to  be  dis¬ 
appointed.  The  desire  of  male  heirs  is  not  ap¬ 
pendant  only  to  feudal  tenures.  A  son  is  almost 
necessary  to  the  continuance  of  Thrale’s  for¬ 
tune;  for  what  can  misses  do  with  a  brewhouse? 
Lands  are  fitter  for  daughters  than  trades. 

Baretti  went  away  from  Thrale’s  in  some 
whimsical  fit  of  disgust,  or  ill-nature,  without 
taking  any  leave.  It  is  well  if  he  finds  in  any  other 
place  as  good  an  habitation,  and  as  many  con¬ 
veniences.  He  has  got  five-and-twenty  guineas 
by  translating  Sir  Joshua’s  Discourses  into  Italian, 
and  Mr.  Thrale  gave  him  an  hundred  in  the 
spring;  so  that  he  is  yet  in  no  difficulties. 

Colman  has  bought  Foote’s  patent,  and  is  to 
allow  Foote  for  life  sixteen  hundred  pounds  a 
year,  as  Reynolds  told  me,  and  to  allow  him  to 
play  so  often  on  such  terms  that  he  may  gain 
four  hundred  pounds  more.  What  Colman  can 
get  by  this  bargain,  but  trouble  and  hazard,  I 
do  not  see.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

Dec.  21,  1776 


327 

The  Reverend  Dr.  Hugh  Blair,  who  had 
long  been  admired  as  a  preacher  at  Edinburgh, 
thought  now  of  diffusing  his  excellent  sermons 
more  extensively,  and  encreasing  his  reputation, 
by  publishing  a  collection  of  them.  He  transmit¬ 
ted  the  manuscript  to  Mr.  Strahan,  the  printer, 
who  after  keeping  it  for  some  time,  wrote  a  letter 
to  him,  discouraging  the  publication.  Such  at 
first  was  the  unpropitious  state  of  one  of  the 
most  successful  theological  books  that  has  ever 
appeared.  Mr.  Strahan,  however,  had  sent  one 
of  the  sermons  to  Dr.  Johnson  for  his  opinion; 
and  after  his  unfavourable  letter  to  Dr.  Blair  had 
been  sent  off,  he  received  from  Johnson  on  Christ- 
mas-eve,  a  note  in  which  was  the  following  par¬ 
agraph:  “I  have  read  over  Dr.  Blair’s  first  ser¬ 
mon  with  more  than  approbation;  to  say  it  is 
good,  is  to  say  too  little. 

I  believe  Mr.  Strahan  had  very  soon  after  this 
time  a  conversation  with  Dr.  Johnson  concern¬ 
ing  them;  and  then  he  very  candidly  wrote  again 
to  Dr.  Blair,  enclosing  Johnson’s  note,  and  agree¬ 
ing  to  purchase  the  volume,  for  which  he  and 
Mr.  Cadell  gave  one  hundred  pounds.  The  sale 
was  so  rapid  and  extensive,  and  the  approbation 
of  the  publick  so  high,  that  to  their  honour  be  it 
recorded,  the  proprietors  made  Dr.  Blair  a  pres¬ 
ent  first  of  one  sum,  and  afterv/ards  of  another, 
of  fifty  pounds,  thus  voluntarily  doubling  the 
stipulated  price;  and  when  he  prepared  another 
volume,  they  gave  him  at  once  three  hundred 
pounds,  being  in  all  five  hundred  pounds,  by  an 
agreement  to  which  I  am  a  subscribing  witness; 
and  now  for  a  third  octavo  volume  he  has  re¬ 
ceived  no  less  than  six  hundred  pounds. 

1777:  je tat.  68.] — In  1777,  it  appears  from 
his  Prayers  and  Meditations ,  that  Johnson  suffered 
much  from  a  state  of  mind  “unsettled  and  per¬ 
plexed,”  and  from  that  constitutional  gloom, 
which,  together  with  his  extreme  humility  and 
anxiety  with  regard  to  his  religious  state,  made 
him  contemplate  himself  through  too  dark  and 
unfavourable  a  medium.  It  may  be  said  of  him, 
that  he  “saw  God  in  clouds.”  Certain  we  may 
be  of  his  injustice  to  himself  in  the  following  la¬ 
mentable  paragraph,  which  it  is  painful  to  think 
came  from  the  contrite  heart  of  this  great  man, 
to  whose  labours  the  world  is  so  much  indebted: 
“When  I  survey  my  past  life,  I  discover  nothing 
but  a  barren  waste  of  time,  with  some  disorders 
of  body,  and  disturbances  of  the  mind,  very  near 
to  madness,  which  I  hope  He  that  made  me  will 
suffer  to  extenuate  many  faults,  and  excuse  many 
deficiencies.”1  But  we  find  his  devotions  in  this 

lPrayers  and  Meditations ,  p.  155. 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


328 

year  eminently  fervent;  and  we  are  comforted 
by  observing  intervals  of  quiet,  composure,  and 
gladness. 

On  Easter-day  we  find  the  following  emphat- 
ick  prayer: 

“Almighty  and  most  merciful  Father,  who 
seest  all  our  miseries,  and  knowest  all  our  neces¬ 
sities,  look  down  upon  me,  and  pity  me.  Defend 
me  from  the  violent  incursion  [incursions]  of  evil 
thoughts,  and  enable  me  to  form  and  keep  such 
resolutions  as  may  conduce  to  the  discharge  of 
the  duties  which  thy  providence  shall  appoint 
me;  and  so  help  me,  by  thy  Holy  Spirit,  that  my 
heart  may  surely  there  be  fixed,  where  true  joys 
are  to  be  found,  and  that  I  may  serve  thee  with 
pure  affection  and  a  cheerful  mind.  Have  mercy 
upon  me,  O  God,  have  mercy  upon  me;  years 
and  infirmities  oppress  me,  terrour  and  anxiety 
beset  me.  Have  mercy  upon  me,  my  Creator 
and  my  Judge.  [In  all  dangers  protect  me.]  In 
all  perplexities  relieve  and  free  me;  and  so  help 
me  by  thy  Holy  Spirit,  that  I  may  now  so  com¬ 
memorate  the  death  of  thy  Son  our  Saviour 
Jesus  Christ,  as  that  when  this  short  and  painful 
life  shall  have  an  end,  I  may,  for  his  sake,  be  re¬ 
ceived  to  everlasting  happiness.  Amen.”1 

While  he  was  at  church,  the  agreeable  im¬ 
pressions  upon  his  mind  are  thus  commemorated : 

“I  was  for  some  time  distressed  but  at  last  ob¬ 
tained,  I  hope  from  the  God  of  Peace,  more 
quiet  than  I  have  enjoyed  for  a  long  time.  I  had 
made  no  resolution,  but  as  my  heart  grew  light¬ 
er,  my  hopes  revived,  and  my  courage  increased; 
and  I  wrote  with  my  pencil  in  my  Common 
Prayer  Book, 

Vita  ordinanda. 

Biblia  legenda. 

Theologize  opera  danda. 

Serviendum  et  Icetandum. 

Mr.  Steevens  whose  generosity  is  well  known, 
joined  Dr.  Johnson  in  kind  assistance  to  a  female 
relation  of  Dr.  Goldsmith,  and  desired  that  on 
her  return  to  Ireland  she  would  procure  authen- 
tick  particulars  of  the  life  of  her  celebrated  rela¬ 
tion.  Concerning  her  there  is  the  following  let¬ 
ter:— 

To  George  Steevens,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  You  will  be  glad  to  hear  that  from 
Mrs.  Goldsmith,  whom  we  lamented  as  drowned, 
I  have  received  a  letter  full  of  gratitude  to  us 
all,  with  promise  to  make  the  enquiries  which 
we  recommended  to  her. 

I  would  have  had  the  honour  of  conveying 
this  intelligence  to  Miss  Caulfield,  but  that  her 
letter  is  not  at  hand,  and  I  know  not  the  direc- 

lIbid.,  p.  1 58. 


[  1777 

tion.  You  will  tell  the  good  news.  I  am,  Sir, 
your  most,  &c. 

Sam.  Johnson 

February  25,  1777 

Mr.  Boswell  to  Dr.  Johnson 

Edinburgh,  Feb .  14,  1777 

My  Dear  Sir,  My  state  of  epistolary  accounts 
with  you  at  present  is  extraordinary.  The  bal¬ 
ance,  as  to  number,  is  on  your  side.  I  am  in¬ 
debted  to  you  for  two  letters;  one  dated  the  16th 
of  November,  upon  which  very  day  I  wrote  to 
you,  so  that  our  letters  were  exactly  exchanged, 
and  one  dated  the  2 1  st  of  December  last. 

My  heart  was  warmed  with  gratitude  by  the 
truely  kind  contents  of  both  of  them;  and  it  is 
amazing  and  vexing  that  I  have  allowed  so 
much  time  to  elapse  without  writing  to  you. 
But  delay  is  inherent  in  me,  by  nature  or  by  bad 
habit.  I  waited  till  I  should  have  an  opportun¬ 
ity  of  paying  you  my  compliments  on  a  new 
year.  I  have  procrastinated  till  the  year  is  no 
longer  new.  .  .  . 

Dr.  Memis’s  cause  was  determined  against 
him,  with  £40  costs.  The  Lord  President,  and 
two  other  of  the  Judges,  dissented  from  the  ma¬ 
jority,  upon  this  ground;  — that  although  there 
may  have  been  no  intention  to  injure  him  by 
calling  him  Doctor  0/  Medicine ,  instead  of  Physi¬ 
cian ,  yet,  as  he  remonstrated  against  the  desig¬ 
nation  before  the  charter  was  printed  off,  and 
represented  that  it  was  disagreeable,  and  even 
hurtful  to  him,  it  was  ill-natured  to  refuse  to  al¬ 
ter  it,  and  let  him  have  the  designation  to  which 
he  was  certainly  entitled.  My  own  opinion  is, 
that  our  court  has  judged  wrong.  The  defend¬ 
ants  were  in  mala  fide ,  to  persist  in  naming  him 
in  a  way  that  he  disliked.  You  remember  poor 
Goldsmith,  when  he  grew  important,  and  wished 
to  appear  Doctor  Major ,  could  not  bear  your 
calling  him  Goldy.  Would  it  not  have  been  wrong 
to  have  named  him  so  in  your  Preface  to  Shak- 
speare,  or  in  any  serious  permanent  writing  of 
any  sort?  The  difficulty  is,  whether  an  action 
should  be  allowed  on  such  petty  wrongs.  De 
minimis  non  curat  lex. 

The  Negro  cause  is  not  yet  decided.  A  memo¬ 
rial  is  preparing  on  the  side  of  slavery.  I  shall 
send  you  a  copy  as  soon  as  it  is  printed.  Mac- 
laurin  is  made  happy  by  your  approbation  of 
his  memorial  for  the  black. 

Macquarry  was  here  in  the  winter,  and  we 
passed  an  evening  together.  The  sale  of  his  es¬ 
tate  cannot  be  prevented. 

Sir  Allan  Maclean’s  suit  against  the  Duke  of 
Argyle,  for  recovering  the  ancient  inheritance 
of  his  family,  is  now  fairly  before  all  our  judges. 
I  spoke  for  him  yesterday,  and  Maclaurin  to¬ 
day;  Crosbie  spoke  to-day  against  him.  Three 
more  counsel  are  to  be  heard,  and  next  week  the 
cause  will  be  determined.  I  send  you  the  Infor¬ 
mations,  or  Cases ,  on  each  side,  which  I  hope  you 


BOSWELL 


i777  l 

will  read.  You  said  to  me  when  we  were  under 
Sir  Allan’s  hospitable  roof,  “I  will  help  him  with 
my  pen.”  You  said  it  with  a  generous  glow;  and 
though  his  Grace  of  Argyle  did  afterwards  mount 
you  upon  an  excellent  horse,  upon  which  “you 
looked  like  a  Bishop,”  you  must  not  swerve  from 
your  purpose  at  Inchkenneth.  I  wish  you  may 
understand  the  points  at  issue,  amidst  our  Scotch 
law  principles  and  phrases. 

[Here  followed  a  full  state  of  the  case,  in 
which  I  endeavoured  to  make  it  as  clear  as  I 
could  to  an  Englishman,  who  had  no  knowledge 
of  the  formularies  and  technical  language  of  the 
law  of  Scotland.] 

“I  shall  inform  you  how  the  cause  is  decided 
here.  But  as  it  may  be  brought  under  the  review 
of  our  Judges,  and  is  certainly  to  be  carried  by 
appeal  to  the  House  of  Lords,  the  assistance  of 
such  a  mind  as  yours  will  be  of  consequence. 
Your  paper  on  Vicious  Intromission  is  a  noble 
proof  of  what  you  can  do  even  in  Scotch  law.... 

I  have  not  yet  distributed  all  your  books. 
Lord  Hailes  and  Lord  Monboddo  have  each  re¬ 
ceived  one,  and  return  you  thanks.  Monboddo 
dined  with  me  lately,  and  having  drank  tea,  we 
were  a  good  while  by  ourselves,  and  as  I  knew 
that  he  had  read  the  Journey  superficially,  as  he 
did  not  talk  of  it  as  I  wished,  I  brought  it  to  him, 
and  read  aloud  several  passages;  and  then  he 
talked  so,  that  I  told  him  he  was  to  have  a  copy 
from  the  authour.  He  begged  that  might  be  marked 
on  it.  ...  I  ever  am,  my  dear  Sir,  your  most 
faithful,  and  affectionate  humble  servant, 

James  Boswell 

Sir  Alexander  Dick  to  Dr.  Samuel  Johnson 
Prestonfield,  Feb.  17,  1777 

Sir,  I  had  yesterday  the  honour  of  receiving 
your  book  of  your  Journey  to  the  Western  Islands  of 
Scotland ,  which  you  was  so  good  as  to  send  me, 
by  the  hands  of  our  mutual  friend,  Mr.  Boswell, 
of  Auchinleck;  for  which  I  return  you  my  most 
hearty  thanks;  and  after  carefully  reading  it 
over  again,  shall  deposit  in  my  little  collection 
of  choice  books,  next  our  worthy  friend’s  Jour¬ 
ney  to  Corsica.  As  there  are  many  things  to  ad¬ 
mire  in  both  performances,  I  have  often  wished 
that  no  Travels  or  Journeys  should  be  published 
but  those  undertaken  by  persons  of  integrity 
and  capacity  to  judge  well,  and  describe  faith¬ 
fully,  and  in  good  language,  the  situation,  con¬ 
dition,  and  manners  of  the  countries  past  through. 
Indeed  our  country  of  Scotland,  in  spite  of  the 
union  of  the  crowns,  is  still  in  most  places  so  de¬ 
void  of  clothing,  or  cover  from  hedges  and  plan¬ 
tations,  that  it  was  well  you  gave  your  readers  a 
sound  Monitoire  with  respect  to  that  circum¬ 
stance.  The  truths  you  have  told,  and  the  pur¬ 
ity  of  the  language  in  which  they  are  expressed, 
as  your  Journey  is  universally  read,  may,  and  al¬ 
ready  appear  to  have  a  very  good  effect.  For  a 
man  of  my  acquaintance,  who  has  the  largest 


329 

nursery  for  trees  and  hedges  in  this  country, 
tells  me,  that  of  late  the  demand  upon  him  for 
these  articles  is  doubled,  and  sometimes  tripled. 
I  have,  therefore,  listed  Dr.  Samuel  Johnson  in 
some  of  my  memorandums  of  the  principal  plant¬ 
ers  and  favourers  of  the  enclosures,  under  a 
name  which  I  took  the  liberty  to  invent  from 
the  Greek,  Papadendrion.  Lord  Auchinleck  and 
some  few  more  are  of  the  list.  I  am  told  that  one 
gentleman  in  the  shire  of  Aberdeen,  viz.  Sir 
Archibald  Grant,  has  planted  above  fifty  mil¬ 
lions  of  trees  on  a  piece  of  very  wild  ground  at 
Monimusk:  I  must  enquire  if  he  has  fenced 
them  well,  before  he  enters  my  list;  for,  that  is 
the  soul  of  enclosing.  I  began  myself  to  plant  a 
little,  our  ground  being  too  valuable  for  much, 
and  that  is  now  fifty  years  ago;  and  the  trees, 
now  in  my  seventy-fourth  year,  I  look  up  to  with 
reverence,  and  shew  them  to  my  eldest  son  now 
in  his  fifteenth  year,  and  they  are  full  the  height 
of  my  country-house  here,  where  I  had  the 
pleasure  of  receiving  you,  and  hope  again  to 
have  that  satisfaction  with  our  mutual  friend, 
Mr.  Boswell.  I  shall  always  continue,  with  the 
truest  esteem,  dear  Doctor,  your  much  obliged, 
and  obedient  humble  servant, 

Alexander  Dick1 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  It  is  so  long  since  I  heard  any 
thing  from  you,2  that  I  am  not  easy  about  it; 
write  something  to  me  next  post.  When  you 
sent  your  last  letter,  every  thing  seemed  to  be 
mending;  I  hope  nothing  has  lately  grown  worse. 
I  suppose  young  Alexander  continues  to  thrive, 
and  Veronica  is  now  very  pretty  company.  I  do 
not  suppose  the  lady  is  yet  reconciled  to  me,  yet 
let  her  know  that  I  love  her  very  well,  and  value 
her  very  much. 

Dr.  Blair  is  printing  some  sermons.  If  they 
are  all  like  the  first,  which  I  have  read,  they  are 
sermones  aurei ,  ac  auro  magis  aurei.  It  is  excellently 
written  both  as  to  doctrine  and  language.  Mr. 
Watson’s  book3  seems  to  be  much  esteemed. . . . 

Poor  Beauclerk  still  continues  very  ill.  Lang- 
ton  lives  on  as  he  used  to  do.  His  children  are 
very  pretty,  and,  I  think,  his  lady  loses  her 
Scotch.  Paoli  I  never  see. 

I  have  been  so  distressed  by  difficulty  of  breath¬ 
ing,  that  I  lost,  as  was  computed,  six-and-thirty 
ounces  of  blood  in  a  few  days.  I  am  better,  but 
not  well. 

I  wish  you  would  be  vigilant  and  get  me  Gra¬ 
ham’s  Telemachus  that  was  printed  at  Glasgow, 
a  very  little  book;  and  Johnstoni  Poemata ,  anoth¬ 
er  little  book,  printed  at  Middleburgh. 

Tor  a  character  of  this  very  amiable  man,  see 
Journal  of  a  Tour  to  the  Hebrides ,  3rd  edit.,  p.  36. 
[Aug.  17.] 

2By  the  then  course  of  the  post,  my  long  letter  of 
the  14th  had  not  yet  reached  him. 

3 History  of  Philip  the  Second. 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


33° 

Mrs.  Williams  sends  her  compliments,  and 
promises  that  when  you  come  hither,  she  will 
accommodate  you  as  well  as  ever  she  can  in  the 
old  room.  She  wishes  to  know  whether  you  sent 
her  book  to  Sir  Alexander  Gordon. 

My  dear  Boswell,  do  not  neglect  to  write  to 
me;  for  your  kindness  is  one  of  the  pleasures  of 
my  life,  which  I  should  be  sorry  to  lose.  I  am, 
Sir,  your  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

February  18,  1777 

To  Dr.  Samuel  Johnson 

Edinburgh,  Feb.  24,  1777 

Dear  Sir,  Your  letter  dated  the  18th  instant, 
I  had  the  pleasure  to  receive  last  post.  Although 
my  late  long  neglect,  or  rather  delay,  was  truely 
culpable,  I  am  tempted  not  to  regret  it,  since  it 
has  produced  me  so  valuable  a  proof  of  your  re¬ 
gard.  I  did,  indeed,  during  that  inexcusable  si¬ 
lence,  sometimes  divert  the  reproaches  of  my 
own  mind,  by  fancying  that  I  should  hear  again 
from  you,  inquiring  with  some  anxiety  about 
me,  because,  for  aught  you  knew,  I  might  have 
been  ill. 

You  are  pleased  to  shew  me,  that  my  kind¬ 
ness  is  of  some  consequence  to  you.  My  heart  is 
elated  at  the  thought.  Be  assured,  my  dear  Sir, 
that  my  affection  and  reverence  for  you  are  ex¬ 
alted  and  steady.  I  do  not  believe  that  a  more 
perfect  attachment  ever  existed  in  the  history  of 
mankind.  And  it  is  a  noble  attachment;  for  the 
attractions  arc  Genius,  Learning,  and  Piety. 

Your  difficulty  of  breathing  alarms  me,  and 
brings  into  my  imagination  an  event,  which  al¬ 
though  in  the  natural  course  of  things,  I  must 
expect  at  some  period,  I  cannot  view  with  com¬ 
posure.  .  .  . 

My  wife  is  much  honoured  by  what  you  say 
of  her.  She  begs  you  may  accept  of  her  best 
compliments.  She  is  to  send  you  some  marma¬ 
lade  of  oranges  of  her  own  making.  ...  I  ever 
am,  my  dear  Sir,  your  most  obliged  and  faith¬ 
ful  humble  servant, 

James  Boswell 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  I  have  been  much  pleased  with 
your  late  letter,  and  am  glad  that  my  old  en¬ 
emy,  Mrs.  Boswell,  begins  to  feel  some  remorse. 
As  to  Miss  Veronica’s  Scotch,  I  think  it  cannot 
be  helped.  An  English  maid  you  might  easily 
have;  but  she  would  still  imitate  the  greater 
number,  as  they  would  be  likewise  those  whom 
she  must  most  respect.  Her  dialect  will  not  be 
gross.  Her  Mamma  has  not  much  Scotch,  and 
you  have  yourself  very  little.  I  hope  she  knows 
my  name,  and  does  not  call  me  Johnston } 

^Johnro/z  is  the  most  common  English  formation 
of  the  Sirname  from  John ;  Joh nston  the  Scotch. 
My  illustrious  friend  observed  that  many  North 
Britons  pronounced  his  name  in  their  own  way. 


[ 1 777 

The  immediate  cause  of  my  writing  is  this: — 
One  Shaw,  who  seems  a  modest  and  a  decent 
man,  has  written  an  Erse  Grammar ,  which  a  very 
learned  Highlander,  Macbean,  has,  at  my  re¬ 
quest,  examined  and  approved. 

The  book  is  very  little,  but  Mr.  Shaw  has 
been  persuaded  by  his  friends  to  set  it  at  half  a 
guinea,  though  I  advised  only  a  crown,  and 
thought  myself  liberal.  You,  whom  the  authour 
considers  as  a  great  encourager  of  ingenious 
men,  will  receive  a  parcel  of  his  proposals  and 
receipts.  I  have  undertaken  to  give  you  notice 
of  them,  and  to  solicit  your  countenance.  You 
must  ask  no  poor  man,  because  the  price  is 
really  too  high.  Yet  such  a  work  deserves  pa¬ 
tronage. 

It  is  proposed  to  augment  our  club  from  twen¬ 
ty  to  thirty,  of  which  I  am  glad;  for  as  we  have 
several  in  it  whom  I  do  not  much  like  to  consort 
with,2  I  am  for  reducing  it  to  a  mere  miscella¬ 
neous  collection  of  conspicuous  men,  without 
any  determinate  character.  ...  I  am,  dear  Sir, 
most  affectionately  your’s, 

Sam.  Johnson 

March  n,  1777 

My  respects  to  Madam,  to  Veronica,  to  Alex¬ 
ander,  to  Euphemia,  to  David. 

Mr.  Boswell  to  Dr.  Johnson 

Edinburgh,  April  4,  1777. 

[After  informing  him  of  the  death  of  my  little 
son  David,  and  that  I  could  not  come  to  Lon¬ 
don  this  spring: — ] 

I  think  it  hard  that  I  should  be  a  whole  year 
without  seeing  you.  May  I  presume  to  petition 
for  a  meeting  with  you  in  the  autumn?  You 
have,  I  believe,  seen  all  the  cathedrals  in  Eng¬ 
land,  except  that  of  Carlisle.  If  you  are  to  be 
with  Dr.  Taylor,  at  Ashbourne,  it  would  not  be 
a  great  journey  to  come  thither.  We  may  pass  a 
few  most  agreeable  days  there  by  ourselves,  and 
I  will  accompany  you  a  good  part  of  the  way  to 
the  southward  again.  Pray  think  of  this. 

You  forget  that  Mr.  Shaw’s  Erse  Grammar  was 
put  into  your  hands  by  myself  last  year.  Lord 
Eglintoune  put  it  into  mine.  I  am  glad  that  Mr. 
Macbean  approves  of  it.  I  have  received  Mr. 
Shaw’s  Proposals  for  its  publication,  which  I  can 
perceive  are  written  by  the  hand  of  a  Master.  .  .  . 

Pray  get  for  me  all  the  editions  of  Walton’s 
Lives:  I  have  a  notion  that  the  republication  of 
them  with  Notes  will  fall  upon  me,  between  Dr. 
Horne  and  Lord  Hailes. 

Mr.  Shaw’s  Proposals  f  for  An  Analysis  of  the 
Scotch  Celtick  Language ,  were  thus  illuminated  by 
the  pen  of  Johnson: 

“Though  the  Erse  dialect  of  the  Celtick  lan¬ 
guage  has,  from  the  earliest  times,  been  spoken 

2On  account  of  their  differing  from  him  as  to 
religion  and  politicks. 


BOSWELL 


1777  1  LIFE  OF 

in  Britain,  and  still  subsists  in  the  northern  parts 
and  adjacent  islands,  yet,  by  the  negligence  of  a 
people  rather  warlike  than  lettered,  it  has  hith¬ 
erto  been  left  to  the  caprice  and  judgement  of 
every  speaker,  and  has  floated  in  the  living  voice, 
without  the  steadiness  of  analogy,  or  direction  of 
rules.  An  Erse  Grammar  is  an  addition  to  the 
stores  of  literature;  and  its  authour  hopes  for  the 
indulgence  always  shewn  to  those  that  attempt 
to  do  what  was  never  done  before.  If  his  work 
shall  be  found  defective,  it  is  at  least  all  his  own: 
he  is  not  like  other  grammarians,  a  compiler  or 
transcriber;  what  he  delivers,  he  has  learned  by 
attentive  observation  among  his  countrymen, 
who  perhaps  will  be  themselves  surprized  to  see 
that  speech  reduced  to  principles,  which  they 
have  used  only  by  imitation. 

“The  use  of  this  book  will,  however,  not  be 
confined  to  the  mountains  and  islands;  it  will 
afford  a  pleasing  and  important  subject  of  spec¬ 
ulation,  to  those  whose  studies  lead  them  to  trace 
the  affinity  of  languages,  and  the  migrations  of 
the  ancient  races  of  mankind.” 

To  Dr.  Samuel  Johnson 

Glasgow,  April  24,  1777 

My  Dear  Sir,  Our  worthy  friend  Thrale’s 
death  having  appeared  in  the  news-papers,  and 
been  afterwards  contradicted,  I  have  been  placed 
in  a  state  of  very  uneasy  uncertainty,  from 
which  I  hoped  to  be  relieved  by  you:  but  my 
hopes  have  as  yet  been  vain.  How  could  you 
omit  to  write  to  me  on  such  an  occasion?  I  shall 
wait  with  anxiety. 

I  am  going  to  Auchinleck  to  stay  a  fortnight 
with  my  father.  It  is  better  not  to  be  there  very 
long  at  one  time.  But  frequent  renewals  of  at¬ 
tention  are  agreeable  to  him. 

Pray  tell  me  about  this  edition  of  “  The  Eng¬ 
lish  Poets ,  with  a  Preface,  biographical  and  criti¬ 
cal,  to  each  Authour, by  SamuelJohnson,LL.D.” 
which  I  see  advertised.  I  am  delighted  with  the 
prospect  of  it.  Indeed  I  am  happy  to  feel  that  I 
am  capable  of  being  so  much  delighted  with 
literature.  But  is  not  the  charm  of  this  publica¬ 
tion  chiefly  owing  to  the  magnum  nomen  in  the 
front  of  it? 

What  do  you  say  of  Lord  Chesterfield’s  Mem¬ 
oirs  and  last  Letters? 

My  wife  has  made  marmalade  of  oranges  for 
you.  I  left  her  and  my  daughters  and  Alexander 
all  well  yesterday.  I  have  taught  Veronica  to 
speak  of  you  thus: —  Dr.  Johmwz,  not  Johm-^w. 
I  remain,  my  dear  Sir,  your  most  affectionate, 
and  obliged  humble  servant, 

James  Boswell 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  The  story  of  Mr.  Thrale’s  death, 
as  he  had  neither  been  sick  nor  in  any  other 


JOHNSON  331 

danger,  made  so  little  impression  upon  me,  that 
I  never  thought  about  obviating  its  effects  on 
any  body  else.  It  is  supposed  to  have  been  pro¬ 
duced  by  the  English  custom  of  making  April 
fools,  that  is,  of  sending  one  another  on  some 
foolish  errand  on  the  first  of  April. 

Tell  Mrs.  Boswell  that  I  shall  taste  her  mar¬ 
malade  cautiously  at  first.  Timeo  Danaos  et  dona 
jerentes.  Beware,  says  the  Italian  proverb,  of  a 
reconciled  enemy.  But  when  I  find  it  does  me 
no  harm,  I  shall  then  receive  it  and  be  thankful 
for  it,  as  a  pledge  of  firm,  and,  I  hope,  of  unal¬ 
terable  kindness.  She  is,  after  all,  a  dear,  dear 
lady. 

Please  to  return  Dr.  Blair  thanks  for  his  ser¬ 
mons.  The  Scotch  write  English  wonderfully 
well.  .  .  . 

Your  frequent  visits  to  Auchinleck,  and  your 
short  stay  there,  are  very  laudable  and  very  ju¬ 
dicious.  Your  present  concord  with  your  father 
gives  me  great  pleasure;  it  was  all  that  you 
seemed  to  want. 

My  health  is  very  bad,  and  my  nights  are 
very  unquiet.  What  can  I  do  to  mend  them?  I 
have  for  this  summer  nothing  better  in  pros¬ 
pect  than  a  journey  into  Staffordshire  and 
Derbyshire,  perhaps  with  Oxford  and  Birming¬ 
ham  in  my  way. 

Make  my  compliments  to  Miss  Veronica;  I 
must  leave  it  to  her  philosophy  to  comfort  you 
for  the  loss  of  little  David.  You  must  remember, 
that  to  keep  three  out  of  four  is  more  than  your 
share.  Mrs.  Thrale  has  but  four  out  of  eleven. 

I  am  engaged  to  write  little  Lives,  and  little 
Prefaces,  to  a  little  edition  of  The  English  Poets. 
I  think  I  have  persuaded  the  booksellers  to  in¬ 
sert  something  of  Thomson;  and  if  you  could 
give  me  some  information  about  him,  for  the 
life  which  we  have  is  very  scanty,  I  should  be 
glad.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  most  affectionate 
humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

May  3,  1777 

To  those  who  delight  in  tracing  the  progress 
of  works  of  literature,  it  will  be  an  entertainment 
to  compare  the  limited  design  with  the  ample 
execution  of  that  admirable  performance,  The 
Lives  of  the  English  Poets ,  which  is  the  richest, 
most  beautiful  and  indeed  most  perfect  produc¬ 
tion  of  Johnson’s  pen.  His  notion  of  it  at  this 
time  appears  in  the  preceding  letter.  He  has  a 
memorandum  in  this  year,  “29  May,  Easter  Eve, 
I  treated  with  booksellers  on  a  bargain,  but  the 
time  was  not  long.”1  The  bargain  was  concern¬ 
ing  that  undertaking;  but  his  tender  conscience 
seems  alarmed  lest  it  should  have  intruded  too 
much  on  his  devout  preparation  for  the  solemn¬ 
ity  of  the  ensuing  day.  But,  indeed,  very  little 
time  was  necessary  for  Johnson’s  concluding  a 

lPrayers  and  Meditations ,  p.  155. 


332  BOSWELL  [1777 


treaty  with  the  booksellers;  as  he  had,  I  believe, 
less  attention  to  profit  from  his  labours  than  any 
man  to  whom  literature  has  been  a  profession.  I 
shall  here  insert  from  a  letter  to  me  from  my 
late  worthy  friend  Mr.  Edward  Dilly,  though  of 
a  later  date,  an  account  of  this  plan  so  happily 
conceived;  since  it  was  the  occasion  of  procuring 
for  us  an  elegant  collection  of  the  best  biography 
and  criticism  of  which  our  language  can  boast. 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Southill,  Sept.  26,  1777 

Dear  Sir,  You  will  find  by  this  letter,  that  I 
am  still  in  the  same  calm  retreat,  from  the  noise 
and  bustle  of  London,  as  when  I  wrote  to  you 
last.  I  am  happy  to  find  you  had  such  an  agree¬ 
able  meeting  with  your  old  friend  Dr.  Johnson; 
I  have  no  doubt  your  stock  is  much  increased 
by  the  interview;  few  men,  nay  I  may  say, 
scarcely  any  man,  has  got  that  fund  of  knowl¬ 
edge  and  entertainment  as  Dr.  Johnson  in  con¬ 
versation.  When  he  opens  freely,  every  one  is 
attentive  to  what  he  says,  and  cannot  fail  of  im¬ 
provement  as  well  as  pleasure. 

The  edition  of  The  Poets ,  now  printing,  will 
do  honour  to  the  English  press;  and  a  concise 
account  of  the  life  of  each  authour,  by  Dr.  John¬ 
son,  will  be  a  very  valuable  addition,  and  stamp 
the  reputation  of  this  edition  superiour  to  any 
thing  that  is  gone  before.  The  first  cause  that 
gave  rise  to  this  undertaking,  I  believe,  was  ow¬ 
ing  to  the  little  trifling  edition  of  The  Poets , 
printing  by  the  Martins,  at  Edinburgh,  and  to 
be  sold  by  Bell,  in  London.  Upon  examining 
the  volumes  which  were  printed,  the  type  was 
found  so  extremely  small,  that  many  persons 
could  not  read  them;  not  only  this  inconveni¬ 
ence  attended  it,  but  the  inaccuracy  of  the  press 
was  very  conspicuous.  These  reasons,  as  well  as 
the  idea  of  an  invasion  of  what  we  call  our  Lit¬ 
erary  Property,  induced  the  London  Booksellers 
to  print  an  elegant  and  accurate  edition  of  all 
the  English  Poets  of  reputation,  from  Chaucer 
to  the  present  time. 

Accordingly  a  select  number  of  the  most  re¬ 
spectable  booksellers  met  on  the  occasion;  and, 
on  consulting  together,  agreed,  that  all  the  pro¬ 
prietors  of  copy-right  in  the  various  Poets  should 
be  summoned  together;  and  when  their  opin¬ 
ions  were  given,  to  proceed  immediately  on  the 
business.  Accordingly  a  meeting  was  held,  con¬ 
sisting  of  about  forty  of  the  most  respectable 
booksellers  of  London,  when  it  was  agreed  that 
an  elegant  and  uniform  edition  of  The  English 
Poets  should  be  immediately  printed,  with  a 
concise  account  of  the  life  of  each  authour,  by 
Dr.  Samuel  Johnson;  and  that  three  persons 
should  be  deputed  to  wait  upon  Dr.  Johnson,  to 
solicit  him  to  undertake  the  Lives,  viz.,  T.  Da¬ 
vies,  Strahan,  and  Cadell.  The  Doctor  very  po¬ 
litely  undertook  it,  and  seemed  exceedingly 


pleased  with  the  proposal.  As  to  the  terms,  it 
was  left  entirely  to  the  Doctor  to  name  his  own: 
he  mentioned  two  hundred  guineas:1  it  was  im¬ 
mediately  agreed  to;  and  a  farther  compliment, 
1  believe,  will  be  made  him.  A  committee  was 
likewise  appointed  to  engage  the  best  engrav¬ 
ers,  viz.,  Bartolozzi,  Sherwin,  Hall,  etc.  Like¬ 
wise  another  committee  for  giving  directions 
about  the  paper,  printing,  etc.,  so  that  the  whole 
will  be  conducted  with  spirit,  and  in  the  best 
manner,  with  respect  to  authourship,  editor¬ 
ship,  engravings,  etc.,  etc.  My  brother  will  give 
you  a  list  of  the  Poets  we  mean  to  give,  many  of 
which  are  within  the  time  of  the  Act  of  Queen 
Anne,  which  Martin  and  Bell  cannot  give,  as 
they  have  no  property  in  them;  the  proprietors 
are  almost  all  the  booksellers  in  London,  of  con¬ 
sequence.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  ever  your’s, 

Edward  Dilly 

I  shall  afterwards  have  occasion  to  consider 
the  extensive  and  varied  range  which  Johnson 
took,  when  he  was  once  led  upon  ground  which 
he  trod  with  a  peculiar  delight,  having  long  been 
intimately  acquainted  with  all  the  circumstances 
of  it  that  could  interest  and  please. 

Dr.  Johnson  to  Charles  O’Connor,  Esq.2 

Sir,  Having  had  the  pleasure  of  conversing 
with  Dr.  Campbell  about  your  character  and 
your  literary  undertaking,  I  am  resolved  to 
gratify  myself  by  renewing  a  correspondence 
which  began  and  ended  a  great  while  ago,  and 
ended,  I  am  afraid,  by  my  fault;  a  fault  which, 
if  you  have  not  forgotten  it,  you  must  now 
forgive. 

If  I  have  ever  disappointed  you,  give  me  leave 
to  tell  you,  that  you  have  likewise  disappointed 
me.  I  expected  great  discoveries  in  Irish  antiq¬ 
uity,  and  large  publications  in  the  Irish  lan¬ 
guage;  but  the  world  still  remains  as  it  was, 
doubtful  and  ignorant.  What  the  Irish  language 

Johnson’s  moderation  in  demanding  so  small  a 
sum  is  extraordinary.  Had  he  asked  one  thousand, 
or  even  fifteen  hundred  guineas,  the  booksellers, 
who  knew  the  value  of  his  name,  would  doubtless 
have  readily  given  it.  They  have  probably  got  five 
thousand  guineas  by  this  work  in  the  course  of 
twenty-five  years.  [M.] 

2Mr.  Joseph  Cooper  Walker,  of  the  Treasury, 
Dublin,  who  obligingly  communicated  to  me  this 
and  a  former  letter  from  Dr.  Johnson  to  the  same 
gentleman  (for  which  see  p.  89),  writes  to  me  as 
follows: — “Perhaps  it  would  gratify  you  to  have 
some  account  of  Mr.  O’Connor.  He  is  an  ami¬ 
able,  learned,  venerable  old  gentleman,  of  an 
independent  fortune,  who  lives  at  Belanagar,  in 
the  county  of  Roscommon;  he  is  an  admired  writ¬ 
er,  and  Member  of  the  Irish  Academy. — The  above 
Letter  is  alluded  to  in  the  Preface  to  the  2nd  edit, 
of  his  Dissert .,  p.  3.” — Mr.  O’Connor  afterwards 
died  at  the  age  of  eighty-two.  See  a  well-drawn 
character  of  him  in  The  Gentleman’s  Magazine  for 
August  1791. 


1777]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  333 


is  in  itself,  and  to  what  languages  it  has  affinity, 
are  very  interesting  questions,  which  every  man 
wishes  to  see  resolved  that  has  any  philological 
or  historical  curiosity.  Dr.  Leland  begins  his 
history  too  late:  the  ages  which  deserve  an  exact 
enquiry  are  those  times  (for  such  there  were) 
when  Ireland  was  the  school  of  the  west,  the 
quiet  habitation  of  sanctity  and  literature.  If 
you  could  give  a  history,  though  imperfect,  of 
the  Irish  nation,  from  its  conversion  to  Chris¬ 
tianity  to  the  invasion  from  England,  you  would 
amplify  knowledge  with  new  views  and  new  ob¬ 
jects.  Set  about  it  therefore,  if  you  can:  do  what 
you  can  easily  do  without  anxious  exactness. 
Lay  the  foundation,  and  leave  the  superstruc¬ 
ture  to  posterity.  I  am,  Sir,  your  most  humble 
servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

May  19,  1777 

Early  in  this  year  came  out,  in  two  volumes 
quarto,  the  posthumous  works  of  the  learned 
Dr.  Zachary  Pearce,  Bishop  of  Rochester;  being 
A  Commentary ,  with  Notes ,  on  the  Jour  Evangelists 
and  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles ,  with  other  theological 
pieces.  Johnson  had  now  an  opportunity  of  mak¬ 
ing  a  grateful  return  to  that  excellent  prelate, 
who,  we  have  seen,  was  the  only  person  who 
gave  him  any  assistance  in  the  compilation  of 
his  Dictionary.  The  Bishop  had  left  some  account 
of  his  life  and  character,  written  by  himself.  To 
this  Johnson  made  some  valuable  additions, f 
and  also  furnished  to  the  editor,  the  Reverend 
Mr.  Derby,  a  Dedication, f  which  I  shall  here 
insert,  both  because  it  will  appear  at  this  time 
with  peculiar  propriety;  and  because  it  will  tend 
to  propagate  and  increase  that  “fervour  of  Loy¬ 
alty ,”  which  in  me,  who  boast  of  the  name  of 
Tory,  is  not  only  a  principle,  but  a  passion. 

To  the  King 

Sir,  I  presume  to  lay  before  your  Majesty  the 
last  labours  of  a  learned  Bishop,  who  died  in  the 
toils  and  duties  of  his  calling.  He  is  now  beyond 
the  reach  of  all  earthly  honours  and  rewards; 
and  only  the  hope  of  inciting  others  to  imitate 
him,  makes  it  now  fit  to  be  remembered,  that 
he  enjoyed  in  his  life  the  favour  of  your  Majesty. 

The  tumultuary  life  of  Princes  seldom  per¬ 
mits  them  to  survey  the  wide  extent  of  national 
interest,  without  losing  sight  of  private  merit;  to 
exhibit  qualities  which  may  be  imitated  by  the 
highest  and  the  humblest  of  mankind;  and  to  be 
at  once  amiable  and  great. 

Such  characters,  if  now  and  then  they  appear 
in  history,  are  contemplated  with  admiration. 
May  it  be  the  ambition  of  all  your  subjects  to 
make  haste  with  their  tribute  of  reverence:  and 
as  posterity  may  learn  from  your  Majesty  how 
Kings  should  live,  may  they  learn,  likewise, 
from  your  people,  how  they  should  be  hon¬ 


oured.  I  am,  may  it  please  your  Majesty,  with 
the  most  profound  respect,  your  Majesty’s  most 
dutiful  and  devoted 

Subject  and  Servant 

In  the  summer  he  wrote  a  Prologue*  which 
was  spoken  before  A  Word  to  the  Wise,  a  comedy 
by  Mr.  Hugh  Kelly,  which  had  been  brought 
upon  the  stage  in  1 770;  but  he  being  a  writer  for 
ministry,  in  one  of  the  news-papers,  it  fell  a  sacri¬ 
fice  to  popular  fury,  and  in  the  playhouse  phrase, 
was  damned.  By  the  generosity  of  Mr.  Harris,  the 
proprietor  of  Govent  Garden  theatre,  it  was  now 
exhibited  for  one  night,  for  the  benefit  of  the 
authour’s  widow  and  children.  To  conciliate  the 
favour  of  the  audience  was  the  intention  of  John¬ 
son’s  Prologue,  which,  as  it  is  not  long,  I  shall 
here  insert,  as  a  proof  that  his  poetical  talents 
were  in  no  degree  impaired. 

This  night  presents  a  play,  which publick  rage , 

Or  right  or  wrong,  once  hooted from  the  stage: 

From  zeal  or  malice,  now  no  more  we  dread. 

For  English  vengeance  wars  not  with  the  dead. 

A  generous  foe  regards  with  pitying  eye 

The  man  whom  Fate  has  laid  where  all  must  lie. 

To  wit,  reviving  from  its  authouAs  dust. 

Be  kind,  ye  judges,  or  at  least  be  just: 

Let  no  renewed  hostilities  invade 
Th*  oblivious  grave' s  inviolable  shade. 

Let  one  great  payment  every  claim  appease. 

And  him  who  cannot  hurt,  allow  to  please; 

To  please  by  scenes,  unconscious  of  offence. 

By  harmless  merriment,  or  useful  sense. 

Where  aught  of  bright  or  fair  the  piece  displays , 
Approve  it  only;  9  tis  too  late  to  praise. 

If  want  of  skill  or  want  of  care  appear. 

Forbear  to  hiss; —  the  poet  cannot  hear. 

By  all,  like  him,  must  praise  and  blame  be  found. 

At  last ,  a  fleeting  gleam,  or  empty  sound; 

Tet  then  shall  calm  reflection  bless  the  night , 

When  liberal  pity  dignified  delight; 

When  pleasure  fidd  her  touch  at  virtue* s  flame , 

And  mirth  was  bounty  with  an  humbler  name. 

A  circumstance  which  could  not  fail  to  be 
very  pleasing  to  Johnson  occurred  this  year.  The 
Tragedy  of  Sir  Thomas  Overbury ,  written  by  his 
early  companion  in  London,  Richard  Savage, 
was  brought  out  with  alterations  at  Drury-lane 
theatre.1  The  Prologue  to  it  was  written  by  Mr. 
Richard  Brinsley  Sheridan;  in  which,  after  de¬ 
scribing  very  pathetically  the  wretchedness  of 

Ill-fated  Savage,  at  whose  birth  was  giv*n 
No  parent  but  the  Muse,  no  friend  but  Heav’n: 

he  introduced  an  elegant  compliment  to  John¬ 
son  on  his  Dictionary,  that  wonderful  perform- 

1It  was  not  at  Drury-lane,  but  at  Govent  Garden 
theatre,  that  it  was  acted.  [M.] 


334 

ance  which  cannot  be  too  often  or  too  highly 
praised;  of  which  Mr.  Harris,  in  his  Philological 
Inquiries,1  justly  and  liberally  observes:  “Such  is 
its  merit,  that  our  language  docs  not  possess  a 
more  copious,  learned,  and  valuable  work.” 
The  concluding  lines  of  this  Prologue  were 
these: — 

So  pleads  the  tale 2  that  gives  to  future  times 
The  son's  misfortunes  and  the  parent's  crimes; 

There  shall  his  fame  (if  own'd  to-night)  survive , 

Fix'd  by  the  hand  that  bids  our  language  live. 

Mr.  Sheridan  here  at  once  did  honour  to  his 
taste  and  to  his  liberality  of  sentiment,  by  shew¬ 
ing  that  he  was  not  prejudiced  from  the  unlucky 
difference  which  had  taken  place  between  his 
worthy  father  and  Dr.  Johnson.  I  have  already 
mentioned,  that  Johnson  was  very  desirous  of 
reconciliation  with  old  Mr.  Sheridan.  It  will, 
therefore,  not  seem  at  all  surprizing  that  he  was 
zealous  in  acknowledging  the  brilliant  merit  of 
his  son.  While  it  had  as  yet  been  displayed  only 
in  the  drama,  Johnson  proposed  him  as  a  mem¬ 
ber  of  The  Literary  Club,  observing,  that  “He 
who  has  written  the  two  best  comedies  of  his  age, 
is  surely  a  considerable  man.”  And  he  had,  ac¬ 
cordingly,  the  honour  to  be  elected;  for  an  hon¬ 
our  it  undoubtedly  must  be  allowed  to  be,  when 
it  is  considered  of  whom  that  society  consists,  and 
that  a  single  black  ball  excludes  a  candidate. 

Mr.  Boswell  to  Dr.  Johnson 

July  9,  1777 

My  Dear  Sir,  For  the  health  of  my  wife  and 
children  I  have  taken  the  little  country-house 
at  which  you  visited  my  uncle,  Dr.  Boswell, 
who,  having  lost  his  wife,  is  gone  to  live  with  his 
son.  We  took  possession  of  our  villa  about  a 
week  ago;  we  have  a  garden  of  three  quarters  of 
an  acre,  well  stocked  with  fruit-trees  and  flow¬ 
ers,  and  gooseberries  and  currants,  and  peas 
and  beans,  and  cabbages,  &c.  &c.,  and  my 
children  are  quite  happy.  I  now  write  to  you  in 
a  little  study,  from  the  window  of  which  I  see 
around  me  a  verdant  grove,  and  beyond  it  the 
lofty  mountain  called  Arthur’s  Seat. 

Your  last  letter,  in  which  you  desire  me  to 
send  you  some  additional  information  concern¬ 
ing  Thomson,  reached  me  very  fortunately  just 
as  I  was  going  to  Lanark,  to  put  my  wife’s  two 
nephews,  the  young  Campbells,  to  school  there, 
under  the  care  of  Mr.  Thomson,  the  master  of 
it,  whose  wife  is  sister  to  the  authour  of  The  Sea¬ 
sons .  She  is  an  old  woman;  but  her  memory  is 
very  good;  and  she  will  with  pleasure  give  me 
for  you  every  particular  that  you  wish  to  know, 
and  she  can  tell.  Pray  then  take  the  trouble  to 

Tart  First,  Chap.  4. 

2Life  of  Richard  Savage ,  by  Dr.  Johnson. 


[ 1 777 

send  me  such  questions  as  may  lead  to  biographi¬ 
cal  materials.  You  say  that  the  Life  which  we 
have  of  Thomson  is  scanty.  Since  I  received 
your  letter  I  have  read  his  Life ,  published  under 
the  name  of  Cibber,  but  as  you  told  me,  really 
written  by  a  Mr.  Shiels;3  that  written  by  Dr. 
Murdoch;  one  prefixed  to  an  edition  of  the  Sea¬ 
sons ,  published  at  Edinburgh,  which  is  com¬ 
pounded  of  both,  with  the  addition  of  an  anec¬ 
dote  of  Quin’s  relieving  Thomson  from  prison; 
the  abridgement  of  Murdoch’s  account  of  him, 
in  the  Biographia  Britannica,  and  another  abridge¬ 
ment  of  it  in  the  Biographical  Dictionary ,  enriched 
with  Dr.  Joseph  Warton’s  critical  panegyrick  on 
the  Seasons  in  his  Essay  on  the  Genius  and  Writings 
of  Pope:  from  all  these  it  appears  to  me  that  we 
have  a  pretty  full  account  of  this  poet.  However, 
you  will,  I  doubt  not,  shew  me  many  blanks, 
and  I  shall  do  what  can  be  done  to  have  them 
filled  up.  As  Thomson  never  returned  to  Scot¬ 
land,  (which you  will  think  very  wise,)  his  sister 
can  speak  from  her  own  knowledge  only  as  to 
the  early  part  of  his  life.,  She  has  some  letters 
from  him,  which  may  probably  give  light  as  to 
his  more  advanced  progress,  if  she  will  let  us  see 
them,  which  I  suppose  she  will.  I  believe  George 
Lewis  Scott4  and  Dr.  Armstrong  are  now  his 
only  surviving  companions,  while  he  lived  in 
and  about  London;  and  they,  I  dare  say,  can 
tell  more  of  him  than  is  yet  known.  My  own  no¬ 
tion  is,  that  Thomson  was  a  much  coarser  man 
than  his  friends  are  willing  to  acknowledge.  His 
Seasons  are  indeed  full  of  elegant  and  pious  senti¬ 
ments:  but  a  rank  soil,  nay  a  dunghill,  will  pro¬ 
duce  beautiful  flowers. 

Your  edition  of  The  English  Poets 5  will  be  very 
valuable,  on  account  of  the  Prefaces  and  Lives. 
But  I  have  seen  a  specimen  of  an  edition  of  The 
Poets  at  the  Apollo  press,  at  Edinburgh,  which, 
for  excellence  in  printing  and  engraving,  highly 
deserves  a  liberal  encouragement. 

Most  sincerely  do  I  regret  the  bad  health  and 
bad  rest  with  which  you  have  been  afflicted; 
and  I  hope  you  are  better.  I  cannot  believe  that 
the  Prologue  which  you  generously  gave  to  Mr. 
Kelly’s  widow  and  children  the  other  day,  is  the 
effusion  of  one  in  sickness  and  in  disquietude:  but 
external  circumstances  are  never  sure  indica¬ 
tions  of  the  state  of  man.  I  send  you  a  letter 
which  I  wrote  to  you  two  years  ago  at  Wilton; 
and  did  not  send  it  at  the  time,  for  fear  of  being 
reproved  as  indulging  too  much  tenderness;  and 
one  written  to  you  at  the  tomb  of  Melancthon, 
which  I  kept  back,  lest  I  should  appear  at  once 
too  superstitious  and  too  enthusiastick.  I  now 
imagine  that  perhaps  they  may  please  you. 

3See  ante ,  pp.  305-6. 

4Formerly  Sub-preceptor  to  his  present  Majesty, 
and  afterwards  a  Commissioner  of  Excise.  [M.] 

6Dr.  Johnson  was  not  the  editor  of  this  Collection 
of  The  English  Poets;  he  merely  furnished  the  bio¬ 
graphical  prefaces.  [M,] 


BOSWELL 


1777]  LIFE  OF 

You  do  not  take  the  least  notice  of  my  pro¬ 
posal  for  our  meeting  at  Carlisle.1  Though  I 
have  meritoriously  refrained  from  visiting  Lon¬ 
don  this  year,  I  ask  you  if  it  would  not  be 
wrong  that  I  should  be  two  years  without  hav¬ 
ing  the  benefit  of  your  conversation,  when,  if 
you  come  down  as  far  as  Derbyshire,  we  may 
meet  at  the  expence  of  a  few  days’  journeying, 
and  not  many  pounds.  I  wish  you  to  see  Car¬ 
lisle,  which  made  me  mention  that  place.  But  if 
you  have  not  a  desire  to  complete  your  tour  of 
the  English  cathedrals,  I  will  take  a  larger  share 
of  the  road  between  this  place  and  Ashbourne. 
So  tell  me  where  you  will  fix  for  our  passing  a 
few  days  by  ourselves.  Now  don’t  cry  “foolish 
fellow,”  or  “idle  dog.”  Chain  your  humour,  and 
let  your  kindness  play. 

You  will  rejoice  to  hear  that  Miss  Macleod, 
of  Rasay,  is  married  to  Colonel  Mure  Camp¬ 
bell,  an  excellent  man,  with  a  pretty  good  es¬ 
tate  of  his  own,  and  the  prospect  of  having  the 
Earl  of  Loudoun’s  fortune  and  honours.  Is  not 
this  a  noble  lot  for  our  fair  Hebridean?  How 
happy  am  I  that  she  is  to  be  in  Ayrshire.  We 
shall  have  the  Laird  of  Rasay,  and  old  Mal¬ 
colm,  and  I  know  not  how  many  gallant  Mac- 
leods,  and  bagpipes,  &c.  &c.  at  Auchinleck. 
Perhaps  you  may  meet  them  all  there. 

Without  doubt  you  have  read  what  is  called 
The  Life  of  David  Hume,  written  by  himself, 
with  the  letter  from  Dr.  Adam  Smith  subjoined 
to  it.  Is  not  this  an  age  of  daring  effrontery?  My 
friend  Mr.  Anderson,  Professor  of  Natural  Phi¬ 
losophy  at  Glasgow,  at  whose  house  you  and  I 
supped,  and  to  whose  care  Mr.  Windham,  of 
Norfolk,  was  entrusted  at  that  University,  paid 
me  a  visit  lately;  and  after  we  had  talked  with 
indignation  and  contempt  of  the  poisonous  pro¬ 
ductions  with  which  this  age  is  infested,  he  said 
there  was  now  an  excellent  opportunity  for  Dr. 
Johnson  to  step  forth.  I  agreed  with  him  that 
you  might  knock  Hume’s  and  Smith’s  heads  to¬ 
gether,  and  make  vain  and  ostentatious  infidel¬ 
ity  exceedingly  ridiculous.  Would  it  not  be  worth 
your  while  to  crush  such  noxious  weeds  in  the 
moral  garden? 

*Dr.  Johnson  had  himself  talked  of  our  seeing 
Carlisle  together.  High  was  a  favourite  word  of  his 
to  denote  a  person  of  rank.  He  said  to  me,  “Sir,  I 
believe  we  may  meet  at  the  house  of  a  Roman 
Catholick  lady  in  Cumberland;  a  high  lady,  Sir.”  I 
afterwards  discovered  that  he  meant  Mrs.  Strick¬ 
land,  sister  of  Charles  Townley,  Esq.,  whose  very 
noble  collection  of  statues  and  pictures  is  not  more 
to  be  admired,  than  his  extraordinary  and  polite 
readiness  in  shewing  it,  which  I  and  several  of  my 
friends  have  agreeably  experienced.  They  who  are 
possessed  of  valuable  stores  of  gratification  to  per¬ 
sons  of  taste,  should  exercise  their  benevolence  in 
imparting  the  pleasure.  Grateful  acknowledgments 
are  due  to  Welbore  Ellis  Agar,  Esq.,  for  the  liberal 
access  which  he  is  pleased  to  allow  to  his  exquisite 
collection  of  pictures. 


JOHNSON  335 

You  have  said  nothing  to  me  of  Dr.  Dodd.  I 
know  not  how  you  think  on  that  subject;  though 
the  newspapers  give  us  a  saying  of  your’s  in  fa¬ 
vour  of  mercy  to  him.  But  I  own  I  am  very  de¬ 
sirous  that  the  royal  prerogative  of  remission  of 
punishment  should  be  employed  to  exhibit  an 
illustrious  instance  of  the  regard  which  GOD’s 
Vicegerent  will  ever  shew  to  piety  and  virtue. 
If  for  ten  righteous  men  the  Almighty  would 
have  spared  Sodom,  shall  not  a  thousand  acts  of 
goodness  done  by  Dr.  Dodd  counterbalance  one 
crime?  Such  an  instance  would  do  more  to  en¬ 
courage  goodness,  than  his  execution  would  do 
to  deter  from  vice.  I  am  not  afraid  of  any  bad 
consequence  to  society;  for  who  will  persevere 
for  a  long  course  of  years  in  a  distinguished  dis¬ 
charge  of  religious  duties,  with  a  view  to  com¬ 
mit  a  forgery  with  impunity? 

Pray  make  my  best  compliments  acceptable 
to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Thrale,  by  assuring  them  of  my 
hearty  joy  that  the  Master ,  as  you  call  him,  is 
alive.  I  hope  I  shall  often  taste  his  Champagne 
— soberly. 

I  have  not  heard  from  Langton  for  a  long 
time.  I  suppose  he  is  as  usual, 

Studious  the  busy  moments  to  deceive. 

...  I  remain,  my  dear  Sir,  your  most  affec¬ 
tionate,  and  faithful  humble  servant, 

James  Boswell 

On  the  23rd  of  June,  I  again  wrote  to  Dr. 
Johnson,  enclosing  a  ship-master’s  receipt  for  a 
jar  of  orange-marmalade,  and  a  large  packet  of 
Lord  Hailes’s  Annals  of  Scotland . 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  I  have  just  received  your  packet 
from  Mr.  Thrale’s,  but  have  not  day-light  enough 
to  look  much  into  it.  I  am  glad  that  I  have 
credit  enough  with  Lord  Hailes  to  be  trusted 
with  more  copy.  I  hope  to  take  more  care  of  it 
than  of  the  last.  I  return  Mrs.  Boswell  my  affec¬ 
tionate  thanks  for  her  present,  which  I  value  as 
a  token  of  reconciliation. 

Poor  Dodd  was  put  to  death  yesterday,  in  op¬ 
position  to  the  recommendation  of  the  jury — 
the  petition  of  the  city  of  London — and  a  subse¬ 
quent  petition  signed  by  three-and-twenty  thou¬ 
sand  hands.  Surely  the  voice  of  the  publick, 
when  it  calls  so  loudly,  and  calls  only  for  mercy, 
ought  to  be  heard. 

The  saying  that  was  given  me  in  the  papers  I 
never  spoke;  but  I  wrote  many  of  his  petitions, 
and  some  of  his  letters.  He  applied  to  me  very 
often.  He  was,  I  am  afraid,  long  flattered  with 
hopes  of  life;  but  I  had  no  part  in  the  dreadful 
delusion;  for,  as  soon  as  the  King  had  signed  his 
sentence,  I  obtained  from  Mr.  Chamier  an  ac¬ 
count  of  the  disposition  of  the  court  towards 
him,  with  a  declaration  that  there  was  no  hope 
even  of  a  respite.  This  letter  immediately  was  laid 


336 

before  Dodd;  but  he  believed  those  whom  he 
wished  to  be  right,  as  it  is  thought,  till  within 
three  days  of  his  end.  He  died  with  pious  com¬ 
posure  and  resolution.  I  have  just  seen  the  Or¬ 
dinary  that  attended  him.  His  address  to  his 
fellow-convicts  offended  the  Methodists;  but  he 
had  a  Moravian  with  him  much  of  his  time. 
His  moral  character  is  very  bad:  I  hope  all  is 
not  true  that  is  charged  upon  him.  Of  his  be¬ 
haviour  in  prison  an  account  will  be  published. 

I  give  you  joy  of  your  country-house,  and 
your  pretty  garden;  and  hope  some  time  to  see 
you  in  your  felicity.  I  was  much  pleased  with 
your  two  letters  that  had  been  kept  so  long  in 
store;1  and  rejoice  at  Miss  Rasay’s  advance¬ 
ment,  and  wish  Sir  Allan  success. 

^ince  they  have  been  so  much  honoured  by  Dr. 
Johnson  I  shall  here  insert  them: — 

“To  Mr.  Samuel  Johnson 

“My  ever  dear  and  much-respected  Sir,  You 
know  my  solemn  enthusiasm  of  mind.  You  love  me 
for  it,  and  I  respect  myself  for  it,  because  in  so  far 
I  resemble  Mr.  Johnson.  You  will  be  agreeably 
surprized  when  you  learn  the  reason  of  my  writing 
this  letter.  I  am  at  Wittemberg  in  Saxony.  I  am  in 
the  old  church  where  the  Reformation  was  first 
preached,  and  where  some  of  the  reformers  lie  in¬ 
terred.  I  cannot  resist  the  serious  pleasure  of  writ¬ 
ing  to  Mr.  Johnson  from  the  Tomb  of  Melancthon. 
My  paper  rests  upon  the  grave-stone  of  that  great 
and  good  man,  who  was  undoubtedly  the  worth¬ 
iest  of  all  the  reformers.  He  wished  to  reform  abus¬ 
es  which  had  been  introduced  into  the  Church; 
but  had  no  private  resentment  to  gratify.  So  mild 
was  he,  that  when  his  aged  mother  consulted  him 
with  anxiety  on  the  perplexing  disputes  of  the 
times,  he  advised  her  ‘to  keep  to  the  old  religion.’ 
At  this  tomb,  then,  my  ever  dear  and  respected 
friend!  I  vow  to  thee  an  eternal  attachment.  It 
shall  be  my  study  to  do  what  I  can  to  render  your 
life  happy:  and,  if  you  die  before  me,  I  shall  en¬ 
deavour  to  do  honour  to  your  memory;  and,  ele¬ 
vated  by  the  remembrance  of  you,  persist  in  noble 
piety.  May  God,  the  Father  of  all  beings,  ever  bless 
you !  and  may  you  continue  to  love,  your  most  af¬ 
fectionate  friend,  and  devoted  servant, 

“Sunday,  Sept.  30,  1764”  “James  Boswell” 

“To  Dr.  Samuel  Johnson 

“Wilton-house,  April  22,  1775. 

“My  Dear  Sir,  Every  scene  of  my  life  confirms 
the  truth  of  what  you  have  told  me,  ‘there  is  no 
certain  happiness  in  this  state  of  being.’ — I  am 
here,  amidst  all  that  you  know  is  at  Lord  Pem¬ 
broke’s;  and  yet  I  am  weary  and  gloomy.  I  am 
just  setting  out  for  the  house  of  an  old  friend  in 
Devonshire,  and  shall  not  get  back  to  London  for 
a  week  yet.  You  said  to  me  last  Good-Friday,  with 
a  cordiality  that  warmed  my  heart,  that  if  1  came 
to  settle  in  London,  we  should  have  a  day  fixed 
every  week,  to  meet  by  ourselves  and  talk  freely. 
To  be  thought  worthy  of  such  a  privilege  cannot 
but  exalt  me.  During  my  present  absence  from  you, 
while,  notwithstanding  the  gaiety  which  you  allow 
me  to  possess,  lam  darkened  by  temporary  clouds, 
I  beg  to  have  a  few  lines  from  you;  a  few  lines 
merely  of  kindness,  as  a  viaticum  till  I  see  you  again. 


[ 1 777 

I  hope  to  meet  you  somewhere  towards  the 
north,  but  am  loath  to  come  quite  to  Carlisle. 
Can  we  not  meet  at  Manchester?  But  we  will 
settle  it  in  some  other  letters. 

Mr.  Seward,2  a  great  favourite  at  Streatham, 
has  been,  I  think,  enkindled  by  our  travels  with 
a  curiosity  to  see  the  Highlands.  I  have  given 
him  letters  to  you  and  Beattie.  He  desires  that  a 
lodging  may  be  taken  for  him  at  Edinburgh, 
against  his  arrival.  He  is  just  setting  out. 

Langton  has  been  exercising  the  militia.  Mrs. 
Williams  is,  I  fear,  declining.  Dr.  Lawrence 
says  he  can  do  no  more.  She  is  gone  to  summer 
in  the  country,  with  as  many  conveniences  about 
her  as  she  can  expect;  but  I  have  no  great  hope. 
We  must  all  die:  may  we  all  be  prepared! 

I  suppose  Miss  Boswell  reads  her  book,  and 
young  Alexander  takes  to  his  learning.  Let  me 
hear  about  them;  for  every  thing  that  belongs 
to  you,  belongs  in  a  more  remote  degree,  and 
not,  I  hope,  very  remote,  to,  dear  Sir,  yours 
affectionately, 

Sam.  Johnson 

June  28,  1777 

To  the  Same 

Dear  Sir,  This  gentleman  is  a  great  favour¬ 
ite  at  Streatham,  and  therefore  you  will  easily 
believe  that  he  has  very  valuable  qualities.  Our 
narrative  has  kindled  him  with  a  desire  of  visit¬ 
ing  the  Highlands,  after  having  already  seen  a 
great  part  of  Europe.  You  must  receive  him  as  a 
friend,  and  when  you  have  directed  him  to  the 
curiosities  of  Edinburgh,  give  him  instructions 
and  recommendations  for  the  rest  of  his  jour¬ 
ney.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

June  24,  1777 

Johnson’s  benevolence  to  the  unfortunate  was, 
I  am  confident,  as  steady  and  active  as  that  of 
any  of  those  who  have  been  most  eminently  dis¬ 
tinguished  for  that  virtue.  Innumerable  proofs 
of  it  I  have  no  doubt  will  be  for  ever  concealed 
from  mortal  eyes.  We  may,  however,  form  some 
judgement  of  it,  from  the  many  and  very  vari¬ 
ous  instances  which  have  been  discovered.  One, 
which  happened  in  the  course  of  this  summer,  is 
remarkable  from  the  name  and  connection  of  the 
person  who  was  the  object  of  it.  The  circum- 

In  your  Vanity  of  Human  Wishes ,  and  in  Parnell’s 
Contentment ,  I  find  the  only  sure  means  of  enjoying 
happiness;  or,  at  least,  the  hopes  of  happiness.  I 
ever  am,  with  reverence  and  affection,  most  faith- 
fully  yours,  “JameS  Boswell” 

2William  Seward,  Esq.,  F.R.S.,  editor  of  Anec¬ 
dotes  oj  Some  Distinguished  Persons ,  etc.,  in  four  vol¬ 
umes,  8 vo.,  well  known  to  a  numerous  and  valu¬ 
able  acquaintance  for  his  literature,  love  of  the 
fine  arts,  and  social  virtues.  I  am  indebted  to  him 
for  several  communications  concerning  Johnson. 


BOSWELL 


1777  ] 

stance  to  which  I  allude  is  ascertained  by  two 
letters,  one  to  Mr.  Langton,  and  another  to  the 
Reverend  Dr.  Vyse,  rector  of  Lambeth,  son  of 
the  respectable  clergyman  at  Lichfield,  who  was 
contemporary  with  Johnson,  and  in  whose  fa¬ 
ther’s  family  Johnson  had  the  happiness  of  be¬ 
ing  kindly  received  in  his  early  years. 

Dr.  Johnson  to  Bennet  Langton,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  I  have  lately  been  much  disor¬ 
dered  by  a  difficulty  of  breathing,  but  am  now 
better.  I  hope  your  house  is  well. 

You  know  we  have  been  talking  lately  of  St. 
Cross,  at  Winchester;  I  have  an  old  acquaint¬ 
ance  whose  distress  makes  him  very  desirous  of 
an  hospital,  and  I  am  afraid  I  have  not  strength 
enough  to  get  him  into  the  Chartreux.  He  is  a 
painter,  who  never  rose  higher  than  to  get  his 
immediate  living,  and  from  that,  at  eighty- 
three,  he  is  disabled  by  a  slight  stroke  of  the 
palsy,  such  as  does  not  make  him  at  all  helpless 
on  common  occasions,  though  his  hand  is  not 
steady  enough  for  his  art. 

My  request  is,  that  you  will  try  to  obtain  a 
promise  of  the  next  vacancy,  from  the  Bishop  of 
Chester.  It  is  not  a  great  thing  to  ask,  and  I 
hope  we  shall  obtain  it.  Dr.  Warton  has  prom¬ 
ised  to  favour  him  with  his  notice,  and  I  hope 
he  may  end  his  days  in  peace.  I  am,  Sir,  your 
most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

June  29,  1777 

To  the  Reverend  Dr.  Vyse,  at  Lambeth 

Sir,  I  doubt  not  but  you  will  readily  forgive 
me  for  taking  the  liberty  of  requesting  your  as¬ 
sistance  in  recommending  an  old  friend  to  his 
Grace  the  Archbishop,  as  Governour  of  the 
Charter-house. 

His  name  is  De  Groot;  he  was  born  at  Glouces¬ 
ter;  I  have  known  him  many  years.  He  has  all 
the  common  claims  to  charity,  being  old,  poor, 
and  infirm,  in  a  great  degree.  He  has  likewise 
another  claim,  to  which  no  scholar  can  refuse 
attention;  he  is  by  several  descents  the  nephew 
of  Hugo  Grotius;  of  him,  from  whom  perhaps 
every  man  of  learning  has  learnt  something. 
Let  it  not  be  said  that  in  any  lettered  country  a 
nephew  of  Grotius  asked  a  charity  and  was  re¬ 
fused.  I  am,  reverend  Sir,  your  most  humble 
servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

July  9,  1777 

Reverend  Dr.  Vyse  to  Mr.  Boswell 
Lambeth,  June  9,  1 787 

Sir,  I  have  searched  in  vain  for  the  letter 
which  I  spoke  of,  and  which  I  wished,  at  your 
desire,  to  communicate  to  you.  It  was  from  Dr. 
Johnson,  to  return  me  thanks  for  my  application 
to  Archbishop  Cornwallis  in  favour  of  poor  De 
Groot.  He  rejoices  at  the  success  it  met  with, 


337 

and  is  lavish  in  the  praise  he  bestows  upon  his 
favourite,  Hugo  Grotius.  I  am  really  sorry  that 
I  cannot  find  this  letter,  as  it  is  worthy  of  the 
writer.  That  which  I  send  you  enclosed1  is  at 
your  service.  It  is  very  short,  and  will  not  per¬ 
haps  be  thought  of  any  consequence,  unless  you 
should  judge  proper  to  consider  it  as  a  proof  of 
the  very  humane  part  which  Dr.  Johnson  took  in 
behalf  of  a  distressed  and  deserving  person.  I 
am,  Sir,  your  most  obedient  humble  servant, 

W.  Vyse 

Dr.  Johnson  to  Mr.  Edward  Dilly 

Sir,  To  the  collection  of  English  Poets ,  I  have 
recommended  the  volume  of  Dr.  Watts  to  be 
added;  his  name  has  long  been  held  by  me  in 
veneration,  and  I  would  not  willingly  be  re¬ 
duced  to  tell  of  him  only  that  he  was  born  and 
died.  Yet  of  his  life  I  know  very  little,  and  there¬ 
fore  must  pass  him  in  a  manner  very  unworthy 
of  his  character,  unless  some  of  his  friends  will 
favour  me  with  the  necessary  information;  many 
of  them  must  be  known  to  you;  and  by  your  in¬ 
fluence,  perhaps  I  may  obtain  some  instruction. 
My  plan  does  not  exact  much;  but  I  wish  to  dis¬ 
tinguish  Watts,  a  man  who  never  wrote  but  for 
a  good  purpose.  Be  pleased  to  do  for  me  what 
you  can.  I  am,  Sir,  your  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

Bolt-Court,  Fleet-street 
July  7,  1777 

To  Dr.  Samuel  Johnson 

Edinburgh,  July  15,  1777 

My  Dear  Sir,  The  fate  of  poor  Dr.  Dodd 
made  a  dismal  impression  upon  my  mind.  .  .  . 

I  had  sagacity  enough  to  divine  that  you 
wrote  his  speech  to  the  Recorder,  before  sen¬ 
tence  was  pronounced.  I  am  glad  you  have 
written  so  much  for  him;  and  I  hope  to  be  fa¬ 
voured  with  an  exact  list  of  the  several  pieces 
when  we  meet. 

I  received  Mr.  Seward  as  the  friend  of  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Thrale,  and  as  a  gentleman  recom¬ 
mended  by  Dr.  Johnson  to  my  attention.  I  have 
introduced  him  to  Lord  Karnes,  Lord  Monbod- 
do,  and  Mr.  Nairne.  He  is  gone  to  the  High¬ 
lands  with  Dr.  Gregory;  when  he  returns  I  shall 
do  more  for  him. 

Sir  Allan  Maclean  has  carried  that  branch 
of  his  cause,  of  which  we  had  good  hopes:  the 
President  and  one  other  Judge  only  were  against 
him.  I  wish  the  House  of  Lords  may  do  as  well 
as  the  Court  of  Session  has  done.  But  Sir  Allan 
has  not  the  lands  of  Brolos  quite  cleared  by  this 
judgement,  till  a  long  account  is  made  up  of 
debts  and  interests  on  the  one  side,  and  rents  on 
the  other.  I  am,  however,  not  much  afraid  of 
the  balance. 

Macquarry’s  estates,  Staffa  and  all,  were  sold 
yesterday,  and  bought  by  a  Campbell.  I  fear  he 

1The  preceding  letter. 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


338 

will  have  little  or  nothing  left  out  of  the  pur¬ 
chase  money. 

I  send  you  the  case  against  the  negro,  by  Mr. 
Cullen,  son  to  Dr.  Cullen,  in  opposition  to  Mac- 
laurin’s  for  liberty,  of  which  you  have  approved. 
Pray  read  this,  and  tell  me  what  you  think  as  a 
Politician ,  as  well  as  a  Poet ,  upon  the  subject. 

Be  so  kind  as  to  let  me  know  how  your  time  is 
to  be  distributed  next  autumn.  I  will  meet  you 
at  Manchester,  or  where  you  please;  but  I  wish 
you  would  complete  your  tour  of  the  cathedrals, 
and  come  to  Carlisle,  and  I  will  accompany  you 
a  part  of  the  way  homewards.  I  am  ever,  most 
faithfully  yours, 

James  Boswell 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq,. 

Dear  Sir,  Your  notion  of  the  necessity  of  an 
yearly  interview  is  very  pleasing  to  both  my 
vanity  and  tenderness.  I  shall,  perhaps,  come  to 
Carlisle  another  year;  but  my  money  has  not 
held  out  so  well  as  it  used  to  do.  I  shall  go  to 
Ashbourne,  and  I  purpose  to  make  Dr.  Taylor 
invite  you.  If  you  live  awhile  with  me  at  his 
house,  we  shall  have  much  time  to  ourselves, 
and  our  stay  will  be  no  expence  to  us  or  him.  I 
shall  leave  London  the  28th;  and  after  some 
stay  at  Oxford  and  Lichfield,  shall  probably 
come  to  Ashbourne  about  the  end  of  your  Ses¬ 
sion,  but  of  all  this  you  shall  have  notice.  Be 
satisfied  we  will  meet  somewhere. 

What  passed  between  me  and  poor  Dr.  Dodd 
you  shall  know  more  fully  when  we  meet. 

Of  lawsuits  there  is  no  end;  poor  Sir  Allan 
must  have  another  trial,  for  which,  however,  his 
antagonist  cannot  be  much  blamed,  having  two 
Judges  on  his  side.  I  am  more  afraid  of  the  debts 
than  of  the  House  of  Lords.  It  is  scarcely  to  be 
imagined  to  what  debts  will  swell,  that  are  daily 
increasing  by  small  additions,  and  how  care¬ 
lessly  in  a  state  of  desperation  debts  are  con¬ 
tracted.  Poor  Macquarry  was  far  from  thinking 
that  when  he  sold  his  islands  he  should  receive 
nothing.  For  what  were  they  sold?  And  what 
was  their  yearly  value?  The  admission  of  money 
into  the  Highlands  will  soon  put  an  end  to  the 
feudal  modes  of  life,  by  making  those  men  land¬ 
lords  who  were  not  chiefs.  I  do  not  know  that 
the  people  will  suffer  by  the  change;  but  there 
was  in  the  patriarchal  authority  something  ven¬ 
erable  and  pleasing.  Every  eye  must  look  with 
pain  on  a  Campbell  turning  the  Macquarries  at  will 
out  of  their  sedes  avita,  their  hereditary  island. 

Sir  Alexander  Dick  is  the  only  Scotsman  lib¬ 
eral  enough  not  to  be  angry  that  I  could  not 
find  trees,  where  trees  were  not.  I  was  much  de¬ 
lighted  by  his  kind  letter. 

I  remember  Rasay  with  too  much  pleasure 
not  to  partake  of  the  happiness  of  any  part  of 
that  amiable  family.  Our  ramble  in  the  islands 
hangs  upon  my  imagination,  I  can  hardly  help 
imagining  that  we  shall  go  again.  Pennant  seems 


[  1777 

to  have  seen  a  great  deal  which  we  did  not  see: 
when  we  travel  again  let  us  look  better  about  us. 

You  have  done  right  in  taking  your  uncle’s 
house.  Some  change  in  the  form  of  life,  gives 
from  time  to  time  a  new  epocha  of  existence.  In 
a  new  place  there  is  something  new  to  be  done, 
and  a  different  system  of  thoughts  rises  in  the 
mind.  I  wish  I  could  gather  currants  in  your 
garden.  Now  fit  up  a  little  study,  and  have  your 
books  ready  at  hand;  do  not  spare  a  little  mon¬ 
ey,  to  make  your  habitation  pleasing  to  yourself. 

I  have  dined  lately  with  poor  dear - .  I 

do  not  think  he  goes  on  well.  His  table  is  rather 
coarse,  and  he  has  his  children  too  much  about 
him.1  But  he  is  a  very  good  man. 

Mrs.  Williams  is  in  the  country  to  try  if  she 
can  improve  her  health;  she  is  very  ill.  Matters 
have  come  so  about  that  she  is  in  the  country 
with  very  good  accommodation;  but  age  and 
sickness,  and  pride,  have  made  her  so  peevish 
that  I  was  forced  to  bribe  the  maid  to  stay  with 
her,  by  a  secret  stipulation  of  half  a  crown  a 
week  over  her  wages. 

Our  Club  ended  its  session  about  six  weeks 
ago.  We  now  only  meet  to  dine  once  a  fort¬ 
night.  Mr.  Dunning,  the  great  lawyer,  is  one  of 
our  members.  The  Thrales  are  well. 

I  long  to  know  how  the  Negro’s  cause  will  be 
decided.  What  is  the  opinion  of  Lord  Auchin- 
leck,  or  Lord  Hailes,  or  Lord  Monboddo?  I  am, 
dear  Sir,  your  most  affectionate,  &c. 

Sam.  Johnson 

July  22,  1777 

Dr.  Johnson  to  Mrs.  Boswell 

Madam,  Though  I  am  well  enough  pleased 
with  the  taste  of  sweetmeats,  very  little  of  the 
pleasure  which  I  received  at  the  arrival  of  your 
jar  of  marmalade  arose  from  eating  it.  I  re¬ 
ceived  it  as  a  token  of  friendship,  as  a  proof  of 
reconciliation,  things  much  sweeter  than  sweet¬ 
meats,  and  upon  this  consideration  I  return  you, 
dear  Madam,  my  sincerest  thanks.  By  having 
your  kindness  I  think  I  have  a  double  security 
for  the  continuance  of  Mr.  Boswell’s,  which  it  is 
not  to  be  expected  that  any  man  can  long  keep, 
when  the  influence  of  a  lady  so  highly  and  so 
justly  valued  operates  against  him.  Mr.  Boswell 
will  tell  you  that  I  was  always  faithful  to  your 
interest,  and  always  endeavoured  to  exalt  you 
in  his  estimation.  You  must  now  do  the  same 
for  me.  We  must  all  help  one  another,  and  you 

HThis  very  just  remark  I  hope  will  be  constantly 
held  in  remembrance  by  parents,  who  are  in  gen¬ 
eral  too  apt  to  indulge  their  own  fond  feelings  for 
their  children  at  the  expence  of  their  friends.  The 
common  custom  of  introducing  them  after  dinner 
is  highly  injudicious.  It  is  agreeable  enough  that 
they  should  appear  at  any  other  time;  but  they 
should  not  be  suffered  to  poison  the  moments  of 
festivity  by  attracting  the  attention  of  the  com¬ 
pany,  and  in  a  manner  compelling  them  from  po¬ 
liteness  to  say  what  they  do  not  think. 


BOSWELL 


1777]  LIFE  OF 

must  now  consider  me,  as,  dear  Madam,  your 
most  obliged,  and  most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

July  22,  1777 

Mr.  Boswell  to  Dr.  Johnson 

Edinburgh,  July  28,  1777 

My  Dear  Sir,  This  is  the  day  on  which  you 
were  to  leave  London,  and  I  have  been  amusing 
myself  in  the  intervals  of  my  law-drudgery, 
with  figuring  you  in  the  Oxford  post-coach.  I 
doubt,  however,  if  you  have  had  so  merry  a 
journey  as  you  and  I  had  in  that  vehicle  last 
year,  when  you  made  so  much  sport  with  Gwyn, 
the  architect.  Incidents  upon  a  journey  are  rec¬ 
ollected  with  peculiar  pleasure;  they  are  pre¬ 
served  in  brisk  spirits,  and  come  up  again  in  our 
minds,  tinctured  with  that  gaiety,  or  at  least  that 
animation  with  which  we  first  perceived  them. . . . 

[I  added,  that  something  had  occurred,  which 
I  was  afraid  might  prevent  me  from  meeting 
him;  and  that  my  wife  has  been  affected  with 
complaints  which  threatened  a  consumption, 
but  was  now  better.] 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  Do  not  disturb  yourself  about  our 
interviews;  I  hope  we  shall  have  many;  nor 
think  it  any  thing  hard  or  unusual,  that  your 
design  of  meeting  me  is  interrupted.  We  have 
both  endured  greater  evils,  and  have  greater 
evils  to  expect. 

Mrs.  Boswell’s  illness  makes  a  more  serious 
distress.  Does  the  blood  rise  from  her  lungs  or 
from  her  stomach?  From  little  vessels  broken  in 
the  stomach  there  is  no  danger.  Blood  from  the 
lungs  is,  I  believe,  always  frothy,  as  mixed  with 
wind.  Your  physicians  know  very  well  what  is  to 
be  done.  The  loss  of  such  a  lady  would,  indeed, 
be  very  afflictive,  and  I  hope  she  is  in  no  danger. 
Take  care  to  keep  her  mind  as  easy  as  is  possible. 

I  have  left  Langton  in  London.  He  has  been 
down  with  the  militia,  and  is  again  quiet  at 
home,  talking  to  his  little  people,  as,  I  suppose, 
you  do  sometimes.  Make  my  compliments  to  Miss 
Veronica.  The  rest  are  too  young  for  ceremony. 

I  cannot  but  hope  that  you  have  taken  your 
country-house  at  a  very  seasonable  time,  and 
that  it  may  conduce  to  restore,  or  establish  Mrs. 
Boswell’s  health,  as  well  as  provide  room  and 
exercise  for  the  young  ones.  That  you  and  your 
lady  may  both  be  happy,  and  long  enjoy  your 
happiness,  is  the  sincere  and  earnest  wish  of, 
dear  Sir,  your  most,  &c. 

Sam.  Johnson 

Oxford,  Aug.  4,  1777 

Mr.  Boswell  to  Dr.  Johnson 

[Informing  him  that  my  wife  had  continued 
to  grow  better,  so  that  my  alarming  apprehen¬ 
sions  were  relieved:  and  that  I  hoped  to  disen¬ 
gage  myself  from  the  other  embarrassment 


339 

which  had  occurred,  and  therefore  requesting 
to  know  particularly  when  he  intended  to  be  at 
Ashbourne.] 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  I  am  this  day  come  to  Ashbourne, 
and  have  only  to  tell  you,  that  Dr.  Taylor  says 
you  shall  be  welcome  to  him,  and  you  know  how 
welcome  you  will  be  to  me.  Make  haste  to  let 
me  know  when  you  may  be  expected. 

Make  my  compliments  to  Mrs.  Boswell,  and 
tell  her,  I  hope  we  shall  be  at  variance  no  more. 
I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

August  30,  1777 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  On  Saturday  I  wrote  a  very  short 
letter,  immediately  upon  my  arrival  hither,  to 
shew  you  that  I  am  not  less  desirous  of  the  inter¬ 
view  than  yourself.  Life  admits  not  of  delays; 
when  pleasure  can  be  had,  it  is  fit  to  catch  it. 
Every  hour  takes  away  part  of  the  things  that 
please  us,  and  perhaps  part  of  our  disposition 
to  be  pleased.  When  I  came  to  Lichfield,  I 
found  my  old  friend  Harry  Jackson  dead.  It 
was  a  loss,  and  a  loss  not  to  be  repaired,  as  he 
was  one  of  the  companions  of  my  childhood.  I 
hope  we  may  long  continue  to  gain  friends,  but 
the  friends  which  merit  or  usefulness  can  pro¬ 
cure  us,  are  not  able  to  supply  the  place  of  old 
acquaintance,  with  whom  the  days  of  youth 
may  be  retraced,  and  those  images  revived  which 
gave  the  earliest  delight.  If  you  and  I  live  to  be 
much  older,  we  shall  take  great  delight  in  talk¬ 
ing  over  the  Hebridean  Journey. 

In  the  mean  time  it  may  not  be  amiss  to  con¬ 
trive  some  other  little  adventure,  but  what  it 
can  be  I  know  not;  leave  it,  as  Sidney  says, 

To  virtue,  fortune,  wine,  and  woman's  breast ;l 

JBy  an  odd  mistake,  in  the  first  three  editions  we 
find  a  reading  in  this  line  to  which  Dr.  Johnson 
would  by  no  means  have  subscribed,  wine  having 
been  substituted  for  time.  That  error  probably  was 
a  mistake  in  the  transcript  of  Johnson’s  original 
letter.  The  other  deviation  in  the  beginning  of  the 
line  ( virtue  instead  of  nature)  must  be  attributed  to 
his  memory  having  deceived  him.  The  verse  quot¬ 
ed  is  the  concluding  line  of  a  sonnet  of  Sidney’s: 

Who  doth  desire  that  chast  his  wife  should  bee, 

First  be  he  true,  for  truth  doth  truth  deserve; 

Then  be  he  such ,  as  she  his  worth  may  see. 

And,  alwaies  one,  credit  with  her  preserve : 

Not  toying  kynd  nor  causelessly  unkynd. 

Nor  stirring  thoughts,  nor  yet  denying  right. 

Nor  spying  faults,  nor  in  plaine  errors  blind. 

Never  hard  hand,  nor  ever  rayns  {reins)  too  light; 

As  far  from  want,  as  far  from  vaine  expence, 

Th’  one  doth  enforce,  the  t’other  doth  entice: 

Allow  good  companie,  but  drive  from  thence 
Allfilthie  mouths  that  glorie  in  their  vice: 

This  done,  thou  hast  no  more  but  leave  the  rest 
To  nature,  fortune,  time,  and  woman! s  breast. 

[M.] 


JOHNSON 


340 

for  I  believe  Mrs.  Boswell  must  have  some  part 
in  the  consultation. 

One  thing  you  will  like.  The  Doctor,  so  far  as 
1  can  judge,  is  likely  to  leave  us  enough  to  our¬ 
selves.  He  was  out  to-day  before  I  came  down, 
and,  I  fancy,  will  stay  out  till  dinner.  I  have 
brought  the  papers  about  poor  Dodd,  to  show 
you,  but  you  will  soon  have  dispatched  them. 

Before  I  came  away  I  sent  poor  Mrs.  Williams 
into  the  country7,  very  ill  of  a  pituitous  defluxion, 
which  wastes  her  gradually  away,  and  which 
her  physician  declares  himself  unable  to  stop.  I 
supplied  her  as  far  as  could  be  desired,  with  all 
conveniences  to  make  her  excursion  and  abode 
pleasant  and  useful.  But  I  am  afraid  she  can  only 
linger  a  short  time  in  a  morbid  state  of  weak¬ 
ness  and  pain. 

The  Thrales,  little  and  great,  are  all  well,  and 
purpose  to  go  to  Brighthelmstone  at  Michaelmas. 
They  will  invite  me  to  go  with  them,  and  per¬ 
haps  I  may  go,  but  I  hardly  think  I  shall  like  to 
stay  the  whole  time;  but  of  futurity  we  know 
but  little. 

Mrs.  Porter  is  well;  but  Mrs.  Aston,  one  of 
the  ladies  at  Stowhill,  has  been  struck  with  a 
palsy,  from  which  she  is  not  likely  ever  to  recov¬ 
er.  How  soon  may  such  a  stroke  fall  upon  us ! 

Write  to  me,  and  let  us  know  when  we  may 
expect  you.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  most  humble 
servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

Ashbourne,  Sept,  i,  1777 

Mr.  Boswell  to  Dr.  Johnson 

Edinburgh,  Sept.  9,  1777 

[After  informing  him  that  I  was  to  set  out 
next  day,  in  order  to  meet  him  at  Ashbourne: — ] 

I  have  a  present  for  you  from  Lord  Hailes; 
the  fifth  book  of  Lactantius ,  which  he  has  pub¬ 
lished  with  Latin  notes.  He  is  also  to  give  you  a 
few  anecdotes  for  your  Life  of  Thomson ,  who  I 
find  was  private  tutor  to  the  present  Earl  of 
Hadington,  Lord  Hailes’s  cousin,  a  circumstance 
not  mentioned  by  Dr.  Murdoch.  I  have  keen 
expectations  of  delight  from  your  edition  of  The 
English  Poets. 

I  am  sorry  for  poor  Mrs.  Williams’s  situation. 
You  will,  however,  have  the  comfort  of  reflect¬ 
ing  on  your  kindness  to  her.  Mr.Jackson’s  death, 
and  Mrs.  Aston’s  palsy,  are  gloomy  circum¬ 
stances.  Yet  surely  we  should  be  habituated  to 
the  uncertainty  of  life  and  health.  When  my 
mind  is  unclouded  by  melancholy,  I  consider 
the  temporary  distresses  of  this  state  of  being,  as 
light  afflictions,  by  stretching  my  mental  view 
into  that  glorious  after-existence,  when  they  will 
appear  to  be  as  nothing.  But  present  pleasures 
and  present  pains  must  be  felt.  I  lately  read 
Rasselas  over  again  with  great  satisfaction. 

Since  you  are  desirous  to  hear  about  Mac- 
quarry’s  sale  I  shall  inform  you  particularly.The 
gentleman  who  purchased  Ulva  is  Mr.  Camp- 


[  1777 

bell,  of  Auchnaba:  our  friend  Macquarry  was 
proprietor  of  two-thirds  of  it,  of  which  the  rent 
was  £156  5$.  1  yid.  This  parcel  was  set  up  at 
£4,069  55-.  1  d.,  but  it  sold  for  no  less  than 
£5,540.  The  other  third  of  Ulva,  with  the  island 
of  Stafla,  belonged  to  Macquarry  of  Ormaig. 
Its  rent,  including  that  of  Stafla,  £83  12 s.  2*4(1. 
— set  up  at  £2 1 78  16s.  4 d. — sold  for  no  less  than 
£3,540.  The  Laird  of  Col  wished  to  purchase 
Ulva,  but  he  thought  the  price  too  high.  There 
may,  indeed, be  great  improvements  made  there, 
both  in  fishing  and  agriculture;  but  the  interest 
of  the  purchase-money  exceeds  the  rent  so  very 
much,  that  I  doubt  if  the  bargain  will  be  profit¬ 
able.  There  is  an  island  called  Little  Colonsay, 
Qf  £10  yearly  rent,  which  I  am  informed  has 
belonged  to  the  Macquarrys  of  Ulva  for  many 
ages,  but  which  was  lately  claimed  by  the  Pres¬ 
byterian  Synod  of  Argyll,  in  consequence  of  a 
grant  made  to  them  by  Queen  Anne.  It  is  be¬ 
lieved  that  their  claim  will  be  dismissed,  and 
that  Little  Colonsay  will  also  be  sold  for  the  ad¬ 
vantage  of  Macquarry’s  creditors.  What  think 
you  of  purchasing  this  island,  and  endowing  a 
school  or  college  there,  the  master  to  be  a  cler¬ 
gyman  of  the  Church  of  England?  How  venera¬ 
ble  would  such  an  institution  make  the  name  of 
Dr.  Samuel  Johnson  in  the  Hebrides!  I  have, 
like  yourself,  a  wonderful  pleasure  in  recollect¬ 
ing  our  travels  in  those  islands.  The  pleasure  is, 
I  think,  greater  than  it  reasonably  should  be, 
considering  that  we  had  not  much  either  of 
beauty  or  elegance  to  charm  our  imaginations, 
or  of  rude  novelty  to  astonish.  Let  us,  by  all 
means,  have  another  expedition.  I  shrink  a  little 
from  our  scheme  of  going  up  the  Baltick.1  I  am 

Tt  appears  that  Johnson,  now  in  his  sixty-eighth 
year,  was  seriously  inclined  to  realise  the  project 
of  our  going  up  the  Baltick,  which  I  had  started 
when  we  were  in  the  Isle  of  Sky;  for  he  thus  writes 
to  Mrs.  Thrale;  Letters ,  vol.  i,  p.  366:  — 

“Ashbourne,  Sept.  13,  1777 

“Boswell,  I  believe,  is  coming.  He  talks  of  being 
here  to  day:  I  shall  be  glad  to  see  him:  but  he 
shrinks  from  the  Baltick  expedition,  which,  I  think, 
is  the  best  scheme  in  our  power:  what  we  shall  sub¬ 
stitute  I  know  not.  He  wants  to  see  Wales;  but,  ex¬ 
cept  the  woods  of  Bachycraigh ,  what  is  there  in 
Wales,  that  can  fill  the  hunger  of  ignorance,  or 
quench  the  thirst  of  curiosity?  We  may,  perhaps, 
form  some  scheme  or  other;  but,  in  the  phrase  of 
Hockley  in  the  Hole ,  it  is  a  pity  he  has  not  a  better 
bottom .” 

Such  an  ardour  of  mind,  and  vigour  of  enter¬ 
prise,  is  admirable  at  any  age:  but  more  particu¬ 
larly  so  at  the  advanced  period  at  which  Johnson 
was  then  arrived.  I  am  sorry  now  that  I  did  not  in¬ 
sist  on  our  executing  that  scheme.  Besides  the  other 
objects  of  curiosity  and  observation,  to  have  seen 
my  illustrious  friend  received,  as  he  probably  would 
have  been,  by  a  Prince  so  eminently  distinguished 
for  his  variety  of  talents  and  acquisitions  as  the  late 
King  of  Sweden;  and  by  the  Empress  of  Russia, 
whose  extraordinary  abilities,  information,  and 


BOSWELL 


1^77  ]  LIFE  OF 

sorry  you  have  already  been  in  Wales;  for  I  wish 
to  see  it.  Shall  we  go  to  Ireland,  of  which  I  have 
seen  but  little?  We  shall  try  to  strike  out  a  plan 
when  we  are  at  Ashbourne.  I  am  ever,  your 
most  faithful  humble  servant, 

James  Boswell 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  I  write  to  be  left  at  Carlisle,  as  you 
direct  me;  but  you  cannot  have  it.  Your  letter, 
dated  Sept.  6,  was  not  at  this  place  till  this  day, 
Thursday,  Sept,  n;  and  I  hope  you  will  be 
here  before  this  is  at  Carlisle.1  However,  what 
you  have  not  going,  you  may  have  returning; 
and  as  I  believe  I  shall  not  love  you  less  after  our 
interview,  it  will  then  be  as  true  as  it  is  now, 
that  I  set  a  very  high  value  upon  your  friend¬ 
ship,  and  count  your  kindness  as  one  of  the  chief 
felicities  of  my  life.  Do  not  fancy  that  an  inter¬ 
mission  of  writing  is  a  decay  of  kindness.  No 
man  is  always  in  a  disposition  to  write;  nor  has 
any  man  at  all  times  something  to  say. 

That  distrust  which  intrudes  so  often  on  your 
mind  is  a  mode  of  melancholy,  which,  if  it  be 
the  business  of  a  wise  man  to  be  happy,  it  is  fool¬ 
ish  to  indulge;  and  if  it  be  a  duty  to  preserve  our 
faculties  entire  for  their  proper  use,  it  is  crimi¬ 
nal.  Suspicion  is  very  often  an  useless  pain. 
From  that,  and  all  other  pains,  I  wish  you  free 
and  safe;  for  I  am,  dear  Sir,  most  affectionately 
yours, 

Sam.  Johnson 

Ashbourne,  Sept,  n,  1777 

On  Sunday  evening,  Sept.  14,  I  arrived  at 
Ashbourne,  and  drove  directly  up  to  Dr.  Tay¬ 
lor’s  door.  Dr.  Johnson  and  he  appeared  before 
I  had  got  out  of  the  post-chaise,  and  welcomed 
me  cordially. 

I  told  them  that  I  had  travelled  all  the  pre¬ 
ceding  night,  and  gone  to  bed  at  Leek  in  Staf¬ 
fordshire;  and  that  when  I  rose  to  go  to  church 
in  the  afternoon,  I  was  informed  there  had  been 
an  earthquake,  of  which,  it  seems,  the  shock  had 
been  felt  in  some  degree  at  Ashbourne.  Johnson. 
“Sir,  it  will  be  much  exaggerated  in  popular 
talk:  for,  in  the  first  place,  the  common  people 
do  not  accurately  adapt  their  thoughts  to  the 
objects;  nor,  secondly,  do  they  accurately  adapt 
their  words  to  their  thoughts:  they  do  not  mean 
to  lie;  but,  taking  no  pains  to  be  exact,  they  give 
you  very  false  accounts.  A  great  part  of  their 

magnanimity,  astonish  the  world,  would  have  af¬ 
forded  a  noble  subject  for  contemplation  and  rec¬ 
ord.  This  reflection  may  possibly  be  thought  too 
visionary  by  the  more  sedate  and  cold-blcoded 
part  of  my  readers;  yet  I  own,  I  frequently  indulge 
it  with  an  earnest,  unavailing  regret. 

Tt  so  happened.  The  letter  was  forwarded  to  my 
house  at  Edinburgh. 


JOHNSON  341 

language  is  proverbial.  If  anything  rocks  at  all, 
they  say  it  rocks  like  a  cradle ;  and  in  this  way  they 
go  on.” 

The  subject  of  grief  for  the  loss  of  relations 
and  friends  being  introduced,  I  observed  that  it 
was  strange  to  consider  how  soon  it  in  general 
wears  away.  Dr.  Taylor  mentioned  a  gentleman 
of  the  neighbourhood  as  the  only  instance  he 
had  ever  known  of  a  person  who  had  endeavoured 
to  retain  grief.  He  told  Dr.  Taylor,  that  after  his 
Lady’s  death,  which  affected  him  deeply,  he  re¬ 
solved  that  the  grief,  which  he  cherished  with  a 
kind  of  sacred  fondness,  should  be  lasting;  but 
that  he  found  he  could  not  keep  it  long.  John¬ 
son.  “All  grief  for  what  cannot  in  the  course  of 
nature  be  helped,  soon  wears  away;  in  some 
sooner,  indeed,  in  some  later;  but  it  never  con¬ 
tinues  very  long,  unless  where  there  is  madness, 
such  as  will  make  a  man  have  pride  so  fixed  in 
his  mind,  as  to  imagine  himself  a  King;  or  any 
other  passion  in  an  unreasonable  way:  for  all 
unnecessary  grief  is  unwise,  and  therefore  will 
not  be  long  retained  by  a  sound  mind.  If,  indeed, 
the  cause  of  our  grief  is  occasioned  by  our  own 
misconduct,  if  grief  is  mingled  with  remorse  of 
conscience,  it  should  be  lasting.”  Boswell.  “But, 
Sir,  we  do  not  approve  of  a  man  who  very  soon 
forgets  the  loss  of  a  wife  or  a  friend.”  Johnson. 
“Sir,  we  disapprove  of  him,  not  because  he  soon 
forgets  his  grief,  for  the  sooner  it  is  forgotten  the 
better,  but  because  we  suppose,  that  if  he  for¬ 
gets  his  wife  or  his  friend  soon,  he  has  not  had 
much  affection  for  them.” 

I  was  somewhat  disappointed  in  finding  that 
the  edition  of  The  English  Poets ,  for  which  he  was 
to  write  Prefaces  and  Lives,  was  not  an  under¬ 
taking  directed  by  him:  but  that  he  was  to  fur¬ 
nish  a  Preface  and  Life  to  any  poet  the  booksell¬ 
ers  pleased.  I  asked  him  if  he  would  do  this  to 
any  dunce’s  works,  if  they  should  ask  him.  John¬ 
son.  “Yes,  Sir,  and  say  he  was  a  dunce.”  My 
friend  seemed  now  not  much  to  relish  talking  of 
this  edition. 

On  Monday,  September  15,  Dr.  Johnson  ob¬ 
served,  that  every  body  commended  such  parts 
of  his  Journey  to  the  Western  Islands ,  as  were  in  their 
own  way.  “For  instance,  (said  he,)  Mr.  Jackson 
(the  all-knowing)  told  me  there  was  more  good 
sense  upon  trade  in  it,  than  he  should  hear  in 
the  House  of  Commons  in  a  year,  except  from 
Burke.  Jones  commended  the  part  which  treats 
of  language ;  Burke  that  which  describes  the  in¬ 
habitants  of  mountainous  countries.” 

After  breakfast,  Johnson  carried  me  to  see  the 
garden  belonging  to  the  school  of  Ashbourne, 
which  is  very  prettily  formed  upon  a  bank,  ris- 


BOSWELL 


342 

ing  gradually  behind  the  house.  The  Reverend 
Mr.  Langley,  the  head-master,  accompanied  us. 

While  we  sat  basking  in  the  sun  upon  a  seat 
here,  I  introduced  a  common  subject  of  com¬ 
plaint,  the  very  small  salaries  which  many  cu¬ 
rates  have,  and  I  maintained,’  “that  no  man 
should  be  invested  with  the  character  of  a  clergy¬ 
man,  unless  he  has  a  security  for  such  an  income 
as  will  enable  him  to  appear  respectable;  that, 
therefore,  a  clergyman  should  not  be  allowed  to 
have  a  curate,  unless  he  gives  him  a  hundred 
pounds  a  year;  if  he  cannot  do  that,  let  him  per¬ 
form  the  duty  himself.”  Johnson.  “To  be  sure, 
Sir,  it  is  wrong  that  any  clergyman  should  be 
without  a  reasonable  income;  but  as  the  church 
revenues  were  sadly  diminished  at  the  Reforma¬ 
tion,  the  clergy  who  have  livings  cannot  af¬ 
ford,  in  many  instances,  to  give  good  salaries  to 
curates,  without  leaving  themselves  too  little; 
and,  if  no  curate  were  to  be  permitted  unless  he 
had  a  hundred  pounds  a  year,  their  number  would 
be  very  small,  which  would  be  a  disadvantage, 
as  then  there  would  not  be  such  choice  in  the 
nursery  for  the  church,  curates  being  candidates 
for  the  higher  ecclesiastical  offices,  according  to 
their  merit  and  good  behaviour.”  He  explained 
the  system  of  the  English  Hierarchy  exceedingly 
well.  “It  is  not  thought  fit  (said  he,)  to  trust  a 
man  with  the  care  of  a  parish  till  he  has  given 
proof  as  a  curate  that  he  shall  deserve  such  a 
trust.”  This  is  an  excellent  theory;  and  if  the  prac¬ 
tice  were  according  to  it,  the  Church  of  England 
would  be  admirable  indeed.  However,  as  I  have 
heard  Dr.  Johnson  observe  as  to  the  Universi¬ 
ties,  bad  practice  does  not  infer  that  the  constitu¬ 
tion  is  bad. 

We  had  with  us  at  dinner  several  of  Dr.  Tay¬ 
lor’s  neighbours,  good  civil  gentlemen,  who  seem¬ 
ed  to  understand  Dr.  Johnson  very  well,  and 
not  to  consider  him  in  the  light  that  a  certain 
person  did,  who  being  struck,  or  rather  stunned 
by  his  voice  and  manner,  when  he  was  after¬ 
wards  asked  what  he  thought  of  him,  answered, 
“He’s  a  tremendous  companion.” 

Johnson  told  me,  that  “Taylor  was  a  very  sen¬ 
sible  acute  man,  and  had  a  strong  mind;  that  he 
had  great  activity  in  some  respects,  and  yet  such 
a  sort  of  indolence,  that  if  you  should  put  a  peb¬ 
ble  upon  his  chimney-piece,  you  would  find  it 
there,  in  the  same  state,  a  year  afterwards.” 

And  here  is  the  proper  place  to  give  an  ac¬ 
count  of  Johnson’s  humane  and  zealous  inter¬ 
ference  in  behalf  of  the  Reverend  Dr.  William 
Dodd,  formerly  Prebendary  of  Brecon,  and  chap¬ 
lain  in  ordinary  to  his  Majesty;  celebrated  as  a 
very  popular  preacher,  an  encourager  of  char¬ 


[  1777 

itable  institutions,  and  authour  of  a  variety  of 
works,  chiefly  theological.  Having  unhappily 
contracted  expensive  habits  of  living,  partly  oc¬ 
casioned  by  licentiousness  of  manners,  he  in  an 
evil  hour,  when  pressed  by  want  of  money,  and 
dreading  an  exposure  of  his  circumstances,  forged 
a  bond  of  which  he  attempted  to  avail  him¬ 
self  to  support  his  credit,  flattering  himself  with 
hopes  that  he  might  be  able  to  repay  its  amount 
without  being  detected.  The  person,  whose  name 
he  thus  rashly  and  criminally  presumed  to  falsi¬ 
fy,  was  the  Earl  of  Chesterfield,  to  whom  he  had 
been  tutor,  and  who,  he  perhaps,  in  the  warmth 
of  his  feelings,  flattered  himself  would  have  gen¬ 
erously  paid  the  money  in  case  of  an  alarm  be¬ 
ing  taken,  rather  than  suffer  him  to  fall  a  victim 
to  the  dreadful  consequences  of  violating  the  law 
against  forgery,  the  most  dangerous  crime  in  a 
commercial  country;  but  the  unfortunate  divine 
had  the  mortification  to  find  that  he  was  mis¬ 
taken.  His  noble  pupil  appeared  against  him, 
and  he  was  capitally  convicted. 

Johnson  told  me  that  Dr.  Dodd  was  very  lit¬ 
tle  acquainted  with  him,  having  been  but  once 
in  his  company,  many  years  previous  to  this  pe¬ 
riod  (which  was  precisely  the  state  of  my  own 
acquaintance  with  Dodd);  but  in  his  distress  he 
bethought  himself  of  Johnson’s  persuasive  pow¬ 
er  of  writing,  if  haply  it  might  avail  to  obtain  for 
him  the  Royal  Mercy.  He  did  not  apply  to  him  di¬ 
rectly,  but,  extraordinary  as  it  may  seem,  through 
the  late  Countess  of  Harrington,  who  wrote  a 
letter  to  Johnson,  asking  him  to  employ  his  pen 
in  favour  of  Dodd.  Mr.  Allen,  the  printer,  who 
was  Johnson’s  landlord  and  next  neighbour  in 
Bolt-court,  and  for  whom  he  had  much  kind¬ 
ness,  was  one  of  Dodd’s  friends,  of  whom  to  the 
credit  of  humanity  be  it  recorded,  that  he  had 
many  who  did  not  desert  him,  even  after  his  in¬ 
fringement  of  the  law  had  reduced  him  to  the 
state  of  a  man  under  sentence  of  death.  Mr.  Al¬ 
len  told  me  that  he  carried  Lady  Harrington’s 
letter  to  Johnson,  that  Johnson  read  it  walking 
up  and  down  his  chamber,  and  seemed  much 
agitated,  after  which  he  said,  “I  will  do  what  I 
can” ; — and  certainly  he  did  make  extraordinary 
exertions. 

He  this  evening,  as  he  had  obligingly  prom¬ 
ised  in  one  of  his  letters,  put  into  my  hands  the 
whole  series  of  his  writings  upon  this  melancholy 
occasion,  and  I  shall  present  my  readers  with 
the  abstract  which  I  made  from  the  collection; 
in  doing  which  I  studied  to  avoid  copying  what 
had  appeared  in  print,  and  now  make  part  of 
the  edition  of  Johnson's  Works ,  published  by  the 
Booksellers  of  London,  but  taking  care  to  mark 


1777]  LIFE  OF 

Johnson’s  variations  in  some  of  the  pieces  there 
exhibited. 

Dr.  Johnson  wrote  in  the  first  place,  Dr.  Dodd’s 
Speech  to  the  Recorder  of  London ,  at  the  Old-Bailey, 
when  sentence  of  death  was  about  to  be  pro¬ 
nounced  upon  him. 

He  wrote  also  The  Convict's  Address  to  his  un¬ 
happy  Brethren ,  a  sermon  delivered  by  Dr.  Dodd, 
in  the  chapel  of  Newgate.  According  to  John¬ 
son’s  manuscript  it  began  thus  after  the  text, 
What  shall  I  do  to  be  saved ? — 

“These  were  the  words  with  which  the  keep¬ 
er,  to  whose  custody  Paul  and  Silas  were  com¬ 
mitted  by  their  prosecutors,  addressed  his  pris¬ 
oners,  when  he  saw  them  freed  from  their  bonds 
by  the  perceptible  agency  of  divine  favour,  and 
was,  therefore,  irresistibly  convinced  that  they 
were  not  offenders  against  the  laws,  but  mar¬ 
tyrs  to  the  truth.55 

Dr.  Johnson  was  so  good  as  to  mark  for  me 
with  his  own  hand,  on  a  copy  of  this  sermon 
which  is  now  in  my  possession,  such  passages  as 
were  added  by  Dr.  Dodd.  They  are  not  many: 
whoever  will  take  the  trouble  to  look  at  the  print¬ 
ed  copy,  and  attend  to  what  I  mention,  will  be 
satisfied  of  this. 

There  is  a  short  introduction  by  Dr.  Dodd, 
and  he  also  inserted  this  sentence,  “You  see  with 
what  confusion  and  dishonour  I  now  stand  be¬ 
fore  you; — no  more  in  the  pulpit  of  instruction, 
but  on  this  humble  seat  with  yourselves.”  The 
notes  are  entirely  Dodd’s  own,  and  Johnson’s 
writing  ends  at  the  words,  “the  thief  whom  he 
pardoned  on  the  cross.”  What  follows  was  sup¬ 
plied  by  Dr.  Dodd  himself. 

The  other  pieces  mentioned  by  Johnson  in  the 
above-mentioned  collection,  are  two  letters,  one  to 
the  Lord  Chancellor  Bathurst,  (not  Lord  North, 
as  is  erroneously  supposed,)  and  one  to  Lord 
Mansfield; — A  Petition  from  Dr.  Dodd  to  the 
King; — A  Petition  from  Mrs.  Dodd  to  the  Queen; 
— Observations  of  some  length  inserted  in  the 
news-papers,  on  occasion  of  Earl  Percy’s  having 
presented  to  his  Majesty  a  petition  for  mercy  to 
Dodd,  signed  by  twenty  thousand  people,  but 
all  in  vain.  He  told  me  that  he  had  also  written 
a  petition  from  the  city  of  London;  “but  (said 
he,  with  a  significant  smile)  they  mended  it.”1 

1Having  unexpectedly,  by  the  favour  of  Mr. 
Stone,  of  London  Field,  Hackney,  seen  the  orig¬ 
inal  in  Johnson’s  hand-writing,  of  The  Petition  of 
the  City  of  London  to  his  Majesty ,  in  favour  of  Dr.  Dodd , 
I  now  present  it  to  my  readers,  with  such  passages 
as  were  omitted  inclosed  in  crotchets,  and  the  ad¬ 
ditions  or  variations  marked  in  Italicks. 

“That  William  Dodd,  Doctor  of  Laws,  now  ly¬ 
ing  under  sentence  of  death  in  your  Majesty’ s  gaol  of 


JOHNSON  343 

The  last  of  these  articles  which  Johnson  'wrote 
is  Dr.  Dodd’s  last  solemn  Declaration ,  which  he  left 
with  the  sheriff  at  the  place  of  execution.  Here 
also  my  friend  marked  the  variations  on  a  copy 
of  that  piece  now  in  my  possession.  Dodd  in¬ 
serted,  “I  never  knew  or  attended  to  the  calls  of 
frugality,  or  the  needful  minuteness  of  painful 
oeconomy”;  and  in  the  next  sentence  he  intro¬ 
duced  the  words  which  I  distinguish  by  Italicks; 
“My  life  for  som zfew  unhappy  years  past  has  been 
dreadfully  erroneous.”  Johnson’s  expression  was  hyp¬ 
ocritical;  but  his  remark  on  the  margin  is  “With 
this  he  said  he  could  not  charge  himself.” 

Having  thus  authentically  settled  what  part 
of  the  Occasional  Papers ,  concerning  Dr.  Dodd’s 
miserable  situation,  came  from  the  pen  of  John¬ 
son,  I  shall  proceed  to  present  my  readers  with 
my  record  of  the  unpublished  writings  relating 
to  that  extraordinary  and  interesting  matter. 

I  found  a  letter  to  Dr.  Johnson  from  Dr.  Dodd, 
May  23,  1777,  in  which  The  Convict’s  Address 
seems  clearly  to  be  meant: 

“I  am  so  penetrated,  my  ever  dear  Sir,  with  a 
sense  of  your  extreme  benevolence  towards  me, 
that  I  cannot  find  words  equal  to  the  sentiments 
of  my  heart.  .  .  . 

“You  are  too  conversant  in  the  world  to  need 
the  slightest  hint  from  me,  of  what  infinite  util¬ 
ity  the  Speech2  on  the  aweful  day  has  been  to 
me.  I  experience,  every  hour,  some  good  effect 
from  it.  I  am  sure  that  effects  still  more  salutary 
and  important  must  follow  from  your  kind  and  in¬ 
tended favour.  I  will  labour — God  being  my  help¬ 
er, — to  do  justice  to  it  from  the  pulpit.  I  am  sure, 
had  I  your  sentiments  constantly  to  deliver  from 
thence,  in  all  their  mighty  force  and  power,  not 

Newgate ,  for  the  crime  of  forgery,  has  for  a  great 
part  of  his  life  set  a  useful  and  laudable  example  of 
diligence  in  his  calling,  [and  as  we  have  reason  to 
believe,  has  exercised  his  ministry  with  great  fidel¬ 
ity  and  efficacy,]  which ,  in  many  instances ,  has  pro¬ 
duced  the  most  happy  effect. 

“That  he  has  been  the  first  institutor,  [or]  and  a 
a  very  earnest  and  active  promoter  of  several  modes 
of  useful  charity,  and  [that]  therefore  [he]  may  be 
considered  as  having  been  on  many  occasions  a 
benefactor  to  the  publick. 

“[That  when  they  consider  his  past  life,  they  are 
willing  to  suppose  his  late  crime  to  have  been  not 
the  consequence  of  habitual  depravity,  but  the  sug¬ 
gestion  of  some  sudden  and  violent  temptation.] 

“[That]  Tour  Petitioners  therefore  considering  his 
case  as  in  some  of  its  circumstances  unprecedented 
and  peculiar,  and  encouraged  by  your  Majesty’s  known 
clemency ,  [they]  most  humbly  recommend  the  said 
William  Dodd  to  [his ]your  Majesty’s  most  gracious 
consideration,  in  hopes  that  he  will  be  found  not 
altogether  [unfit]  unworthy  to  stand  an  example  of 
Royal  Mercy.” 

2His  Speech  at  the  Old  Bailey,  when  found  guilty. 


344 

a  soul  could  be  left  unconvinced  and  unper¬ 
suaded.  .  .  .” 

—He  added: — “May  God  Almighty  bless  and 
reward,  with  his  choicest  comforts,  your  philan- 
thropick  actions,  and  enable  me  at  all  times  to 
express  what  I  feel  of  the  high  and  uncommon 
obligations  which  I  owe  to  the  first  man  in  our 
times.” 

On  Sunday,  June  22,  he  writes,  begging  Dr. 
Johnson’s  assistance  in  framing  a  supplicatory 
letter  to  his  Majesty: — 

“If  his  Majesty  could  be  moved  of  his  royal 
clemency  to  spare  me  and  my  family  the  hor- 
rours  and  ignominy  of  a  publick  death ,  which  the 
publick  itself  is  solicitous  to  wave,  and  to  grant 
me  in  some  silent  distant  corner  of  the  globe,  to 
pass  the  remainder  of  my  days  in  penitence  and 
prayer,  I  would  bless  his  clemency  and  be  hum¬ 
bled.” 

This  letter  was  brought  to  Dr.  Johnson  when 
in  church.  He  stooped  down  and  read  it,  and 
wrote,  when  he  went  home,  the  following  letter 
for  Dr.  Dodd  to  the  King: 

Sir,  May  it  not  offend  your  Majesty,  that  the 
most  miserable  of  men  applies  himself  to  your 
clemency,  as  his  last  hope  and  his  last  refuge; 
that  your  mercy  is  most  earnestly  and  humbly 
implored  by  a  clergyman,  whom  your  Laws  and 
Judges  have  condemned  to  the  horrour  and  ig¬ 
nominy  of  a  publick  execution. 

I  confess  the  crime,  and  own  the  enormity  of 
its  consequences,  and  the  danger  of  its  example. 
Nor  have  I  the  confidence  to  petition  for  impu¬ 
nity;  but  humbly  hope,  that  publick  security 
may  be  established,  without  the  spectacle  of  a 
clergyman  dragged  through  the  streets,  to  a 
death  of  infamy,  amidst  the  derision  of  the  pro¬ 
fligate  and  profane;  and  that  justice  may  be  sat¬ 
isfied  with  irrevocable  exile,  perpetual  disgrace, 
and  hopeless  penury. 

My  life,  Sir,  has  not  been  useless  to  mankind. 
I  have  benefited  many.  But  my  offences  against 
God  are  numberless,  and  I  have  had  little  time 
for  repentance.  Preserve  me,  Sir,  by  your  pre¬ 
rogative  of  mercy,  from  the  necessity  of  appear¬ 
ing  unprepared  at  that  tribunal,  before  which 
Kings  and  Subjects  must  stand  at  last  together. 
Permit  me  to  hide  my  guilt  in  some  obscure  cor¬ 
ner  of  a  foreign  country,  where,  if  I  can  ever  at¬ 
tain  confidence  to  hope  that  my  prayers  will  be 
heard,  they  shall  be  poured  with  all  the  fervour 
of  gratitude,  for  the  life  and  happiness  of  your 
Majesty.  I  am,  Sir,  your  Majesty’s,  &c. 

Subjoined  to  it  was  written  as  follows: 

To  Dr.  Dodd 

Sir,  I  most  seriously  enjoin  you  not  to  let  it  be 
at  all  known  that  I  have  written  this  letter,  and 


1 1777 

to  return  the  copy  to  Mr.  Allen  in  a  cover  to  me. 
I  hope  I  need  not  tell  you,  that  I  wish  it  success. 
— But  do  not  indulge  hope.  — Tell  nobody. 

It  happened  luckily  that  Mr.  Allen  was  pitched 
on  to  assist  in  this  melancholy  office,  for  he 
was  a  great  friend  of  Mr.  Akerman,  the  keeper 
of  Newgate.  Dr.  Johnson  never  went  to  see 
Dr.  Dodd.  He  said  to  me,  “it  would  have  done 
him  more  harm,  than  good  to  Dodd,  who 
once  expressed  a  desire  to  see  him,  but  not 
earnestly.” 

Dr.  Johnson,  on  the  20th  of  June,  wrote  the 
following  letter: 

To  the  Right  Honourable 
Charles  Jenkinson 

Sir,  Since  the  conviction  and  condemnation 
of  Dr.  Dodd,  I  have  had,  by  the  intervention  of 
a  friend,  some  intercourse  with  him,  and  I  am 
sure  I  shall  lose  nothing  in  your  opinion  by  ten¬ 
derness  and  commiseration.  Whatever  be  the 
crime,  it  is  not  easy  to  have  any  knowledge  of 
the  delinquent,  without  a  wish  that  his  life  may 
be  spared;  at  least  when  no  life  has  been  taken 
away  by  him.  I  will,  therefore,  take  the  liberty 
of  suggesting  some  reasons  for  which  I  wish  this 
unhappy  being  to  escape  the  utmost  rigour  of 
his  sentence. 

He  is,  so  far  as  I  can  recollect,  the  first  clergy¬ 
man  of  our  church  who  has  suffered  publick 
execution  for  immorality;  and  I  know  not  wheth¬ 
er  it  would  not  be  more  for  the  interest  of  reli¬ 
gion  to  bury  such  an  offender  in  the  obscurity 
of  perpetual  exile,  than  to  expose  him  in  a  cart, 
and  on  the  gallows,  to  all  who  for  any  reason  are 
enemies  to  the  clergy. 

The  supreme  power  has,  in  all  ages,  paid 
some  attention  to  the  voice  of  the  people;  and 
that  voice  does  not  least  deserve  to  be  heard, 
when  it  calls  out  for  mercy.  There  is  now  a  very 
general  desire  that  Dodd’s  life  should  be  spared. 
More  is  not  wished;  and,  perhaps,  this  is  not  too 
much  to  be  granted. 

If  you,  Sir,  have  any  opportunity  of  enforcing 
these  reasons,  you  may,  perhaps,  think  them 
worthy  of  consideration:  but  whatever  you  de¬ 
termine,  I  most  respectfully  intreat  that  you 
will  be  pleased  to  pardon  for  this  intrusion,  Sir, 
your  most  obedient,  and  most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

It  has  been  confidently  circulated,  with  invidi¬ 
ous  remarks,  that  to  this  letter  no  attention  what¬ 
ever  was  paid  by  Mr.  Jenkinson  (afterwards  Earl 
of  Liverpool),  and  that  he  did  not  even  deign  to 
shew  the  common  civility  of  owning  the  receipt 
of  it.  I  could  not  but  wonder  at  such  conduct  in 
the  noble  Lord,  whose  own  character  and  just 
elevation  in  life,  I  thought,  must  have  impressed 
him  with  all  due  regard  for  great  abilities  and 


BOSWELL 


1777]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  345 


attainments.  As  the  story  had  been  much  talked 
of,  and  apparently  from  good  authority,  I  could 
not  but  have  animadverted  upon  it  in  this  work, 
had  it  been  as  was  alledged ;  but  from  my  earnest 
love  of  truth,  and  having  found  reason  to  think 
that  there  might  be  a  mistake,  I  presumed  to 
write  to  his  Lordship,  requesting  an  explana¬ 
tion;  and  it  is  with  the  sincerest  pleasure  that  I 
am  enabled  to  assure  the  world,  that  there  is  no 
foundation  for  it,  the  fact  being,  that  owing  to 
some  neglect,  or  accident,  Johnson’s  letter  never 
came  to  Lord  Hawkesbury’s  hands.  I  should  have 
thought  it  strange  indeed,  if  that  noble  Lord  had 
undervalued  my  illustrious  friend;  but  instead 
of  this  being  the  case,  his  Lordship,  in  the  very 
polite  answer  with  which  he  was  pleased  im¬ 
mediately  to  honour  me,  thus  expresses  himself: 
— “I  have  always  respected  the  memory  of  Dr. 
Johnson,  and  admire  his  writings;  and  I  fre¬ 
quently  read  many  parts  of  them  with  pleasure 
and  great  improvement.” 

All  applications  for  the  Royal  Mercy  having 
failed,  Dr.  Dodd  prepared  himself  for  death; 
and,  with  a  warmth  of  gratitude,  wrote  to  Dr. 
Johnson  as  follows: 

June  25,  Midnight 

Accept,  thou  great  and  good  heart,  my  earnest 
and  fervent  thanks  and  prayers  for  all  thy  ben¬ 
evolent  and  kind  efforts  in  my  behalf.  — Oh !  Dr. 
Johnson!  as  I  sought  your  knowledge  at  an 
early  hour  in  life,  would  to  heaven  I  had  culti¬ 
vated  the  love  and  acquaintance  of  so  excellent 
a  man ! —  I  pray  God  most  sincerely  to  bless  you 
with  the  highest  transports — the  infelt  satisfac¬ 
tion  of  humane  and  benevolent  exertions ! —  And 
admitted,  as  I  trust  I  shall  be,  to  the  realms  of 
bliss  before  you,  I  shall  hail  your  arrival  there 
with  transports,  and  rejoice  to  acknowledge  that 
you  was  my  Comforter,  my  Advocate  and  my 
Friend!  God  be  ever  with  you! 

Dr.  Johnson  lastly  wrote  to  Dr.  Dodd  this 
solemn  and  soothing  letter: 

To  the  Reverend  Dr.  Dodd 

Dear  Sir,  That  which  is  appointed  to  all 
men  is  now  coming  upon  you.  Outward  circum¬ 
stances,  the  eyes  and  the  thoughts  of  men,  are 
below  the  notice  of  an  immortal  being  about  to 
stand  the  trial  for  eternity,  before  the  Supreme 
Judge  of  heaven  and  earth.  Be  comforted:  your 
crime,  morally  or  religiously  considered,  has  no 
very  deep  dye  of  turpitude.  It  corrupted  no 
man’s  principles;  it  attacked  no  man’s  life.  Of 
this,  and  of  all  other  sins,  you  are  earnestly  to 
repent;  and  may  God,  who  knoweth  our  frailty, 
and  desireth  not  our  death,  accept  your  repent¬ 
ance,  for  the  sake  of  his  Son  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord. 


In  requital  of  those  well-intended  offices  which 
you  are  pleased  so  emphatically  to  acknowl¬ 
edge,  let  me  beg  that  you  make  in  your  devo¬ 
tions  one  petition  for  my  eternal  welfare.  I  am, 
dear  Sir,  your  affectionate  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

June  26,  1777 

Under  the  copy  of  this  letter  I  found  written, 
in  Johnson’s  own  hand,  “Next  day,  June  27,  he 
was  executed.” 

To  conclude  this  interesting  episode  with  an 
useful  application,  let  us  now  attend  to  the  re¬ 
flections  of  Johnson  at  the  end  of  the  Occasional 
Papers ,  concerning  the  unfortunate  Dr.  Dodd: 

“Such  were  the  last  thoughts  of  a  man  whom 
we  have  seen  exulting  in  popularity,  and  sunk 
in  shame.  For  his  reputation,  which  no  man  can 
give  to  himself,  those  who  conferred  it  are  to 
answer.  Of  his  publick  ministry  the  means  of 
judging  were  sufficiently  attainable.  He  must  be 
allowed  to  preach  well,  whose  sermons  strike  his 
audience  with  forcible  conviction.  Of  his  life, 
those  who  thought  it  consistent  with  his  doc¬ 
trine,  did  not  originally  form  false  notions.  He 
was  at  first  what  he  endeavoured  to  make 
others;  but  the  world  broke  down  his  resolu¬ 
tion,  and  he  in  time  ceased  to  exemplify  his 
own  instructions. 

“Let  those  who  are  tempted  to  his  faults,  trem¬ 
ble  at  his  punishment;  and  those  whom  he  im¬ 
pressed  from  the  pulpit  with  religious  sen¬ 
timents,  endeavour  to  confirm  them,  by  con¬ 
sidering  the  regret  and  self-abhorrence  with 
which  he  reviewed  in  prison  his  deviations  from 
rectitude.” 

Johnson  gave  us  this  evening,  in  his  happy  dis¬ 
criminative  manner,  a  portrait  of  the  late  Mr. 
Fitzherbert,  of  Derbyshire.  “There  was  (said  he,) 
no  sparkle,  no  brilliancy  in  Fitzherbert;  but  I 
never  knew  a  man  who  was  so  generally  accep¬ 
table.  He  made  every  body  quite  easy,  overpow¬ 
ered  nobody  by  the  superiority  of  his  talents, 
made  no  man  think  worse  of  himself  by  being 
his  rival,  seemed  always  to  listen,  did  not  oblige 
you  to  hear  much  from  him,  and  did  not  oppose 
what  you  said.  Every  body  liked  him;  but  he  had 
no  friend,  as  I  understand  the  word,  nobody  with 
whom  he* exchanged  intimate  thoughts.  People 
were  willing  to  think  well  of  every  thing  about 
him.  A  gentleman  was  making  an  affected  rant, 
as  many  people  do,  of  great  feelings  about  £his 
dear  son,’  who  was  at  school  near  London;  how 
anxious  he  was  lest  he  might  be  ill,  and  what  he 
would  give  to  see  him.  'Can’t  you  (said  Fitz¬ 
herbert,)  take  a  post-chaise  and  go  to  him.’  This 
to  be  sure,  finished  the  affected  man,  but  there 


346 

was  not  much  in  it.1  However,  this  was  circu¬ 
lated  as  wit  for  a  whole  winter,  and  I  believe  part 
of  a  summer  too;  a  proof  that  he  was  no  very 
witty  man.  He  was  an  instance  of  the  truth  of 
the  observation,  that  a  man  will  please  more 
upon  the  whole  by  negative  qualities  than  by 
positive;  by  never  offending,  than  by  giving  a 
great  deal  of  delight.  In  the  first  place,  men  hate 
more  steadily  than  they  love;  and  if  I  have  said 
something  to  hurt  a  man  once,  I  shall  not  get  the 
better  of  this,  by  saying  many  things  to  please 
him.” 

Tuesday,  September  16,  Dr.  Johnson  having 
mentioned  to  me  the  extraordinary  size  and  price 
of  some  cattle  reared  by  Dr.  Taylor,  I  rode  out 
with  our  host,  surveyed  his  farmland  was  shown 
one  cow  which  he  had  sold  for  a  hundred  and 
twenty  guineas,  and  another  for  which  he  had 
been  offered  a  hundred  and  thirty.  Taylor  thus 
described  to  me  his  old  schoolfellow  and  friend, 
Johnson:  “He  is  a  man  of  a  very  clear  head, 
great  power  of  words,  and  a  very  gay  imagina¬ 
tion;  but  there  is  no  disputing  with  him.  He  will 
not  hear  you,  and  having  a  louder  voice  than 
you,  must  roar  you  down.” 

In  the  afternoon  I  tried  to  get  Dr.  Johnson  to 
like  the  Poems  of  Mr .  Hamilton  of  Bangour,  which 
I  had  brought  with  me :  I  had  been  much  pleased 
with  them  at  a  very  early  age;  the  impression 
still  remained  on  my  mind;  it  was  confirmed  by 
the  opinion  of  my  friend  the  Honourable  An¬ 
drew  Erskine,  himself  both  a  good  poet  and  a 
good  critick,  who  thought  Hamilton  as  true  a 
poet  as  ever  wrote,  and  that  his  not  having  fame 
was  unaccountable.  Johnson,  upon  repeated  oc¬ 
casions,  while  I  was  at  Ashbourne,  talked  slight¬ 
ingly  of  Hamilton.  He  said  there  was  no  power 
of  thinking  in  his  verses,  nothing  that  strikes  one, 
nothing  better  than  what  you  generally  find  in 
magazines;  and  that  the  highest  praise  they  de¬ 
served  was,  that  they  were  very  well  for  a  gentle¬ 
man  to  hand  about  among  his  friends.  He  said 
the  imitation  of  Ne  sit  ancillce  tibi  amor ,  &c.  was 

JDr.  Gisborne,  Physician  to  his  Majesty’s  House¬ 
hold,  has  obligingly  communicated  to  me  a  fuller 
account  of  this  story  than  had  reached  Dr.  John¬ 
son.  The  affected  Gentleman  was  the  late  John 
Gilbert  Cooper,  Esq.,  author  of  a  Life  oj  Socrates , 
and  of  some  poems  in  Dodsley’s  Collection.  Mr.  Fitz- 
herbert  found  him  one  morning,  apparently,  in 
such  violent  agitation,  on  account  of  the  indispo¬ 
sition  of  his  son,  as  to  seem  beyond  the  power  of 
comfort.  At  length,  however,  he  exclaimed,  “I’ll 
write  an  Elegy.”  Mr.  Fitzherbert  being  satisfied, 
by  this,  of  the  sincerity  of  his  emotions,  slyly  said, 
“Had  not  you  better  take  a  post-chaise  and  go  and 
see  him?”  It  was  the  shrewdness  of  the  insinuation 
which  made  the  story  be  circulated. 


[  llTi 

too  solemn;  he  read  partofitatthe  beginning.  He 
read  the  beautiful  pathetick  song,  uAh  the  poor 
shepherd’s  mournful  fate,”  and  did  not  seem  to 
give  attention  to  what  I  had  been  used  to  think 
tender  elegant  strains,  but  laughed  at  the  rhyme, 
in  Scotch  pronunciation,  wishes  and  blushes ,  read¬ 
ing  washes — and  there  he  stopped.  He  owned 
that  the  epitaph  on  Lord  Newhall  was  pretty 
well  done.  He  read  the  Inscription  in  a  Summer¬ 
house ’,  and  a  little  of  the  imitations  of  Horace’s 
Epistles;  but  said  he  found  nothing  to  make  him 
desire  to  read  on.  When  I  urged  that  there  were 
some  good  poetical  passages  in  the  book.  “Where 
(said  he,)  will  you  find  so  large  a  collection  with¬ 
out  some?”  I  thought  the  description  of  Winter 
might  obtain  his  approbation: 

See  Winter,  from  the  frozen  north 

Drives  his  iron  chariot  forth! 

His  grisly  hand  in  icy  chains 

Fair  Tweedd’s  silver  flood  constrains,  &c. 

He  asked  why  an  uiron  chariot”?  and  said  “icy 
chains”  was  an  old  image.  I  was  struck  with  the 
uncertainty  of  taste,  and  somewhat  sorry  that  a 
poet  whom  I  had  long  read  with  fondness,  was 
not  approved  by  Dr.  Johnson.  I  comforted  my¬ 
self  with  thinking  that  the  beauties  were  too  del¬ 
icate  for  his  robust  perceptions.  Garrick  main¬ 
tained  that  he  had  not  a  taste  for  the  finest 
productions  of  genius:  but  I  was  sensible,  that 
when  he  took  the  trouble  to  analyse  critically, 
he  generally  convinced  us  that  he  was  right. 

In  the  evening,  the  Reverend  Mr.  Seward,  of 
Lichfield,  who  was  passing  through  Ashbourne 
in  his  way  home,  drank  tea  with  us.  Johnson 
described  him  thus: — “Sir,  his  ambition  is  to  be 
a  fine  talker;  so  he  goes  to  Buxton,  and  such 
places,  where  he  may  find  companies  to  listen  to 
him.  And,  Sir,  he  is  a  valetudinarian,  one  of 
those  who  are  always  mending  themselves.  I  do 
not  know  a  more  disagreeable  character  than  a 
valetudinarian,  who  thinks  he  may  do  any  thing 
that  is  for  his  ease,  and  indulges  himself  in  the 
grossest  freedoms:  Sir,  he  brings  himself  to  the 
state  of  a  hog  in  a  stye.” 

Dr.  Taylor’s  nose  happening  to  bleed,  he  said, 
it  was  because  he  had  omitted  to  have  himself 
blooded  four  days  after  a  quarter  of  a  year’s  in¬ 
terval.  Dr.  Johnson,  who  was  a  great  dabbler  in 
physick,  disapproved  much  of  periodical  bleed¬ 
ing.  “For  (said  he,)  you  accustom  yourself  to  an 
evacuation  which  Nature  cannot  perform  of  her¬ 
self,  and  therefore  she  cannot  help  you,  should 
you,  from  forgetfulness  or  any  other  cause,  omit 
it;  so  you  may  be  suddenly  suffocated.  You  may 
accustom  yourself  to  other  periodical  evacua- 


BOSWELL 


1 777]  LIFE  OF 

tions,  because  should  you  omit  them,  Nature  can 
supply  the  omission;  but  Nature  cannot  open  a 
vein  to  blood  you.” — “I  do  not  like  to  take  an 
emetick,  (said  Taylor,)  for  fear  of  breaking  some 
small  vessels.” — “Poh!  (said  Johnson,)  if  you 
have  so  many  things  that  will  break,  you  had 
better  break  your  neck  at  once,  and  there’s  an 
end  on’t.  You  will  break  no  small  vessels” :  (blow¬ 
ing  with  high  derision.) 

I  mentioned  toDr.  Johnson,  thatDavid  Hume’s 
persisting  in  his  infidelity,  when  he  was  dying, 
shocked  me  much.  Johnson.  “Why  should  it 
shock  you,  Sir?  Hume  owned  he  had  never  read 
the  New  Testament  with  attention.  Here  then 
was  a  man,  who  had  been  at  no  pains  to  inquire 
into  the  truth  of  religion,  and  had  continually 
turned  his  mind  the  other  way.  It  was  not  to  be 
expected  that  the  prospect  of  death  would  alter 
his  way  of  thinking,  unless  God  should  send  an 
angel  to  set  him  right.”  I  said,  I  had  reason  to 
believe  that  the  thought  of  annihilation  gave 
Hume  no  pain.  Johnson.  “It  was  not  so,  Sir.  He 
had  a  vanity  in  being  thought  easy.  It  is  more 
probable  that  he  should  assume  an  appearance 
of  ease,  than  that  so  very  improbable  a  thing 
should  be,  as  a  man  not  afraid  of  going  (as,  in 
spite  of  his  delusive  theory,  he  cannot  be  sure 
but  he  may  go,)  into  an  unknown  state,  and  not 
being  uneasy  at  leaving  all  he  knew.  And  you 
are  to  consider,  that  upon  his  own  principle  of  an¬ 
nihilation  he  had  no  motive  to  speak  the  truth.” 
The  horrour  of  death  which  I  had  always  ob¬ 
served  in  Dr.  Johnson,  appeared  strong  to-night. 
I  ventured  to  tell  him,  that  I  had  been,  for  mo¬ 
ments  in  my  life,  not  afraid  of  death;  therefore  I 
could  suppose  another  man  in  that  state  of  mind 
for  a  considerable  space  of  time.  He  said,  “he 
never  had  a  moment  in  which  death  was  not 
terrible  to  him.”  He  added,  that  it  had  been  ob¬ 
served,  that  scarce  any  man  dies  in  publick,  but 
with  apparent  resolution;  from  that  desire  of 
praise  which  never  quits  us.  I  said,  Dr.  Dodd 
seemed  to  be  willing  to  die,  and  full  of  hopes  of 
happiness.  “Sir,  (said  he,)  Dr.  Dodd  would  have 
given  both  his  hands  and  both  his  legs  to  have 
lived.  The  better  a  man  is,  the  more  afraid  he  is 
of  death,  having  a  clearer  view  of  infinite  puri¬ 
ty.”  He  owned,  that  our  being  in  an  unhappy 
uncertainty  as  to  our  salvation,  was  mysterious; 
and  said, c  ‘Ah !  we  must  wait  till  we  are  in  another 
state  of  being,  to  have  many  things  explained  to 
us.”  Even  the  powerful  mind  of  Johnson  seemed 
foiled  by  futurity.  But  I  thought,  that  the  gloom 
of  uncertainty  in  solemn  religious  speculation, 
being  mingled  with  hope,  was  yet  more  consola¬ 
tory  than  the  emptiness  of  infidelity.  A  man  can 


JOHNSON  347 

live  in  thick  air,  but  perishes  in  an  exhausted 
receiver. 

Dr.  Johnson  was  much  pleased  with  a  remark 
which  I  told  him  was  made  to  me  by  General 
Paoli: — “That  it  is  impossible  not  to  be  afraid 
of  death;  and  that  those  who  at  the  time  of  dying 
are  not  afraid,  are  not  thinking  of  death,  but  of 
applause,  or  something  else,  which  keeps  death 
out  of  their  sight:  so  that  all  men  are  equally 
afraid  of  death  when  they  see  it;  only  some  have 
a  power  of  turning  their  sight  away  from  it  bet¬ 
ter  than  others.” 

On  Wednesday,  September  17,  Dr.  Butter, 
physician  at  Derby,  drank  tea  with  us;  and  it 
was  settled  that  Dr.  Johnson  and  I  should  go  on 
Friday  and  dine  with  him.  Johnson  said,  “I’m 
glad  of  this.”  He  seemed  weary  of  the  uniform¬ 
ity  of  life  at  Dr.  Taylor’s. 

Talking  of  biography,  I  said,  in  writing  a  life, 
a  man’s  peculiarities  should  be  mentioned,  be¬ 
cause  they  mark  his  character.  Johnson.  “Sir, 
there  is  no  doubt  as  to  peculiarities:  the  question 
is,  whether  a  man’s  vices  should  be  mentioned: 
for  instance,  whether  it  should  be  mentioned 
that  Addison  and  Parnell  drank  too  freely:  for 
people  will  probably  more  easily  indulge  in  drink¬ 
ing  from  knowing  this;  so  that  more  ill  may  be 
done  by  the  example,  than  good  by  telling  the 
whole  truth.”  Here  was  an  instance  of  his  vary¬ 
ing  himself  in  talk;  for  when  Lord  Hailes  and  he 
sat  one  morning  calmly  conversing  in  my  house 
at  Edinburgh,  I  well  remember  that  Dr.  John¬ 
son  maintained,  that  “If  a  man  is  to  write  A 
Panegyrick ,  he  may  keep  vices  out  of  sight;  but  if 
he  professes  to  write  A  Life ,  he  must  represent  it 
really  as  it  was”:  and  when  I  objected  to  the 
danger  of  telling  that  Parnell  drank  to  excess,  he 
said,  that  “it  would  produce  an  instructive  cau¬ 
tion  to  avoid  drinking,  when  it  was  seen,  that 
even  the  learning  and  genius  of  Parnell  could  be 
debased  by  it.”  And  in  the  Hebrides  he  main¬ 
tained,  as  appears  from  my  Journal,1  that  a  man’s 
intimate  friend  should  mention  his  faults,  if  he 
writes  his  life. 

He  had  this  evening,  partly,  I  suppose,  from 
the  spirit  of  contradiction  to  his  Whig  friend,  a 
violent  argument  with  Dr.  Taylor,  as  to  the  in¬ 
clinations  of  the  people  of  England  at  this  time 
towards  the  Royal  Family  of  Stuart.  He  grew  so 
outrageous  as  to  say,  “that,  if  England  were  fair¬ 
ly  polled,  the  present  King  would  be  sent  away 
tonight,  and  his  adherents  hanged  to-morrow.” 
Taylor,  who  was  as  violent  a  Whig  as  Johnson 
was  a  Tory,  was  roused  by  this  to  a  pitch  of  bel- 

xJournal  of  a  Tour  to  the  Hebrides.  3rd  edit.,  p. 
240  [Sept.  22]. 


BOSWELL 


348 

lowing.  He  denied,  loudly,  what  Johnson  said; 
and  maintained,  that  there  was  an  abhorrence 
against  the  Stuart  family,  though  he  admitted 
that  the  people  were  not  much  attached  to  the 
present  King.2  Johnson.  “Sir,  the  state  of  the 
country  is  this:  the  people  knowing  it  to  be  agreed 
on  all  hands  that  this  King  has  not  the  heredi¬ 
tary  right  to  the  crown,  and  there  being  no  hope 
that  he  who  has  it  can  be  restored,  have  grown 
cold  and  indifferent  upon  the  subject  of  loyalty, 
and  have  no  warm  attachment  to  any  King. 
They  would  not,  therefore,  risk  any  thing  to  re¬ 
store  the  exiled  family.  They  would  not  give 
twenty  shillings  a  piece  to  bring  it  about.  But,  if 
a  mere  vote  could  do  it,  there  would  be  twenty 
to  one;  at  least,  there  would  be  a  very  great  ma¬ 
jority  of  voices  for  it.  For,  Sir,  you  are  to  consid¬ 
er,  that  all  those  who  think  a  King  has  a  right  to 
his  crown,  as  a  man  has  to  his  estate,  which  is 
the  just  opinion,  would  be  for  restoring  the  King 
who  certainly  has  the  hereditary  right,  could  he 
be  trusted  with  it;  in  which  there  would  be  no 
danger  now,  when  laws  and  every  thing  else  are 
so  much  advanced:  and  every  King  will  govern 
by  the  laws.  And  you  must  also  consider,  Sir, 
that  there  is  nothing  on  the  other  side  to  oppose 
to  this;  for  it  is  not  alledged  by  any  one  that  the 
present  family  has  any  inherent  right:  so  that 
the  Whigs  could  not  have  a  contest  between  two 
rights.” 

Dr.  Taylor  admitted,  that  if  the  question  as 
to  hereditary  right  were  to  be  tried  by  a  poll  of 
the  people  of  England,  to  be  sure  the  abstract 
doctrine  would  be  given  in  favour  of  the  family 
of  Stuart;  but  he  said,  the  conduct  of  that  family, 
which  occasioned  their  expulsion,  was  so  fresh 
in  the  minds  of  the  people,  that  they  would  not 
vote  for  a  restoration.  Dr.  Johnson,  I  think,  was 
contented  with  the  admission  as  to  the  hereditary 
right,  leaving  the  original  point  in  dispute,  viz. 
what  the  people  upon  the  whole  would  do,  tak¬ 
ing  in  right  and  affection;  for  he  said,  people 
were  afraid  of  a  change,  even  though  they  think 
it  right.  Dr.  Taylor  said  something  of  the  slight 
foundation  of  the  hereditary  right  of  the  house 
of  Stuart.  “Sir,  (said  Johnson,)  the  house  of  Stu¬ 
art  succeeded  to  the  full  right  of  both  the  houses 
of  York  and  Lancaster,  whose  common  source 
had  the  undisputed  right.  A  right  to  a  throne  is 
like  a  right  to  any  thing  else.  Possession  is  sufh- 

2Dr.  Taylor  was  very  ready  to  make  this  admis¬ 
sion,  because  the  party  with  which  he  was  con¬ 
nected  was  not  in  power.  There  was  then  some 
truth  in  it,  owing  the  pertinacity  of  factious  clam¬ 
our.  Had  he  lived  till  now,  it  would  have  been 
impossible  for  him  to  deny  that  his  Majesty  pos¬ 
sesses  the  warmest  affection  of  his  people. 


[  1777 

cient,  where  no  better  right  can  be  shown.  This 
was  the  case  with  the  Royal  Family  of  England, 
as  it  is  now  with  the  King  of  France:  for  as  to  the 
first  beginning  of  the  right,  we  are  in  the  dark.” 

Thursday,  September  1 8.  Last  night  Dr.  John¬ 
son  had  proposed  that  the  crystal  lustre,  or  chan¬ 
delier,  in  Dr.  Taylor’s  large  room,  should  be 
lighted  up  some  time  or  other.  Taylor  said,  it 
should  be  lighted  up  next  night.  “That  will  do 
very  well,  (said  I,)  for  it  is  Dr.  Johnson’s  birth¬ 
day.”  When  we  were  in  the  Isle  of  Sky, 
Johnson  had  desired  me  not  to  mention  his 
birth-day.  He  did  not  seem  pleased  at  this  time 
that  I  mentioned  it,  and  said  (somewhat 
sternly,)  “he  would  not  have  the  lustre  lighted 
the  next  day.” 

Some  ladies,  who  had  been  present  yester¬ 
day  when  I  mentioned  his  birth-day,  came  to 
dinner  to-day,  and  plagued  him  unintentional¬ 
ly,  by  wishing  him  joy.  I  know  not  why  he  dis¬ 
liked  having  his  birth-day  mentioned,  unless  it 
were  that  it  reminded  him  of  his  approach¬ 
ing  nearer  to  death,  of  which  he  had  a  constant 
dread. 

I  mentioned  to  him  a  friend  of  mine  who  was 
formerly  gloomy  from  low  spirits,  and  much  dis¬ 
tressed  by  the  fear  of  death,  but  was  now  uni¬ 
formly  placid,  and  contemplated  his  dissolution 
without  any  perturbation.  “Sir,  (said  Johnson,) 
this  is  only  a  disordered  imagination  taking  a 
different  turn.” 

We  talked  of  a  collection  being  made  of  all 
the  English  Poets  who  had  published  a  volume 
of  poems.  Johnson  told  me  “that  a  Mr.  Coxeter, 
whom  he  knew,  had  gone  the  greatest  length 
towards  this;  having  collected,  I  think,  about 
five  hundred  volumes  of  poets  whose  works  were 
little  known;  but  that  upon  his  death  Tom  Os¬ 
borne  bought  them,  and  they  were  dispersed, 
which  he  thought  a  pity,  as  it  was  curious  to  see 
any  series  complete;  and  in  every  volume  of  po¬ 
ems  something  good  may  be  found.” 

He  observed,  that  a  gentleman  of  eminence  in 
literature  had  got  into  a  bad  style  of  poetry  of 
late.  “He  puts  (said  he,)  a  very  common  thing 
in  a  strange  dress  till  he  does  not  know  it  him¬ 
self,  and  thinks  other  people  do  not  know  it.” 
Boswell.  “That  is  owing  to  his  being  so  much 
versant  in  old  English  poetry.”  Johnson.  “What 
is  that  to  the  purpose,  Sir?  If  I  say  a  man  is 
drunk,  and  you  tell  me  it  is  owing  to  his  taking 
much  drink,  the  matter  is  not  mended.  No,  Sir. 

- has  taken  to  an  odd  mode.  For  example, 

he’d  write  thus: 

Hermit  hoar ,  in  solemn  cell. 

Wearing  out  life's  evening  gray. 


1777  1  LIFE  OF 

Gray  evening  is  common  enough;  but  evening  gray 
he’d  think  fine. — Stay;— we’ll  make  out  the 
stanza: 

Hermit  hoar ,  in  solemn  cell , 

Wearing  out  life's  evening  gray; 

Smite  thy  bosom ,  sage,  and  tell , 

What  is  bliss?  and  which  the  way? 

Boswell.  “Butwhy  smite  his  bosom,  Sir?”  John¬ 
son.  “Why,  to  shew  he  was  in  earnest,”  (smil¬ 
ing.) — He  at  an  after  period  added  the  following 
stanza: 

Thus  I  spoke;  and  speaking  sigh'd; 

— Scarce  repress'd  the  starting  tear;  — 

When  the  smiling  sage  reply' d — 

— Come ,  my  lad ,  and  drink  some  beer } 

I  cannot  help  thinking  the  first  stanza  very  good 
solemn  poetry,  as  also  the  three  first  lines  of  the 
second.  Its  last  line  is  an  excellent  burlesque  sur¬ 
prise  on  gloomy  sentimental  enquirers.  And,  per¬ 
haps,  the  advice  is  as  good  as  can  be  given  to  a 
low-spirited  dissatisfied  being: — “Don’t  trouble 
your  head  with  sickly  thinking:  take  a  cup,  and 
be  merry.” 

Friday,  September  19,  after  breakfast  Dr. 
Johnson  and  I  set  out  in  Dr.  Taylor’s  chaise  to 
go  to  Derby.  The  day  was  fine,  and  we  resolved 
to  go  by  Keddlestone,  the  seat  of  Lord  Scars- 
dale,  that  I  might  see  his  Lordship’s  fine  house. 
I  was  struck  with  the  magnificence  of  the  build¬ 
ing;  and  the  extensive  park,  with  the  finest  ver¬ 
dure,  covered  with  deer,  and  cattle,  and  sheep, 
delighted  me.  The  number  of  old  oaks,  of  an  im¬ 
mense  size,  filled  me  with  a  sort  of  respectful  ad¬ 
miration:  for  one  of  them  sixty  pounds  was  of¬ 
fered.  The  excellent  smooth  gravel  roads;  the 
large  piece  of  water  formed  by  his  Lordship 
from  some  small  brooks,  with  a  handsome  barge 
upon  it;  the  venerable  Gothick  church,  now  the 
family  chapel,  just  by  the  house;  in  short,  the 

*As  some  of  my  readers  may  be  gratified  by  read¬ 
ing  the  progress  of  this  little  composition,  I  shall 
insert  it  from  my  notes.  “When  Dr.  Johnson  and  I 
were  sitting  tete-a-tete  at  the  Mitre  tavern,  May  9, 
1778,  he  said  1  Where  is  bliss,’  would  be  better.  He 
then  added  a  ludicrous  stanza,  but  would  not  re¬ 
peat  it,  lest  I  should  take  it  down.  It  was  somewhat 
as  follows;  the  last  line  I  am  sure  I  remember: 
While  I  thus  cried , 

seer , 

The  hoary  reply' d. 

Come ,  my  lad ,  and  drink  some  beer. 

In  spring,  1779,  when  in  better  humour,  he  made 
the  second  stanza,  as  in  the  text.  There  was  only 
one  variation  afterwards  made  on  my  suggestion, 
which  was  changing  hoary  in  the  third  line  to  smil¬ 
ing ,  both  to  avoid  a  sameness  with  the  epithet  in 
the  first  line,  and  to  describe  the  hermit  in  his 
pleasantry.  He  was  then  very  well  pleased  that  I 
would  preserve  it.” 


JOHNSON  349 

grand  group  of  objects  agitated  and  distended 
my  mind  in  a  most  agreeable  manner.  “One 
should  think  (said  I,)  that  the  proprietor  of  all 
thism&rt  be  happy.” — “Nay,  Sir,  (said  Johnson,) 
all  this  excludes  but  one  evil — poverty.”2 

Our  names  were  sent  up,  and  a  well-drest  elder¬ 
ly  housekeeper,  a  most  distinct  articulator, 
shewed  us  the  house;  which  I  need  not  describe, 
as  there  is  an  account  of  it  published  in  Adam's 
Works  in  Architecture.  Dr.  Johnson  thought  better 
of  it  to-day  than  when  he  saw  it  before;  for  he 
had  lately  attacked  it  violently,  saying,  “It  would 
do  excellently  for  a  town-hall.  The  large  room 
with  the  pillars  (said  he,)  would  do  for  the  Judges 
to  sit  in  at  the  assizes;  the  circular  room  for  a 
jury-chamber;  and  the  room  above  for  prison¬ 
ers.”  Still  he  thought  the  large  room  ill  lighted, 
and  of  no  use  but  for  dancing  in;  and  the  bed¬ 
chambers  but  indifferent  rooms;  and  that  the 
immense  sum  which  it  cost  was  injudiciously  laid 
out.  Dr.  Taylor  had  put  him  in  mind  of  his  ap¬ 
pearing  pleased  with  the  house.  “But  (said  he,) 
that  was  when  Lord  Scarsdale  was  present.  Po¬ 
liteness  obliges  us  to  appear  pleased  with  a  man’s 
works  when  he  is  present.  No  man  will  be  so  ill 
bred  as  to  question  you.  You  may  therefore  pay 
compliments  without  saying  what  is  not  true.  I 
should  say  to  Lord  Scarsdale  of  his  large  room, 
cMy  Lord,  this  is  the  most  costly  room  that  I  ever 
saw’;  which  is  true.” 

Dr.  Manningham,  physician  in  London,  who 
was  visiting  at  Lord  Scarsdale’s,  accompanyed 
us  through  many  of  the  rooms,  and  soon  after¬ 
wards  my  Lord  himself,  to  whom  Dr.  Johnson 
was  known,  appeared,  and  did  the  honours  of 
the  house.  We  talked  of  Mr.  Langton.  Johnson, 
with  a  warm  vehemence  of  affectionate  regard, 
exclaimed,  “The  earth  does  not  bear  a  worthier 
man  than  Bennet  Langton.  ’ ’  W e  saw  a  good  many 
fine  pictures,  which  I  think  are  described  in  one 
of  Young's  Tours.  There  is  a  printed  catalogue  of 
them  which  the  housekeeper  put  into  my  hand; 
I  should  like  to  view  them  at  leisure.  I  was  much 
struck  with  Daniel  interpreting  Nebuchadnez¬ 
zar’s  dream  by  Rembrandt.  We  were  shown  a 
pretty  large  library.  In  his  Lordship’s  dressing- 

2 When  I  mentioned  Dr.  Johnson’s  remark  to  a 
lady  of  admirable  good  sense  and  quickness  of  un¬ 
derstanding,  she  observed,  “It  is  true,  all  this  ex¬ 
cludes  only  one  evil;  but  how  much  good  does  it 
let  in?” — To  this  observation  much  praise  has  been 
justly  given.  Let  me  then  now  do  myself  the  honour 
to  mention  that  the  lady  who  made  it  was  the  late 
Margaret  Montgomerie,  my  very  valuable  wife, 
and  the  very  affectionate  mother  of  my  children, 
who,  if  they  inherit  her  good  qualities,  will  have  no 
reason  to  complain  of  their  lot.  Dos  magna  parentum 
virtus . 


BOSWELL 


350 

room  lay  Johnson’s  small  Dictionary:  he  shewed 
it  to  me,  with  some  eagerness,  saying,  “Look’- 
ye !  Qua1  terra  nostri  non  plena  laboris.”  He  observed, 
also,  Goldsmith’s  Animated  Nature;  and  said, 
<£Here’s  our  friend !  The  poor  Doctor  would  have 
been  happy  to  hear  of  this.” 

In  our  way,  Johnson  strongly  expressed  his 
love  of  driving  fast  in  a  post-chaise.  “If  (said  he,) 
I  had  no  duties,  and  no  reference  to  futurity,  I 
would  spend  my  life  in  driving  briskly  in  a  post- 
chaise  with  a  pretty  woman;  but  she  should  be 
one  who  could  understand  me,  and  would  add 
something  to  the  conversation.”  I  observed,  that 
we  were  this  day  to  stop  just  where  the  High¬ 
land  army  did  in  1745.  Johnson.  “It  was  a  no¬ 
ble  attempt.”  Boswell.  “I  wish  we  could  have 
an  authentick  history  of  it.”  Johnson.  “If  you 
were  not  an  idle  dog  you  might  write  it,  by  col¬ 
lecting  from  every  body  what  they  can  tell,  and 
putting  down  your  authorities.”  Boswell.  “But 
I  could  not  have  the  advantage  of  it  in  my  life¬ 
time.”  Johnson.  “You  might  have  the  satisfac¬ 
tion  of  its  fame,  by  printing  it  in  Holland;  and 
as  to  profit,  consider  how  long  it  was  before  writ¬ 
ing  came  to  be  considered  in  a  pecuniary  view. 
Baretti  says,  he  is  the  first  man  that  ever  received 
copy-money  in  Italy.”  I  said  that  I  would  en¬ 
deavour  to  do  what  Dr.  Johnson  suggested;  and 
I  thought  that  I  might  write  so  as  to  venture  to 
publish  my  History  of  the  Civil  War  in  Great-Britain 
in  1 745  and  1 746,  without  being  obliged  to  go  to 
a  foreign  press.1 

When  we  arrived  at  Derby,  Dr.  Butter  ac¬ 
companied  us  to  see  the  manufactory  of  china 
there.  I  admired  the  ingenuity  and  delicate  art 
with  which  a  man  fashioned  clay  into  a  cup,  a 
saucer,  or  a  tea-pot,  while  a  boy  turned  round 
a  wheel  to  give  the  mass  rotundity.  I  thought 
this  as  excellent  in  its  species  of  power,  as  mak¬ 
ing  good  verses  in  its  species.  Yet  I  had  no  re¬ 
spect  for  this  potter.  Neither,  indeed,  has  a  man 
of  any  extent  of  thinking  for  a  mere  verse-maker, 
in  whose  numbers,  however  perfect,  there  is  no 
poetry,  no  mind.  The  china  was  beautiful,  but 
Dr.  Johnson  justly  observed  it  was  too  dear;  for 
that  he  could  have  vessels  of  silver,  of  the  same 
size,  as  cheap  as  what  were  here  made  of  porce¬ 
lain. 

I  felt  a  pleasure  in  walking  about  Derby  such 
as  I  always  have  in  walking  about  any  town  to 
which  I  am  not  accustomed.  There  is  an  im- 

JI  am  now  happy  to  understand,  that  Mr.  John 
Home,  who  was  himself  gallantly  in  the  field  for 
the  reigning  family,  in  that  interesting  warfare, 
but  is  generous  enough  to  do  justice  to  the  other 
side,  is  preparing  an  account  of  it  for  the  press. 


[  1777 

mediate  sensation  of  novelty;  and  one  speculates 
on  the  way  in  which  life  is  passed  in  it,  which, 
although  there  is  a  sameness  every  where  upon 
the  whole,  is  yet  minutely  diversified.  The  min¬ 
ute  diversities  in  every  thing  are  wonderful. 
Talking  of  shaving  the  other  night  at  Dr.  Tay¬ 
lor’s,  Dr.  Johnson  said,  “Sir,  of  a  thousand  shav¬ 
ers,  two  do  not  shave  so  much  alike  as  not  to  be 
distinguished.”  I  thought  this  not  possible,  till 
he  specified  so  many  of  the  varieties  in  shaving; 
— holding  the  razor  more  or  less  perpendicular; 
— drawing  long  or  short  strokes; — beginning  at 
the  upper  part  of  the  face,  or  the  under; — at  the 
right  side  or  the  left  side.  Indeed,  when  one  con¬ 
siders  what  variety  of  sounds  can  be  uttered  by 
the  windpipe,  in  the  compass  of  a  very  small 
aperture,  we  may  be  convinced  how  many  de¬ 
grees  of  difference  there  may  be  in  the  applica¬ 
tion  of  a  razor. 

Wedined  with  Dr.  Butter,  whose  lady  isdaugh- 
ter  of  my  cousin  Sir  John  Douglas,  whose  grand¬ 
son  is  now  presumptive  heir  of  the  noble  family 
of  Queensberry.  Johnson  and  he  had  a  good  deal 
of  medical  conversation.  Johnson  said,  he  had 
somewhere  or  other  given  an  account  of  Dr. 
Nichols’s  discourse  De  Anima  Medicd.  He  told  us 
“that  whatever  a  man’s  distemper  was,  Dr.  Nic¬ 
hols  would  not  attend  him  as  a  physician,  if  his 
mind  was  not  at  ease;  for  he  believed  that  no 
medicines  would  have  any  influence.  He  once 
attended  a  man  in  trade,  upon  whom  he  found 
none  of  the  medicines  he  prescribed  had  any  ef¬ 
fect:  he  asked  the  man’s  wife  privately  whether 
his  affairs  were  not  in  a  bad  way?  She  said  no. 
He  continued  his  attendance  some  time,  still 
without  success.  At  length  the  man’s  wife  told 
him,  she  had  discovered  that  her  husband’s  af¬ 
fairs  were  in  a  bad  way.  When  Goldsmith  was 
dying,  Dr.  Turton  said  to  him,  ‘Your  pulse  is  in 
greater  disorder  than  it  should  be,  from  the  de¬ 
gree  of  fever  which  you  have:  is  your  mind  at 
ease?’  Goldsmith  answered  it  was  not.” 

After  dinner,  Mrs.  Butter  went  with  me  to  see 
the  silk-mill  which  Mr.  John  Lombe  had2  had  a 
patent  for,  having  brought  away  the  contrivance 
from  I  taly.  I  am  not  very  conversant  with  mecha- 
nicks;  but  the  simplicity  of  this  machine,  and  its 
multiplied  operations,  struck  me  with  an  agree¬ 
able  surprize.  I  had  learnt  from  Dr.  Johnson, 
during  this  interview,  not  to  think  with  a  de¬ 
jected  indifference  of  the  works  of  art,  and  the 

2See  Hutton’s  History  of  Derby ,  a  book  which  is 
deservedly  esteemed  for  its  information,  accuracy, 
and  good  narrative.  Indeed  the  age  in  which  we 
live  is  eminently  distinguished  by  topographical 
excellence. 


1777  ] 

pleasures  of  life,  because  life  is  uncertain  and 
short;  but  to  consider  such  indifference  as  a  fail¬ 
ure  of  reason,  a  morbidness  of  mind;  for  happi¬ 
ness  should  be  cultivated  as  much  as  we  can,  and 
the  objects  which  are  instrumental  to  it  should  be 
steadily  considered  as  of  importance,  with  a  ref¬ 
ence  not  only  to  ourselves,  but  to  multitudes  in 
successive  ages.  Though  it  is  proper  to  value 
small  parts,  as 

Sands  make  the  mountain ,  moments  make  the  year;1 

yet  we  must  contemplate,  collectively,  to  have  a 
just  estimation  of  objects.  One  moment’s  being 
uneasy  or  not,  seems  of  no  consequence;  yet  this 
may  be  thought  of  the  next,  and  the  next,  and 
so  on,  till  there  is  a  large  portion  of  misery.  In 
the  same  way  one  must  think  of  happiness,  of 
learning,  of  friendship.  We  cannot  tell  the  pre¬ 
cise  moment  when  friendship  is  formed.  As  in 
filling  a  vessel  drop  by  drop,  there  is  at  last  a 
drop  which  makes  it  run  over;  so  in  a  series  of 
kindnesses  there  is  at  last  one  which  makes  the 
heart  run  over.  We  must  not  divide  objects  of 
our  attention  into  minute  parts,  and  think  sep¬ 
arately  of  each  part.  It  is  by  contemplating  a 
large  mass  of  human  existence,  that  a  man,  while 
he  sets  a  just  value  on  his  own  life,  does  not  think 
of  his  death  as  annihilating  all  that  is  great  and 
pleasing  in  the  world,  as  if  actually  contained  in 
his  mind ,  according  to  Berkeley’s  reverie.  If  his 
imagination  be  not  sickly  and  feeble,  it  “wings 
its  distant  way”  far  beyond  himself,  and  views 
the  world  in  unceasing  activity  of  every  sort.  It 
must  be  acknowledged,  however,  that  Pope’s 
plaintive  reflection,  that  all  things  would  be  as 
gay  as  ever,  on  the  day  of  his  death,  is  natural 
and  common.  We  are  apt  to  transfer  to  ali  around 
us  our  own  gloom,  without  considering  that  at 
any  given  point  of  time  there  is,  perhaps,  as  much 
youth  and  gaiety  in  the  world  as  at  another.  Be¬ 
fore  I  came  into  this  life,  in  which  I  have  had  so 
many  pleasant  scenes,  have  not  thousands  and 
ten  thousands  of  deaths  and  funerals  happened, 
and  have  not  families  been  in  grief  for  their  near¬ 
est  relations?  But  have  those  dismal  circumstances 
at  all  affected  me?  Why  then  should  the  gloomy 
scenes  which  I  experience,  or  which  I  know,  af¬ 
fect  others?  Let  us  guard  against  imagining  that 
there  is  an  end  of  felicity  upon  earth,  when  we 
ourselves  grow  old,  or  are  unhappy. 

Dr.  Johnson  told  us  at  tea,  that  when  some  of 
Dr.  Dodd’s  pious  friends  were  trying  to  console 
him  by  saying  that  he  was  going  to  leave  “a 
wretched  world,”  he  had  honesty  enough  not  to 
join  in  the  cant: — “No,  no,  (said  he,)  it  has  been 

1  Young. 


351 

a  very  agreeable  world  to  me.”  Johnson  added, 
“I  respect  Dodd  for  thus  speaking  the  truth;  for, 
to  be  sure,  he  had  for  several  years  enjoyed  a 
life  of  great  voluptuousness.” 

He  told  us,  that  Dodd’s  city  friends  stood  by 
him  so,  that  a  thousand  pounds  were  ready  to 
be  given  to  the  gaoler,  if  he  would  let  him  es¬ 
cape.  He  added,  that  he  knew  a  friend  of  Dodd’s, 
who  walked  about  Newgate  for  some  time  on 
the  evening  before  the  day  of  his  execution,  with 
five  hundred  pounds  in  his  pocket,  ready  to  be 
paid  to  any  of  the  turnkeys  who  could  get  him 
out:  but  it  was  too  late;  for  he  was  watched  with 
much  circumspection.  He  said,  Dodd’s  friends 
had  an  image  of  him  made  of  wax,  which  was  to 
have  been  left  in  his  place;  and  he  believed  it 
was  carried  into  the  prison. 

Johnson  disapproved  of  Dr.  Dodd’s  leaving 
the  world  persuaded  that  The  Convict' s  Address  to 
his  unhappy  Brethren  was  of  his  own  writing.  “But, 
Sir,  (said  I,)  you  contributed  to  the  deception; 
for  when  Mr.  Seward  expressed  a  doubt  to  you 
that  it  was  not  Dodd’s  own,  because  it  had  a 
great  deal  more  force  of  mind  in  it  than  any 
thing  known  to  be  his,  you  answered, — cWtn 
should  you  think  so?  Depend  upon  it,  Sir,  wher 
a  man  knows  he  is  to  be  hanged  in  a  fortnight, 
it  concentrates  his  mind  wonderfully.’  ”  John¬ 
son.  “Sir,  as  Dodd  got  it  from  me  to  pass  as  his 
own,  while  that  could  do  him  any  good,  there 
was  an  implied  promise  that  I  should  not  own  it. 
To  own  it,  therefore,  would  have  been  telling  a 
lie,  with  the  addition  of  breach  of  promise,  which 
was  worse  than  simply  telling  a  lie  to  make  it  be 
believed  it  was  Dodd’s.  Besides,  Sir,  I  did  not  di¬ 
rectly  tell  a  lie:  I  left  the  matter  uncertain.  Per¬ 
haps  I  thought  that  Seward  would  not  believe  it 
the  less  to  be  mine  for  what  I  said;  but  I  would 
not  put  it  in  his  power  to  say  I  had  owned  it.” 

He  praised  Blair’s  sermons:  “Yet,”  said  he, 
(willing  to  let  us  see  he  was  aware  that  fashiona¬ 
ble  fame,  however  deserved,  is  not  always  the 
most  lasting,)  “perhaps,  they  may  not  be  re¬ 
printed  after  seven  years;  at  least  not  after  Blair’s 
death.” 

He  said,  “Goldsmith  was  a  plant  that  flow¬ 
ered  late.  There  appeared  nothing  remarkable 
about  him  when  he  was  young;  though  when  he 
had  got  high  in  fame,  one  of  his  friends  began  to 
recollect  something  of  his  being  distinguished  at 
College.  Goldsmith  in  the  same  manner  recol¬ 
lected  more  of  that  friend’s  early  years,  as  he 
grew  a  greater  man.” 

I  mentioned  that  Lord  Monboddo  told  me, 
he  awaked  every  morning  at  four,  and  then  for 
his  health  got  up  and  walked  in  his  room  naked, 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


BOSWELL 


352 

with  the  window  open,  which  he  called  taking  an 
air  bath;  after  which  he  went  to  bed  again,  and 
slept  two  hours  more.  Johnson,  who  was  always 
ready  to  beatdown  any  thing  that  seemed  to  beex- 
hibited  with  disproportionate  importance,  thus 
observed:  “ I  suppose,  Sir,  there  is  no  more  in  it 
than  this,  he  awakes  at  four,  and  cannot  sleep 
till  he  chills  himself,  and  makes  the  warmth  of 
the  bed  a  grateful  sensation.” 

I  talked  of  the  difficulty  of  rising  in  the  morn¬ 
ing.  Dr.  Johnson  told  me,  “that  the  learned  Mrs. 
Carter,  at  that  period  when  she  was  eager  in 
study,  did  not  awake  as  early  as  she  wished,  and 
she  therefore  had  a  contrivance,  that,  at  a  cer¬ 
tain  hour,  her  chamber-light  should  burn  a  string 
to  which  a  heavy  weight  was  suspended,  which 
then  fell  with  a  strong  sudden  noise:  this  roused 
her  from  sleep,  and  then  she  had  no  difficulty  in 
getting  up.”  But  I  said  that  was  my  difficulty; 
and  wished  there  could  be  some  medicine  in¬ 
vented  which  would  make  one  rise  without  pain, 
which  I  never  did,  unless  after  lying  in  bed  a 
very  long  time.  Perhaps  there  may  be  something 
in  the  stores  of  Nature  which  could  do  this.  I 
have  thought  of  a  pulley  to  raise  me  gradually; 
but  that  would  give  me  pain,  as  it  would  counter¬ 
act  my  internal  inclination.  I  would  have  some¬ 
thing  that  can  dissipate  the  vis  inertia ,  and  give 
elasticity  to  the  muscles.  As  I  imagine  that  the 
human  body  may  be  put,  by  the  operation  of 
other  substances,  into  any  state  in  which  it  has 
ever  been;  and  as  I  have  experienced  a  state  in 
which  rising  from  bed  was  not  disagreeable  but 
easy,  nay,  sometimes  agreeable;  I  suppose  that 
this  state  may  be  produced,  if  we  knew  by  what. 
We  can  heat  the  body,  we  can  cool  it;  we  can 
give  it  tension  or  relaxation;  and  surely  it  is  pos¬ 
sible  to  bring  it  into  a  state  in  which  rising  from 
bed  will  not  be  a  pain. 

Johnson  observed,  that  “a  man  should  take  a 
sufficient  quantity  of  sleep,  which  Dr.  Mead  says 
is  between  seven  and  nine  hours.”  I  told  him, 
that  Dr.  Cullen  said  to  me,  that  a  man  should 
not  take  more  sleep  than  he  can  take  at  once. 
Johnson.  “This  rule,  Sir,  cannot  hold  in  all  cases; 
for  many  people  have  their  sleep  broken  by  sick¬ 
ness;  and  surely,  Cullen  would  not  have  a  man 
to  get  up,  after  having  slept  but  an  hour.  Such  a 
regimen  would  soon  end  in  a  long  sleep”1  Dr. 

DThis  regimen  was  however,  practised  by  Bishop 
Ken,  of  whom  Hawkins  {not  Sir  John)  in  his  life  of 
that  venerable  Prelate,  p.  4,  tells  us:  “And  that 
neither  his  study  might  be  the  aggressor  on  his 
hours  of  instruction,  or  what  he  judged  his  duty 
prevent  his  improvements;  or  both,  his  closet  ad¬ 
dresses  to  his  God;  he  strictly  accustomed  himself 
to  but  one  sleep,  which  often  obliged  him  to  rise  at 


1777 

Taylor  remarked,  I  think  very  justly,  that  “a 
man  who  does  not  feel  an  inclination  to  sleep  at 
the  ordinary  time,  instead  of  being  stronger  than 
other  people,  must  not  be  well;  for  a  man  in 
health  has  all  the  natural  inclinations  to  eat, 
drink,  and  sleep,  in  a  strong  degree.” 

Johnson  advised  me  to-night  not  to  refine  in 
the  education  of  my  children.  “Life  (said  he,) 
will  not  bear  refinement:  you  must  do  as  other 
people  do.” 

As  we  drove  back  to  Ashbourne,  Dr.  Johnson 
recommended  to  me,  as  he  had  often  done,  to 
drink  water  only:  “For  (said  he,)  you  are  then 
sure  not  to  get  drunk;  whereas  if  you  drink  wine 
you  are  never  sure.”  I  said,  drinking  wine  was  a 
pleasure  which  I  was  unwilling  to  give  up,  “Why, 
Sir,  (said  he,)  there  is  no  doubt  that  not  to  drink 
wine  is  a  great  deduction  from  life;  but  it  may 
be  necessary.”  He  however  owned,  that  in  his 
opinion  a  free  use  of  wine  did  not  shorten  life; 
and  said,  he  would  not  give  less  for  the  life  of  a 
certain  Scotch  Lord  (whom  he  named)  celebrat¬ 
ed  for  hard  drinking,  than  for  that  of  a  sober 
man.  “But  stay,  (said  he,  with  his  usual  intelli¬ 
gence,  and  accuracy  of  enquiry,)  does  it  take 
much  wine  to  make  him  drunk?”  I  answered, 
“a  great  deal  either  of  wine  or  strong  punch.” — 
“Then  (said  he,)  that  is  the  worse.”  I  presume 
to  illustrate  my  friend’s  observation  thus:  “A  for¬ 
tress  which  soon  surrenders  has  its  walls  less  shat¬ 
tered  than  when  a  long  and  obstinate  resistance 
is  made.” 

I  ventured  to  mention  a  person  who  was  as 
violent  a  Scotsman  as  he  was  an  Englishman; 
and  literally  had  the  same  contempt  for  an  Eng¬ 
lishman  compared  with  a  Scotsman,  that  he  had 
for  a  Scotsman  compared  with  an  Englishman; 
and  that  he  would  say  of  Dr.  Johnson,  “Damned 
rascal!  to  talk  as  he  does  of  the  Scotch.”  This 
seemed,  for  a  moment,  “to  give  him  pause.”  It, 
perhaps,  presented  his  extreme  prejudice  against 
the  Scotch  in  a  point  of  view  somewhat  new  to 
him,  by  the  effect  of  contrast. 

By  the  time  when  we  returned  to  Ashbourne, 
Dr.  Taylor  was  gone  to  bed.  Johnson  and  I  sat 
up  a  long  time  by  ourselves. 


one  or  two  of  the  clock  in  the  morning,  and  some¬ 
times  sooner;  and  grew  so  habitual,  that  it  con¬ 
tinued  with  him  almost  till  his  last  illness.  And  so 
lively  and  chearful  was  his  temper,  that  he  would 
be  very  facetious  and  entertaining  to  his  friends  in 
the  evening,  even  when  it  was  perceived  that  with 
difficulty  he  kept  his  eyes  open;  and  then  seemed 
to  go  to  rest  with  no  other  purpose  than  the  re¬ 
freshing  and  enabling  him  with  more  vigour  and 
chearfulness  to  sing  his  morning  hymn,  as  he  then 
used  to  do  to  his  lute  before  he  put  on  his  cloaths.” 


1777  ] 

He  was  much  diverted  with  an  article  which 
I  shewed  him  in  The  Critical  Review  of  this  year, 
giving  an  account  of  a  curious  publication,  en¬ 
titled,  A  Spiritual  Diary  and  Soliloquies ,  by  John 
Rutty,  M.D.  Dr.  Rutty  was  one  of  the  people 
called  Quakers,  a  physician  of  some  eminence  in 
Dublin,  and  authour  of  several  works.  This  Di¬ 
ary,  which  was  kept  from  1 753  to  1775,  the  year 
in  which  he  died,  and  was  now  published  in  two 
volumes  octavo,  exhibited,  in  the  simplicity  of 
his  heart,  a  minute  and  honest  register  of  the  state 
of  his  mind;  which,  though  frequently  laugh¬ 
able  enough,  was  not  more  so  than  the  history  of 
many  men  would  be,  if  recorded  with  equal 
fairness. 

The  following  specimens  were  extracted  by 
the  Reviewers: 

“Tenth  month,  1753. 

23.  Indulgence  in  bed  an  hour  too  long. 

Twelfth  month,  17.  An  hypochondriack  ob¬ 
nubilation  from  wind  and  indigestion. 

Ninth  month,  28.  An  over-dose  of  whisky. 

29.  A  dull,  cross,  cholerick  day. 

First  month,  1 757 — 22.  A  little  swinish  at  din¬ 
ner  and  repast. 

31.  Dogged  on  provocation. 

Second  month,  5.  Very  dogged  or  snappish. 

14.  Snappish  on  fasting. 

26.  Cursed  snappishness  to  those  under  me, 
on  a  bodily  indisposition. 

Third  month,  1 1.  On  a  provocation,  exercised 
a  dumb  resentment  for  two  days,  instead  of 
scolding. 

22.  Scolded  too  vehemently. 

23.  Dogged  again. 

Fourth  month,  29.  Mechanically  and  sinful¬ 
ly  dogged.” 

Johnson  laughed  heartily  at  this  good  Quiet- 
ist’s  self-condemning  minutes;  particularly  at  his 
mentioning,  with  such  a  serious  regret,  occa¬ 
sional  instances  of  “swinishness  in  eating,  and  dog¬ 
gedness  of  temper .”  He  thought  the  observations 
of  the  Critical  Reviewers  upon  the  importance 
of  a  man  to  himself  so  ingenious  and  so  well  ex¬ 
pressed,  that  I  shall  here  introduce  them. 

After  observing,  that  “There  are  few  writers 
who  have  gained  any  reputation  by  recording 
their  own  actions,”  they  say: 

“We  may  reduce  the  egotists  to  four  classes. 
In  the  first  we  have  Julius  Caesar:  he  relates  his 
own  transactions;  but  he  relates  them  with  pe¬ 
culiar  grace  and  dignity,  and  his  narrative  is 
supported  by  the  greatness  of  his  character  and 
achievements.  In  the  second  class  we  have  Mar¬ 
cus  Antoninus:  this  writer  has  given  us  a  series 
of  reflections  on  his  own  life;  but  his  sentiments 


353 

are  so  noble,  his  morality  so  sublime,  that  his 
meditations  are  universally  admired.  In  the  third 
class  we  have  some  others  of  tolerable  credit, 
who  have  given  importance  to  their  own  private 
history  by  an  intermixture  of  literary  anecdotes, 
and  the  occurrences  of  their  own  times:  the  cele¬ 
brated  Huetius ,  has  published  an  entertaining 
volume  upon  this  place  De  rebus  ad  eum  perti- 
nentibus.  In  the  fourth  class  we  have  the  journal¬ 
ists,  temporal  and  spiritual:  Elias  Ashmole,  Wil¬ 
liam  Lilly,  George  Whitefield,  John  Wesley,  and 
a  thousand  other  old  women  and  fanatick  writ¬ 
ers  of  memoirs  and  meditations.” 

I  mentioned  to  him  that  Dr.  Hugh  Blair,  in  his 
lectures  on  Rhetorick  and  Belles  Lettres,  which 
I  heard  him  deliver  at  Edinburgh,  had  animad¬ 
verted  on  the  Johnsonian  style  as  too  pompous; 
and  attempted  to  imitate  it,  by  giving  a  sentence 
of  Addison  in  The  Spectator ,  No.  41 1,  in  the  man¬ 
ner  of  Johnson.  When  treating  of  the  utility  of 
the  pleasures  of  imagination  in  preserving  us 
from  vice,  it  is  observed  of  those  “who  know  not 
how  to  be  idle  and  innocent,”  that  “their  very 
first  step  out  of  business  is  into  vice  or  folly”; 
which  Dr.  Blair  supposed  would  have  been  ex¬ 
pressed  in  The  Rambler  thus:  “Their  very  first 
step  out  of  the  regions  of  business  is  into  the  per¬ 
turbation  of  vice,  or  the  vacuity  of  folly.”1  John¬ 
son.  “Sir,  these  are  not  the  words  I  should  have 
used.  No,  Sir;  the  imitators  of  my  style  have  not 
hit  it.  Miss  Aikin  has  done  it  the  best;  for  she 
has  imitated  the  sentiment  as  well  as  the  dic¬ 
tion.” 

I  intend,  before  this  work  is  concluded,  to  ex¬ 
hibit  specimens  of  imitation  of  my  friend’s  style 
in  various  modes;  some  caricaturing  or  mimick¬ 
ing  it,  and  some  formed  upon  it,  whether  inten¬ 
tionally  or  with  a  degree  of  similarity  to  it,  of 
which,  perhaps,  the  writers  were  not  conscious. 

In  Baretti’s  Review,  which  he  published  in 
Italy,  under  the  title  of  Frusta  Letteraria ,  it  is  ob¬ 
served,  that  Dr.  Robertson  the  historian  had 
formed  his  style  upon  that  of  II  celebre  Samuele 
Johnson.  My  friend  himself  was  of  that  opinion; 
for  he  once  said  to  me,  in  a  pleasant  humour, 
“Sir,  if  Robertson’s  style  be  faulty,  he  owes  it  to 
me;  that  is,  having  too  many  words,  and  those 
too  big  ones.” 

1When  Dr.  Blair  published  his  Lectures ,  he  was 
invidiously  attacked  for  having  omitted  his  cen¬ 
sure  on  Johnson’s  style,  and,  on  the  contrary,  prais¬ 
ing  it  highly.  But  before  that  time  Johnson’s  Lives 
of  the  Poets  had  appeared,  in  which  his  style  was 
considerably  easier  than  when  he  wrote  The  Ram¬ 
bler.  It  would,  therefore  have  been  uncandid  in 
Blair,  even  supposing  his  criticism  to  have  been 
just,  to  have  preserved  it. 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


BOSWELL 


354 

I  read  to  him  a  letter  which  Lord  Monboddo 
had  written  to  me,  containing  some  critical  re¬ 
marks  upon  the  style  of  his  Journey  to  the  Western 
Islands  of  Scotland.  His  Lordship  praised  the  very 
fine  passage  upon  landing  at  Icolmkill;1  but  his 
own  style  being  exceedingly  dry  and  hard,  he  dis¬ 
approved  of  the  richness  of  Johnson’s  language, 
and  of  his  frequent  use  of  metaphorical  expres¬ 
sions.  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  this  criticism  would 
be  just,  if  in  my  style,  superfluous  words,  or  words 
too  big  for  the  thoughts,  could  be  pointed  out; 
but  this  1  do  not  believe  can  be  done.  For  in¬ 
stance;  in  the  passage  which  Lord  Monboddo 
admires,  ‘We  were  now  treading  that  illustrious 
region,’  the  word  illustrious ,  contributes  nothing 
to  the  mere  narration;  for  the  fact  might  be  told 
without  it:  but  it  is  not,  therefore,  superfluous; 
for  it  wakes  the  mind  to  peculiar  attention,  where 
something  of  more  than  usual  importance  is  to  be 
presented.  ‘Illustrious!’-— for  what?  and  then  the 
sentence  proceeds  to  expand  the  circumstances 
connected  with  Iona.  And,  Sir,  as  to  metaphori¬ 
cal  expression,  that  is  a  great  excellence  in  style, 
when  it  is  used  with  propriety,  for  it  gives  you 
two  ideas  for  one; — conveys  the  meaning  more 
luminously,  and  generally  with  a  perception  of 
delight.” 

He  told  me,  that  he  had  been  asked  to  under¬ 
take  the  new  edition  of  the  Biographia  Britannica , 
but  had  declined  it;  which  he  afterwards  said  to 
me  he  regretted.  In  this  regret  many  will  join, 
because  it  would  have  procured  us  more  of  John¬ 
son’s  most  delightful  species  of  writing;  and  al¬ 
though  my  friend  Dr.  Kippis  has  hitherto  dis¬ 
charged  the  task  judiciously,  distinctly,  and  with 

1<cWe  were  now  treading  that  illustrious  island, 
which  was  once  the  luminary  of  the  Caledonian 
regions,  whence  savage  clans  and  roving  barbar¬ 
ians  derived  the  benefits  of  knowledge,  and  the 
blessings  of  religion.  To  abstract  the  mind  from  all 
local  emotion  would  be  impossible  if  it  were  en¬ 
deavoured,  and  would  be  foolish  if  it  were  possible. 
Whatever  withdraws  us  from  the  power  of  our 
senses,  whatever  makes  the  past,  the  distant,  or  the 
future,  predominate  over  the  present,  advances  us 
in  the  dignity  of  thinking  beings.  Far  from  me,  and 
from  my  friends,  be  such  frigid  philosophy,  as  may 
conduct  us,  indifferent  and  unmoved,  over  any 
ground  which  has  been  dignified  by  wisdom,  brav¬ 
ery,  or  virtue.  The  man  is  little  to  be  envied,  whose 
patriotism  would  not  gain  force  upon  the  plain  of 
Marathon,  or  whose  piety  would  not  grow  warmer 
among  the  ruins  of  Iona.” 

Had  our  Tour  produced  nothing  else  but  this 
sublime  passage,  the  world  must  have  acknowledged 
that  it  was  not  made  in  vain.  Sir  Joseph  Banks, 
the  present  respectable  President  of  the  Royal  So¬ 
ciety,  told  me,  he  was  so  much  struck  on  reading 
it,  that  he  clasped  his  hands  together,  and  remained 
for  some  time  in  an  attitude  of  silent  admiration. 


[  1 77  7 

more  impartiality  than  might  have  been  expect¬ 
ed  from  a  Separatist,  it  were  to  have  been  wished 
that  the  superintendence  of  this  literary  Temple 
of  Fame  had  been  assigned  to  “a  friend  to  the 
constitution  in  Church  and  State.”  We  should 
not  then  have  had  it  too  much  crowded  with  ob¬ 
scure  dissenting  teachers,  doubtless  men  of  merit 
and  worth,  but  not  quite  to  be  numbered  amongst 
“the  most  eminent  persons  who  have  flourished 
in  Grcat-Britain  and  Ireland.”2 

On  Saturday,  September  20,  after  breakfast, 
when  Taylor  was  gone  out  to  his  farm,  Dr.  John¬ 
son  and  I  had  a  serious  conversation  by  ourselves 
on  melancholy  and  madness;  which  he  was,  I  al¬ 
ways  thought,  erroneously  inclined  to  confound 
together.  Melancholy,  like  “great  wit,”  may  be 
“near  allied  to  madness”;  but  there  is,  in  my 
opinion,  a  distinct  separation  between  them. 
When  he  talked  of  madness,  he  was  to  be  under- 

2In  this  censure  which  has  been  carelessly  ut¬ 
tered,  I  carelessly  joined.  But  injustice  to  Dr.  Kip¬ 
pis,  who  with  that  manly  candid  good  temper 
which  marks  his  character,  set  me  right,  I  now 
with  pleasure  retract  it;  and  I  desire  it  may  be  par¬ 
ticularly  observed,  as  pointed  out  by  him  to  me, 
that  “The  new  lives  of  dissenting  Divines,  in  the 
first  four  volumes  of  the  second  edition  of  the  Bio¬ 
graphia  Britannica  are  those  of  John  Abernethy, 
Thomas  Amory,  George  Benson,  Hugh  Broughton, 
the  learned  Puritan,  Simon  Browne,  Joseph  Boyse 
of  Dublin,  Thomas  Cartwright  the  learned  Puri¬ 
tan,  and  Samuel  Chandler.  The  only  doubt  I  have 
ever  heard  suggested  is,  whether  there  should  have 
been  an  article  of  Dr.  Amory.  But  I  was  convinced, 
and  am  still  convinced,  that  he  was  entitled  to  one, 
from  the  reality  of  his  learning,  and  the  excellent 
and  candid  nature  of  his  practical  writings. 

“The  new  lives  of  clergymen  of  the  Church  of 
England,  in  the  same  four  volumes,  are  as  follows: 
John  Balguy,  Edward  Bentham,  George  Berkley 
Bishop  of  Cloyne,  William  Berriman,  Thomas 
Birch,  William  Borlase,  Thomas  Bott,  James  Brad¬ 
ley,  Thomas  Broughton,  John  Brown,  John  Bur¬ 
ton,  Joseph  Butler  Bishop  of  Durham,  Thomas 
Carte,  Edmund  Castell,  Edmund  Chishull,  Charles 
Churchill,  William  Clarke,  Robert  Clayton  Bishop 
of  Clogher,  John  Conybeare  Bishop  of  Bristol, 
George  Costard,  and  Samuel  Croxall. — T  am  not 
conscious  (says  Dr.  Kippis,)  of  any  partiality  in 
conducting  the  work.  I  would  not  willingly  insert 
a  Dissenting  Minister  that  does  not  justly  deserve 
to  be  noticed,  or  omit  an  established  Clergyman 
that  does.  At  the  same  time,  I  shall  not  be  deterred 
from  introducing  Dissenters  into  the  Biographia , 
when  I  am  satisfied  that  they  are  entitled  to  that 
distinction,  from  their  writings,  learning,  and  mer¬ 
it.’  ” 

Let  me  add  that  the  expression  “A  friend  to  the 
constitution  in  Church  and  State,”  was  not  meant 
by  me,  as  any  reflection  upon  this  reverend  gentle¬ 
man,  as  if  he  were  an  enemy  to  the  political 
constitution  of  his  country,  as  established  at  the 
revolution,  but,  from  my  steady  and  avowed  pre¬ 
dilection  for  a  Tory ,  was  quoted  from  Johnson’s 
Dictionary ,  where  that  distinction  is  so  defined. 


i777  ]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  355 


stood  as  speaking  of  those  who  were  in  any  great 
degree  disturbed,  or  as  it  is  commonly  expressed, 
“troubled  in  mind.”  Some  of  the  ancient  philos¬ 
ophers  held,  that  all  deviations  from  right  reason 
were  madness;  and  whoever  wishes  to  see  the 
opinions  both  of  ancients  and  moderns  upon 
this  subject,  collected  and  illustrated  with  a  va¬ 
riety  of  curious  facts,  may  read  Dr.  Arnold’s 
very  entertaining  work.1 

Johnson  said,  “A  madman  loves  to  be  with 
people  whom  he  fears;  not  as  a  dog  fears  the 
lash;  but  of  whom  he  stands  in  awe.”  I  was  struck 
with  the  justice  of  this  observation.  To  be  with 
those  of  whom  a  person,  whose  mind  is  wavering 
and  dejected,  stands  in  awe,  represses  and  com¬ 
poses  an  uneasy  tumult  of  spirits,  and  consoles 
him  with  the  contemplation  of  something  steady, 
and  at  least  comparatively  great. 

He  added,  “Madmen  are  all  sensual  in  the 
lower  stages  of  the  distemper.  They  are  eager  for 
gratifications  to  sooth  their  minds,  and  divert 
their  attention  from  the  misery  which  they  suf¬ 
fer:  but  when  they  grow  very  ill,  pleasure  is  too 
weak  for  them,  and  they  seek  for  pain. 2  Employ¬ 
ment,  Sir,  and  hardships,  prevent  melancholy. 
I  suppose  in  all  our  army  in  America  there  was 
not  one  man  who  went  mad.” 

W e  entered  seriously  upon  a  question  of  much 
importance  to  me,  which  Johnson  was  pleased 
to  consider  with  friendly  attention.  I  had  long 
complained  to  him  that  I  felt  myself  discontent¬ 
ed  in  Scotland,  as  too  narrow  a  sphere,  and  that 
I  wished  to  make  my  chief  residence  in  London, 
the  great  scene  of  ambition,  instruction,  and 
amusement:  a  scene,  which  was  to  me,  compar¬ 
atively  speaking,  a  heaven  upon  earth.  Johnson. 
“Why,  Sir,  I  never  knew  any  one  who  had  such 
a  gust  for  London  as  you  have:  and  I  cannot 

1 Observations  on  Insanity ,  by  Thomas  Arnold, 
M.D.,  London,  1782. 

2We  read  in  the  Gospels,  that  those  unfortunate 
persons  who  were  possessed  with  evil  spirits  (which, 
after  all,  I  think  is  the  most  probable  cause  of 
madness,  as  was  first  suggested  to  me  by  my  re¬ 
spectable  friend  Sir  John  Pringle),  had  recourse  to 
pain,  tearing  themselves,  and  jumping  sometimes 
into  the  fire,  sometimes  into  the  water.  Mr.  Sew¬ 
ard  has  furnished  me  with  a  remarkable  anecdote 
in  confirmation  of  Dr.  Johnson’s  observation.  A 
tradesman,  who  had  acquired  a  large  fortune  in 
London,  retired  from  business,  and  went  to  live  at 
Worcester.  His  mind,  being  without  its  usual  occu¬ 
pation,  and  having  nothing  else  to  supply  its  place, 
preyed  upon  itself,  so  that  existence  was  a  torment 
to  him.  At  last  he  was  seized  with  the  stone;  and  a 
friend  who  found  him  in  one  of  its  severest  fits, 
having  expressed  his  concern,  “No,  no,  Sir,  (said 
he,)  don’t  pity  me:  what  I  now  feel  is  ease  com¬ 
pared  with  that  torture  of  mind  from  which  it  re¬ 
lieves  me.” 


blame  you  for  your  wish  to  live  there:  yet,  Sir, 
were  I  in  your  father’s  place,  I  should  not  con¬ 
sent  to  your  settling  there;  for  I  have  the  old  feu¬ 
dal  notions,  and  I  should  be  afraid  that  Auchin- 
leck  would  be  deserted,  as  you  would  soon  find 
it  more  desirable  to  have  a  country-seat  in  a  bet¬ 
ter  climate.  I  own,  however,  that  to  consider  it 
as  a  duty  to  reside  on  a  family  estate  is  a  preju¬ 
dice;  for  we  must  consider,  that  working-people 
get  employment  equally,  and  the  produce  of 
land  is  sold  equally,  whether  a  great  family  re¬ 
sides  at  home  or  not;  and  if  the  rents  of  an  es¬ 
tate  be  carried  to  London,  they  return  again  in 
the  circulation  of  commerce;  nay,  Sir,  we  must 
perhaps  allow,  that  carrying  the  rents  to  a  dis¬ 
tance  is  a  good,  because  it  contributes  to  that 
circulation.  We  must,  however,  allow,  thata  well- 
regulated  great  family  may  improve  a  neigh¬ 
bourhood  in  civility  and  elegance,  and  give  an 
example  of  good  order,  virtue,  and  piety;  and  so 
its  residence  at  home  may  be  of  much  advantage. 
But  if  a  great  family  be  disorderly  and  vicious, 
its  residence  at  home  is  very  pernicious  to  a  neigh¬ 
bourhood.  There  is  not  now  the  same  induce¬ 
ment  to  live  in  the  country  as  formerly;  the 
pleasures  of  social  life  are  much  better  enjoyed 
in  town;  and  there  is  no  longer  in  the  country 
that  power  and  influence  in  proprietors  of  land 
which  they  had  in  old  times,  and  which  made 
the  country  so  agreeable  to  them.  The  Laird  of 
Auchinleck  now  is  not  near  so  great  a  man  as 
the  Laird  of  Auchinleck  was  a  hundred  years 
ago.” 

I  told  him,  that  one  of  my  ancestors  never 
wentfromhome  without  being  attended  by  thirty 
men  on  horseback.  Johnson’s  shrewdness  and 
spirit  of  enquiry  were  exerted  upon  every  occa¬ 
sion.  “Pray  (said  he,)  how  did  your  ancestor 
support  his  thirty  men  and  thirty  horses,  when 
he  went  at  a  distance  from  home,  in  an  age  when 
there  was  hardly  any  money  in  circulation?”  I 
suggested  the  same  difficulty  to  a  friend,  who 
mentioned  Douglas’s  going  to  the  Holy  Land  with 
a  numerous  train  of  followers.  Douglas  could, 
no  doubt,  maintain  followers  enough  while  liv¬ 
ing  upon  his  own  lands,  the  produce  of  which 
supplied  them  with  food;  but  he  could  not  carry 
that  food  to  the  Holy  Land;  and  as  there  was  no 
commerce  by  which  he  could  be  supplied  with 
money,  how  could  he  maintain  them  in  foreign 
countries? 

I  suggested  a  doubt,  that  if  I  were  to  reside  in 
London,  the  exquisite  zest  with  which  I  relished 
it  in  occasional  visits  might  go  off,  and  I  might 
grow  tired  of  it.  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  you  find 
no  man,  at  all  intellectual,  who  is  willing  to  leave 


BOSWELL 


356 

London.  No,  Sir,  when  a  man  is  tired  of  London, 
he  is  tired  of  life;  for  there  is  in  London  all  that 
life  can  afford.’5 

To  obviate  his  apprehension,  that  by  settling 
in  London  I  might  desert  the  seat  of  my  ances¬ 
tors,  I  assured  him,  that  I  had  old  feudal  princi¬ 
ples  to  a  degree  of  enthusiasm;  and  that  I  felt  all 
the  dulcedo  of  the  natale  solum.  I  reminded  him, 
that  the  Laird  of  Auchinleck  had  an  elegant 
house,  in  front  of  which  he  could  ride  ten  miles 
forward  upon  his  own  territories,  upon  which  he 
had  upwards  of  six  hundred  people  attached  to 
him;  that  the  family  seat  was  rich  in  natural  ro- 
mantick  beauties  of  rock,  wood,  and  water;  and 
that  in  my  “morn  of  life,”  I  had  appropriated 
the  finest  descriptions  in  the  ancient  Classicks  to 
certain  scenes  there,  which  were  thus  associated 
in  my  mind.  That  when  all  this  was  considered,  I 
should  certainly  pass  a  part  of  the  year  at  home, 
and  enjoy  it  the  more  from  variety,  and  from 
bringing  with  me  a  share  of  the  intellectual  stores 
of  the  metropolis.  He  listened  to  all  this,  and 
kindly  “hoped  it  might  be  as  I  now  supposed.” 

He  said,  “A  country  gentleman  should  bring 
his  lady  to  visit  London  as  soon  as  he  can,  that 
they  may  have  agreeable  topicks  for  conversa¬ 
tion  when  they  are  by  themselves.” 

As  I  meditated  trying  my  fortune  in  West¬ 
minster  Hall,  our  conversation  turned  upon  the 
profession  of  the  law  in  England.  Johnson.  “You 
must  not  indulge  too  sanguine  hopes,  should  you 
be  called  to  our  bar.  I  was  told,  by  a  very  sensi¬ 
ble  lawyer,  that  there  are  a  great  many  chances 
against  any  man’s  success  in  the  profession  of 
the  law;  the  candidates  are  so  numerous,  and 
those  who  get  large  practice  so  few.  He  said,  it  was 
by  no  means  true  that  a  man  of  good  parts  and 
application  is  sure  of  having  business,  though 
he,  indeed,  allowed  that  if  such  a  man  could  but 
appear  in  a  few  causes,  his  merit  would  be  known, 
and  he  would  get  forward;  but  that  the  great 
risk  was,  that  a  man  might  pass  half  a  life-time 
in  the  Courts,  and  never  have  an  opportunity  of 
shewing  his  abilities.”1 

We  talked  of  employment  being  absolutely 
necessary  to  preserve  the  mind  from  wearying 

Wow,  at  the  distance  of  fifteen  years  since  this 
conversation  passed,  the  observation  which  I  have 
had  an  opportunity  of  making  in  Westminster  Hall 
has  convinced  me,  that,  however  true  the  opinion 
of  Dr.  Johnson’s  legal  friend  may  have  been  some 
time  ago,  the  same  certainty  of  success  cannot  now 
be  promised  to  the  same  display  of  merit.  The 
reasons,  however,  of  the  rapid  rise  of  some,  and 
the  disappointment  of  others  equally  respectable, 
are  such  as  it  might  seem  invidious  to  mention,  and 
would  require  a  longer  detail  than  would  be  prop¬ 
er  for  this  work. 


[  1777 

and  growing  fretful,  especially  in  those  who  have 
a  tendency  to  melancholy;  and  I  mentioned  to 
him  a  saying  which  somebody  had  related  of  an 
American  savage,  who,  when  an  European  was 
expatiating  on  all  the  advantages  of  money,  put 
this  question:  “Will  it  purchase  occupation ?” 
Johnson.  “Depend  upon  it,  Sir,  this  saying  is  too 
refined  for  a  savage.  And,  Sir,  money  will  pur¬ 
chase  occupation;  it  will  purchase  all  the  con¬ 
veniences  of  life;  it  will  purchase  variety  of  com¬ 
pany;  it  will  purchase  all  sorts  of  entertainment.” 

I  talked  to  him  of  Forster’s  Voyage  to  the  South 
Seas ,  which  pleased  me;  but  I  found  he  did  not 
like  it.  “Sir,  (said  he,)  there  is  a  great  affecta¬ 
tion  of  fine  writing  in  it.”  Boswell.  “But  he  car¬ 
ries  you  along  with  him.”  Johnson.  “No,  Sir;  he 
does  not  carry  me  along  with  him:  he  leaves  me 
behind  him:  or  rather,  indeed,  he  sets  me  before 
him;  for  he  makes  me  turn  over  many  leaves  at 
a  time.” 

On  Sunday,  September  12,  we  went  to  the 
church  of  Ashbourne,  which  is  one  of  the  largest 
and  most  luminous  that  I  have  seen  in  any  town 
of  the  same  size.  I  felt  great  satisfaction  in  con¬ 
sidering  that  I  was  supported  in  my  fondness  for 
solemn  publick  worship  by  the  general  concur¬ 
rence  and  munificence  of  mankind. 

Johnson  and  Taylor  were  so  different  from 
each  other,  that  I  wondered  at  their  preserving 
an  intimacy.  Their  having  been  at  school  and 
college  together,  might,  in  some  degree,  account 
for  this;  but  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  has  furnished 
me  with  a  stronger  reason;  for  Johnson  men¬ 
tioned  to  him,  that  he  had  been  told  by  Taylor 
he  was  to  be  his  heir.  I  shall  not  take  upon  me  to 
animadvert  upon  this;  but  certain  it  is,  that 
Johnson  paid  great  attention  to  Taylor.  He  now, 
however,  said  to  me,  “Sir,  I  love  him;  but  I  do 
not  love  him  more;  my  regard  for  him  does  not 
increase.  As  it  is  said  in  the  Apocrypha,  ‘his  talk 
is  of  bullocks’2:  I  do  not  suppose  he  is  very  fond 
of  my  company.  His  habits  are  by  no  means  suf¬ 
ficiently  clerical:  this  he  knows  that  I  see;  and 
no  man  likes  to  live  under  the  eye  of  perpetual 
disapprobation.” 

I  have  no  doubt  that  a  good  many  sermons 
were  composed  for  Taylor  by  Johnson.  At  this 
time  I  found,  upon  his  table,  a  part  of  one  which 
he  had  newly  begun  to  write:  and  Concio pro  T ay- 
loro  appears  in  one  of  his  diaries.  When  to  these 
circumstances  we  add  the  internal  evidence  from 
the  power  of  thinking  and  style,  in  the  collection 

2Ecclesiasticus,  38.  25.  The  whole  chapter  may 
be  read  as  an  admirable  illustration  of  the  su¬ 
periority  of  cultivated  minds  over  the  gross  and 
illiterate. 


1777]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  357 


which  the  Reverend  Mr.  Hayes  has  published, 
with  the  significant  title  of  “ Sermons  left  for  publi¬ 
cation  by  the  Reverend  John  Taylor ,  LL.D .,”  our 
conviction  will  be  complete. 

I,  however,  would  not  have  it  thought,  that 
Dr.  Taylor,  though  he  could  not  write  like  John¬ 
son,  (as,  indeed,  who  could?)  did  not  sometimes 
compose  sermons  as  good  as  those  which  we  gen¬ 
erally  have  from  very  respectable  divines.  He 
shewed  me  one  with  notes  on  the  margin  in  John¬ 
son’s  hand-writing,  and  I  was  present  when  he 
read  another  to  Johnson,  that  he  might  have  his 
opinion  of  it,  and  Johnson  said  it  was  “very  well.” 
These,  we  may  be  sure,  were  not  Johnson’s:  for 
he  was  above  little  arts,  or  tricks  of  deception. 

Johnson  was  by  no  means,  of  opinion,  that 
every  man  of  a  learned  profession  should  con¬ 
sider  it  as  incumbent  upon  him,  or  as  necessary 
to  his  credit,  to  appear  as  an  authour.  When  in 
the  ardour  of  ambition  for  literary  fame,  I  re¬ 
gretted  to  him  one  day  that  an  eminent  Judge 
had  nothing  of  it,  and  therefore  would  leave  no 
perpetual  monument  of  himself  to  posterity. 
“Alas,  Sir  (said  Johnson,)  what  a  mass  of  confu¬ 
sion  should  we  have,  if  every  Bishop,  and  every 
Judge,  every  Lawyer,  Physician,  and  Divine, 
were  to  write  books.” 

I  mentioned  to  Johnson  a  respectable  person 
of  a  very  strong  mind,  who  had  little  of  that 
tenderness  which  is  common  to  human  nature; 
as  an  instance  of  which,  when  I  suggested  to  him 
that  he  should  invite  his  son,  who  had  been  set¬ 
tled  ten  years  in  foreign  parts,  to  come  home 
and  pay  him  a  visit,  his  answer  was,  “No,  no,  let 
him  mind  his  business.”  Johnson.  “I  do  not 
agree  with  him,  Sir,  in  this.  Getting  money  is 
not  all  a  man’s  business:  to  cultivate  kindness  is 
a  valuable  part  of  the  business  of  life.” 

In  the  evening,  Johnson,  being  in  very  good 
spirits,  entertained  us  with  several  characteristi- 
cal  portraits.  I  regret  that  any  of  them  escaped 
my  retention  and  diligence.  I  found,  from  expe¬ 
rience,  that  to  collect  my  friend’s  conversation 
so  as  to  exhibit  it  with  any  degree  of  its  original 
flavour,  it  was  necessary  to  write  it  down  with¬ 
out  delay.  To  record  his  sayings,  after  some  dis¬ 
tance  of  time,  was  like  preserving  or  pickling 
long-kept  and  faded  fruits,  or  other  vegetables, 
which,  when  in  that  state,  have  little  or  nothing 
of  their  taste  when  fresh. 

I  shall  present  my  readers  with  a  series  of  what 
I  gathered  this  evening  from  the  Johnsonian 
garden. 

“My  friend,  the  late-Earl  of  Corke,  had  a 
great  desire  to  maintain  the  literary  character  of 
his  family:  he  was  a  genteel  man,  but  did  not 


keep  up  the  dignity  of  his  rank.  He  was  so  gen¬ 
erally  civil,  that  nobody  thanked  him  for  it.” 

“Did  we  not  hear  so  much  said  of  Jack  Wilkes, 
we  should  think  more  highly  of  his  conversa¬ 
tion.  Jack  has  great  variety  of  talk,  Jack  is  a 
scholar,  and  Jack  has  the  manners  of  a  gentle¬ 
man.  But  after  hearing  his  name  sounded  from 
pole  to  pole,  as  the  phcenix  of  convivial  felicity, 
we  are  disappointed  in  his  company.  He  has  al¬ 
ways  been  at  me:  but  I  would  do  Jack  a  kind¬ 
ness,  rather  than  not.  The  contest  is  now  over.” 

“Garrick’s  gaiety  of  conversation  has  delicacy 
and  elegance:  Foote  makes  you  laugh  more;  but 
Foote  has  the  air  of  a  buffoon  paid  for  entertain¬ 
ing  the  company.  He  indeed,  well  deserves  his 
hire.” 

“Colley  Cibber  once  consulted  me  as  to  one 
of  his  birthday  Odes,  a  long  time  before  it  was 
wanted.  I  objected  very  freely  to  several  pas¬ 
sages.  Cibber  lost  patience,  and  would  not  read 
his  Ode  to  an  end.  When  we  had  done  with 
criticism,  we  walked  over  to  Richardson’s,  the 
authour  of  Clarissa ,  and  I  wondered  to  find 
Richardson  displeased  that  I  ‘did  not  treat  Cib¬ 
ber  with  more  respect .’  Now,  Sir  to  talk  of  respect 
for  a  player /”  (smiling  disdainfully.)  Boswell. 
“There,  Sir,  you  are  always  heretical:  you  never 
will  allow  merit  to  a  player.”  Johnson.  “Merit, 
Sir !  what  merit?  Do  you  respect  a  rope-dancer, 
or  a  ballad-singer?”  Boswell.  “No,  Sir;  but  we 
respect  a  great  player,  as  a  man  who  can  con¬ 
ceive  lofty  sentiments,  and  can  express  them 
gracefully.”  Johnson.  “What,  Sir,  a  fellow  who 
claps  a  hump  on  his  back,  and  a  lump  on  his 
leg,  and  cries  am  Richard  the  Third ’?  Nay,  Sir, 
a  ballad-singer  is  a  higher  man,  for  he  does  two 
things;  he  repeats  and  he  sings:  there  is  both 
recitation  and  musick  in  his  performance:  the 
player  only  recites.”  Boswell.  “My  dear  Sir! 
you  may  turn  anything  into  ridicule.  I  allow, 
that  a  player  of  farce  is  not  entitled  to  respect; 
he  does  a  little  thing:  but  he  who  can  represent 
exalted  characters,  and  touch  the  noblest  pas¬ 
sions,  has  very  respectable  powers;  and  man¬ 
kind  have  agreed  in  admiring  great  talents  for 
the  stage.  We  must  consider,  too,  that  a  great 
player  does  what  very  few  are  capable  to  do :  his 
art  is  a  very  rare  faculty.  Who  can  repeat  Ham¬ 
let’s  soliloquy,  ‘To  be,  or  not  to  be,’  as  Garrick 
does  it?”  Johnson.  “Any  body  may.  Jemmy, 
there  (a  boy  about  eight  years  old,  who  was  in 
the  room,)  will  do  it  as  well  in  a  week.”  Bos¬ 
well.  “No,  no,  Sir:  and  as  a  proof  of  the  merit 
of  great  acting,  and  of  the  value  which  mankind 
set  upon  it,  Garrick  has  got  a  hundred  thousand 
pounds.”  Johnson.  “Is  getting  a  hundred  thou- 


BOSWELL 


358 

sand  pounds  a  proof  of  excellence?  That  has 
been  done  by  a  scoundrel  commissary.55 

This  was  most  fallacious  reasoning.  I  was  sure , 
for  once,  that  I  had  the  best  side  of  the  argu¬ 
ment.  I  boldly  maintained  the  just  distinction 
between  a  tragedian  and  a  mere  theatrical  droll; 
between  those  who  rouse  our  terrour  and  pity, 
and  those  who  only  make  us  laugh.  “If  (said  I,) 
Betterton  and  Foote  were  to  walk  into  this  room, 
you  would  respect  Betterton  much  more  than 
Foote.55  Johnson.  “If  Betterton  were  to  walk 
into  this  room  with  Foote,  Foote  would  soon 
drive  him  out  of  it.  Foote,  Sir,  quatenils  Foote, 
has  powers  superiour  to  them  all.55 

On  Monday,  September  22,  when  at  break¬ 
fast.  I  unguardedly  said  to  Dr.  Johnson,  “I  wish 
I  saw  you  and  Mrs.  Macaulay  together.55  He 
grew  very  angry;  and,  after  a  pause,  while  a 
cloud  gathered  on  his  brow,  he  burst  out,  “No, 
Sir;  you  would  not  see  us  quarrel,  to  make  you 
sport.  Don’t  you  know  that  it  is  very  uncivil  to 
pit  two  people  against  one  another?55  Then, 
checking  himself,  and  wishing  to  be  more  gen¬ 
tle,  he  added,  “Ido  not  say  you  should  be  hanged 
or  drowned  for  this;  but  it  is  very  uncivil.55  Dr. 
Taylor  thought  him  in  the  wrong,  and  spoke  to 
him  privately  of  it;  but  I  afterwards  acknowl¬ 
edged  to  Johnson  that  I  was  to  blame,  for  I  can¬ 
didly  owned,  that  I  meant  to  express  a  desire  to 
see  a  contest  between  Mrs.  Macaulay  and  him; 
but  then  I  knew  how  the  contest  would  end;  so 
that  I  was  to  see  him  triumph.  Johnson.  “Sir, 
you  cannot  be  sure  how  a  contest  will  end;  and 
no  man  has  a  right  to  engage  two  people  in  a 
dispute  by  which  their  passions  may  be  inflamed, 
and  they  may  part  with  bitter  resentment 
against  each  other.  I  would  sooner  keep  com¬ 
pany  with  a  man  from  whom  I  must  guard  my 
pockets,  than  with  a  man  who  contrives  to  bring 
me  into  a  dispute  with  somebody  that  he  may 
hear  it.  This  is  the  great  fault  of - ,  (nam¬ 

ing  one  of  our  friends,)  endeavouring  to  intro¬ 
duce  a  subject  upon  which  he  knows  two  people 
in  the  company  differ.55  Boswell.  “But  he  told 
me,  Sir,  he  does  it  for  instruction.55  Johnson. 
“Whatever  the  motive  be,  Sir,  the  man  who 
does  so,  does  very  wrong.  He  has  no  more  right 
to  instruct  himself  at  such  risk,  than  he  has  to 
make  two  people  fight  a  duel,  that  he  may  learn 
how  to  defend  himself.55 

He  found  great  fault  with  a  gentleman  of  our 
acquaintance  for  keeping  a  bad  table.  “Sir,  (said 
he.)  when  a  man  is  invited  to  dinner,  he  is  dis¬ 
appointed  if  he  does  not  get  something  good.  I 
advised  Mrs.  Thrale,  who  has  no  card-parties  at 
her  house,  to  give  sweet-meats,  and  such  good 


[ 1 777 

things,  in  an  evening,  as  are  not  commonly  giv¬ 
en,  and  she  would  find  company  enough  come 
to  her;  for  every  body  loves  to  have  things  which 
please  the  palate  put  in  their  way,  without  trou¬ 
ble  or  preparation.55  Such  was  his  attention  tc 
the  minutice  of  life  and  manners. 

He  thus  characterised  the  Duke  of  Devon¬ 
shire,  grandfather  of  the  present  representative 
of  that  very  respectable  family:  “He  was  not  a 
man  of  superiour  abilities,  but  he  was  a  man 
strictly  faithful  to  his  word.  If,  for  instance,  he 
had  promised  you  an  acorn,  and  none  had  grown 
that  year  in  his  woods,  he  would  not  have  con¬ 
tented  himself  with  that  excuse;  he  would  have 
sent  to  Denmark  for  it.  So  unconditional  was  he 
in  keeping  his  word;  so  high  as  to  the  point  of 
honour.55  This  was  a  liberal  testimony  from  the 
Tory  Johnson  to  the  virtue  of  a  great  Whig 
nobleman. 

Mr.  Burke’s  Letter  to  the  Sheriffs  of  Bristol ,  on  the 
affairs  of  America,  being  mentioned,  Johnson  cen¬ 
sured  the  composition  much,  and  he  ridiculed  the 
definition  of  a  free  government,  viz.  “For  any 
practical  purpose,  it  is  what  the  people  think  so.551 
— “I  will  let  the  King  of  France  govern  me  on 
those  conditions,  (said  he,)  for  it  is  to  be  governed 
just  as  I  please. ’’And  when  Dr. Taylor  talked  of  a 
girl  being  sent  to  a  parish  workhouse,  and  asked 
how  much  she  could  be  obliged  to  work,  “Why, 
(said  Johnson,)  as  much  as  is  reasonable:  and 
what  is  that?  as  much  as  she  thinks  reasonable.55 

Dr.  Johnson  obligingly  proposed  to  carry  me 
to  see  Islam,  a  romantick  scene,  now  belonging 
to  a  family  of  the  name  of  Port,  but  formerly 
the  seat  of  the  Congreves.  I  suppose  it  is  well  de¬ 
scribed  in  some  of  the  Tours.  Johnson  described 
it  distinctly  and  vividly,  at  which  I  could  not 
but  express  to  him  my  wonder;  because,  though 
my  eyes,  as  he  observed,  were  better  than  his,  I 
could  not  by  any  means  equal  him  in  represent¬ 
ing  visible  objects.  I  said,  the  difference  between 
us  in  this  respect  was  as  that  between  a  man 
who  has  a  bad  instrument,  but  plays  well  on  it, 
and  a  man  who  has  a  good  instrument,  on  which 
he  can  play  very  imperfectly. 

I  recollect  a  very  fine  amphitheatre,  surround¬ 
ed  with  hills  covered  with  woods,  and  walks 
neatly  formed  along  the  side  of  a  rocky  steep, 
on  the  quarter  next  the  house,  with  recesses  un¬ 
der  projections  of  rock,  overshadowed  with  trees; 
in  one  of  which  recesses,  we  were  told,  Congreve 
wrote  his  Old  Bachelor.  We  viewed  a  remarkable 
natural  curiosity  at  Islam;  two  rivers  bursting 
near  each  other  from  the  rock,  not  from  imme¬ 
diate  springs,  but  after  havingrun  for  many  miles 

xSecond  edit.,  p.  53. 


1777  ] 

under  ground.  Plott,  in  his  History  of  Stafford¬ 
shire J  gives  an  account  of  this  curiosity;  but 
Johnson  would  not  believe  it,  though  we  had 
the  attestation  of  the  gardener,  who  said,  he  had 
put  in  corks,  where  the  river  Manyfold  sinks  into 
the  ground,  and  had  catched  them  in  a  net, 
placed  before  one  of  the  openings  where  the  wa¬ 
ter  bursts  out.  Indeed,  such  subterraneous  courses 
of  water  are  found  in  various  parts  of  our  globe. 2 

Talking  of  Dr.  Johnson’s  unwillingness  to  be¬ 
lieve  extraordinary  things,  I  ventured  to  say, 
“Sir,  you  come  near  Hume’s  argument  against 
miracles,  cThat  it  is  more  probable  witnesses 
should  lie,  or  be  mistaken,  than  that  they  should 
happen.”  ’  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  Hume,  taking 
the  proposition  simply,  is  right.  But  the  Chris¬ 
tian  revelation  is  not  proved  by  the  miracles 
alone,  but  as  connected  with  prophecies,  and 
with  the  doctrines  in  confirmation  of  which  the 
miracles  were  wrought.” 

He  repeated  his  observation,  that  the  differ¬ 
ences  among  Christians  are  really  of  no  conse¬ 
quence.  “For  instance  (said  he,)  if  a  Protestant 
objects  to  a  Papist,  ‘You  worship  images’;  the 
Papist  can  answer,  ‘I  do  not  insist  on  your  doing 
it;  you  may  be  a  very  good  Papist  without  it:  I 
do  it  only  as  a  help  to  my  devotion.’”  I  said, 
the  great  article  of  Christianity  is  the  revelation 
of  immortality.  Johnson  admitted  it  was. 

In  the  evening,  a  gentleman-farmer,  who  was 
on  a  visit  at  Dr.  Taylor’s,  attempted  to  dispute 
with  Johnson  in  favour  of  Mungo  Campbell, 
who  shot  Alexander,  Earl  of  Eglintoune,  upon 
his  having  fallen,  when  retreating  from  his  Lord- 
ship,  who  he  believed  was  about  to  seize  his 
gun,  as  he  had  threatened  to  do.  He  said,  he 
should  have  done  just  as  Campbell  did.  John¬ 
son.  “Whoever  would  do  as  Campbell  did,  de¬ 
serves  to  be  hanged;  not  that  I  could,  as  a  jury¬ 
man,  have  found  him  legally  guilty  of  murder; 
but  I  am  glad  they  found  means  to  convict  him.” 
The  gentleman-farmer  said,  “A  poor  man  has 
as  much  honour  as  a  rich  man;  and  Campbell 
had  that  to  defend. ’’Johnson  exclaimed,  “A  poor 
man  has  no  honour.”  The  English  yeoman,  not 
dismayed,  proceeded:  “Lord  Eglintoune  was  a 
damned  fool  to  run  on  upon  Campbell,  after  be¬ 
ing  warned  that  Campbell  would  shoot  him  if 
he  did.”  Johnson,  who  could  not  bear  any  thing 
like  swearing,  angrily  replied,  “He  was  not  a 
damned  fool:  he  only  thought  too  well  of  Camp¬ 
bell.  He  did  not  believe  Campbell  would  be 
such  a  damned  scoundrel,  as  to  do  so  damned  a 

xPage  89. 

2See  Plott’s  History  of  Staffordshire ,  p.  88,  and  the 
authorities  referred  to  by  him. 


359 

thing.”  His  emphasis  on  damned ,  accompanied 
with  frowning  looks,  reproved  his  opponent’s 
want  of  decorum  in  his  presence. 

Talking  of  the  danger  of  being  mortified  by 
rejection,  when  making  approaches  to  the  ac¬ 
quaintance  of  the  great,  I  observed:  “I  am, 
however,  generally  for  trying,  ‘Nothing  venture, 
nothing  have.’  ”  Johnson.  “Very  true,  Sir;  but 
I  have  always  been  more  afraid  of  failing,  than 
hopeful  of  success.”  And,  indeed,  though  he  had 
all  just  respect  for  rank,  no  man  ever  less  court¬ 
ed  the  favour  of  the  great. 

During  this  interview  at  Ashbourne,  Johnson 
seemed  to  be  more  uniformly  social,  cheerful, 
and  alert,  than  I  had  almost  ever  seen  him.  He 
was  prompt  on  great  occasions  and  on  small. 
Taylor,  who  praised  every  thing  of  his  own  to 
excess;  in  short,  “whose  geese  were  all  swans,” 
as  the  proverb  says,  expatiated  on  the  excel¬ 
lence  of  his  bull-dog,  which,  he  told  us,  was 
“perfectly  well  shaped.”  Johnson,  after  exam¬ 
ining  the  animal  attentively,  thus  repressed  the 
vain-glory  of  our  host: — “No,  Sir,  he  is  not  well 
shaped;  for  there  is  not  the  quick  transition  from 
the  thickness  of  the  fore-part,  to  the  tenuity — the 
thin  part — behind, — which  a  bull-dog  ought  to 
have.”  This  tenuity  was  the  only  hard  word  that  I 
heard  him  use  during  this  interview,  and  it  will 
be  observed,  he  instantly  put  another  expres¬ 
sion  in  its  place.  Taylor  said,  a  small  bull-dog 
was  as  good  as  a  large  one.  Johnson.  “No,  Sir; 
for,  in  proportion  to  his  size,  he  has  strength: 
and  your  argument  would  prove,  that  a  good 
bull -dog  may  be  as  small  as  a  mouse.”  It  was 
amazing  how  he  entered  with  perspicuity  and 
keenness  upon  every  thing  that  occurred  in  con¬ 
versation.  Most  men,  whom  I  know,  would  no 
more  think  of  discussing  a  question  about  a  bull¬ 
dog,  than  of  attacking  a  bull. 

I  cannot  allow  any  fragment  whatever  that 
floats  in  my  memory  concerning  the  great  sub¬ 
ject  of  this  work  to  be  lost.  Though  a  small  par¬ 
ticular  may  appear  trifling  to  some,  it  will  be 
relished  by  others;  while  every  little  spark  adds 
something  to  the  general  blaze:  and  to  please 
the  true,  candid,  warm  admirers  of  Johnson, 
and  in  any  degree  increase  the  splendour  of  his 
reputation,  I  bid  defiance  to  the  shafts  of  ridi¬ 
cule,  or  even  of  malignity.  Showers  of  them  have 
been  discharged  at  my  Journal  of  a  Tour  to  the 
Hebrides ;  yet  it  still  sails  unhurt  along  the  stream 
of  time,  and,  as  an  attendant  upon  Johnson, 

Pursues  the  triumph ,  and  partakes  the  gale. 

One  morning  after  breakfast,  when  the  sun 
shone  bright,  we  walked  out  together,  and 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


BOSWELL 


360 

upored”  for  some  time  with  placid  indolence 
upon  an  artificial  water-fall,  which  Dr.  Taylor 
had  made  by  building  a  strongdyke  of  stone  across 
the  river  behind  the  garden.  It  was  now  some¬ 
what  obstructed  by  branches  of  trees  and  other 
rubbish,  which  had  come  down  the  river,  and 
settled  close  to  it.  Johnson,  partly  from  a  desire 
to  see  it  play  more  freely,  and  partly  from  that 
inclination  to  activity  which  will  animate,  at 
times,  the  most  inert  and  sluggish  mortal,  took 
a  long  pole  which  was  lying  on  a  bank,  and 
pushed  down  several  parcels  of  this  wreck  with 
painful  assiduity,  while  I  stood  quietly  by,  won¬ 
dering  to  behold  the  sage  thus  curiously  em¬ 
ployed,  and  smiling  with  an  humorous  satisfac¬ 
tion  each  time  when  he  carried  his  point.  He 
worked  till  he  was  quite  out  of  breath;  and  hav¬ 
ing  found  a  large  dead  cat  so  heavy  that  he 
could  not  move  it  after  several  efforts,  “Come,” 
said  he,  (throwing  down  the  pole,)  “you  shall 
take  it  now”;  which  I  accordingly  did,  and  be¬ 
ing  a  fresh  man,  soon  made  the  cat  tumble  over 
the  cascade.  This  may  be  laughed  at  as  too  trifl¬ 
ing  to  record;  but  it  is  a  small  characteristick 
trait  in  the  Flemish  picture  which  I  give  of  my 
friend,  and  in  which,  therefore  I  mark  the  most 
minute  particulars.  And  let  it  be  remembered, 
that  Msop  at  play  is  one  of  the  instructive  apo¬ 
logues  of  antiquity. 

I  mentioned  an  old  gentleman  of  our  acquaint¬ 
ance  whose  memory  was  beginning  to  fail.  John¬ 
son.  “There  must  be  a  diseased  mind,  where 
there  is  a  failure  of  memory  at  seventy.  A  man’s 
head,  Sir,  must  be  morbid,  if  he  fails  so  soon.” 
My  friend,  being  now  himself  sixty-eight,  might 
think  thus:  but  I  imagine,  that  threescore  and  ten , 
the  Psalmist’s  period  of  sound  human  life  in  lat¬ 
er  ages,  may  have  a  failure,  though  there  be  no 
disease  in  the  constitution. 

Talking  of  Rochester’s  Poems,  he  said,  he  had 
given  them  to  Mr.  Steevens  to  castrate  for  the 
edition  of  the  poets,  to  which  he  was  to  write 
Prefaces.  Dr.  Taylor  (the  only  time  I  ever  heard 
him  say  any  thing  witty)1  observed,  that  “if 
Rochester  had  been  castrated  himself,  his  ex¬ 
ceptionable  poems  would  not  have  been  writ¬ 
ten.”  I  asked  if  Burnet  had  not  given  a  good 
Life  of  Rochester,  Johnson.  “We  have  a  good 
Death :  there  is  not  much  Life”  I  asked  whether 
Prior’s  Poems  were  to  be  printed  entire:  John¬ 
son  said  they  were.  I  mentioned  Lord  Hailes’s 
censure  of  Prior,  in  his  Preface  to  a  collection  of 
Sacred  Poems ,  by  various  hands,  published  by 

II  am  told  that  Horace,  Earl  of  Orford,  has  a 
collection  of  Bon-Mots  by  persons  who  never  said 
but  one. 


1 1777 

him  at  Edinburgh  a  great  many  years  ago,  where 
he  mentions,  “those  impure  tales  which  will  be 
the  eternal  opprobrium  of  their  ingenious  au- 
thour.”  Johnson.  “Sir,  Lord  Hailes  has  forgot. 
There  is  nothing  in  Prior  that  will  excite  to  lewd¬ 
ness.  If  Lord  Hailes  thinks  there  is,  he  must  be 
more  combustible  than  other  people.”  I  in¬ 
stanced  the  tale  of  Paulo  Purganti  and  his  Wife. 
Johnson.  “Sir,  there  is  nothing  there,  but  that 
his  wife  wanted  to  be  kissed  when  poor  Paulo 
was  out  of  pocket.  No,  Sir,  Prior  is  a  lady’s  book. 
No  lady  is  ashamed  to  have  it  standing  in  her 
library.” 

The  hypochondriack  disorder  being  men¬ 
tioned,  Dr.  Johnson  did  not  think  it  so  common 
as  I  supposed.  “Dr.  Taylor  (said  he,)  is  the  same 
one  day  as  another.  Burke  and  Reynolds  are  the 
same;  Beauclerk,  except  when  in  pain,  is  the 
same.  I  am  not  so  myself;  but  this  I  do  not  men¬ 
tion  commonly.” 

I  complained  of  a  wretched  changefulness,  so 
that  I  could  not  preserve,  for  any  long  continu¬ 
ance,  the  same  views  of  any  thing.  It  was  most 
comfortable  to  me  to  experience,  in  Dr.  John¬ 
son’s  company,  a  relief  from  this  uneasiness.  His 
steady  vigorous  mind  held  firm  before  me  those 
objects  which  my  own  feeble  and  tremulous  im¬ 
agination  frequently  presented,  in  such  a  wav¬ 
ering  state,  that  my  reason  could  not  judge  well 
of  them. 

Dr.  Johnson  advised  me  to-day,  to  have  as 
many  books  about  me  as  I  could;  that  I  might 
read  upon  any  subject  upon  which  I  had  a  de¬ 
sire  for  instruction  at  the  time.  “What  you  read 
then  (said  he,)  you  will  remember;  but  if  you 
have  not  a  book  immediately  ready,  and  the 
subject  moulds  in  your  mind,  it  is  a  chance  if 
you  again  have  a  desire  to  study  it.”  He  added, 
“If  a  man  never  has  an  eager  desire  for  instruc¬ 
tion,  he  should  prescribe  a  task  for  himself.  But  it 
is  better  when  a  man  reads  from  immediate  in¬ 
clination.” 

He  repeated  a  good  many  lines  of  Horace’s 
Odes,  while  we  were  in  the  chaise.  I  remember 
particularly  the  Ode  “Eheu  fugaces.” 

He  said,  the  dispute  as  to  the  comparative  ex¬ 
cellence  of  Homer  or  Virgil2  was  inaccurate. 
“We  must  consider  (said  he,)  whether  Homer 

2I  am  informed  by  Mr.  Langton,  that  a  great 
many  years  ago  he  was  present  when  this  question 
was  agitated  between  Dr.  Johnson  and  Mr.  Burke; 
and,  to  use  Johnson’s  phrase,  they  “talked  their 
best”;  Johnson  for  Homer,  Burke  for  Virgil.  It  may 
well  be  supposed  to  have  been  one  of  the  ablest 
and  most  brilliant  contests  that  ever  was  exhibited. 
How  much  must  we  regret  that  it  has  not  been 
preserved. 


i777  ]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  361 


was  not  the  greatest  poet,  though  Virgil  may 
have  produced  the  finest  poem.  Virgil  was  in¬ 
debted  to  Homer  for  the  whole  invention  of  the 
structure  of  an  epick  poem,  and  for  many  of  his 
beauties.55 

He  told  me  that  Bacon  was  a  favourite  auth- 
our  with  him;  but  he  had  never  read  his  works 
till  he  was  compiling  the  English  Dictionary ,  in 
which,  he  said,  I  might  see  Bacon  very  often 
quoted.  Mr.  Seward  recollects  his  having  men¬ 
tioned,  that  a  Dictionary  of  the  English  lan¬ 
guage  might  be  compiled  from  Bacon’s  writings 
alone,  and  that  he  had  once  an  intention  of  giv¬ 
ing  an  edition  of  Bacon,  at  least  of  his  English 
works,  and  writing  the  Life  of  that  great  man. 
Had  he  executed  this  intention,  there  can  be  no 
doubt  that  he  would  have  done  it  in  a  most  mas¬ 
terly  manner.  Mallet’s  Life  of  Bacon  has  no  in¬ 
considerable  merit  as  an  acute  and  elegant  dis¬ 
sertation  relative  to  its  subject;  but  Mallet’s 
mind  was  not  comprehensive  enough  to  em¬ 
brace  the  vast  extent  of  Lord  Verulam’s  genius 
and  research.  Dr.  Warburton  therefore  observ¬ 
ed,  with  witty  justness,  “that  Mallet,  in  his  Life 
of  Bacon ,  had  forgotten  that  he  was  a  philoso¬ 
pher;  and  if  he  should  write  the  Life  of  the  Duke 
of  Marlborough,  which  he  had  undertaken  to  do, 
he  would  probably  forget  that  he  was  a  general.55 

Wishing  to  be  satisfied  what  degree  of  truth 
there  was  in  a  story  which  a  friend  of  Johnson’s 
and  mine  had  told  me  to  his  disadvantage,  I 
mentioned  it  to  him  in  direct  terms;  and  it  was 
to  this  effect:  that  a  gentleman  who  had  lived 
in  great  intimacy  with  him,  shewn  him  much 
kindness,  and  even  relieved  him  from  a  spung- 
ing-house,  having  afterwards  fallen  into  bad  cir¬ 
cumstances,  was  one  day,  when  Johnson  was  at 
dinner  with  him,  seized  for  debt,  and  carried  to 
prison;  that  Johnson  sat  still  undisturbed,  and 
went  on  eating  and  drinking;  upon  which  the 
gentleman’s  sister,  who  was  present,  could  not 
suppress  her  indignation:  “What,  Sir,  (said  she,) 
are  you  so  unfeeling,  as  not  even  to  offer  to  go  to 
my  brother  in  his  distress;  you  who  have  been 
so  much  obliged  to  him?’5  And  that  Johnson  an¬ 
swered,  “Madam,  I  owe  him  no  obligation; 
what  he  did  for  me  he  would  have  done  for  a  dog.” 

Johnson  assured  me,  that  the  story  was  abso¬ 
lutely  false:  but  like  a  man  conscious  of  being  in 
the  right,  and  desirous  of  completely  vindicat¬ 
ing  himself  from  such  a  charge,  he  did  not  arro¬ 
gantly  rest  on  a  mere  denial,  and  on  his  general 
character,  but  proceeded  thus: — “Sir,  I  was  very 
intimate  with  that  gentleman,  and  was  once  re¬ 
lieved  by  him  from  an  arrest;  but  I  never  was 
present  when  he  was  arrested,  never  knew  that 


he  was  arrested,  and  I  believe  he  never  was  in 
difficulties  after  the  time  when  he  relieved  me.  I 
loved  him  much;  yet,  in  talking  of  his  general 
character,  I  may  have  said,  though  I  do  not  re¬ 
member  that  I  ever  did  say  so,  that  as  his  gen¬ 
erosity  proceeded  from  no  principle,  but  was  a 
part  of  his  profusion,  he  would  do  for  a  dog 
what  he  would  do  for  a  friend:  but  I  never  ap¬ 
plied  this  remark  to  any  particular  instance, 
and  certainly  not  to  his  kindness  to  me.  If  a  pro¬ 
fuse  man,  who  does  not  value  his  money,  and 
gives  a  large  sum  to  a  whore,  gives  half  as  much, 
or  an  equally  large  sum  to  relieve  a  friend,  it 
cannot  be  esteemed  as  virtue.  This  was  all  that 
I  could  say  of  that  gentleman;  and,  if  said  at  all, 
it  must  have  been  said  after  his  death.  Sir,  I 
would  have  gone  to  the  world’s  end  to  relieve 
him.  The  remark  about  the  dog,  if  made  by  me, 
was  such  a  sally  as  might  escape  one  when  paint¬ 
ing  a  man  highly.” 

On  Tuesday,  September  23,  Johnson  was  re¬ 
markably  cordial  to  me.  It  being  necessary  for 
me  to  return  to  Scotland  soon,  I  had  fixed  on 
the  next  day  for  my  setting  out,  and  I  felt  a  ten 
der  concern  at  the  thought  of  parting  with  him, 
He  had,  at  this  time,  frankly  communicated  to 
me  many  particulars,  which  are  inserted  in  this 
work  in  their  proper  places;  and  once,  when  I 
happened  to  mention  that  the  expence  of  my 
jaunt  would  come  to  much  more  than  I  had 
computed,  he  said,  “Why,  Sir,  if  the  expence 
were  to  be  an  inconvenience,  you  would  have 
reason  to  regret  it:  but,  if  you  have  had  the 
money  to  spend,  I  know  not  that  you  could  have 
purchased  as  much  pleasure  with  it  in  any  other 
way.” 

During  this  interview  at  Ashbourne,  Johnson 
and  I  frequently  talked  with  wonderful  pleasure 
of  mere  trifles  which  had  occurred  in  our  tour  to 
the  Hebrides;  for  it  had  left  a  most  agreeable 
and  lasting  impression  upon  his  mind. 

He  found  fault  with  me  for  using  the  phrase 
to  make  money.  “Don’t  you  see  (said  he,)  the 
impropriety  of  it?  To  make  money  is  to  coin  it: 
you  should  say  get  money.”  The  phrase,  how¬ 
ever,  is,  I  think,  pretty  current.  But  Johnson 
was  at  all  times  jealous  of  infractions  upon  the 
genuine  English  language,  and  prompt  to  re¬ 
press  colloquial  barbarisms;  such  as,  pledging  my¬ 
self ,  for  undertaking ;  line,  for  department ,  or  branch , 
as,  the  civil  line ,  the  banking  line.  He  was  partic¬ 
ularly  indignant  against  the  almost  universal 
use  of  the  word  idea  in  the  sense  of  notion  or  opin¬ 
ion,  when  it  is  clear  that  idea  can  only  signify 
something  of  which  an  image  can  be  formed  in 
the  mind.  We  may  have  an  idea  or  image  of  a 


BOSWELL 


362 

mountain,  a  tree,  a  building;  but  we  cannot 
surely  have  an  idea  or  image  of  an  argument  or 
proposition .  Yet  we  hear  the  sages  of  the  law  “de¬ 
livering  their  ideas  upon  the  question  under  con¬ 
sideration”;  and  the  first  speakers  in  parliament 
“entirely  coinciding  in  the  idea  which  has  been 
ably  stated  by  an  honourable  member”; — or 
“reprobating  an  idea  unconstitutional,  and 
fraught  with  the  most  dangerous  consequences 
to  a  great  and  free  country.”  Johnson  called 
this  “modern  cant.” 

I  perceived  that  he  pronounced  the  word 
heard ,  as  if  spelt  with  a  double  e ,  heerd ,  instead  of 
sounding  it  herd ,  as  is  most  usually  done.  He 
said,  his  reason  was,  that  if  it  was  pronounced 
herd,  there  would  be  a  single  exception  from  the 
English  pronounciation  of  the  syllable  ear ,  and 
he  thought  it  better  not  to  have  that  exception. 

He  praised  Grainger’s  Ode  on  Solitude ,  in  Dods- 
ley’s  Collection ,  and  repeated,  with  great  energy, 
the  exordium: 

0  Solitude ,  romantick  maid. 

Whether  by  nodding  towers  you  tread; 

Or  haunt  the  desart's  trackless  gloom, 

Or  hover  o'er  the  yawning  tomb; 

Or  climb  the  Andes'  clifted  side , 

Or  by  the  Nile's  coy  source  abide; 

Or,  starting  from  your  half-year's  sleep. 

From  Hecla  view  the  thawing  deep; 

Or,  at  the  purple  dawn  of  day, 

Tadnor's  marble  waste  survey; 

observing,  “This,  Sir  is  very  noble.” 

In  the  evening  our  gentleman-farmer,  and 
two  others,  entertained  themselves  and  the  com¬ 
pany  with  a  great  number  of  tunes  on  the  fiddle. 
Johnson  desired  to  have  “Let  ambition  fire  thy 
mind,”  played  over  again,  and  appeared  to 
give  a  patient  attention  to  it;  though  he  owned 
to  me  that  he  was  very  insensible  to  the  power 
of  musick.  I  told  him,  that  it  affected  me  to  such 
a  degree,  as  often  to  agitate  my  nerves  painful¬ 
ly,  producing  in  my  mind  alternate  sensations 
of  pathetick  dejection,  so  that  I  was  ready  to 
shed  tears;  and  of  daring  resolution,  so  that  I 
was  inclined  to  rush  into  the  thickest  part  of  the 
battle.  “Sir,  (said  he,)  I  should  never  hear  it,  if 
it  made  me  such  a  fool.” 

Much  of  the  effect  of  musick,  I  am  satisfied, 
is  owing  to  the  association  of  ideas.  That  air, 
which  instantly  and  irresistibly  excites  in  the 
Swiss,  when  in  a  foreign  land,  the  maladie  du 
pais ,  has,  I  am  told,  no  intrinsick  power  of  sound. 
And  I  know  from  my  own  experience,  that 
Scotch  reels,  though  brisk,  make  me  melancholy, 
because  I  used  to  hear  them  in  my  early  years, 
at  a  time  when  Mr.  Pitt  called  for  soldiers  “from 


[ 1 777 

the  mountains  of  the  north,”  and  numbers  of 
brave  Highlanders  were  going  abroad,  never  to 
return.  Whereas  the  airs  in  The  Begger's  Opera, 
many  of  which  are  very  soft,  never  fail  to  render 
me  gay,  because  they  are  associated  with  the 
warm  sensations  and  high  spirits  of  London. 
This  evening,  while  some  of  the  tunes  of  ordi¬ 
nary  composition  were  played  with  no  great 
skill,  my  frame  was  agitated,  and  I  was  conscious 
of  a  generous  attachment  to  Dr.  Johnson,  as  my 
preceptor  and  friend,  mixed  with  an  affection¬ 
ate  regret  that  he  was  an  old  man,  whom  I 
should  probably  lose  in  a  short  time.  I  thought 
I  could  defend  him  at  the  point  of  my  sword. 
My  reverence  and  affection  for  him  were  in  full 
glow.  I  said  to  him,  “My  dear  Sir,  we  must 
meet  every  year,  if  you  don’t  quarrel  with  me.” 
Johnson.  “Nay,  Sir,  you  are  more  likely  to  quar¬ 
rel  with  me,  than  I  with  you.  My  regard  for  you 
is  greater  almost  than  I  have  words  to  express; 
but  I  do  not  choose  to  be  always  repeating  it; 
write  it  down  in  the  first  leaf  of  your  pocket- 
book,  and  never  doubt  of  it  again.” 

I  talked  to  him  of  misery  being  “the  doom  of 
man”  in  this  life,  as  displayed  in  his  Vanity  of 
Human  Wishes.  Yet  I  observed  that  things  were 
done  upon  the  supposition  of  happiness;  grand 
houses  were  built,  fine  gardens  were  made,  splen¬ 
did  places  of  publick  amusement  were  contrived 
and  crowded  with  company.  Johnson.  “Alas 
Sir,  these  are  all  only  struggles  for  happiness. 
When  I  first  entered  Ranelagh,  it  gave  an  ex¬ 
pansion  and  gay  sensation  to  my  mind,  such  as 
I  never  experienced  any  where  else.  But,  as 
Xerxes  wept  when  he  viewed  his  immense  army, 
and  considered  that  not  one  of  that  great  multi¬ 
tude  would  be  alive  a  hundred  years  afterwards, 
so  it  went  to  my  heart  to  consider  that  there  was 
not  one  in  all  that  brilliant  circle,  that  was  not 
afraid  to  go  home  and  think;  but  that  the 
thoughts  of  each  individual  there,  would  be  dis¬ 
tressing  when  alone.”  This  reflection  was  ex¬ 
perimentally  just.  The  feeling  of  languor,1 
which  succeeds  the  animation  of  gaiety,  is  it¬ 
self  a  very  severe  pain;  and  when  the  mind 
is  then  vacant,  a  thousand  disappointments 
and  vexations  rush  in  and  excruciate.  Will  not 
many  even  of  my  fairest  readers  allow  this  to 
be  true? 

Tope  mentions, 

Stretch'd  on  the  rack  of  a  too  easy  chair. 

But  I  recollect  a  couplet  quite  apposite  to  my  sub¬ 
ject  in  Virtue,  an  Ethick  Epistle ,  a  beautiful  and  in¬ 
structive  poem,  by  an  anonymous  writer,  in  1758; 
who,  treating  of  pleasure  in  excess,  says: 

Till  languour,  suffering  on  the  rack  of  bliss , 

Confess  that  man  was  never  made  for  this . 


1777]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  363 


I  suggested,  that  being  in  love,  and  flattered 
with  hopes  of  success;  or  having  some  favourite 
scheme  in  view  for  the  next  day,  might  prevent 
that  wretchedness  of  which  we  had  been  talk¬ 
ing.  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  it  may  sometimes  be 
so  as  you  suppose;  but  my  conclusion  is  in  gen¬ 
eral  but  too  true.” 

While  Johnson  and  I  stood  in  calm  confer¬ 
ence  by  ourselves  in  Dr.  Taylor’s  garden,  at  a 
pretty  late  hour  in  a  serene  autumn  night,  look¬ 
ing  up  to  the  heavens,  I  directed  the  discourse 
to  the  subject  of  a  future  state.  My  friend  was  in 
a  placid  and  most  benignant  frame.  “Sir,  (said 
he,)  I  do  not  imagine  that  all  things  will  be 
made  clear  to  us  immediately  after  death,  but 
that  the  ways  of  Providence  will  be  explained  to 
us  very  gradually.”  I  ventured  to  ask  him  wheth¬ 
er,  although  the  words  of  some  texts  of  Scrip¬ 
ture  seemed  strong  in  support  of  the  dreadful 
doctrine  of  an  eternity  of  punishment,  we  might 
not  hope  that  the  denunciation  was  figurative, 
and  would  not  literally  be  executed.  Johnson. 
“Sir,  you  are  to  consider  the  intention  of  pun¬ 
ishment  in  a  future  state.  We  have  no  reason  to 
be  sure  that  we  shall  then  be  no  longer  liable  to 
offend  against  God.  We  do  not  know  that  even 
the  angels  are  quite  in  a  state  of  security;  nay  we 
know  that  some  of  them  have  fallen.  It  may, 
therefore,  perhaps  be  necessary,  in  order  to  pre¬ 
serve  both  men  and  angels  in  a  state  of  recti¬ 
tude,  that  they  should  have  continually  before 
them  the  punishment  of  those  who  have  devi¬ 
ated  from  it;  but  we  may  hope  that  by  some 
other  means  a  fall  from  rectitude  may  be  pre¬ 
vented.  Some  of  the  texts  of  Scripture  upon  this 
subject  are,  as  you  observe,  indeed  strong;  but 
they  may  admit  of  a  mitigated  interpretation.” 
He  talked  to  me  upon  this  aweful  and  delicate 
question  in  a  gentle  tone,  and  as  if  afraid  to  be 
decisive. 

After  supper  I  accompanied  him  to  his  apart¬ 
ment,  and  at  my  request  he  dictated  to  me  an 
argument  in  favour  of  the  negro  who  was  then 
claiming  his  liberty,  in  an  action  in  the  Court  of 
Session  in  Scotland.  He  had  always  been  very 
zealous  against  slavery  in  every  form,  in  which 
I,  with  all  deference,  thought  that  he  discovered 
“a  zeal  without  knowledge.”  Upon  one  occa¬ 
sion,  when  in  company  with  some  very  grave 
men  at  Oxford,  his  toast  was,  “Here’s  to  the 
next  insurrection  of  the  negroes  in  the  West  In¬ 
dies.”  His  violent  prejudice  against  our  West 
Indian  and  American  settlers  appeared  when¬ 
ever  there  was  an  opportunity.  Towards  the 
conclusion  of  his  Taxation  no  Tyranny ,  he  says, 
“how  is  it  that  we  hear  the  loudest  yelps  for  lib¬ 


erty  among  the  drivers  of  negroes?”  and  in  his 
conversation  with  Mr.  Wilkes,  he  asked,  “Where 
did  Beckford  and  Trecothick  learn  English?”1 
That  Trecothick  could  both  speak  and  write 
good  English  is  well  known.  I  myself  was  fa¬ 
voured  with  his  correspondence  concerning  the 
brave  Corsicans.  And  that  Beckford  could  speak 
it  with  a  spirit  of  honest  resolution  even  to  his 
Majesty,  as  his  “faithful  Lord-Mayor  of  Lon¬ 
don,”  is  commemorated  by  the  noble  monu¬ 
ment  erected  to  him  in  Guildhall. 

The  argument  dictated  by  Dr.  Johnson  was 
as  follows: — 

“It  must  be  agreed  that  in  most  ages  many 
countries  have  had  part  of  their  inhabitants  in  a 
state  of  slavery;  yet  it  may  be  doubted  whether 
slavery  can  ever  be  supposed  the  natural  con¬ 
dition  of  man.  It  is  impossible  not  to  conceive 
that  men  in  their  original  state  were  equal;  and 
very  difficult  to  imagine  how  one  would  be  sub¬ 
jected  to  another  but  by  violent  compulsion.  An 
individual  may,  indeed,  forfeit  his  liberty  by  a 
crime;  but  he  cannot  by  that  crime  forfeit  the 
liberty  of  his  children.  What  is  true  of  a  crim¬ 
inal  seems  true  likewise  of  a  captive.  A  man  may 
accept  life  from  a  conquering  enemy  on  condi¬ 
tion  of  perpetual  servitude;  but  it  is  very  doubt¬ 
ful  whether  he  can  entail  that  servitude  on  his 
descendants;  for  no  man  can  stipulate  without 
commission  for  another.  The  condition  which 
he  himself  accepts,  his  son  or  grandson  perhaps 
would  have  rejected.  If  we  should  admit,  what 
perhaps  may  with  more  reason  be  denied,  that 
there  are  certain  relations  between  man  and  man 
which  may  make  slavery  necessary  and  just,  yet 
it  can  never  be  proved  that  he  who  is  now  suing 
for  his  freedom  ever  stood  in  any  of  those  rela¬ 
tions.  He  is  certainly  subject  by  no  law,  but  that 
of  violence,  to  his  present  master;  who  pretends 
no  claim  to  his  obedience,  but  that  he  bought 
him  from  a  merchant  of  slaves,  whose  right  to 
sell  him  never  was  examined.  It  is  said  that,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  constitutions  of  Jamaica,  he  was 
legally  enslaved;  these  constitutions  are  merely 
positive;  and  apparendy  injurious  to  the  rights 
of  mankind,  because  whoever  is  exposed  to  sale 
is  condemned  to  slavery  without  appeal;  by 
whatever  fraud  or  violence  he  might  have  been 
originally  brought  into  the  merchant’s  power. 
In  our  own  time  Princes  have  been  sold,  by 
wretches  to  whose  care  they  were  entrusted, 
that  they  might  have  an  European  education; 
but  when  once  they  were  brought  to  a  market 
in  the  plantations,  little  would  avail  either  their 
dignity  or  their  wrongs.  The  laws  of  Jamaica  af- 

^ee  ante ,  p.  320. 


BOSWELL 


364 

ford  a  Negro  no  redress.  His  colour  is  considered 
as  a  sufficient  testimony  against  him.  It  is  to  be 
lamented  that  moral  right  should  ever  give  way 
to  political  convenience.  But  if  temptations  of 
interest  are  sometimes  too  strong  for  human  vir¬ 
tue,  let  us  at  least  retain  a  virtue  where  there  is 
no  temptation  to  quit  it.  In  the  present  case 
there  is  apparent  right  on  one  side,  and  no  con¬ 
venience  on  the  other.  Inhabitants  of  this  island 
can  neither  gain  riches  nor  power  by  taking 
away  the  liberty  of  any  part  of  the  human  spe¬ 
cies.  The  sum  of  the  argument  is  this: — No  man 
is  by  nature  the  property  of  another:  The  de¬ 
fendant  is,  therefore,  by  nature  free:  The  rights 
of  nature  must  be  some  way  forfeited  before 
they  can  be  justly  taken  away:  That  the  de¬ 
fendant  has  by  any  act  forfeited  the  rights  of 
nature  we  require  to  be  proved;  and  if  no  proof 
of  such  forfeiture  can  be  given,  we  doubt  not 
but  the  justice  of  the  court  will  declare  him 
free.55 

I  record  Dr.  Johnson’s  argument  fairly  upon 
this  particular  case;  where,  perhaps,  he  was  in 
the  right.  But  I  beg  leave  to  enter  my  most  sol¬ 
emn  protest  against  his  general  doctrine  with  re¬ 
spect  to  the  Slave  Trade.  For  I  will  resolutely  say 
— that  his  unfavourable  notion  of  it  was  owing 
to  prejudice,  and  imperfect  or  false  information. 
The  wild  and  dangerous  attempt  which  has  for 
some  time  been  persisted  in  to  obtain  an  act  of 
our  Legislature,  to  abolish  so  very  important 
and  necessary  a  branch  of  commercial  interest, 
must  have  been  crushed  at  once,  had  not  the  in¬ 
significance  of  the  zealots  who  vainly  took  the 
lead  in  it,  made  the  vast  body  of  Planters,  Mer¬ 
chants,  and  others,  whose  immense  properties 
are  involved  in  that  trade,  reasonably  enough 
suppose  that  there  could  be  no  danger.  The  en¬ 
couragement  which  the  attempt  has  received  ex¬ 
cites  my  wonder  and  indignation:  and  though 
some  men  of  superiour  abilities  have  supported 
it;  whether  from  a  love  of  temporary  popularity, 
when  prosperous;  or  a  love  of  general  mischief, 
when  desperate,  my  opinion  is  unshaken.  To 
abolish  a  status ,  which  in  all  ages  God  has  sanc¬ 
tioned,  and  man  has  continued,  would  not  only 
be  robbery  to  an  innumerable  class  of  our  fellow- 
subjects;  but  it  would  be  extreme  cruelty  to  the 
African  Savages,  a  portion  of  whom  it  saves 
from  massacre,  or  intolerable  bondage  in  their 
own  country,  and  introduces  into  a  much  hap¬ 
pier  state  of  life;  especially  now  when  their  pas¬ 
sage  to  the  West-Indies  and  their  treatment  there 
is  humanely  regulated.  To  abolish  that  trade 
would  be  to 

— shut  the  gates  oj  mercy  on  mankind. 


[  1777 

Whatever  may  have  passed  elsewhere  con¬ 
cerning  it,  The  House  of  Lords  is  wise  and  in¬ 
dependent: 

Intaminatis  fulget  honoribus; 

Nec  sumit  autponit  secures 

Arbitrio  popularis  aurce. 

I  have  read,  conversed,  and  thought  much 
upon  the  subject,  and  would  recommend  to  all 
who  are  capable  of  conviction,  an  excellent  T  ract 
by  my  learned  and  ingenious  friend  John  Ran- 
by,  Esq.,  entitled  Doubts  on  the  Abolition  of  the  Slave 
Trade.  To  Mr.  Ranby’s  Doubts  I  will  apply  Lord 
Chancellor  Hardwicke’s  expression  in  praise  of 
a  Scotch  Law  Book,  called  Dirletorfs  Doubts; 
his  Doubts ,  (said  his  Lordship,)  are  better  than 
most  people’s  Certainties. 

When  I  said  now  to  Johnson,  that  I  was  afraid 
I  kept  him  too  late  up.  “No,  Sir,  (said  he,)  I 
don’t  care  though  I  sit  all  night  with  you.”  This 
was  an  animated  speech  from  a  man  in  his  six¬ 
ty-ninth  year. 

Had  I  been  as  attentive  not  to  displease  him 
as  I  ought  to  have  been,  I  know  not  but  this  vig¬ 
il  might  have  been  fulfilled;  but  I  unluckily  en¬ 
tered  upon  the  controversy  concerning  the  right 
of  Great-Britain  to  tax  America,  and  attempted 
to  argue  in  favour  of  our  fellow-subjects  on  the 
other  side  of  the  Atlantick.  I  insisted  that  Amer¬ 
ica  might  be  very  well  governed,  and  made  to 
yield  sufficient  revenue  by  the  means  of  injlu- 
ence>  as  exemplified  in  Ireland,  while  the  people 
might  be  pleased  with  the  imagination  of  their 
participating  of  the  British  constitution,  by  hav¬ 
ing  a  body  of  representatives,  without  whose 
consent  money  could  not  be  exacted  from  them. 
Johnson  could  not  bear  my  thus  opposing  his 
avowed  opinion,  which  he  had  exerted  himself 
with  an  extreme  degree  of  heat  to  enforce;  and 
the  violent  agitation  into  which  he  was  thrown, 
while  answering,  or  rather  reprimanding  me, 
alarmed  me  so,  that  I  heartily  repented  of  my 
having  unthinkingly  introduced  the  subject.  I 
myself,  however,  grew  warm,  and  the  change 
was  great,  from  the  calm  state  of  philosophical 
discussion  in  which  we  had  a  little  before  been 
pleasingly  employed. 

I  talked  of  the  corruption  of  the  British  Par¬ 
liament,  in  which  I  alledged  that  any  question, 
however  unreasonable  or  unjust,  might  be  car¬ 
ried  by  a  venal  majority;  and  I  spoke  with  high 
admiration  of  the  Roman  Senate,  as  if  com¬ 
posed  of  men  sincerely  desirous  to  resolve  what 
theyshould  think  best  for  their  country.  My  friend 
would  allow  no  such  character  to  the  Roman 
Senate;  and  he  maintained  that  the  British  Par¬ 
liament  was  not  corrupt,  and  that  there  was  no 


1777  1  LIFE  OF 

occasion  to  corrupt  its  members;  asserting,  that 
there  was  hardly  ever  any  question  of  great 
importance  before  Parliament,  any  question  in 
which  a  man  might  not  very  well  vote  either  up¬ 
on  one  side  or  the  other.  He  said  there  had  been 
none  in  his  time  except  that  respecting  America. 

We  were  fatigued  by  the  contest,  which  was 
produced  by  my  want  of  caution;  and  he  was 
not  then  in  the  humour  to  slide  into  easy  and 
cheerful  talk.  It  therefore  so  happened,  that  we 
were  after  an  hour  or  two  very  willing  to  sep¬ 
arate  and  go  to  bed. 

On  Wednesday,  September  24,  I  went  into 
Dr.  Johnson’s  room  before  he  got  up,  and  find¬ 
ing  that  the  storm  of  the  preceding  night  was 
quite  laid,  I  sat  down  upon  his  bed-side,  and  he 
talked  with  as  much  readiness  and  good-hu¬ 
mour  as  ever.  He  recommended  to  me  to  plant 
a  considerable  part  of  a  large  moorish  farm 
which  I  had  purchased,  and  he  made  several 
calculations  of  the  expence  and  profit:  for  he  de¬ 
lighted  in  exercising  his  mind  on  the  science  of 
numbers.  He  pressed  upon  me  the  importance 
of  planting  at  the  first  in  a  very  sufficient  man¬ 
ner,  quoting  the  saying  “In  bello  non  licet  bis  er - 
rare”:  and  adding,  “this  is  equally  true  in  plant¬ 
ing.” 

I  spoke  with  gratitude  of  Dr.  Taylor’s  hos¬ 
pitality;  and,  as  evidence  that  it  was  not  on  ac¬ 
count  of  his  good  table  alone  that  Johnson  vis¬ 
ited  him  often,  I  mentioned  a  little  anecdote 
which  had  escaped  my  friend’s  recollection,  and 
at  hearing  which  repeated,  he  smiled.  One  eve¬ 
ning,  when  I  was  sitting  with  him,  Frank  deliv¬ 
ered  this  message:  “Sir,  Dr.  Taylor  sends  his 
compliments  to  you  and  begs  you  will  dine  with 
him  to-morrow.  He  has  got  a  hare.” — “My  com¬ 
pliments  (said  Johnson,)  and  I’ll  dine  with  him 
— hare  or  rabbit.” 

After  breakfast  I  departed,  and  pursued  my 
journey  northwards.  I  took  my  post-chaise  from 
the  Green  Man,  a  very  good  inn  at  Ashbourne, 
the  mistress  of  which,  a  mighty  civil  gentlewom¬ 
an,  courtseying  very  low,  presented  me  with  an 
engraving  of  the  sign  of  her  house;  to  which  she 
had  subjoined,  in  her  own  hand -writing,  an  ad¬ 
dress  in  such  singular  simplicity  of  style,  that  I 
have  preserved  it  pasted  upon  one  of  the  boards 
of  my  original  Journal  at  this  time,  and  shall 
here  insert  it  for  the  amusement  of  my  readers: 

“M.  KILLINGLE T’s  duty  waits  upon  Mr.  Bos¬ 
well,  is  exceedingly  obliged  to  him  for  this  favour; 
whenever  he  comes  this  way ,  hopes  for  a  continuance  of 
the  same.  Would  Mr.  Boswell  name  the  house  to  his 
extensive  acquaintance ,  it  would  be  a  singular  favour 
conferred  on  one  who  has  it  not  in  her  power  to  make 


JOHNSON  365 

any  other  return  but  her  most  grateful  thanks ,  and  sin - 
cerest  prayers  for  his  happiness  in  time ,  and  in  a  blessed 
eternity.  —  T uesday  mornl  ’ 

From  this  meeting  at  Ashbourne  I  derived  a 
considerable  accession  to  my  Johnsonian  store. 
I  communicated  my  original  Journal  to  Sir  Wil¬ 
liam  Forbes,  in  whom  I  have  always  placed  de¬ 
served  confidence;  and  what  he  wrote  to  me 
concerning  it  is  so  much  to  my  credit  as  the  bi¬ 
ographer  of  Johnson,  that  my  readers  will,  I 
hope,  grant  me  their  indulgence  for  here  insert¬ 
ing  it:  “It  is  not  once  or  twice  going  over  it  (says 
Sir  William,)  that  will  satisfy  me;  for  I  find  in  it 
a  high  degree  of  instruction  as  well  as  entertain¬ 
ment;  and  I  derive  more  benefit  from  Dr.  John¬ 
son’s  admirable  discussions  than  I  should  be 
able  to  draw  from  his  personal  conversation; 
for,  I  suppose  there  is  not  a  man  in  the  world  to 
whom  he  discloses  his  sentiments  so  freely  as  to 
yourself.” 

I  cannot  omit  a  curious  circumstance  which 
occurred  at  Edensor-inn,  close  by  Chatsworth, 
to  survey  the  magnificence  of  which  I  had  gone 
a  considerable  way  out  of  my  road  to  Scotland. 
The  inn  was  then  kept  by  a  very  jolly  landlord, 
whose  name,  I  think,  was  Malton.  He  happened 
to  mention  that  “the  celebrated  Dr.  Johnson 
had  been  in  his  house.”  I  inquired  who  this  Dr. 
Johnson  was,  that  I  might  hear  mine  host’s  no¬ 
tion  of  him.  “Sir,  (said  he,)  Johnson,  the  great 
writer;  Oddity ,  as  they  call  him.  He’s  the  greatest 
writer  in  England;  he  writes  for  the  ministry;  he 
has  a  correspondence  abroad,  and  lets  them 
know  what’s  going  on.” 

My  friend,  who  had  a  thorough  dependance 
upon  the  authenticity  of  my  relation  without 
any  embellishment ,  as  falsehood  or  fiction  is  too  gen¬ 
tly  called,  laughed  a  good  deal  at  this  represen¬ 
tation  of  himself. 

Mr.  Boswell  to  Dr.  Johnson 

Edinburgh,  Sept.  29,  1777 

My  Dear  Sir,  By  the  first  post  I  inform  you 
of  my  safe  arrival  at  my  own  house,  and  that  I 
had  the  comfort  of  finding  my  wife  and  children 
all  in  good  health. 

When  I  look  back  upon  our  late  interview,  it 
appears  to  me  to  have  answered  expectation 
better  than  almost  any  scheme  of  happiness  that 
I  ever  put  in  execution.  My  Journal  is  stored 
with  wisdom  and  wit;  and  my  memory  is  filled 
with  the  recollection  of  lively  and  affectionate 
feelings,  which  now,  I  think,  yield  me  more  sat¬ 
isfaction  than  at  the  time  when  they  were  first 
excited.  I  have  experienced  this  upon  other  oc¬ 
casions.  I  shall  be  obliged  to  you  if  you  will  ex¬ 
plain  it  to  me;  for  it  seems  wonderful  that  pleas¬ 
ure  should  be  more  vivid  at  a  distance  than 


366 

when  near.  I  wish  you  may  find  yourself  in  a 
humour  to  do  me  this  favour;  but  I  flatter  myself 
with  no  strong  hope  of  it;  for  I  have  observed, 
that  unless  upon  very  serious  occasions,  your  let¬ 
ters  to  me  are  not  answers  to  those  which  I  write. 

[I  then  expressed  much  uneasiness  that  I  had 
mentioned  to  him  the  name  of  the  gentleman 
who  had  told  me  the  story  so  much  to  his  dis¬ 
advantage,  the  truth  of  which  he  had  complete¬ 
ly  refuted;  for  that  my  having  done  so  might  be 
interpreted  as  a  breach  of  confidence,  and  of¬ 
fend  one  whose  society  I  valued: — therefore  ear¬ 
nestly  requesting  that  no  notice  might  be  taken 
of  it  to  any  body,  till  I  should  be  in  London, 
and  have  an  opportunity  to  talk  it  over  with 
the  gentleman.] 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  You  will  wonder,  or  you  have  won¬ 
dered,  why  no  letter  has  come  from  me.  What 
you  wrote  at  your  return,  had  in  it  such  a  strain 
of  cowardly  caution  as  gave  me  no  pleasure.  I 
could  not  well  do  what  you  wished;  I  had  no 
need  to  vex  you  with  a  refusal.  I  have  seen  Mr. 

- ,  and  as  to  him  have  set  all  right,  without 

any  inconvenience,  so  far  as  I  know,  to  you. 
Mrs.  Thrale  had  forgot  the  story.  You  may  now 
be  at  ease. 

And  at  ease  I  certainly  wish  you,  for  the  kind¬ 
ness  that  you  shewed  in  coming  so  long  a  jour¬ 
ney  to  see  me.  It  was  pity  to  keep  you  so  long  in 
pain,  but,  upon  reviewing  the  matter,  I  do  not 
see  what  I  could  have  done  better  than  as  I  did. 

I  hope  you  found  at  your  return  my  dear  en¬ 
emy  and  all  her  little  people  quite  well,  and  had 
no  reason  to  repent  of  your  journey.  I  think  on 
it  with  great  gratitude. 

I  was  not  well  when  you  left  me  at  the  Doc¬ 
tor’s,  and  I  grew  worse;  yet  I  staid  on,  and  at 
Lichfield  was  very  ill.  Travelling,  however,  did 
not  make  me  worse;  and  when  I  came  to  Lon¬ 
don,  I  complied  with  a  summons  to  go  to  Bright- 
helmston,  where  I  saw  Beauclerk,  and  staid 
three  days. 

Our  Club  has  recommenced  last  Friday,  but 
I  was  not  there.  Langton  has  another  wench.1 
Mrs.  Thrale  is  in  hopes  of  a  young  brewer.  They 
got  by  their  trade  last  year  a  very  large  sum, 
and  their  expenses  are  proportionate. 

Mrs.  Williams’s  health  is  very  bad.  And  I 
have  had  for  some  time  a  very  difficult  and  la¬ 
borious  respiration;  but  I  am  better  by  purges, 
abstinence,  and  other  methods.  I  am  yet,  how¬ 
ever,  much  behind-hand  in  my  health  and  rest. 

Dr.  Blair’s  Sermons  are  now  universally  com¬ 
mended;  but  let  him  think  that  I  had  the  hon¬ 
our  of  first  finding  and  first  praising  his  excel¬ 
lencies.  I  did  not  stay  to  add  my  voice  to  that  of 
the  publick. 

My  dear  friend,  let  me  thank  you  once  more 
for  your  visit;  you  did  me  great  honour,  and  I 

1A  daughter  born  to  him. 


[  1777 

hope  met  with  nothing  that  displeased  you.  I  staid 
long  at  Ashbourne,  not  much  pleased,  yet  auk- 
ward  at  departing.  I  then  went  to  Lichfield, 
where  I  found  my  friend  at  Stow-hill2  very  dan¬ 
gerously  diseased.  Such  is  life.  Let  us  try  to  pass 
it  well,  whatever  it  be,  for  there  is  surely  some¬ 
thing  beyond  it. 

Well,  now  I  hope  all  is  well,  write  as  soon  as 
you  can  to,  dear  Sir,  your  affectionate  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

London,  Nov .  25,  1777 

To  Dr.  Samuel  Johnson 

Edinburgh,  Nov.  29,  1777 

My  Dear  Sir,  This  day’s  post  has  at  length 
relieved  me  from  much  uneasiness,  by  bringing 
me  a  letter  from  you.  I  was,  indeed,  doubly  un¬ 
easy;  on  my  own  account  and  yours.  I  was  very 
anxious  to  be  secured  against  any  bad  conse¬ 
quences  from  my  imprudence  in  mentioning  the 
gentleman’s  name  who  had  told  me  a  story  to  your 
disadvantage;  and  as  I  could  hardly  suppose  it 
possible,  that  you  would  delay  so  long  to  make 
me  easy,  unless  you  were  ill,  I  was  not  a  little  ap¬ 
prehensive  about  you.  You  must  not  be  offended 
when  I  venture  to  tell  you  that  you  appear  to 
me  to  have  been  too  rigid  upon  this  occasion. 
“The  cowardly  caution  which  gave  you  no  pleasure ,” 
was  suggested  to  me  by  a  friend  here,  to  whom  I 
mentioned  the  strange  story  and  the  detection 
of  its  falsity,  as  an  instance  how  one  may  be  de¬ 
ceived  by  what  is  apparently  very  good  autho¬ 
rity.  But,  as  I  am  still  persuaded,  that  as  I 
might  have  obtained  the  truth,  without  men¬ 
tioning  the  gentleman’s  name,  it  was  wrong  in 
me  to  do  it,  I  cannot  see  that  you  are  just  in 
blaming  my  caution.  But  if  you  were  ever  so 
just  in  your  disapprobation,  might  you  not  have 
dealt  more  tenderly  with  me? 

I  went  to  Auchinleck  about  the  middle  of  Oc¬ 
tober,  and  passed  some  time  with  my  father 
very  comfortably.  .  .  . 

I  am  engaged  in  a  criminal  prosecution  against 
a  country  schoolmaster,  for  indecent  behaviour 
to  his  female  scholars.  There  is  no  statute  against 
such  abominable  conduct;  but  it  is  punishable 
at  common  law.  I  shall  be  obliged  to  you  for 
your  assistance  in  this  extraordinary  trial.  I  ever 
am,  my  dear  Sir,  your  faithful  humble  servant, 

James  Boswell 

About  this  time  I  wrote  to  Johnson,  giving 
him  an  account  of  the  decision  of  the  Negro  cause , 
by  the  court  of  Session,  which  by  those  who  hold 
even  the  mildest  and  best  regulated  slavery  in 
abomination,  (of  which  number  I  do  not  hesi¬ 
tate  to  declare  that  I  am  none,)  should  be  re¬ 
membered  with  high  respect,  and  to  the  credit 
of  Scotland;  for  it  went  upon  a  much  broader 
ground  than  the  case  of  Somerset ,  which  was  de- 

2Mrs.  Aston. 


BOSWELL 


1778  ]  LIFE  OF 

cided  in  England;1  being  truly  the  general  ques¬ 
tion,  whether  a  perpetual  obligation  of  service 
to  one  master  in  any  mode  should  be  sanctified 
by  the  law  of  a  free  country.  A  negro,  then  called 
Joseph  Knight ,  a  native  of  Africa,  who  having 
been  brought  to  Jamaica  in  the  usual  course  of 
the  slave  trade,  and  purchased  by  a  Scotch  gen¬ 
tleman  in  that  island,  had  attended  his  master 
to  Scotland,  where  it  was  officiously  suggested 
to  him  that  he  would  be  found  entitled  to  his 
liberty  without  any  limitation.  He  accordingly 
brought  his  action,  in  the  course  of  which  the 
advocates  on  both  sides  did  themselves  great 
honour.  Mr.  Maclaurin  has  had  the  praise  of 
Johnson,  for  his  argument2  in  favour  of  the  ne¬ 
gro,  and  Mr.  Macconochie  distinguished  him¬ 
self  on  the  same  side,  by  his  ingenuity  and  ex¬ 
traordinary  research.  Mr.  Cullen,  on  the  part  of 
the  master,  discovered  good  information  and 
sound  reasoning;  in  which  he  was  well  support¬ 
ed  by  Mr.  James  Ferguson,  remarkable  for  a 
manly  understanding,  and  a  knowledge  both  of 
books  and  of  the  world.  But  I  cannot  too  highly 
praise  the  speech  which  Mr.  Henry  Dundas 
generously  contributed  to  the  cause  of  the  sooty 
stranger.  Mr.  Dundas’s  Scottish  accent,  which 
has  been  so  often  in  vain  obtruded  as  an  objec¬ 
tion  to  his  powerful  abilities  in  parliament,  was 
no  disadvantage  to  him  in  his  own  country. 
And  I  do  declare,  that  upon  this  memorable 
question  he  impressed  me  and  I  believe  all  his 
audience,  with  such  feelings  as  were  produced 
by  some  of  the  most  eminent  orations  of  antiq¬ 
uity.  This  testimony  I  liberally  give  to  the  excel¬ 
lence  of  an  old  friend,  with  whom  it  has  been 
my  lot  to  differ  very  widely  upon  many  political 
topicks;  yet  I  persuade  myself  without  malice. 
A  great  majority  of  the  Lords  of  Session  decided 
for  the  negro.  But  four  of  their  number,  the  Lord 
President,  Lord  Elliock,  Lord  Monboddo,  and 
Lord  Covington,  resolutely  maintained  the  law¬ 
fulness  of  a  status ,  which  has  been  acknowledged 
in  all  ages  and  countries,  and  that  when  free¬ 
dom  flourished,  as  in  old  Greece  and  Rome. 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  This  is  the  time  of  the  year  in 
which  all  express  their  good  wishes  to  their 

1See  State  Trials,  vol.  xi,  p.  339,  and  Mr.  Har¬ 
grave’s  argument. 

2The  motto  to  it  was  happily  chosen: 

Quamvis  ille  niger,  quamvis  tu  Candidas  esses. 

I  cannot  avoid  mentioning  a  circumstance  no  less 
strange  than  true,  that  a  brother  Advocate  in  con¬ 
siderable  practice,  but  of  whom  it  certainly  cannot 
be  said,  Ingenuas  didicit fideliter  artes ,  asked  Mr.  Mac¬ 
laurin,  with  a  face  of  flippant  assurance,  “Are 
these  words  your  own?” 


JOHNSON  367 

friends,  and  I  send  mine  to  you  and  your  fam¬ 
ily.  May  your  lives  be  long,  happy,  and  good.  I 
have  been  much  out  of  order,  but,  I  hope,  do 
not  grow  worse. 

The  crime  of  the  schoolmaster  whom  you  are 
engaged  to  prosecute  is  very  great,  and  may  be 
suspected  to  be  too  common.  In  our  law  it  would 
be  a  breach  of  the  peace,  and  a  misdemeanour: 
that  is,  a  kind  of  indefinite  crime,  not  capital, 
but  punishable  at  the  discretion  of  the  Court. 
You  cannot  want  matter:  all  that  needs  to  be 
said  will  easily  occur. 

Mr.  Shaw,  the  authour  of  the  Gaelick  Gram¬ 
mar,  desires  me  to  make  a  request  for  him  to 
Lord  Eglintoune,  that  he  may  be  appointed 
Chaplain  to  one  of  the  new-raised  regiments. 

All  our  friends  are  as  they  were;  little  has 
happened  to  them  of  either  good  or  bad.  Mrs. 
Thrale  ran  a  great  black  hair-dressing  pin  into 
her  eye;  but  by  great  evacuation  she  kept  it 
from  inflaming,  and  it  is  almost  well.  Miss  Rey¬ 
nolds  has  been  out  of  order,  but  is  better.  Mrs. 
Williams  is  in  a  very  poor  state  of  health. 

If  I  should  write  on,  I  should,  perhaps,  write 
only  complaints,  and  therefore  I  will  content 
myself  with  telling  you,  that  I  love  to  think  on 
you,  and  to  hear  from  you;  and  that  I  am,  dear 
Sir,  yours  faithfully, 

Sam.  Johnson 

December  27,  1777 

To  Dr.  Samuel  Johnson 

Edinburgh,  Jan.  8,  1778 

Dear  Sir,  Your  congratulations  upon  a  new 
year  are  mixed  with  complaint:  mine  must  be 
so  too.  My  wife  has  for  some  time  been  very  ill, 
having  been  confined  to  the  house  these  three 
months  by  a  severe  cold,  attended  with  alarm¬ 
ing  symptoms. 

[Here  I  gave  a  particular  account  of  the  dis¬ 
tress  which  the  person,  upon  every  account  most 
dear  to  me,  suffered;  and  of  the  dismal  state  of 
apprehension  in  which  I  now  was:  adding  that  I 
never  stood  more  in  need  of  his  consoling  phi¬ 
losophy.] 

Did  you  every  look  at  a  book  written  by  Wil¬ 
son,  a  Scotchman,  under  the  Latin  name  of 
Volusenus ,  according  to  the  custom  of  literary 
men  at  a  certain  period.  It  is  entitled  De  Animi 
Tranquillitate.  I  earnestly  desire  tranquillity.  Bo¬ 
na  res  quies:  but  I  fear  I  shall  never  attain  it:  for, 
when  unoccupied,  I  grow  gloomy,  and  occupa¬ 
tion  agitates  me  to  feverishness.  ...  I  am,  dear 
Sir,  your  most  affectionate  humble  servant, 

James  Boswell 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  To  a  letter  so  interesting  as  your 
last,  it  is  proper  to  return  some  answer,  however 
little  I  may  be  disposed  to  write. 

Your  alarm  at  your  lady’s  illness  was  reason¬ 
able,  and  not  disproportionate  to  the  appear- 


368  BOSWELL  [1778 


ance  of  the  disorder.  I  hope  your  physical  friend’s 
conjecture  is  now  verified,  and  all  fear  of  a  con¬ 
sumption  at  an  end:  a  little  care  and  exercise 
will  then  restore  her.  London  is  a  good  air  for 
ladies;  and  if  you  bring  her  hither,  1  will  do  for 
her  what  she  did  for  me — I  will  retire  from  my 
apartments,  for  her  accommodation.  Behave 
kindly  to  her,  and  keep  her  chearful. 

You  always  seem  to  call  for  tenderness.  Know 
then,  that  in  the  first  month  of  the  present  year 
I  very  highly  esteem  and  very  cordially  love 
you.  I  hope  to  tell  you  this  at  the  beginning  of 
every  year  as  long  as  we  live;  and  why  should 
we  trouble  ourselves  to  tell  or  hear  it  oftener? 

Tell  Veronica,  Euphemia,  and  Alexander, 
that  I  wish  them,  as  well  as  their  parents,  many 
happy  years. 

You  have  ended  the  negro’s  cause  much  to  my 
mind.  Lord  Auchinleck  and  dear  Lord  Hailes 
were  on  the  side  of  liberty.  Lord  Hailes’s  name 
reproaches  me;  but  if  he  saw  my  languid  neg¬ 
lect  of  my  own  affairs,  he  would  rather  pity 
than  resent  my  neglect  of  his.  I  hope  to  mend, 
ut  et  mihi  vivam  et  amicis .  I  am,  dear  Sir,  your’s 
affectionately, 

Sam.  Johnson 

January  24,  1778 

My  service  to  my  fellow-traveller,  Joseph. 

Johnson  maintained  a  long  and  intimate 
friendship  with  Mr.  Welch,  who  succeeded  the 
celebrated  Henry  Fielding  as  one  of  his  Majesty’s 
Justices  of  the  Peace  for  Westminster;  kept  a  reg¬ 
ular  office  for  the  police  of  that  great  district; 
and  discharged  his  important  trust,  for  many 
years,  faithfully  and  ably.  Johnson,  who  had  an 
eager  and  unceasing  curiosity  to  know  human 
life  in  all  its  variety,  told  me,  that  he  attended 
Mr.  Welch  in  his  office  for  a  whole  winter,  to 
hear  the  examinations  of  the  culprits;  but  that 
he  found  an  almost  uniform  tenor  of  misfortune, 
wretchedness  and  profligacy.  Mr.  Welch’s  health 
being  impaired,  he  was  advised  to  try  the  effect 
of  a  warm  climate;  and  Johnson,  by  his  interest 
with  Mr.  Chamier,  procured  him  leave  of  ab¬ 
sence  to  go  to  Italy,  and  a  promise  that  the  pen¬ 
sion  or  salary  of  two  hundred  pounds  a  year, 
which  Government  allowed  him,  should  not  be 
discontinued.  Mr.  Welch  accordingly  went 
abroad,  accompanied  by  his  daughter  Anne,  a 
young  lady  of  uncommon  talents  and  literature. 

To  Saunders  Welch,  Esq.,  at  the 
English  Coffee-House,  Rome 

Dear  Sir,  To  have  suffered  one  of  my  best 
and  dearest  friends  to  pass  almost  two  years  in 
foreign  countries  without  a  letter,  has  a  very 
shameful  appearance  of  inattention.  But  the 
truth  is,  that  there  was  no  particular  time  in 
which  I  had  any  thing  particular  to  say;  and 


general  expressions  of  good  will,  I  hope,  our 
long  friendship  is  grown  too  solid  to  want. 

Of  publick  affairs  you  have  information  from 
the  newspapers  wherever  you  go,  for  the  Eng¬ 
lish  keep  no  secret;  and  of  other  things,  Mrs. 
Nollekens  informs  you.  My  intelligence  could 
therefore  be  of  no  use;  and  Miss  Nancy’s  letters 
made  it  unnecessary  to  write  to  you  for  informa¬ 
tion:  I  was  likewise  for  some  time  out  of  hu¬ 
mour,  to  find  that  motion, and  nearer  approaches 
to  the  sun,  did  not  restore  your  health  so  fast  as 
I  expected.  Of  your  health,  the  accounts  have 
lately  been  more  pleasing;  and  I  have  the  grati¬ 
fication  of  imaging  to  myself  a  length  of  years 
which  I  hope  you  have  gained,  and  of  which  the 
enjoyment  will  be  improved  by  a  vast  accession 
of  images  and  observations  which  your  journeys 
and  various  residence  have  enabled  you  to  make 
and  accumulate.  You  have  travelled  with  this 
felicity,  almost  peculiar  to  yourself,  that  your 
companion  is  not  to  part  from  you  at  your  jour¬ 
ney’s  end;  but  you  are  to  live  on  together,  to 
help  each  other’s  recollection,  and  to  supply  each 
other’s  omissions.  The  world  has  few  greater 
pleasures  than  that  which  two  friends  enjoy,  in 
tracing  back,  at  some  distant  time,  those  trans¬ 
actions  and  events  through  which  they  have 
passed  together.  One  of  the  old  man’s  miseries 
is,  that  he  cannot  easily  find  a  companion  able 
to  partake  with  him  of  the  past.  You  and  your 
fellow-traveller  have  this  comfort  in  store,  that 
your  conversation  will  be  not  easily  exhausted; 
one  will  always  be  glad  to  say  what  the  other 
will  always  be  willing  to  hear. 

That  you  may  enjoy  this  pleasure  long,  your 
health  must  have  your  constant  attention.  I  sup¬ 
pose  you  purpose  to  return  this  year.  There  is 
no  need  of  haste:  do  not  come  hither  before  the 
height  of  summer,  that  you  may  fall  gradually 
into  the  inconveniences  of  your  native  clime. 
July  seems  to  be  the  proper  month.  August  and 
September  will  prepare  you  for  the  winter.  After 
having  travelled  so  far  to  find  health,  you  must 
take  care  not  to  lose  it  at  home;  and  I  hope  a  lit¬ 
tle  care  will  effectually  preserve  it. 

Miss  Nancy  has  doubtless  kept  a  constant  and 
copious  journal.  She  must  not  expect  to  be  wel¬ 
come  when  she  returns,  without  a  great  mass  of 
information.  Let  her  review  her  journal  often, 
and  set  down  what  she  finds  herself  to  have 
omitted,  that  she  may  trust  to  memory  as  little 
as  possible,  for  memory  is  soon  confused  by  a 
quick  succession  of  things;  and  she  will  grow 
every  day  less  confident  of  the  truth  of  her  own 
narratives,  unless  she  can  recur  to  some  written 
memorials.  If  she  has  satisfied  herself  with  hints, 
instead  of  full  representations,  let  her  supply  the 
deficiencies  now  while  her  memory  is  yet  fresh, 
and  while  her  father’s  memory  may  help  her.  If 
she  observes  this  direction,  she  will  not  have 
travelled  in  vain;  for  she  will  bring  home  a  book 
with  which  she  may  entertain  herself  to  the  end 


1778]  LIFE  OF 

of  life.  If  it  were  not  now  too  late,  I  would  ad¬ 
vise  her  to  note  the  impression  which  the  first 
sight  of  any  thing  new  and  wonderful  made  up¬ 
on  her  mind.  Let  her  now  set  her  thoughts  down 
as  she  can  recollect  them;  for  faint  as  they  may 
already  be,  they  will  grow  every  day  fainter. 

Perhaps  I  do  not  flatter  myself  unreasonably 
when  I  imagine  that  you  may  wish  to  know 
something  of  me.  I  can  gratify  your  benevolence 
with  no  account  of  health.  The  hand  of  time,  or 
of  disease,  is  very  heavy  upon  me.  I  pass  restless 
and  uneasy  nights,  harassed  with  convulsions  of 
my  breast,  and  flatulencies  at  my  stomach;  and 
restless  nights  make  heavy  days.  But  nothing 
will  be  mended  by  complaints,  and  therefore  I 
will  make  an  end.  When  we  meet,  we  will  try  to 
forget  our  cares  and  our  maladies,  and  contrib¬ 
ute,  as  we  can,  to  the  chearfulness  of  each  other. 
If  I  had  gone  with  you,  I  believe  I  should  have 
been  better;  but  I  do  not  know  that  it  was  in  my 
power.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

Feb.  3,  1778 

This  letter,  while  it  gives  admirable  advice 
how  to  travel  to  the  best  advantage,  and  will 
therefore  be  of  very  general  use,  is  another  em¬ 
inent  proof  of  Johnson’s  warm  and  affectionate 
heart.1 

To  Dr.  Samuel  Johnson 

Edinburgh,  Feb.  26,  1778 

My  Dear  Sir,  Why  I  have  delayed,  for  near 
a  month,  to  thank  you  for  your  last  affectionate 
letter,  I  cannot  say;  for  my  mind  has  been  in 
better  health  these  three  weeks  than  for  some 
years  past.  I  believe  I  have  evaded  till  I  could 
send  you  a  copy  of  Lord  Hailes’s  opinion  on  the 
negro’s  cause,  which  he  wishes  you  to  read,  and 
correct  any  errours  that  there  may  be  in  the  lan¬ 
guage;  for,  says  he,  “we  live  in  a  critical,  though 
not  a  learned  age;  and  I  seek  to  screen  myself 
under  the  shield  of  Ajax.”  I  communicated  to 
him  your  apology  for  keeping  the  sheets  of  his 
Annals  so  long.  He  says,  “I  am  sorry  to  see  that 
Dr.  Johnson  is  in  a  state  of  languor.  Why  should 
a  sober  Christian,  neither  an  enthusiast  nor  a 
fanatick,  be  very  merry  or  very  sad?”  I  envy  his 
Lordship’s  comfortable  constitution:  but  well 
do  I  know  that  languor  and  dejection  will  afflict 
the  best,  however  excellent  their  principles.  I 
am  in  possession  of  Lord  Hailes’s  opinion  in  his 
own  hand-writing,  and  have  had  it  for  some 
time.  My  excuse  then  for  procrastination  must 

^he  friendship  between  Mr.  Welch  and  him 
was  unbroken.  Mr.  Welch  died  not  many  months 
before  him,  and  bequeathed  him  five  guineas  for  a 
ring,  which  Johnson  received  with  tenderness,  as  a 
kind  memorial.  His  regard  was  constant  for  his 
friend  Mr.  Welch’s  daughters;  of  whom,  Jane  is 
married  to  Mr.  Nollekens  the  statuary,  whose 
merit  is  too  well  known  to  require  any  praise  from 
me. 


369 

be,  that  I  wanted  to  have  it  copied;  and  I  have 
now  put  that  off  so  long,  that  it  will  be  better  to 
bring  it  with  me  than  send  it,  as  I  shall  prob¬ 
ably  get  you  to  look  at  it  sooner,  when  I  solicit 
you  in  person. 

My  wife,  who  is,  I  thank  God,  a  good  deal 
better,  is  much  obliged  to  you  for  your  very  po¬ 
lite  and  courteous  offer  of  your  apartment;  but, 
if  she  goes  to  London,  it  will  be  best  for  her  to 
have  lodgings  in  the  more  airy  vicinity  of  Hyde- 
Park.  I,  however,  doubt  much  if  I  shall  be  able 
to  prevail  with  her  to  accompany  me  to  the  me¬ 
tropolis;  for  she  is  so  different  from  you  and  me, 
that  she  dislikes  travelling;  and  she  is  so  anxious 
about  her  children,  that  she  thinks  she  should  be 
unhappy  if  at  a  distance  from  them.  She  there¬ 
fore  wishes  rather  to  go  to  some  country  place 
in  Scotland,  where  she  can  have  them  with  her. 

I  purpose  being  in  London  about  the  20th  of 
next  month,  as  I  think  it  creditable  to  appear  in 
the  House  of  Lords  as  one  of  Douglas’s  Counsel, 
in  the  great  and  last  competition  between  Duke 
Hamilton  and  him.  .  .  . 

I  am  sorry  poor  Mrs.  Williams  is  so  ill:  though 
her  temper  is  unpleasant,  she  has  always  been 
polite  and  obliging  to  me.  I  wish  many  happy 
years  to  good  Mr.  Levett,  who  I  suppose  holds 
his  usual  place  at  your  breakfast  table.2  I  ever 
am,  my  dear  Sir,  your  affectionate  humble  serv¬ 
ant, 

James  Boswell 

To  the  Same 

Edinburgh,  Feb.  28,  1778 

My  Dear  Sir,  Y  ou  are  at  present  busy  amongst 
the  English  poets,  preparing,  for  the  publick  in¬ 
struction  and  entertainment,  Prefaces,  biograph¬ 
ical  and  critical.  It  will  not,  therefore,  be  out  of 
season  to  appeal  to  you  for  the  decision  of  a  con¬ 
troversy  which  has  arisen  between  a  lady  and 
me  concerning  a  passage  in  Parnell.  That  poet 
tells  us,  that  his  Hermit  quitted  his  cell 

66 - to  know  the  world  by  sight. 

To  find  if  books  or  swains  report  it  right ; 

{For yet  by  swains  alone  the  world  he  knew. 

Whose  feet  came  wand'ring  o'er  the  nightly  dew.)" 

I  maintain,  that  there  is  an  inconsistency  here; 
for  as  the  Hermit’s  notions  of  the  world  were 
formed  from  the  reports  both  of  books  and  swains, 
he  could  not  justly  be  said  to  know  by  swains 
alone.  Be  pleased  to  judge  between  us,  and  let  us 
have  your  reasons.3 

2Dr.  Percy,  the  Bishop  of  Dromore,  humorously 
observed,  that  Levett  used  to  breakfast  on  the  crust 
of  a  roll,  which  Johnson,  after  tearing  out  the 
crumb  for  himself,  threw  to  his  humble  friend. 
Boswell.  [Perhaps  the  word  threw  is  here  too 
strong.  Dr.  Johnson  never  treated  Levett  with  con¬ 
tempt. — M.] 

3See  this  subject  discussed  in  a  subsequent  page, 
under  May  3,  1 779. 


JOHNSON 


37° 

What  do  you  say  to  Taxation  no  Tyranny ,  now, 
after  Lord  North’s  declaration,  or  confession,  or 
whatever  else  his  conciliatory  speech  should  be 
called?  I  never  differed  from  you  in  politicks 
but  upon  two  points,  the  Middlesex  Election, 
and  the  Taxation  of  the  Americans  by  the  Brit¬ 
ish  Houses  of  Representatives .  There  is  a  charm  in 
the  word  Parliament ,  so  I  avoid  it.  As  I  am  a 
steady  and  warm  a  Tory,  I  regret  that  the  King 
does  not  see  it  to  be  better  for  him  to  receive 
constitutional  supplies  from  his  American  sub¬ 
jects  by  the  voice  of  their  own  assemblies,  where 
his  Royal  Person  is  represented,  than  through 
the  medium  of  his  British  subjects.  I  am  per¬ 
suaded  that  the  power  of  the  Crown,  which  I 
wish  to  increase,  would  be  greater  when  in  con¬ 
tact  with  all  its  dominions,  than  if  “the  rays  of 
regal  bounty”1  were  to  shine  upon  America 
through  that  dense  and  troubled  body,  a  mod¬ 
ern  British  Parliament.  But,  enough  of  this  sub¬ 
ject;  for  your  angry  voice  at  Ashbourne  upon  it, 
still  sounds  aweful  “in  my  mind’s  ears.”  I  ever 
am,  my  dear  Sir,  your  most  affectionate  humble 
servant, 

James  Boswell 
To  the  Same 

Edinburgh,  March  12,  1778 

My  Dear  Sir,  The  alarm  of  your  late  illness 
distressed  me  but  a  few  hours;  for  on  the  even¬ 
ing  of  the  day  that  it  reached  me,  I  found  it  con¬ 
tradicted  in  The  London  Chronicle ,  which  I  could 
depend  upon  as  authentick  concerning  you,  Mr. 
Strahan  being  the  printer  of  it.  I  did  not  see  the 
paper  in  which  “the  approaching  extinction  of  a 
bright  luminary”  was  announced.  Sir  William 
Forbes  told  me  of  it;  and  he  says,  he  saw  me  so 
uneasy,  that  he  did  not  give  me  the  report  in 
such  strong  terms  as  he  read  it.  He  afterwards 
sent  me  a  letter  from  Mr.  Langton  to  him, 
which  relieved  me  much.  I  am,  however,  not 
quite  easy,  as  I  have  not  heard  from  you;  and 
now  I  shall  not  have  that  comfort  before  I  see 
you,  for  I  set  out  for  London  to-morrow  before 
the  post  comes  in.  I  hope  to  be  with  you  on 
Wednesday  morning;  and  I  ever  am,  with  the 
highest  veneration,  my  dear  Sir,  your  much 
obliged,  faithful,  and  affectionate,  humble  serv¬ 
ant, 

James  Boswell 

On  Wednesday,  March  18,  I  arrived  in  Lon¬ 
don,  and  was  informed  by  good  Mr.  Francis 
that  his  master  was  better,  and  was  gone  to  Mr. 
Thrale’s  at  Streatham,  to  which  place  I  wrote 
to  him,  begging  to  know  when  he  would  be  in 
town.  He  was  not  expected  for  some  time;  but 

Alluding  to  a  line  in  his  Vanity  of  Human  Wishes, 
describing  Cardinal  Wolsey  in  his  state  of  eleva¬ 
tion: 

Through  him  the  rays  of  legal  bounty  shine. 


[  1778 

next  day  having  called  on  Dr.  Taylor,  in  Dean’s- 
yard,  Westminster,  I  found  him  there,  and  was 
told  he  had  come  to  town  for  a  few  hours.  He 
met  me  with  his  usual  kindness,  but  instantly 
returned  to  the  writing  of  something  on  which 
he  was  employed  when  I  came  in,  and  on  which 
he  seemed  much  intent.  Finding  him  thus  en¬ 
gaged,  I  made  my  visit  very  short,  and  had  no 
more  of  his  conversation,  except  his  expressing 
a  serious  regret  that  a  friend  of  ours  was  living 
at  too  much  expence,  considering  how  poor  an 
appearance  he  made:  “If  (said  he,)  a  man  has 
splendour  from  his  expence,  if  he  spends  his 
money  in  pride  or  in  pleasure,  he  has  value:  but 
if  he  lets  others  spend  it  for  him,  which  is  most 
commonly  the  case,  he  has  no  advantage  from 
it.” 

On  Friday,  March  20,  I  found  him  at  his  own 
house,  sitting  with  Mrs.  Williams,  and  was  in¬ 
formed  that  the  room  formerly  allotted  to  me 
was  now  appropriated  to  a  charitable  purpose; 
Mrs.  Desmoulins,2  and  I  think  her  daughter, 
and  a  Miss  Carmichael,  being  all  lodged  in  it. 
Such  was  his  humanity,  and  such  his  generos¬ 
ity,  that  Mrs.  Desmoulins  herself  told  me,  he 
allowed  her  half-a-guinea  a  week.  Let  it  be  re¬ 
membered,  that  this  was  above  a  twelfth  part 
of  his  pension. 

His  liberality,  indeed,  was  at  all  periods  of  his 
life  very  remarkable.  Mr.  Howard,  of  Lichfield, 
at  whose  father’s  house  Johnson  had  in  his  early 
years  been  kindly  received,  told  me,  that  when 
he  was  a  boy  at  the  Charter-House,  his  father 
wrote  to  him  to  go  and  pay  a  visit  to  Mr.  Sam¬ 
uel  Johnson,  which  he  accordingly  did,  and 
found  him  in  an  upper  room,  of  poor  appear¬ 
ance.  Johnson  received  him  with  much  courte¬ 
ousness,  and  talked  a  great  deal  to  him,  as  to  a 
school-boy,  of  the  course  of  his  education,  and 
other  particulars.  When  he  afterwards  came  to 
know  and  understand  the  high  character  of  this 
great  man,  he  recollected  his  condescension  with 
wonder.  He  added,  that  when  he  was  going 
away,  Mr.  Johnson  presented  him  with  half-a- 
guinea;  and  this,  said  Mr.  Howard,  was  at  a 
time  when  he  probably  had  not  another. 

We  retired  from  Mrs.  Williams  to  another 
room.  Tom  Davies  soon  after  joined  us.  He  had 
now  unfortunately  failed  in  his  circumstances, 
and  was  much  indebted  to  Dr.  Johnson’s  kind¬ 
ness  for  obtaining  for  him  many  alleviations  of 
his  distress.  After  he  went  away,  Johnson  blamed 
his  folly  in  quitting  the  stage,  by  which  he 
and  his  wife  got  five  hundred  pounds  a  year.  I 

2Daughter  of  Dr.  Swinfen,  Johnson’s  godfather, 
and  widow  of  Mr.  Desmoulins,  a  writing-master. 


BOSWELL 


177B]  LIFE  OF 

said,  I  believed  it  was  owing  to  ChurchilPs  at¬ 
tack  upon  him, 

He  mouths  a  sentence ,  as  curs  mouth  a  bone . 

Johnson.  “I  believe  so  too,  Sir.  But  what  a  man 
is  he,  who  is  to  be  driven  from  the  stage  by  a 
line?  Another  line  would  have  driven  him  from 
his  shop.” 

I  told  him,  that  I  was  engaged  as  Counsel  at 
the  bar  of  the  House  of  Commons  to  oppose  a 
road-bill  in  the  county  of  Stirling,  and  asked 
him  what  mode  he  would  advise  me  to  follow  in 
addressing  such  an  audience.  Johnson.  “Why, 
Sir,  you  must  provide  yourself  with  a  good  deal 
of  extraneous  matter,  which  you  are  to  produce 
occasionally,  so  as  to  fill  up  the  time;  for  you 
must  consider,  that  they  do  not  listen  much.  If 
you  begin  with  the  strength  of  your  cause,  it 
may  be  lost  before  they  begin  to  listen.  When 
you  catch  a  moment  of  attention,  press  the  mer¬ 
its  of  the  question  upon  them.”  He  said,  as  to 
one  point  of  the  merits,  that  he  thought  “it 
would  be  a  wrong  thing  to  deprive  the  small 
landholders  of  the  privilege  of  assessing  them¬ 
selves  for  making  and  repairing  the  high  roads; 
it  was  destroying  a  certain  portion  of  liberty,  without  a 
good  reason ,  which  was  always  a  bad  thing”  When 
I  mentioned  this  observation  next  day  to  Mr. 
Wilkes,  he  pleasantly  said,  “What!  does  he  talk 
of  liberty?  Liberty  is  as  ridiculous  in  his  mouth  as 
Religion  in  mine  .”  Mr.  Wilkes’s  advice,  as  to  the 
best  mode  of  speaking  at  the  bar  of  the  House  of 
Commons,  was  not  more  respectful  towards  the 
senate,  than  that  of  Dr.  Johnson.  “Be  as  impu¬ 
dent  as  you  can,  as  merry  as  you  can,  and  say 
whatever  comes  uppermost.  Jack  Lee  is  the  best 
heard  there  of  any  Counsel;  and  he  is  the  most 
impudent  dog,  and  always  abusing  us.” 

In  my  interview  with  Dr.  Johnson  this  eve¬ 
ning,  I  was  quite  easy,  quite  as  his  companion; 
upon  which  I  find  in  my  Journal  the  following 
reflection:  “So  ready  is  my  mind  to  suggest  mat¬ 
ter  for  dissatisfaction,  that  I  felt  a  sort  of  regret 
that  I  was  so  easy.  I  missed  that  aweful  rever¬ 
ence  with  which  I  used  to  contemplate  Mr. 
Samuel  Johnson,  in  the  complex  magnitude  of 
his  literary,  moral,  and  religious  character.  I 
have  a  wonderful  superstitious  love  of  mystery ; 
when,  perhaps,  the  truth  is,  that  it  is  owing  to 
the  cloudy  darkness  of  my  own  mind.  I  should 
be  glad  that  I  am  more  advanced  in  my  prog¬ 
ress  of  being,  so  that  I  can  view  Dr.  Johnson 
with  a  steadier  and  clearer  eye.  My  dissatisfac¬ 
tion  to-night  was  foolish.  Would  it  not  be  foolish 
to  regret  that  we  shall  have  less  mystery  in  a  fu¬ 
ture  state?  That  we  ‘now  see  in  a  glass  darkly,5 


JOHNSON  371 

but  shall  Then  see  face  to  face?5”  This  reflec¬ 
tion,  which  I  thus  freely  communicate,  will  be 
valued  by  the  thinking  part  of  my  readers,  who 
may  have  themselves  experienced  a  similar  state 
of  mind. 

He  returned  next  day  to  Streatham,  to  Mr. 
Thrale’s;  where,  as  Mr.  Strahan  once  com¬ 
plained  to  me,  “he  was  in  a  great  measure  ab¬ 
sorbed  from  the  society  of  his  old  friends.”  I  was 
kept  in  London  by  business,  and  wrote  to  him 
on  the  27th,  that  a  separation  from  him  for  a 
week,  when  we  were  so  near,  was  equal  to  a  sep¬ 
aration  for  a  year,  when  we  were  at  four  hun¬ 
dred  miles  distance.  I  went  to  Streatham  on 
Monday,  March  30.  Before  he  appeared,  Mrs. 
Thrale  made  a  very  characteristical  remark: — 
“I  do  not  know  for  certain  what  will  please  Dr. 
Johnson:  but  I  know  for  certain  that  it  will  dis¬ 
please  him  to  praise  any  thing,  even  what  he 
likes,  extravagantly.” 

At  dinner  he  laughed  at  querulous  declama¬ 
tions  against  the  age,  on  account  of  luxury, — 
increase  of  London, — scarcity  of  provisions, — 
and  other  such  topicks.  “ Houses  (said  he,)  will 
be  built  till  rents  fall:  and  corn  is  more  plentiful 
now  than  ever  it  was.” 

I  had  before  dinner  repeated  a  ridiculous  sto¬ 
ry  told  me  by  an  old  man  who  had  been  a  pas¬ 
senger  with  me  in  the  stage-coach  to-day.  Mrs. 
Thrale,  having  taken  occasion  to  allude  to  it  in 
talking  to  me,  called  it  “The  story  told  you  by 
the  old  woman” — “Now,  Madam,  (said  I,)  give 
me  leave  to  catch  you  in  the  fact;  it  was  not  an 
old  woman ,  but  an  old  man ,  whom  I  mentioned 
as  having  told  me  this.”  I  presumed  to  take  an 
opportunity,  in  presence  of  Johnson,  of  shewing 
this  lively  lady  how  ready  she  was,  unintention¬ 
ally,  to  deviate  from  exact  authenticity  of  nar¬ 
ration. 

Thomas  a  Kempis  (he  observed,)  must  be  a 
good  book,  as  the  world  has  opened  its  arms  to 
receive  it.  It  is  said  to  have  been  printed,  in  one 
language  or  other,  as  many  times  as  there  have 
been  months  since  it  first  came  out.1  I  always 
was  struck  with  this  sentence  in  it:  “Be  not  angry 
that  you  cannot  make  others  as  you  wish  them 
to  be,  since  you  cannot  make  yourself  as  you 
wish  to  be.” 

He  said,  “I  was  angry  with  Hurd  about  Cow¬ 
ley,  for  having  published  a  selection  of  his  works: 
but,  upon  better  consideration,  I  think  there  is 
no  impropriety  in  a  man’s  publishing  as  much 

LThe  first  edition  was  in  1492.  Between  that  per¬ 
iod  and  1792,  according  to  this  account,  there 
were  3600  editions.  But  this  is  very  improbable. 
[MJ 


372 

as  he  chooses  of  any  authour,  if  he  does  not  put 
the  rest  out  of  the  way.  A  man,  for  instance,  may 
print  the  Odes  of  Horace  alone.”  He  seemed  to 
be  in  a  more  indulgent  humour,  than  when  this 
subject  was  discussed  between  him  and  Mr. 
Murphy.1 

When  we  were  at  tea  and  coffee,  there  came 
in  Lord  Trimlestown,  in  whose  family  was  an 
ancient  Irish  peerage,  but  it  suffered  by  taking 
the  generous  side  in  the  troubles  of  the  last  cen¬ 
tury.2  He  was  a  man  of  pleasing  conversation, 
and  was  accompanied  by  a  young  gentleman, 
his  son. 

I  mentioned  that  I  had  in  my  possession  the 
Life  of  Sir  Robert  Sibbald ,  the  celebrated  Scottish 
antiquary,  and  founder  of  the  Royal  College  of 
Physicians  at  Edinburgh,  in  the  original  manu¬ 
script  in  his  own  handwriting;  and  that  it  was  I 
believed  the  most  natural  and  candid  account  of 
himself  that  ever  was  given  by  any  man.  As  an 
instance,  he  tells  that  the  Duke  of  Perth,  then 
Chancellor  of  Scotland,  pressed  him  very  much 
to  come  over  to  the  Roman  Catholick  faith: 
that  he  resisted  all  his  Grace’s  arguments  for  a 
considerable  time,  till  one  day  he  felt  himself, 
as  it  were,  instantaneously  convinced,  and  with 
tears  in  his  eyes  ran  into  the  Duke’s  arms,  and 
embraced  the  ancient  religion;  that  he  continued 
very  steady  in  it  for  some  time,  and  accompa¬ 
nied  his  Grace  to  London  one  winter,  and  lived 
in  his  household;  that  there  he  found  the  rigid 
fasting  prescribed  by  the  church  very  severe  up¬ 
on  him;  that  this  disposed  him  to  reconsider  the 
controversy,  and  having  then  seen  that  he  was 
in  the  wrong,  he  returned  to  Protestantism.  I 
talked  of  some  time  or  other  publishing  this  cur¬ 
ious  life.  Mrs.  Thrale.  “I  think  you  had  as  well 
let  alone  that  publication.  To  discover  such 
weakness,  exposes  a  man  when  he  is  gone.” 
Johnson.  “Nay,  it  is  an  honest  picture  of  human 
nature.  How  often  are  the  primary  motives  of 
our  greatest  actions  as  small  as  Sibbald’s,  for  his 
re-conversion.”  Mrs.  Thrale.  “But  may  they 
not  as  well  be  forgotten?”  Johnson.  “No,  Mad¬ 
am,  a  man  loves  to  review  his  own  mind.  That 
is  the  use  of  a  diary,  or  journal.”  Lord  Trim¬ 
lestown.  “True,  Sir.  As  the  ladies  love  to  see 
themselves  in  a  glass;  so  a  man  likes  to  see  him¬ 
self  in  his  journal.”  Boswell.  “A  very  pretty  al¬ 
lusion  .  ’  ’  J  ohnson.  “Yes,  indeed .  ’  ’  Boswell.  4 4  And 

JSee  ante ,  p.  305. 

2Since  this  was  written  the  attainder  has  been  re¬ 
versed;  and  Nicholas  Barnewall  is  now  a  peer  of 
Ireland  with  this  title.  The  person  mentioned  in 
the  text  had  studied  physick,  and  prescribed  gratis 
to  the  poor.  Hence  arose  the  subsequent  conversa¬ 
tion.  [M.] 


[  j778 

as  a  lady  adjusts  her  dress  before  a  mirror,  a 
man  adjusts  his  character  by  looking  at  his  jour¬ 
nal.”  I  next  year  found  the  very  same  thought 
in  Atterbury’s  Funeral  Sermon  on  Lady  Cutts; 
where,  having  mentioned  her  Diary,  he  says,  “In 
this  glass  she  every  day  dressed  her  mind.”  This 
is  a  proof  of  coincidence,  and  not  of  plagiarism; 
for  I  had  never  read  that  sermon  before. 

Next  morning,  while  we  were  at  breakfast, 
Johnson  gave  a  very  earnest  recommendation 
of  what  he  himself  practised  with  the  utmost 
conscientiousness:  I  mean  a  strict  attention  to 
truth,  even  in  the  most  minute  particulars. 4 ‘Ac¬ 
custom  your  children  (said  he,)  constantly  to 
this;  if  a  thing  happened  at  one  window,  and 
they,  when  relating  it,  say  that  it  happened  at 
another,  do  not  let  it  pass,  but  instantly  check 
them;  you  do  not  know  where  deviation  from 
truth  will  end.”  Boswell.  “It  may  come  to  the 
door:  and  when  once  an  account  is  at  all  varied 
in  one  circumstance,  it  may  by  degrees  be  varied 
so  as  to  be  totally  different  from  what  really 
happened.”  Our  lively  hostess,  whose  fancy  was 
impatient  of  the  rein,  fidgeted  at  this,  and  ven¬ 
tured  to  say,  “Nay,  this  is  too  much.  If  Mr.  John¬ 
son  should  forbid  me  to  drink  tea,  I  would  com¬ 
ply,  as  I  should  feel  the  restraint  only  twice  a 
day;  but  little  variations  in  narrative  must  hap¬ 
pen  a  thousand  times  a  day,  if  one  is  not  per¬ 
petually  watching.”  Johnson.  “Well,  Madam, 
and  you  ought  to  be  perpetually  watching.  It  is 
more  from  carelessness  about  truth  than  from 
intentional  lying,  that  there  is  so  much  false¬ 
hood  in  the  world.” 

In  his  review  of  Dr.  War  ton’s  Essay  on  the 
Writings  and  Genius  of  Pope,  Johnson  has  given 
the  following  salutary  caution  upon  this  subject: 

“Nothing  but  experience  could  evince  the  fre¬ 
quency  of  false  information,  or  enable  any  man 
to  conceive  that  so  many  groundless  reports 
should  be  propagated,  as  every  man  of  eminence 
may  hear  of  himself.  Some  men  relate  what  they 
think,  as  what  they  know;  some  men  of  confused 
memories  and  habitual  inaccuracy,  ascribe  to 
one  man  what  belongs  to  another;  and  some 
talk  on,  without  thought  or  care.  A  few  men  are 
sufficient  to  broach  falsehoods,  which  are  after¬ 
wards  innocendy  diffused  by  successive  relat- 
ers.”3 

Had  he  lived  to  read  what  Sir  John  Hawkins 
and  Mrs.  Piozzi  have  related  concerning  him¬ 
self,  how  much  would  he  have  found  his  obser¬ 
vation  illustrated.  He  was  indeed  so  much  im¬ 
pressed  with  the  prevalence  of  falsehood,  vol¬ 
untary  or  unintentional,  that  I  never  knew  any 

zThe  Literary  Magazine ,  1756,  p.  37. 


BOSWELL 


1778]  LIFE  OF 

person  who  upon  hearing  an  extraordinary  cir¬ 
cumstance  told,  discovered  more  of  the  incredulus 
odi.  He  would  say,  with  a  significant  look  and 
decisive  tone,  “It  is  not  so.  Do  not  tell  this 
again.551  He  inculcated  upon  all  his  friends  the 
importance  of  perpetual  vigilance  against  the 
slightest  degrees  of  falsehood ;  the  effect  of  which, 
as  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  observed  to  me,  has  been, 
that  all  who  were  of  his  school  are  distinguished 
for  a  love  of  truth  and  accuracy,  which  they 
would  not  have  possessed  in  the  same  degree, 
if  they  had  not  been  acquainted  with  Johnson. 

Talking  of  ghosts,  he  said,  “It  is  wonderful 
that  five  thousand  years  have  now  elapsed  since 
the  creation  of  the  world,  and  still  it  is  undecid¬ 
ed  whether  or  not  there  has  ever  been  an  in¬ 
stance  of  the  spirit  of  any  person  appearing  after 
death.  All  argument  is  against  it;  but  all  belief 
is  for  it.55 

He  said,  “John  Wesley’s  conversation  is  good, 
but  he  is  never  at  leisure.  He  is  always  obliged 
to  go  at  a  certain  hour.  This  is  very  disagreeable 
to  a  man  who  loves  to  fold  his  legs  and  have  out 
his  talk,  as  I  do.55 

On  Friday,  April  3,  I  dined  with  him  in  Lon¬ 
don,  in  a  company  where  were  present  several 
eminent  men,  whom  I  shall  not  name,  but  dis¬ 
tinguish  their  parts  in  the  conversation  by  dif¬ 
ferent  letters. 

F.  “I  have  been  looking  at  this  famous  an¬ 
tique  marble  dog  of  Mr.  Jennings,  valued  at  a 
thousand  guineas,  said  to  be  Alcibiades’s  dog.” 
Johnson.  “His  tail  then  must  be  docked.  That 
was  the  mark  of  Alcibiades’s  dog.55  E.  “A  thou¬ 
sand  guineas !  The  representation  of  no  animal 
whatever  is  worth  so  much.  At  this  rate  a  dead 
dog  would  indeed  be  better  than  a  living  lion.” 
Johnson.  “Sir,  it  is  not  the  worth  of  the  thing, 
but  of  the  skill  in  forming  it  which  is  so  highly 
estimated.  Every  thing  that  enlarges  the  sphere 
of  human  powers,  that  shews  man  he  can  do 
what  he  thought  he  could  not  do,  is  valuable. 
The  first  man  who  balanced  a  straw  upon  his 
nose;  Johnson,  who  rode  upon  three  horses  at  a 
time;  in  short,  all  such  men  deserved  the  ap¬ 
plause  of  mankind,  not  on  account  of  the  use  of 
what  they  did,  but  of  the  dexterity  which  they 
exhibited.55  Boswell.  “Yet  a  misapplication  of 
time  and  assiduity  is  not  to  be  encouraged.  Ad¬ 
dison,  in  one  of  his  Spectators ,  commends  the 

Hhe  following  plausible  but  overprudent  coun¬ 
sel  on  this  subject  is  given  by  an  Italian  writer, 
quoted  by  i<‘Rhedi  de  generatione  insectarum with  the 
epithet  of tc divini  poete” : 

Sempre  a  quel  ver  eft  ha  Jaccia  di  menzogna 

Dee  Vuom  chiuder  le  labbra  quanto  ei  puote ; 

Pero  che  senza  colpaja  vergogna. 


JOHNSON  373 

judgement  of  a  King,  who,  as  a  suitable  reward 
to  a  man  that  by  long  perseverance  had  attained 
to  the  art  of  throwing  a  barley-corn  through  the 
eye  of  a  needle,  gave  him  a  bushel  of  barley.55 
Johnson.  “He  must  have  been  a  King  of  Scot¬ 
land,  where  barley  is  scarce.”  F.  “One  of  the 
most  remarkable  antique  figures  of  an  animal  is 
the  boar  at  Florence.”  Johnson.  “The  first  boar 
that  is  well  made  in  marble,  should  be  preserved 
as  a  wonder.  When  men  arrive  at  a  facility  of 
making  boars  well,  then  the  workmanship  is  not 
of  such  value,  but  they  should  however  be  pre¬ 
served  as  examples,  and  as  a  greater  security  for 
the  restoration  of  the  art,  should  it  be  lost.” 

E.  “We  hear  prodigious  complaints  at  pres¬ 
ent  of  emigration.  I  am  convinced  that  emigra¬ 
tion  makes  a  country  more  populous.55  J.  “That 
sounds  very  much  like  a  paradox.55  E.  “Expor¬ 
tation  of  men,  like  exportation  of  all  other  com¬ 
modities,  makes  more  be  produced.55  Johnson. 
“But  there  would  be  more  people  were  there 
not  emigration,  provided  there  were  food  for 
more.55  E.  “No;  leave  a  few  breeders,  and  you’ll 
have  more  people  than  if  there  were  no  emigra¬ 
tion.”  Johnson.  “Nay,  Sir,  it  is  plain  there  will 
be  more  people,  if  there  are  more  breeders.  Thir¬ 
ty  cows  in  good  pasture  will  produce  more  calves 
than  ten  cows,  provided  they  have  good  bulls.” 
E.  “There  are  bulls  enough  in  Ireland.”  John¬ 
son.  (smiling,)  “So,  Sir,  I  should  think  from  your 
argument.”  Boswell.  “You  said,  exportation 
of  men,  like  exportation  of  other  commodities, 
makes  more  be  produced.  But  a  bounty  is  given 
to  encourage  the  exportation  of  corn,  and  no 
bounty  is  given  for  the  exportation  of  men; 
though,  indeed,  those  who  go,  gain  by  it.”  R. 
“But  the  bounty  on  the  exportation  of  corn  is 
paid  at  home.”  E.  “That’s  the  same  thing.” 
Johnson.  “No,  Sir.”  R.  “A  man  who  stays  at 
home,  gains  nothing  by  his  neighbours  emigrat¬ 
ing.”  Boswell.  “I  can  understand  that  emigra¬ 
tion  may  be  the  cause  that  more  people  may  be 
produced  in  a  country;  but  the  country  will  not 
therefore  be  the  more  populous;  for  the  people 
issue  from  it.  It  can  only  be  said  that  there  is  a 
flow  of  people.  It  is  an  encouragement  to  have 
children,  to  know  that  they  can  get  a  living  by 
emigration.”  R.  “Yes,  if  there  were  an  emigra¬ 
tion  of  children  under  six  years  of  age.  But  they 
don’t  emigrate  till  they  could  earn  their  liveli¬ 
hood  in  some  way  at  home.”  G.  “It  is  remark¬ 
able  that  the  most  unhealthy  countries,  where 
there  are  the  most  destructive  diseases,  such  as 
Egypt  and  Bengal,  are  the  most  populous.” 
Johnson.  “Countries  which  are  the  most  popu¬ 
lous  have  the  most  destructive  diseases.  That  is 


374 

the  true  state  of  the  proposition.”  C.  “Holland 
is  very  unhealthy,  yet  it  is  exceedingly  popu¬ 
lous.”  Johnson.  “I  know  not  that  Holland  is  un¬ 
healthy.  But  its  populousness  is  owing  to  an  in¬ 
flux  of  people  from  all  other  countries.  Disease 
cannot  be  the  cause  of  populousness,  for  it  not 
only  carries  off  a  great  proportion  of  the  people, 
but  those  who  are  left  are  weakened  and  unfit 
for  the  purposes  of  increase.” 

R.  “Mr.  E.,  I  don’t  mean  to  flatter,  but  when 
posterity  reads  one  of  your  speeches  in  Parlia¬ 
ment,  it  will  be  difficult  to  believe  that  you  took 
so  much  pains,  knowing  with  certainty  that  it 
could  produce  no  effect,  that  not  one  vote  would 
be  gained  by  it.”  E.  “Waiving  your  compliment 
to  me,  I  shall  say  in  general,  that  it  is  very  well 
worth  while  for  a  man  to  take  pains  to  speak  well 
in  Parliament.  A  man,  who  has  vanity,  speaks 
to  display  his  talents;  and  if  a  man  speaks  well, 
he  gradually  establishes  a  certain  reputation  and 
consequence  in  the  general  opinion,  which  soon¬ 
er  or  later  will  have  its  political  reward.  Besides, 
though  not  one  vote  is  gained,  a  good  speech 
has  its  effect.  Though  an  act  which  has  been  ab¬ 
ly  opposed  passes  into  a  law,  yet  in  its  progress 
it  is  modelled,  it  is  softened  in  such  a  manner, 
that  we  see  plainly  the  Minister  has  been  told, 
that  the  Members  attached  to  him  are  so  sensi¬ 
ble  of  its  injustice  or  absurdity  from  what  they 
have  heard,  that  it  must  be  altered.”  Johnson. 
“And,  Sir,  there  is  a  gratification  of  pride.  Though 
we  cannot  out-vote  them  we  will  out-argue  them. 
They  shall  not  do  wrong  without  its  being  shown 
both  to  themselves  and  to  the  world.”  E.  “The 
House  of  Commons  is  a  mixed  body.  (I  except 
the  Minority,  which  I  hold  to  be  pure,  [smiling,] 
but  I  take  the  whole  House.)  It  is  a  mass  by  no 
means  pure;  but  neither  is  it  wholly  corrupt, 
though  there  is  a  large  proportion  of  corruption 
in  it.  There  are  many  members  who  generally 
go  with  the  Minister,  who  will  not  go  all  lengths. 
There  are  many  honest  well-meaning  country 
gentlemen  who  are  in  parliament  only  to  keep 
up  the  consequence  of  their  families.  Upon  most 
of  these  a  good  speech  will  have  influence.” 
Johnson.  “We  are  all  more  or  less  governed  by 
interest.  But  interest  will  not  make  us  do  every 
thing.  In  a  case  which  admits  of  doubt,  we  try 
to  think  on  the  side  which  is  for  our  interest, 
and  generally  bring  ourselves  to  act  according¬ 
ly.  But  the  subject  must  admit  of  diversity  of 
colouring;  it  must  receive  a  colour  on  that  side. 
In  the  House  of  Commons  there  are  members 
enough  who  will  not  vote  what  is  grossly  unjust 
or  absurd.  No,  Sir,  there  must  always  be  right 
enough,  or  appearance  of  right,  to  keep  wrong 


[ 1 778 

in  countenance.”  Boswell.  “There  is  surely  al¬ 
ways  a  majority  in  parliament  who  have  places, 
or  who  want  to  have  them,  and  who  therefore 
will  be  generally  ready  to  support  government 
without  requiring  any  pretext.”  E.  “True,  Sir; 
that  majority  will  ahvays  follow 

Quo  clamor  vocat  et  turba  Javentium. 

Boswell.  “Well  now,  let  us  take  the  common 
phrase,  Placehunters.  I  thought  they  had  hunt¬ 
ed  without  regard  to  any  thing,  just  as  their 
huntsmen,  the  Minister,  leads,  looking  only  to 
the  prey.”1  J.  “But  taking  your  metaphor,  you 
know  that  in  hunting  there  are  few  so  desperate¬ 
ly  keen  as  to  follow  without  reserve.  Some  do  not 
choose  to  leap  ditches  and  hedges  and  risk  their 
necks,  or  gallop  over  steeps,  or  even  to  dirty 
themselves  in  bogs  and  mire.”  Boswell.  “I  am 
glad  there  are  some  good,  quiet,  moderate  po¬ 
litical  hunters.”  E.  “I  believe,  in  any  body  of 
men  in  England,  I  should  have  been  in  the  Mi¬ 
nority;  I  have  always  been  in  the  Minority.” 
P.  “The  House  of  Commons  resembles  a  private 
company.  How  seldom  is  any  man  convinced 
by  another’s  argument;  passion  and  pride  rise 
against  it.”  R.  “What  would  be  the  consequence, 
if  a  Minister,  sure  of  a  majority  in  the  House  of 
Commons,  should  resolve  that  there  should  be 
no  speaking  at  all  upon  his  side.”  E.  “He  must 
soon  go  out.  That  has  been  tried;  but  it  was 
found  it  would  not  do.  .  .  .” 

E.  “The  Irish  language  is  not  primitive;  it  is 
Teutonick,  a  mixture  of  the  northern  tongues: 
it  has  much  English  in  it.”  Johnson.  “It  may 
have  been  radically  Teutonick;  but  English  and 
High  Dutch  have  no  similarity  to  the  eye,  though 
radically  the  same.  Once,  when  looking  into  Low 
Dutch,  I  found,  in  a  whole  page,  only  one  word 
similar  to  English;  stroem ,  like  stream ,  and  it  sig¬ 
nified  tide”  E.  “I  remember  having  seen  a  Dutch 
Sonnet,  in  which  I  found  this  word,  roesnopies. 
Nobody  would  at  first  think  that  this  could  be 
English;  but,  when  we  enquire,  we  find  roes ,  rose, 
and  nopie,  knob;  so  we  have  rosebuds .” 

Johnson.  “I  have  been  reading  Thicknesse’s 
Travels ,  which  I  think  are  entertaining.”  Bos¬ 
well.  “What,  Sir,  a  good  book?”  Johnson.  “Yes, 
Sir,  to  read  once;  I  do  not  say  you  are  to  make 
a  study  of  it,  and  digest  it;  and  I  believe  it  to  be 

JLord  Bolingbroke,  who,  however  detestable  as 
a  metaphysician,  must  be  allowed  to  have  had  ad¬ 
mirable  talents  as  a  political  writer,  thus  describes 
the  House  of  Commons,  in  his  Letter  to  Sir  William 
Wyndham: — “You  know  the  nature  of  that  assem¬ 
bly;  they  grow,  like  hounds,  fond  of  the  man  who 
shews  them  game,  and  by  whose  halloo  they  are 
used  to  be  encouraged.” 


BOSWELL 


1778]  LIFE  OF 

a  true  book  in  his  intention.  All  travellers  gen¬ 
erally  mean  to  tell  truth;  though  Thicknesse  ob¬ 
serves,  upon  Smollet’s  account  of  his  alarming 
a  whole  town  in  France  by  firing  a  blunderbuss, 
and  frightening  a  French  nobleman  till  he  made 
him  tie  on  his  portmanteau,  that  he  would  be 
loth  to  say  Smollet  had  told  two  lies  in  one  page; 
but  he  had  found  the  only  town  in  France  where 
these  things  could  have  happened.  Travellers 
must  often  be  mistaken.  In  every  thing,  except 
where  mensuration  can  be  applied,  they  may 
honestly  differ.  There  has  been,  of  late,  a  strange 
turn  in  travellers  to  be  displeased.” 

E.  “From  the  experience  which  I  have  had, 
— and  I  have  had  a  great  deal, — I  have  learnt 
to  think  better  of  mankind.”  Johnson.  “From  my 
experience  I  have  found  them  worse  in  com¬ 
mercial  dealings,  more  disposed  to  cheat,  than 
I  had  any  notion  of;  but  more  disposed  to  do 
one  another  good  than  I  had  conceived.”  J. 
“Less  just  and  more  beneficent.”  Johnson.  “And 
really  it  is  wonderful,  considering  how  much  at¬ 
tention  is  necessary  for  men  to  take  care  of  them¬ 
selves,  and  ward  off  immediate  evils  which  press 
upon  them,  it  is  wonderful  how  much  they  do 
for  others.  As  it  is  said  of  the  greatest  liar,  that  he 
tells  more  truth  than  falsehood;  so  it  may  be 
said  of  the  worst  man,  that  he  does  more  good 
than  evil.”  Boswell.  “Perhaps  from  experience 
men  may  be  found  happier  than  we  suppose.” 
Johnson.  “No,  Sir;  the  more  we  enquire,  we 
shall  find  men  the  less  happy.”  P.  “As  to  think¬ 
ing  better  or  worse  of  mankind  from  experience, 
some  cunning  people  will  not  be  satisfied  unless 
they  have  put  men  to  the  test,  as  they  think. 
There  is  a  very  good  story  told  of  Sir  Godfrey 
Kneller,  in  his  character  of  a  Justice  of  the  peace. 
A  gentleman  brought  his  servant  before  him,  up¬ 
on  an  accusation  of  having  stolen  some  money 
from  him;  but  it  having  come  out  that  he  had 
laid  it  purposely  in  the  servant’s  way,  in  order 
to  try  his  honesty,  Sir  Godfrey  sent  the  master 
to  prison.”1  J ohnson.  “To  resist  temptation  once, 
is  not  a  sufficient  proof  of  honesty.  If  a  servant, 
indeed,  were  to  resist  the  continued  temptation 
of  silver  lying  in  a  window,  as  some  people  let  it 
lye,  when  he  is  sure  his  master  does  not  know 
how  much  there  is  of  it,  he  would  give  a  strong 
proof  of  honesty.  But  this  is  a  proof  to  which  you 
have  no  right  to  put  a  man.  You  know,  human¬ 
ly  speaking,  there  is  a  certain  degree  of  tempta- 
1Pope  thus  introduces  this  story: 

Faith  in  such  case  if  you  should  prosecute , 

I  think  Sir  Godfrey  should  decide  the  suit, 

Who  sent  the  thief  who  \that\  stole  the  cask  away , 
And  punish’d  him  that  put  it  in  his  way . 

Imitations  of  Horace ,  book  ii,  epist.  2. 


JOHNSON  375 

tion,  which  will  overcome  any  virtue.  Now,  in 
so  far  as  you  approach  temptation  to  a  man, 
you  do  him  an  injury;  and,  if  he  is  overcome, 
you  share  his  guilt.”  P.  “And,  when  once  over¬ 
come,  it  is  easier  for  him  to  be  got  the  better  of 
again.”  Boswell.  “Yes,  you  are  his  seducer; 
you  have  debauched  him.  I  have  known  a  man 
resolved  to  put  friendship  to  the  test,  by  asking 
a  friend  to  lend  him  money  merely  with  that 
view,  when  he  did  not  want  it.”  Johnson.  “That 
is  very  wrong,  Sir.  Your  friend  may  be  a  narrow 
man,  and  yet  have  many  good  qualities:  nar¬ 
rowness  may  be  his  only  fault.  Now  you  are  try¬ 
ing  his  general  character  as  a  friend,  by  one  par¬ 
ticular  singly,  in  which  he  happens  to  be  defec¬ 
tive,  when,  in  truth,  his  character  is  composed 
of  many  particulars.” 

E.  “I  understand  the  hogshead  of  claret,  which 
this  society  was  favoured  with  by  our  friend  the 
Dean,  is  nearly  out;  I  think  he  should  be  writ¬ 
ten  to,  to  send  another  of  the  same  kind.  Let  the 
request  be  made  with  a  happy  ambiguity  of  ex¬ 
pression,  so  that  we  may  have  the  chance  of  his 
sending  it  also  as  a  present.”  Johnson.  “I  am 
willing  to  offer  my  services  as  secretary  on  this 
occasion.”  P.  “As  many  as  are  for  Dr.  Johnson 
being  secretary  hold  up  your  hands. — Carried 
unanimously.”  Boswell.  “He  will  be  our  Dic¬ 
tator.”  Johnson.  “‘No,  the  company  is  to  dic¬ 
tate  to  me.  I  am  only  to  write  for  wine;  and  I  am 
quite  disinterested,  as  I  drink  none;  I  shall  not 
be  suspected  of  having  forged  the  application.  I 
am  no  more  than  humble  scribe .”  E.  “Then  you 
shall  ^scribe.”  Boswell.  “Very  well.  The  first 
play  of  words  to-day.”  J.  “No,  no;  the  bulls  in 
Ireland.”  Johnson.  “Were  I  your  Dictator  you 
should  have  no  wine.  It  would  be  my  business 
caver e  ne  quid  detrimenti  Respublica  caper et,  and  wine 
is  dangerous.  Rome  was  ruined  by  luxury,” 
(smiling.)  E.  “If  you  allow  no  wine  as  Dictator, 
you  shall  not  have  me  for  your  master  of  horse.” 

On  Saturday,  April  4,  I  drank  tea  with  John¬ 
son  at  Dr.  Taylor’s,  where  he  had  dined.  He  en¬ 
tertained  us  with  an  account  of  a  tragedy  writ¬ 
ten  by  a  Dr.  Kennedy,  (not  the  Lisbon  physi¬ 
cian.)  “The  catastrophe  of  it  (said  he,)  was,  that 
a  King,  who  was  jealous  of  his  Queen  with  his 
prime-minister,  castrated  himself.2  This  tragedy 

2The  reverse  of  the  story  of  Combabus ,  on  which 
Mr.  David  Hume  told  Lord  Macartney,  that  a 
friend  of  his  had  written  a  tragedy.  It  is,  however, 
possible  that  I  may  have  been  inaccurate  in  my 
perception  of  what  Dr.  Johnson  related,  and  that 
he  may  have  been  talking  of  the  same  ludicrous 
tragical  subject  that  Mr.  Hume  had  mentioned. 
[The  story  of  Combabus ,  which  was  originally  told  by 
Lucian,  may  be  found  in  Bayle’s  Dictionary . — M.] 


376  BOSWELL  [1778 


was  actually  shewn  about  in  manuscript  to  sev¬ 
eral  people,  and,  amongst  others,  to  Mr.  Fitz- 
herbert,  who  repeated  to  me  two  lines  of  the 
Prologue: 

Our  hero's  fate  we  have  but  gently  touch'd; 

The  jair  might  blame  us,  if  it  were  less  couch'd. 

It  is  hardly  to  be  believed  what  absurd  and  in¬ 
decent  images  men  will  introduce  into  their 
writings,  without  being  sensible  of  the  absurdity 
and  indecency.  I  remember  Lord  Orrery  told 
me,  that  there  was  a  pamphlet  written  against 
Sir  Robert  Walpole,  the  whole  of  which  was 
an  allegory  on  the  phallick  obscenity.  The 
Duchess  of  Buckingham  asked  Lord  Orrery 
who  this  person  was?  He  answered  he  did 
not  know.  She  said,  she  would  send  to  Mr. 
Pulteney,  who,  she  supposed,  could  inform  her. 
So  then,  to  prevent  her  from  making  herself 
ridiculous,  Lord  Orrery  sent  her  Grace  a  note, 
in  which  he  gave  her  to  understand  what  was 
meant.” 

He  was  very  silent  this  evening;  and  read  in  a 
variety  of  books:  suddenly  throwing  down  one, 
and  taking  up  another. 

He  talked  of  going  to  Streatham  that  night. 
Taylor.  “You’ll  be  robbed  if  you  do:  or  you 
must  shoot  a  highwayman.  Now  I  would  rather 
be  robbed  than  do  that;  I  would  not  shoot  a 
highwayman.”  Johnson.  “But  I  would  rather 
shoot  him  in  the  instant  when  he  is  attempting 
to  rob  me,  than  afterwards  swear  against  him  at 
the  Old-Bailey,  to  take  away  his  life,  after  he 
has  robbed  me.  I  am  surer  I  am  right  in  the  one 
case  than  in  the  other.  I  may  be  mistaken  as  to 
the  man,  when  I  swear:  I  cannot  be  mistaken,  if 
I  shoot  him  in  the  act.  Besides,  we  feel  less  reluc¬ 
tance  to  take  away  a  man’s  life,  when  we  are 
heated  by  the  injury,  than  to  do  it  at  a  distance 
of  time  by  an  oath,  after  we  have  cooled.”  Bos¬ 
well.  “So,  Sir,  you  would  rather  act  from  the 
motive  of  private  passion,  than  that  of  publick 
advantage.”  Johnson.  “Nay,  Sir,  when  I  shoot 
the  highwayman  I  act  from  both.”  Boswell. 
“Very  well,  very  well. — There  is  no  catching 
him.”  Johnson.  “At  the  same  time  one  does  not 
know  what  to  say.  For  perhaps  one  may,  a  year 
after,  hang  himself  from  uneasiness  for  having 

JThe  late  Duke  of  Montrose  was  generally  said 
to  have  been  uneasy  on  that  account;  but  I  can 
contradict  the  report  from  his  Grace’s  own  author¬ 
ity.  As  he  used  to  admit  me  to  very  easy  conversa¬ 
tion  with  him,  I  took  the  liberty  to  introduce  the 
subject.  His  Grace  told  me,  that  when  riding  one 
night  near  London,  he  was  attacked  by  two  high¬ 
waymen  on  horseback,  and  that  he  instantly  shot 
one  of  them,  upon  which  the  other  galloped  off; 


shot  a  man.1  Few  minds  are  fit  to  be  trusted  with 
so  great  a  thing.”  Boswell.  “Then,  Sir,  you 
would  not  shoot  him?”  Johnson.  “But  I  might 
be  vexed  afterwards  for  that  too.” 

Thrale’s  carriage  not  having  come  for  him,  as 
he  expected,  I  accompanied  him  some  part  of 
the  way  home  to  his  own  house.  I  told  him,  that 
I  had  talked  of  him  to  Mr.  Dunning  a  few  days 
before,  and  had  said,  that  in  his  company  we  did 
not  so  much  interchange  conversation,  as  listen 
to  him;  and  that  Dunning  observed,  upon  this, 
“One  is  always  willing  to  listen  to  Dr.  Johnson” : 
to  which  I  answered,  “That  is  a  great  deal  from 
you,  Sir.” — “Yes,  Sir,  (said  Johnson,)  a  great 
deal  indeed.  Here  is  a  man  willing  to  listen, 
to  whom  the  world  is  listening  all  the  rest  of 
the  year.”  Boswell.  “I  think,  Sir,  it  is  right  to 
tell  one  man  of  such  a  handsome  thing,  which 
has  been  said  of  him  by  another.  It  tends  to  in¬ 
crease  benevolence.”  Johnson.  “Undoubtedly 
it  is  right,  Sir.” 

On  Tuesday,  April  7,  I  breakfasted  with  him 
at  his  house.  He  said,  “nobody  was  content.”  I 
mentioned  to  him  a  respectable  person  in  Scot¬ 
land  whom  he  knew;  and  I  asserted,  that  I  real¬ 
ly  believed  he  was  always  con  tent.  Johnson.  “No, 
Sir,  he  is  not  content  with  the  present;  he  has  al¬ 
ways  some  new  scheme,  some  new  plantation, 
something  which  is  future.  You  know  he  was  not 
content  as  a  widower;  for  he  married  again.” 
Boswell.  “But  he  is  not  restless.”  Johnson.  “Sir, 
he  is  only  locally  at  rest.  A  chymist  is  locally  at 
rest;  but  his  mind  is  hard  at  work.  This  gentle¬ 
man  has  done  with  external  exertions.  It  is  too 
late  for  him  to  engage  in  distant  projects.”  Bos¬ 
well.  “He  seems  to  amuse  himself  quite  well;  to 
have  his  attention  fixed,  and  his  tranquillity  pre¬ 
served  by  very  small  matters.  I  have  tried  this; 
but  it  would  not  do  with  me.”  Johnson  (laugh¬ 
ing,)  “No,  Sir;  it  must  be  born  with  a  man  to  be 
contented  to  take  up  with  little  things.  Women 
have  a  great  advantage  that  they  may  take  up 
with  little  things,  without  disgracing  themselves: 
a  man  cannot,  except  with  fiddling.  Had  I  learnt 
to  fiddle,  I  should  have  done  nothing  else.”  Bos¬ 
well.  ‘  ‘Pray, Sir, did  you  ever  play  on  any  musical 
instrument?”  Johnson.  “No,  Sir.  I  once  bought 
me  a  flagelet;  but  I  never  made  out  a  tune.” 
Boswell.  “A  flagelet,  Sir! — so  small  an  instru- 


that  his  servant,  who  was  very  well  mounted,  pro¬ 
posed  to  pursue  him  and  take  him,  but  that  his 
Grace  said,  “No,  we  have  had  blood  enough:  I 
hope  the  man  may  live  to  repent.”  His  Grace, 
upon  my  presuming  to  put  the  question,  assured 
me,  that  his  mind  was  not  at  all  clouded  by  what 
he  had  thus  done  in  self-defence. 


1778]  LIFE  OF 

ment?1  I  should  have  liked  to  hear  you  play  on 
the  violoncello.  That  should  have  been  your  in¬ 
strument.55  Johnson.  “Sir,  I  might  as  well  have 
played  on  the  violoncello  as  another;  but  I  should 
have  done  nothing  else.  No,  Sir;  a  man  would 
never  undertake  great  things,  could  he  be  amus¬ 
ed  with  small.  I  once  tried  knotting.  Dempster’s 
sister  undertook  to  teach  me;  but  I  could  not 
learn  it.55  Boswell.“So,  Sir;  it  will  be  related  in 
pompous  narrative,  ‘Once  for  his  amusement  he 
tried  knotting;  nor  did  this  Hercules  disdain  the 
distaff.5  5  5  Johnson.  “Knitting  of  stockings  is  a 
good  amusement.  As  a  freeman  of  Aberdeen  I 
should  be  a  knitter  of  stockings.55  He  asked  me 
to  go  down  with  him  and  dine  at  Mr.  Thrale’s 
at  Streatham,  to  which  I  agreed.  I  had  lent  him 
An  Account  of  Scotland,  in  1702,  written  by  a  man 
of  various  enquiry,  an  English  chaplain  to  a  reg¬ 
iment  stationed  there.  Johnson.  “It  is  sad  stuff, 
Sir,  miserably  written,  as  books  in  general  then 
were.  There  is  now  an  elegance  of  style  univer¬ 
sally  diffused.  No  man  now  writes  so  ill  as  Mar¬ 
tin’s  Account  of  the  Hebrides  is  written.  A  man  could 
not  write  so  ill,  if  he  should  try.  Set  a  merchant’s 
clerk  now  to  write,  and  he’ll  do  better.” 

He  talked  to  me  with  serious  concern  of  a  cer¬ 
tain  female  friend’s  “laxity  of  narration,  and  in¬ 
attention  to  truth.” — “I  am  as  much  vexed  (said 
he,)  at  the  ease  with  which  she  hears  it  mention¬ 
ed  to  her,  as  at  the  thing  itself.  I  told  her,  ‘Ma¬ 
dam,  you  are  contented  to  hear  every  day  said 
to  you,  what  the  highest  of  mankind  have  died 
for,  rather  than  bear.5 — You  know,  Sir,  the  high¬ 
est  of  mankind  have  died  rather  than  bear  to  be 
told  they  had  uttered  a  falsehood.  Do  talk  to 
her  of  it:  I  am  weary.” 

Boswell.  “Was  not  Dr.  John  Campbell  a  very 
inaccurate  man  in  his  narrative,  Sir?  He  once 
told  me,  that  he  drank  thirteen  bottles  of  port  at 
a  sitting.”2  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  I  do  not  know 

xWhen  I  told  this  to  Miss  Seward,  she  smiled, 
and  repeated,  with  admirable  readiness,  from  Acis 
and  Galatea , 

Bring  me  a  hundred  reeds  of  ample  growth , 

To  make  a  pipe  for  my  capacious  mouth. 

2Lord  Macartney  observes  upon  this  passage,  “I 
have  heard  him  tell  many  things,  which,  though 
embellished  by  their  mode  of  narrative,  had  their 
foundation  in  truth;  but  I  never  remember  any 
thing  approaching  to  this.  If  he  had  written  it,  I 
should  have  supposed  some  wag  had  put  the  figure 
of  one  before  the  three.53 — I  am,  however,  abso¬ 
lutely  certain  that  Dr.  Campbell  told  me  it,  and  I 
gave  particular  attention  to  it,  being  myself  a  lover 
of  wine,  and  therefore  curious  to  hear  whatever  is 
remarkable  concerning  drinking.  There  can  be  no 
doubt  that  some  men  can  drink,  without  suffering 
any  injury,  such  a  quantity  as  to  others  appears  in¬ 
credible.  It  is  but  fair  to  add,  that  Dr.  Campbell 


JOHNSON  377 

that  Campbell  ever  lied  with  pen  and  ink;  but 
you  could  not  entirely  depend  on  any  thing  he 
told  you  in  conversation:  if  there  was  fact  mixed 
with  it.  However,  I  loved  Campbell:  he  was  a 
solid  orthodox  man:  he  had  a  reverence  for  re¬ 
ligion.  Though  defective  in  practice,  he  was  re¬ 
ligious  in  principle;  and  he  did  nothing  gross¬ 
ly  wrong  that  I  have  heard.” 

I  told  him,  that  I  had  been  present  the  day 
before,  when  Mrs.  Montagu,  the  literary  lady, 
sat  to  Miss  Reynolds  for  her  picture;  and  that 
she  said,  “she  had  bound  up  Mr.  Gibbon’s  His¬ 
tory  without  the  last  two  offensive  chapters;  for 
that  she  thought  the  book  so  far  good,  as  it  gave, 
in  an  elegant  manner,  the  substance  of  the  bad 
writers  medii  cevi ,  which  the  late  Lord  Lyttelton 
advised  her  to  read.”  Johnson.  “Sir,  she  has  not 
read  them:  she  shews  none  of  this  impetuosity 
to  me:  she  does  not  know  Greek,  and,  I  fancy, 
knows  little  Latin.  She  is  willing  you  should 
think  she  knows  them;  but  she  does  not  say  she 
does.”  Boswell.  “Mr.  Harris,  who  was  present, 
agreed  with  her.”  Johnson.  “Harris  was  laugh¬ 
ing  at  her,  Sir.  Harris  is  a  sound  sullen  scholar; 
he  does  not  like  interlopers.  Harris,  however,  is 
a  prig,  and  a  bad  prig.3  I  looked  into  his  book, 
and  thought  he  did  not  understand  his  own  sys¬ 
tem.”  Boswell.  “He  says  plain  things  in  a  for¬ 
mal  and  abstract  way,  to  be  sure:  but  his  meth¬ 
od  is  good:  for  to  have  clear  notions  upon  any 
subject,  we  must  have  recourse  to  analytick  ar- 
rangement.”JoHNSON.  “Sir,  it  is  what  every  body 
does,  whether  they  will  or  no.  But  sometimes 
things  may  be  made  darker  by  definition.  I  see 
a  cow ,  I  define  her,  Animal  quadrupes  ruminans 
cornutum.  But  a  goat  ruminates,  and  a  cow 
may  have  no  horns.  Cow  is  plainer.”  Boswell. 
“I  think  Dr.  Franklin’s  definition  of  Man  a 
good  one — ‘A  tool-making  animal.5  ”  Johnson. 
“But  many  a  man  never  made  a  tool;  and  sup¬ 
pose  a  man  without  arms,  he  could  not  make 
a  tool.” 


told  me,  he  took  a  very  long  time  to  this  great  po¬ 
tation;  and  I  have  heard  Dr.  Johnson  say,  “Sir,  if 

a  man  drinks  very  slowly,  and  lets  one  glass  evapo¬ 
rate  before  he  takes  another,  I  know  not  how  long 
he  may  drink.”  Dr.  Campbell  mentioned  a  Colonel 
of  Militia  who  sat  with  him  all  the  time,  and  drank 
equally. 

3What  my  friend  meant  by  these  words  concern¬ 

ing  the  amiable  philosopher  of  Salisbury,  I  am  at 

a  loss  to  understand.  A  friend  suggests,  that  John¬ 
son  thought  his  manner  as  a  writer  affected,  while  at 
the  same  time  the  matter  did  not  compensate  for 
that  fault.  In  short,  that  he  meant  to  make  a  re¬ 
mark  quite  different  from  that  which  a  celebrated 
gentleman  made  on  a  very  eminent  physician:  “He 
is  a  coxcomb,  but  a  satisfactory  coxcomb .” 


378  BOSWELL  [1778 


Talking  of  drinking  wine,  he  said,  “I  did  not 
leave  off  wine,  because  I  could  not  bear  it;  I 
have  drunk  three  bottles  of  port  without  being 
the  worse  for  it.  U niversity  College  has  witnessed 
this.”  Boswell.  “Why  then,  Sir,  did  you  leave 
it  off?”  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  because  it  is  so 
much  better  for  a  man  to  be  sure  that  he  is  never 
to  be  intoxicated,  never  to  lose  the  power  over 
himself.  I  shall  not  begin  to  drink  wine  again, 
till  I  grow  old,  and  want  it.”  Boswell.  “I  think, 
Sir,  you  once  said  to  me,  that  not  to  drink  wine 
was  a  great  deduction  from  life.”  Johnson.  “It 
is  a  diminution  of  pleasure,  to  be  sure;  but  I  do 
not  say  a  diminution  of  happiness.  There  is  more 
happiness  in  being  rational.”  Boswell.  “But  if 
we  could  have  pleasure  always,  should  not  we 
be  happy?  The  greatest  part  of  men  would  com¬ 
pound  for  pleasure.”  Johnson.  “Supposing  we 
could  have  pleasure  always,  an  intellectual  man 
would  not  compound  for  it.  The  greatest  part  of 
men  would  compound,  because  the  greatest  part 
of  men  are  gross.”  Boswell.  “I  allow  there  may 
be  greater  pleasure  than  from  wine.  I  have  had 
more  pleasure  from  your  conversation,  I  have 
indeed;  I  assure  you  I  have.”  Johnson.  “When 
we  talk  of  pleasure,  we  mean  sensual  pleasure. 
When  a  man  says,  he  had  pleasure  with  a  wom¬ 
an,  he  does  not  mean  conversation,  but  some¬ 
thing  of  a  very  different  nature.  Philosophers 
tell  you,  that  pleasure  is  contrary  to  happiness. 
Gross  men  prefer  animal  pleasure.  So  there  are 
men  who  have  preferred  living  among  savages. 
Now  what  a  wretch  must  he  be,  who  is  content 
with  such  conversation  as  can  be  had  among 
savages!  You  may  remember  an  officer  at  Fort 
Augustus,  who  had  served  in  America,  told  us 
of  a  woman  whom  they  were  obliged  to  bind ,  in 
order  to  get  her  back  from  savage  life.”  Boswell. 
“She  must  have  been  an  animal,  a  beast.”  John¬ 
son.  “Sir,  she  was  a  speaking  cat.” 

I  mentioned  to  him  that  I  had  become  very 
weary  in  a  company  where  I  heard  not  a  single 
intellectual  sentence,  except  that  “a  man  who 
had  been  settled  ten  years  in  Minorca  was  be¬ 
come  a  much  inferiour  man  to  what  he  was  in 
London,  because  a  man’s  mind  grows  narrow 
in  a  narrow  place.”  Johnson.  “A  man’s  mind 
grows  narrow  in  a  narrow  place,  whose  mind  is 
enlarged  only  because  he  has  lived  in  a  large 
place:  but  what  is  got  by  books  and  thinking  is 
preserved  in  a  narrow  place  as  well  as  in  a  large 
place.  A  man  cannot  know  modes  of  life  as  well 
in  Minorca  as  in  London;  but  he  may  study 
mathematicksas  well  in  Minorca.”  Boswell.  “I 
don’t  know,  Sir:  if  you  had  remained  ten  years 
in  the  Isle  of  Col,  you  would  not  have  been  the 


man  that  you  now  are.”  Johnson.  “Yes,  Sir,  if  I 
had  been  there  from  fifteen  to  twenty-five;  but 
not  if  from  twenty-five  to  thirty-five.”  Boswell. 
“I  own,  Sir,  the  spirits  which  I  have  in  London 
make  me  do  every  thing  with  more  readiness 
and  vigour.  I  can  talk  twice  as  much  in  London 
as  any  where  else.” 

Of  Goldsmith  he  said,  “He  was  not  an  agree¬ 
able  companion,  for  he  talked  always  for  fame. 
A  man  who  does  so  never  can  be  pleasing.  The 
man  who  talks  to  unburthen  his  mind  is  the  man 
to  delight  you.  An  eminent  friend  of  ours  is  not  so 
agreeable  as  the  variety  of  his  knowledge  would 
otherwise  make  him,  because  he  talks  partly 
from  ostentation.” 

Soon  after  our  arrival  at  Thrale’s,  I  heard  one 
of  the  maids  calling  eagerly  on  another,  to  go  to 
Dr.  Johnson.  I  wondered  what  this  could  mean. 
I  afterwards  learnt,  that  it  was  to  give  her  a 
Bible,  which  he  had  brought  from  London  as  a 
present  to  her. 

He  was  for  a  considerable  time  occupied  in 
reading  MemoiresdeFontenelle,  leaning  and  swing¬ 
ing  upon  the  low  gate  into  the  court,  without 
his  hat. 

I  looked  into  Lord  Karnes’s  Sketches  of  the  His - 
tory  of  Man;  and  mentioned  to  Dr.  Johnson  his 
censure  of  Charles  the  Fifth,  for  celebrating  his 
funeral  obsequies  in  his  lifetime,  which,  I  told 
him,  I  had  been  used  to  think  a  solemn  and  af¬ 
fecting  act.  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  a  man  may  dis¬ 
pose  his  mind  to  think  so  of  that  act  of  Charles; 
but  it  is  so  liable  to  ridicule,  that  if  one  man  out 
of  ten  thousand  laughs  at  it,  he’ll  make  the  oth¬ 
er  nine  thousand  nine  hundred  and  ninety-nine 
laugh  too.”  I  could  not  agree  with  him  in  this. 

Sir  John  Pringle  had  expressed  a  wish  that  I 
would  ask  Dr.  Johnson’s  opinion  what  were  the 
best  English  sermons  for  style.  I  took  an  oppor¬ 
tunity  to-day  of  mentioning  several  to  him. — 
“ Atterbury ”  Johnson.  “Yes,  Sir,  one  of  the  best.” 
Boswell. “  Tillotson?”  Johnson.  “Why,  not  now. 
1  should  not  advise  a  preacher  at  this  day  to  im¬ 
itate  Tillotson’s  style:  though  I  don’t  know;  I 
should  be  cautious  of  objecting  to  what  has  been 
applauded  by  so  many  suffrages. — South  is  one 
of  the  best,  if  you  except  his  peculiarities,  and 
his  violence,  and  sometimes  coarseness  of  lan¬ 
guage. — Seed  has  a  very  fine  style;  but  he  is  not 
very  theological. — forties  sermons  are  very  ele¬ 
gant. — Sherlock’s  style  too  is  very  elegant,  though 
he  has  not  made  it  his  principal  study. — And 
you  may  add  Smallridge.  All  the  latter  preachers 
have  a  good  style.  Indeed,  nobody  now  talks 
much  of  style:  every  body  composes  pretty  well. 
There  are  no  such  unharmonious  periods  as  there 


1778]  LIFE  OF 

were  a  hundred  years  ago.  I  should  recommend 
Dr.  Clarke's  sermons,  were  he  orthodox.  How¬ 
ever,  it  is  very  well  known  where  he  was  not  or¬ 
thodox,  which  was  upon  the  doctrine  of  the  Trin¬ 
ity,  as  to  which  he  is  a  condemned  here  tick;  so 
one  is  aware  of  it.”  Boswell.  “I  like  Ogden’s 
Sermons  on  Prayer  very  much,  both  for  neatness 
of  style  and  subtilty  of  reasoning.”  Johnson.  ccI 
should  like  to  read  all  that  Ogden  has  written.” 
Boswell.  “What  I  wish  to  know  is,  what  ser¬ 
mons  afford  the  best  specimen  of  English  pulpit 
eloquence.”  Johnson.  “We  have  no  sermons  ad¬ 
dressed  to  the  passions  that  are  good  for  any 
thing;  if  you  mean  that  kind  of  eloquence.”  A 
Clergyman:  (whose  name  I  do  not  recollect.) 
“Were  not  Dodd’s  sermons  addressed  to  the  pas¬ 
sions?”  Johnson.  “They  were  nothing,  Sir,  be 
they  addressed  to  what  they  may.” 

At  dinner,  Mrs.  Thrale  expressed  a  wish  to  go 
and  see  Scotland.  Johnson.  “Seeing  Scotland, 
Madam,  is  only  seeing  a  worse  England.  It  is 
seeing  the  flower  gradually  fade  away  to  the 
naked  stalk.  Seeing  the  Hebrides,  indeed,  is  see¬ 
ing  quite  a  different  scene.” 

Our  poor  friend,  Mr.  Thomas  Davies,  was 
soon  to  have  a  benefit  at  Drury-lane  theatre,  as 
some  relief  to  his  unfortunate  circumstances.  We 
were  all  warmly  interested  for  his  success,  and 
had  contributed  to  it.  However,  we  thought  there 
was  no  harm  in  having  our  joke,  when  he  could 
not  be  hurt  by  it.  I  proposed  that  he  should  be 
brought  on  to  speak  a  Prologue  upon  the  occa¬ 
sion;  and  I  began  to  mutter  fragments  of  what  it 
might  be:  as,  that  when  now  grown  old>  he  was 
obliged  to  cry,  “Poor  Tom’s  a-cold ”; — that  he 
owned  he  had  been  driven  from  the  stage  by  a 
Churchill,  but  that  this  was  no  disgrace,  for  a 
Churchill  had  beat  the  French; — that  he  had 
been  satyrised  as  “mouthing  a  sentence  as  curs 
mouth  a  bone,”  but  he  was  now  glad  of  a  bone 
to  pick. — “Nay,  (said  Johnson,)  I  would  have 
him  to  say, 

Mad  Tom  is  come  to  see  the  world  again." 

He  and  I  returned  to  town  in  the  evening. 
Upon  the  road,  I  endeavoured  to  maintain,  in 
argument,  that  a  landed  gentleman  is  not  under 
any  obligation  to  reside  upon  his  estate ;  and  that 
by  living  in  London  he  does  no  injury  to  his 
country.  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  he  does  no  injury 
to  his  country  in  general,  because  the  money 
which  he  draws  from  it  gets  back  again  in  circu¬ 
lation;  but  to  his  particular  district,  his  particu¬ 
lar  parish,  he  does  an  injury.  All  that  he  has  to 
give  away  is  not  given  to  those  who  have  the 
first  claim  to  it.  And  though  I  have  said  that  the 


JOHNSON  379 

money  circulates  back,  it  is  a  long  time  before 
that  happens.  Then,  Sir,  a  man  of  family  and 
estate  ought  to  consider  himself  as  having  the 
charge  of  a  district,  over  which  he  is  to  diffuse 
civility  and  happiness.” 

Next  day  I  found  him  at  home  in  the  morn¬ 
ing.  He  praised  Delany’s  Observations  on  Swift; 
said  that  his  book  and  Lord  Orrery’s  might  both 
be  true,  though  one  viewed  Swift  more,  and  the 
other  less  favourably;  and  that,  between  both, 
we  might  have  a  complete  notion  of  Swift. 

Talking  of  a  man’s  resolving  to  deny  himself 
the  use  of  wine,  from  moral  and  religious  con¬ 
siderations,  he  said,  “He  must  not  doubt  about 
it.  When  one  doubts  as  to  pleasure,  we  know 
what  will  be  the  conclusion.  I  now  no  more  think 
of  drinking  wine,  than  a  horse  does.  The  wine 
upon  the  table  is  no  more  for  me,  than  for  the 
dog  that  is  under  the  table.” 

On  Thursday,  April  9,  I  dined  with  him  at 
Sir  Joshua  Reynolds’s,  with  the  Bishop  of  St. 
Asaph,  (Dr.  Shipley,)  Mr.  Allan  Ramsay,  Mr. 
Gibbon,  Mr.  Cambridge,  and  Mr.  Langton.  Mr. 
Ramsay  had  lately  returned  from  Italy,  and  en¬ 
tertained  us  with  his  observations  upon  Horace’s 
villa,  which  he  had  examined  with  great  care.  I 
relished  this  much,  as  it  brought  fresh  into  my 
mind  what  I  had  viewed  with  great  pleasure 
thirteen  years  before.  The  Bishop,  Dr.  Johnson, 
and  Mr.  Cambridge,  joined  with  Mr.  Ramsay, 
in  recollecting  the  various  lines  in  Horace  relat¬ 
ing  to  the  subject. 

Horace’s  journey  to  Brundusium  being  men¬ 
tioned,  Johnson  observed,  that  the  brook  which 
he  describes  is  to  be  seen  now,  exactly  as  at  that 
time,  and  that  he  had  often  wondered  how  it 
happened,  that  small  brooks,  such  as  this,  kept  the 
same  situation  for  ages,  notwithstanding  earth¬ 
quakes,  by  which  even  mountains  have  been 
changed,  and  agriculture,  which  produces  such 
a  variation  upon  the  surface  of  the  earth.  Cam¬ 
bridge.  “A  Spanish  writer  has  this  thought  in  a 
poetical  conceit.  After  observing  that  most  of 
the  solid  structures  of  Rome  are  totally  perished, 
while  the  Tiber  remains  the  same,  he  adds, 

Lo  que  era  Firme  huio  solamente , 

Lo  Fugitivo  permanece y  dura." 

Johnson.  “Sir,  that  is  taken  from  Janus  Vitalis: 

- immota  labescunt; 

Et  qua  perpetuo  sunt  agitata  manent." 

The  Bishop  said,  it  appeared  from  Horace’s 
writings  that  he  was  a  cheerful  contented  man. 
Johnson.  “We  have  no  reason  to  believe  that, 
my  Lord.  Are  we  to  think  Pope  was  happy,  be- 


380  BOSWELL  [1778 


cause  he  says  so  in  his  writings?  We  see  in  his 
writings  what  he  wished  the  state  of  his  mind  to 
appear.  Dr.  Young,  who  pined  for  preferment, 
talks  with  contempt  of  it  in  his  writings,  and  af¬ 
fects  to  despise  every  thing  that  he  did  not  de¬ 
spise.”  Bishop  of  St.  Asaph.  “He  was  like  other 
chaplains,  looking  for  vacancies:  but  that  is  not 
peculiar  to  the  clergy.  I  remember  when  I  was 
with  the  army,  after  the  battle  of  Lafeldt,  the 
officers  seriously  grumbled  that  no  general  was 
killed.”  Cambridge.  “We  may  believe  Horace 
more  when  he  says, 

Roma  Tibur  amem ,  ventosus  Tibure  Romam; 
than  when  he  boasts  of  his  consistency: 

Me  cons  tare  mihi  sets,  et  decedere  tristem , 

Quandocunque  trahunt  invisa  negotia  Romam” 

Boswell.  “How  hard  is  it  that  man  can  never 
be  at  rest.”  Ramsay.  “It  is  not  in  his  nature  to  be 
at  rest.  When  he  is  at  rest,  he  is  in  the  worst  state 
that  he  can  be  in;  for  he  has  nothing  to  agitate 
him.  He  is  then  like  the  man  in  the  Irish  song, 

There  liv’d  a  young  man  in  Ballinacrazy. 

Who  wanted  a  wife  for  to  make  him  unaisy” 

Goldsmth  being  mentioned,  Johnson  observ¬ 
ed,  that  it  was  long  before  his  merit  came  to  be 
acknowledged.  That  he  once  complained  to  him, 
in  ludicrous  terms  of  distress,  “Whenever  I  write 
any  thing,  the  publick  make  a  point  to  know  noth¬ 
ing  about  it”:  but  that  his  Traveller  brought  him 
into  high  reputation.  Langton.  “There  is  not 
one  bad  line  in  that  poem;  not  one  of  Dryden’s 
careless  verses.”  Sir  Joshua.  “I  was  glad  to  hear 
Charles  Fox  say,  it  was  one  of  the  finest  poems 
in  the  English  language.”  Langton.  “Why  was 
you  glad?  You  surely  had  no  doubt  of  this  be¬ 
fore.”  Johnson.  “No;  the  merit  of  The  Traveller 
is  so  well  established,  that  Mr.  Fox’s  praise  can¬ 
not  augment  it,  nor  his  censure  diminish  it.”  Sir 
Joshua.  “But  his  friends  may  suspect  they  had 
too  great  a  partiality  for  him.”  Johnson.  “Nay, 
Sir,  the  partiality  of  his  friends  was  always  against 
him.  It  was  with  difficulty  we  could  give  him  a 
hearing.  Goldsmith  had  no  settled  notions  upon 
any  subject;  so  he  talked  always  at  random.  It 
seemed  to  be  his  intention  to  blurt  out  whatever 
was  in  his  mind,  and  see  what  would  become  of 
it.  He  was  angry  too,  when  catched  in  an  ab¬ 
surdity;  but  it  did  not  prevent  him  from  falling 
into  another  the  next  minute.  I  remember  Cha- 
mier,  after  talking  with  him  for  some  time,  said, 
‘Well,  I  do  believe  he  wrote  this  poem  himself: 
and,  let  me  tell  you,  that  is  believing  a  great 
deal.’  Chamier  once  asked  him,  what  he  meant 


by  slow ,  the  last  word  in  the  first  line  of  The 
Traveller , 

Remote ,  unfriended ,  melancholy ,  slow . 

Did  he  mean  tardiness  of  locomotion?  Goldsmith, 
who  would  say  something  without  considera¬ 
tion,  answered,  ‘Yes.’  I  was  sitting  by,  and  said, 
‘No,  Sir;  you  do  not  mean  tardiness  of  locomo¬ 
tion;  you  mean,  that  sluggishness  of  mind  which 
comes  upon  a  man  in  solitude.  ’  Chamier  believed 
then  that  I  had  written  the  line  as  much  as  if 
he  had  seen  me  write  it.  Goldsmith,  however, 
was  a  man,  who,  whatever  he  wrote,  did  it  bet¬ 
ter  than  any  other  man  could  do.  He  deserved  a 
place  in  Westminster-Abbey,  and  every  year  he 
lived,  would  have  deserved  it  better.  He  had,  in¬ 
deed,  been  at  no  pains  to  fill  his  mind  with 
knowledge.  He  transplanted  it  from  one  place  to 
another;  and  it  did  not  settle  in  his  mind;  so  he 
could  not  tell  what  was  in  his  own  books.” 

We  talked  of  living  in  the  country.  Johnson. 
“No  wise  man  will  go  to  live  in  the  country,  un¬ 
less  he  has  something  to  do  which  can  be  better 
done  in  the  country.  For  instance:  if  he  is  to  shut 
himself  up  for  a  year  to  study  a  science,  it  is  bet¬ 
ter  to  look  out  to  the  fields,  than  to  an  opposite 
wall.  Then,  if  a  man  walks  out  in  the  country, 
there  is  nobody  to  keep  him  from  walking  in 
again:  but  if  a  man  walks  out  in  London,  he  is 
not  sure  when  he  shall  walk  in  again.  A  great 
city  is,  to  be  sure,  the  school  for  studying  life; 
and  ‘The  proper  study  of  mankind  is  man,’  as 
Pope  observes.”  Boswell.  “I  fancy  London  is 
the  best  place  for  society;  though  I  have  heard 
that  the  very  first  society  of  Paris  is  still  beyond 
any  thing  that  we  have  here.”  Johnson.  “Sir,  I 
question  if  in  Paris  such  a  company  as  is  sitting 
round  this  table  could  be  got  together  in  less 
than  half  a  year.  They  talk  in  France  of  the  fe¬ 
licity  of  men  and  women  living  together:  the 
truth  is,  that  there  the  men  are  not  higher  than 
the  women,  they  know  no  more  than  the  women 
do,  and  they  are  not  held  down  in  their  conver¬ 
sation  by  the  presence  of  women.”  Ramsay.  “Lit¬ 
erature  is  upon  the  growth,  it  is  in  its  spring  in 
France.  Here  it  is  rather  passee .”  Johnson.  “Lit¬ 
erature  was  in  France  long  before  we  had  it. 
Paris  was  the  second  city  for  the  revival  of  let¬ 
ters:  Italy  had  it  first,  to  be  sure.  What  have  we 
done  for  literature,  equal  to  what  was  done  by 
the  Stephani  and  others  in  France?  Our  litera¬ 
ture  came  to  us  through  France.  Caxton  printed 
only  two  books,  Chaucer  and  Gower,  that  were 
not  translations  from  the  French;  and  Chaucer, 
we  know,  took  much  from  the  Italians.  No,  Sir, 
if  literature  be  in  its  spring  in  France,  it  is  a  sec- 


1778]  LIFE  OF 

ond  spring;  it  is  after  a  winter.  We  are  now  be¬ 
fore  the  French  in  literature;  but  we  had  it  long 
after  them.  In  England,  any  man  who  wears  a 
sword  and  a  powdered  wig  is  ashamed  to  be  il¬ 
literate.  I  believe  it  is  not  so  in  France.  Yet  there 
is,  probably,  a  great  deal  of  learning  in  France, 
because  they  have  such  a  number  of  religious 
establishments;  so  many  men  who  have  nothing 
else  to  do  but  to  study.  I  do  not  know  this;  but 
I  take  it  upon  the  common  principles  of  chance. 
Where  there  are  many  shooters,  some  will 
hit/3 

We  talked  of  old  age.  Johnson  (now  in  his 
seventieth  year,)  said,  “It  is  a  man’s  own  fault, 
it  is  from  want  of  use,  if  his  mind  grows  torpid  in 
old  age.33  The  Bishop  asked,  if  an  old  man  does 
not  lose  faster  than  he  gets.  Johnson.  “I  think 
not,  my  Lord,  if  he  exerts  himself.”  One  of  the 
company  rashly  observed,  that  he  thought  it  was 
happy  for  an  old  man  that  insensibility  comes 
upon  him.  Johnson,  (with  a  noble  elevation  and 
disdain,)  “No,  Sir,  I  should  never  be  happy  by 
being  less  rational.”  Bishop  of  St.  Asaph.  “Your 
wish  then,  Sir,  is  ynpaaKe iv  Si daaicofxevos.”  John¬ 
son.  “Yes,  my  Lord.” 

His  Lordship  mentioned  a  charitable  estab¬ 
lishment  in  Wales,  where  people  were  main¬ 
tained,  and  supplied  with  every  thing,  upon  the 
condition  of  their  contributing  the  weekly  pro¬ 
duce  of  their  labour;  and  he  said,  they  grew  quite 
torpid  for  want  of  property.  Johnson.  “They 
have  no  object  for  hope.  Their  condition  cannot 
be  better.  It  is  rowing  without  a  port.” 

One  of  the  company  asked  him  the  meaning 
of  the  expression  in  Juvenal,  unius  lacerta.  “I 
think  it  clear  enough;  as  much  ground  as  one 
may  have  a  chance  to  find  a  lizard  upon.” 

Commentators  have  differed  as  to  the  exact 
meaning  of  the  expression  by  which  the  Poet  in¬ 
tended  to  enforce  the  sentiment  contained  in  the 
passage  where  these  words  occur.  It  is  enough 
that  they  mean  to  denote  even  a  very  small  pos¬ 
session,  provided  it  be  a  man’s  own: 

Est  aliquid  quocunque  loco  quocunque  recessu , 

Unius  sese  dominumfecisse  lacertce. 

This  season  there  was  a  whimsical  fashion  in 
the  newspapers  of  applying  Shakspeare’s  words 
to  describe  living  persons  well  known  in  the 
world;  which  was  done  under  the  title  of  Modern 
Characters  from  Shakspeare ;  many  of  which  were 
admirably  adapted.  The  fancy  took  so  much, 
that  they  were  afterwards  collected  into  a  pam¬ 
phlet.  Somebody  said  to  Johnson,  across  the  ta¬ 
ble,  that  he  had  not  been  in  those  characters. 
“Yes  (said  he,)  I  have.  I  should  have  been  sorry 


JOHNSON  381 

to  be  left  out.”  He  then  repeated  what  had  been 
applied  to  him, 

I  must  borrow  Garagantua’s  mouth . 

Miss  Reynolds  not  perceiving  at  once  the  mean¬ 
ing  of  this,  he  was  obliged  to  explain  it  to  her, 
which  had  something  of  an  awkward  and  ludi¬ 
crous  effect.  “Why,  Madam,  it  has  a  reference 
to  me,  as  using  big  words,  which  require  the 
mouth  of  a  giant  to  pronounce  them.  Garagan- 
tua  is  the  name  of  a  giant  in  Rabelais .”  Boswell. 
“But,  Sir,  there  is  another  amongst  them  for  you: 

He  would  not fatter  Neptune  for  his  trident , 

Or  Jove  for  his  power  to  thunder .” 

Johnson.  “There  is  nothing  marked  in  that.  No, 
Sir,  Garagantua  is  the  best.”  Notwithstanding 
this  ease  and  good  humour,  when  I,  a  little  while 
afterwards,  repeated  his  sarcasm  on  Kenrick,1 
which  was  received  with  applause,  he  asked, 
“  Who  said  that?”  and  on  my  suddenly  answer¬ 
ing,  Garagantua ,  he  looked  serious,  which  was  a 
sufficient  indication  that  he  did  not  wish  it  to  be 
kept  up. 

When  we  went  to  the  drawing-room  there  was 
a  rich  assemblage.  Besides  the  company  who  had 
been  at  dinner,  there  were  Mr.  Garrick,  Mr.  Har¬ 
ris  of  Salisbury,  Dr.  Percy,  Dr.  Burney,  Honoura¬ 
ble  Mrs.  Gholmondeley,  Miss  Hannah  More, 
&c.  &c. 

After  wandering  about  in  a  kind  of  pleasing 
distraction  for  some  time,  I  got  into  a  corner, 
with  Johnson,  Garrick,  and  Harris.  Garrick. 
(to  Harris,)  “Pray,  Sir,  have  you  read  Potter’s 
JEschylusV ’  Harris.  “Yes;  and  think  it  pretty.” 
Garrick,  (to  Johnson,)  “And  what  think  you, 
Sir,  of  it?”  Johnson.  “I  thought  what  I  read  of 
it  verbiage:  but  upon  Mr.  Harris’s  recommenda¬ 
tion,  I  will  read  a  play.  (To  Mr.  Harris,)  Don’t 
prescribe  two.”  Mr.  Harris  suggested  one,  I  do 
not  remember  which.  Johnson.  “We  must  try 
its  effect  as  an  English  poem;  that  is  the  way  to 
judge  of  the  merit  of  a  translation.  Translations 
are,  in  general,  for  people  who  cannot  read  the 
original.”  I  mentioned  the  vulgar  saying,  that 
Pope’s  Homer  was  not  a  good  representation  of 
the  original.  Johnson.  “Sir,  it  is  the  greatest 
work  of  the  kind  that  has  ever  been  produced.” 
Boswell.  “The  truth  is,  it  is  impossible  perfect¬ 
ly  to  translate  poetry.  In  a  different  language  it 
may  be  the  same  tune,  but  it  has  not  the  same 
tone.  Homer  plays  it  on  a  bassoon;  Pope  on  a 
flagelet.”  Harris.  “I  think  Heroick  poetry  is 
best  in  blank  verse;  yet  it  appears  that  rhyme  is 
essential  to  English  poetry,  from  our  deficiency 
^ee  p.  142. 


382 

in  metrical  quantities.  In  my  opinion,  the  chief 
excellence  of  our  language  is  numerous  prose.” 
Johnson.  “Sir  WilliamTemple  was  the  first  writ¬ 
er  who  gave  cadence  to  English  prose.  Before  his 
time  they  were  careless  of  arrangement,  and  did 
not  mind  whether  a  sentence  ended  with  an  im¬ 
portant  word  or  an  insignificant  word,  or  with 
what  part  of  speech  it  was  concluded.”  Mr. 
Langton,  who  now  had  joined  us,  commended 
Clarendon.  Johnson.  “He  is  objected  to  for  his 
parentheses,  his  involved  clauses,  and  his  want 
of  harmony.  But  he  is  supported  by  his  matter. 
It  is,  indeed,  owing  to  a  plethory  of  matter  that 
his  style  is  so  faulty.  Every  substance ,  (smiling  to 
Mr.  Harris,)  has  so  many  accidents. — To  be  dis¬ 
tinct,  we  must  talk  analytically.  If  we  analyse  lan¬ 
guage,  we  must  speak  of  it  grammatically;  if  we 
analyse  argument,  we  must  speak  of  it  logical¬ 
ly.”  Garrick.  “Of  all  the  translations  that  ever 
were  attempted,  I  think  Elphinston’s  Afizr/za/  the 
most  extraordinary.  He  consulted  me  upon  it, 
who  am  a  little  of  an  epigrammatist  myself, 
you  know.  I  told  him  freely,  ‘You  don’t  seem  to 
have  that  turn.’  I  asked  him  if  he  was  serious; 
and  finding  he  was,  I  advised  him  against  pub¬ 
lishing.  Why,  his  translation  is  more  difficult  to 
understand  than  the  original.  I  thought  him  a 
man  of  some  talents;  but  he  seems  crazy  in  this.” 
Johnson.  “Sir,  you  have  done  what  I  had  not 
courage  to  do.  But  he  did  not  ask  my  advice,  and  I 
did  not  force  it  upon  him,  to  make  him  angry 
with  me.”  Garrick.  “But  as  a  friend,  Sir — .” 
Johnson.  “Why,  such  a  friend  as  I  am  with 
him — no.”  Garrick.  “But  if  you  see  a  friend  go¬ 
ing  to  tumble  over  a  precipice?”  Johnson.  “That 
is  an  extravagant  case,  Sir.  You  are  sure  a  friend 
will  thank  you  for  hindering  him  from  tumbling 
over  a  precipice;  but,  in  the  other  case,  I  should 
hurt  his  vanity,  and  do  him  no  good.  He  would 
not  take  my  advice.  His  brother-in-law,  Strahan, 
sent  him  a  subscription  of  fifty  pounds,  and  said 
he  would  send  him  fifty  more,  if  he  would  not 
publish.”  Garrick.  “What!  eh!  is  Strahan  a 
good  judge  of  an  Epigram?  Is  not  he  rather  an 
obtuse  man,  eh?”  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  he  may 
not  be  a  judge  of  an  Epigram:  but  you  see  he  is 
a  judge  of  what  is  not  an  Epigram.”  Boswell. 
“It  is  easy  for  you,  Mr.  Garrick,  to  talk  to  an 
authour  as  you  talked  to  Elphinston;  you,  who 
have  been  so  long  the  manager  of  a  theatre,  re¬ 
jecting  the  plays  of  poor  authours.  You  are  an 
old  Judge,  who  have  often  pronounced  sentence 
of  death.  You  are  a  practiced  surgeon,  who  have 
often  amputated  limbs  ;and  though  this  may  have 
been  for  the  good  of  your  patients,  they  cannot 
like  you.  Those  who  have  undergone  a  dreadful 


[  1778 

operation,  are  not  very  fond  of  seeing  the  operator 
again.”  Garrick.  “Yes,  I  know  enough  of  that. 
There  was  a  reverend  gentleman,  (Mr.  Haw¬ 
kins,)  who  wrote  a  tragedy,  the  siege  of  some¬ 
thing,1  which  I  refused.”  Harris.  “So,  the  siege 
was  raised.”  Johnson.  “Ay,  he  came  to  me  and 
complained;  and  told  me,  that  Garrick  said  his 
play  was  wrong  in  the  concoction.  Now,  what  is 
the  concoction  of  a  play?”  (Here  Garrick  started, 
and  twisted  himself,  and  seemed  sorely  vexed; 
for  Johnson  told  me,  he  believed  the  story  was 
true. )  Garrick  .  “  I — I — I — said  first  concoction.  ’  ’ 
Johnson,  (smiling,)  “Well,  he  left  out  first.  And 
Rich,  he  said,  refused  him  in  false  English:  he 
could  shew  it  under  his  hand.”  Garrick.  “He 
wrote  to  me  in  violent  wrath,  for  having  refused 
his  play:  ‘Sir,  this  is  growing  a  very  serious  and 
terrible  affair.  I  am  resolved  to  publish  my  play. 
I  will  appeal  to  the  world;  and  how  will  your 
judgement  appear?’  I  answered,  ‘Sir,  nothwith- 
standing  all  the  seriousness,  and  all  the  terrours, 
I  have  no  objection  to  your  publishing  your 
play;  and  as  you  live  at  a  great  distance,  (Devon¬ 
shire,  I  believe,)  if  you  will  send  it  to  me,  I  will 
convey  it  to  the  press.’  I  never  heard  more  of  it, 
ha!  ha!  ha!” 

On  Friday,  April  10, 1  found  Johnson  at  home 
in  the  morning.  We  resumed  the  conversation 
of  yesterday.  He  put  me  in  mind  of  some  of  it 
which  had  escaped  my  memory,  and  enabled 
me  to  record  it  more  perfectly  than  I  otherwise 
could  have  done.  He  was  much  pleased  with  my 
paying  so  great  attention  to  his  recommendation 
in  1 763,  the  period  when  our  acquaintance  be¬ 
gan,  that  I  should  keep  a  journal;  and  I  could 
perceive  he  was  secretly  pleased  to  find  so  much 
of  the  fruit  of  his  mind  preserved;  and  as  he  had 
been  used  to  imagine  and  say  that  he  always  la¬ 
boured  when  he  said  a  good  thing — it  delighted 
him,  on  a  review,  to  find  that  his  conversation 
teemed  with  point  and  imagery. 

I  said  to  him,  “You  were  yesterday,  Sir,  in  re¬ 
markably  good  humour:  but  there  was  nothing 
to  offend  you,  nothing  to  produce  irritation  or 
violence.  There  was  no  bold  offender.  There  was 
not  one  capital  conviction.  It  was  a  maiden  as¬ 
size.  You  had  on  your  white  gloves.” 

He  found  fault  with  our  friend  Langton  for 
having  been  too  silent.  “Sir,  (said  I,)  you  will 
recollect,  that  he  very  properly  took  up  Sir 
Joshua  for  being  glad  that  Charles  Fox  had 
praised  Goldsmith’s  Traveller ,  and  you  joined 

!It  was  called  The  Siege  of  Aleppo.  Mr.  Hawkins, 
the  author  of  it,  was  formerly  Professor  of  Poetry 
at  Oxford.  It  is  printed  in  his  Miscellanies ,  3  vols., 
8vo. 


BOSWELL 


1778]  LIFE  OF 

him.”  Johnson.  “Yes,  Sir,  I  knocked  Fox  on 
the  head,  without  ceremony.  Reynolds  is  too 
much  under  Fox  and  Burke  at  present.  He  is 
under  the  Fox  star  and  the  Irish  constellation . 
He  is  always  under  some  planet.”  Boswell. 
‘‘There  is  no  Fox  star.”  Johnson.  “But  there  is  a 
dog  star.”  Boswell.  “They  say,  indeed,  a  fox 
and  a  dog  are  the  same  animal.” 

I  reminded  him  of  a  gentleman,  who,  Mrs. 
Cholmondeley  said,  was  first  talkative  from  af¬ 
fectation,  and  then  silent  from  the  same  cause; 
that  he  first  thought,  “I  shall  be  celebrated  as 
the  liveliest  man  in  every  company”;  and  then, 
all  at  once,  “O !  it  is  much  more  respectable  to 
be  grave  and  look  wise.”  “He  has  reversed  the 
Pythagorean  discipline,  by  being  first  talkative, 
and  then  silent.  He  reverses  the  course  of  Na¬ 
ture  too:  he  was  first  the  gay  butterfly,  and  then 
the  creeping  worm.”  Johnson  laughed  loud  and 
long  at  this  expansion  and  illustration  of  what 
he  himself  had  told  me. 

We  dined  together  with  Mr.  Scott  (now  Sir 
William  Scott,  his  Majesty’s  Advocate  General,) 
at  his  chambers  in  the  T emple,  nobody  else  there. 
The  company  being  small,  Johnson  was  not  in 
such  spirits  as  he  had  been  the  preceding  day, 
and  for  a  considerable  time  little  was  said.  At 
last  he  burstforth,  “Subordination  is  sadly  broken 
down  in  this  age.  No  man,  now,  has  the  same 
authority  which  his  father  had, — except  a  gaol¬ 
er.  No  master  has  it  over  his  servants:  it  is  di¬ 
minished  in  our  colleges;  nay,  in  our  grammar- 
schools.”  Boswell.  “What  is  the  cause  of  this, 
Sir?”  Johnson.  “Why,  the  coming  in  of  the 
Scotch,”  (laughing  sarcastically.)  Boswell. 
“ That  is  to  say,  things  have  been  turned  topsy  tur- 
vey. — But  your  serious  cause.”  Johnson.  “Why, 
Sir,  there  are  many  causes,  the  chief  of  which  is, 
I  think,  the  great  increase  of  money.  No  man 
now  depends  upon  the  Lord  of  a  Manour,  when 
he  can  send  to  another  country,  and  fetch  pro¬ 
visions.  The  shoeblack  at  the  entry  of  my  court 
does  not  depend  on  me.  I  can  deprive  him  but 
of  a  penny  a  day,  which  he  hopes  somebody  else 
will  bring  him;  and  that  penny  I  must  carry  to 
another  shoe-black,  so  the  trade  suffers  nothing. 
I  have  explained,  in  my  Journey  to  the  Hebrides , 
how  gold  and  silver  destroy  feudal  subordina¬ 
tion.  But,  besides,  there  is  a  general  relaxation 
of  reverence.  No  son  now  depends  upon  his  fa¬ 
ther  as  in  former  times.  Paternity  used  to  be  con¬ 
sidered  as  of  itself  a  great  thing,  which  had  a 
right  to  many  claims.  That  is,  in  general,  reduced 
to  very  small  bounds.  My  hope  is,  that  as  an¬ 
archy  produces  tyranny,  this  extreme  relaxation 
will  produce  jreni  strictio .” 


JOHNSON  383 

Talking  of  fame,  for  which  there  is  so  great  a 
desire,  I  observed  how  little  there  is  of  it  in  re¬ 
ality,  compared  with  the  other  objects  of  human 
attention.  “Let  every  man  recollect,  and  he  will 
be  sensible  how  small  a  part  of  his  time  is  em¬ 
ployed  in  talking  or  thinking  of  Shakspeare,  Vol¬ 
taire,  or  any  of  the  most  celebrated  men  that 
have  ever  lived,  or  are  now  supposed  to  occupy 
the  attention  and  admiration  of  the  world.  Let 
this  be  extracted  and  compressed;  into  what  a 
narrow  space  will  it  go !”  I  then  slily  introduced 
Mr.  Garrick’s  fame,  and  his  assuming  the  airs  of 
a  great  man.  Johnson.  “Sir,  it  is  wonderful  how 
little  Garrick  assumes.  No,  Sir,  Garrick  Jortunam 
r  ever  enter  habet.  Consider,  Sir:  celebrated  men, 
such  as  you  have  mentioned,  have  had  their  ap¬ 
plause  at  a  distance;  but  Garrick  had  it  dashed 
in  his  face,  sounded  in  his  ears,  and  went  home 
every  night  with  the  plaudits  of  a  thousand  in 
his  cranium .  Then,  Sir,  Garrick  did  not  find ,  but 
made  his  way  to  the  tables,  the  levees,  and  al¬ 
most  the  bed-chambers  of  the  great.  Then,  Sir, 
Garrick  had  under  him  a  numerous  body  of  peo¬ 
ple  ;  who,  from  fear  of  his  power,  and  hopes  of  his 
favour,  and  admiration  of  his  talents,  were  con¬ 
stantly  submissive  to  him.  And  here  is  a  man 
who  has  advanced  the  dignity  of  his  profession. 
Garrick  has  made  a  player  a  higher  character.” 
Scott.  “And  he  is  a  very  sprightly  writer  too.” 
Johnson.  “Yes,  Sir;  and  all  this  supported  by 
great  wealth  of  his  own  acquisition.  If  all  this 
had  happened  to  me,  I  should  have  had  a  cou¬ 
ple  of  fellows  with  long  poles  walking  before  me, 
to  knock  down  every  body  that  stood  in  the  way. 
Consider,  if  all  this  had  happened  to  Cibber  or 
Quin,  they’d  have  jumped  over  the  moon. — 
Yet  Garrick  speaks  to  us.”  (smiling.)  Boswell. 
“And  Garrick  is  a  very  good  man,  a  charitable 
man.”  Johnson.  “Sir,  a  liberal  man,  He  has 
given  away  more  money  than  any  man  in  Eng¬ 
land.  There  may  be  a  little  vanity  mixed;  but  he 
has  shewn,  that  money  is  not  his  first  object.” 
Boswell.  “Yet  Foote  used  to  say  of  him,  that  he 
walked  out  with  an  intention  to  do  a  generous 
action;  but,  turning  the  corner  of  a  street,  he 
met  with  the  ghost  of  a  halfpenny,  which  fright¬ 
ened  him.”  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  that  is  very 
true,  too;  for  I  never  knew  a  man  of  whom  it 
could  be  said  with  less  certainty  to-day,  what  he 
will  do  to-morrow,  than  Garrick;  it  depends  so 
much  on  his  humour  at  the  time.”  Scott.  “I 
am  glad  to  hear  of  his  liberality.  He  has  been 
represented  as  very  saving.”  Johnson.  “With  his 
domestick  saving  we  have  nothing  to  do.  I  re¬ 
member  drinking  tea  with  him  long  ago,  when 
Peg  Woffington  made  it,  and  he  grumbled  at 


384  BOSWELL  1 1778 


her  for  making  it  too  strong.1  He  had  then  begun 
to  feel  money  in  his  purse,  and  did  not  know 
when  he  should  have  enough  of  it.” 

On  the  subject  of  wealth,  the  proper  use  of  it, 
and  the  effects  of  that  art  which  is  called  oecon- 
omy,  he  observed:  “It  is  wonderful  to  think  how 
men  of  very  large  estates  not  only  spend  their 
yearly  incomes,  but  are  often  actually  in  want  of 
money.  It  is  clear,  they  have  not  value  for  what 
they  spend.  Lord  Shelburne  told  me,  that  a  man 
of  high  rank,  who  looks  into  his  own  affairs,  may 
have  all  that  he  ought  to  have,  all  that  can  be  of 
any  use,  or  appear  with  any  advantage  for  five 
thousand  pounds  a  year.  Therefore,  a  great  pro¬ 
portion  must  go  in  waste;  and,  indeed,  this  is  the 
case  with  most  people,  whatever  their  fortune 
is.”  Boswell.  “I  have  no  doubt,  Sir,  of  this.  But 
how  is  it?  What  is  waste?”  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir, 
breaking  bottles,  and  a  thousand  other  things. 
Waste  cannot  be  accurately  told,  though  we  are 
sensible  how  destructive  it  is.  (Economy  on  the 
one  hand,  by  which  a  certain  income  is  made  to 
maintain  a  man  genteely,  and  waste  on  the  oth¬ 
er,  by  which,  on  the  same  income,  another  man 
lives  shabbily,  cannot  be  defined.  It  is  a  very 
nice  thing:  as  one  man  wears  his  coat  out  much 
sooner  than  another,  we  cannot  tell  how.” 

We  talked  of  war.  Johnson.  “Every  man  thinks 
meanly  of  himself  for  not  having  been  a  soldier, 
or  not  having  been  at  sea.”  Boswell.  “Lord 
Mansfield  does  not.”JoHNSON.“Sir,  if  Lord  Mans¬ 
field  were  in  a  company  of  General  Officers  and 
Admirals  who  have  been  in  service,  he  would 
shrink;  he’d  wish  to  creep  under  the  table.”  Bos¬ 
well.  “No;  he’d  think  he  could  try  them  all.” 
Johnson.  “Yes,  if  he  could  catch  them:  but 
they’d  try  him  much  sooner.  No,  Sir;  were  Soc¬ 
rates  and  Charles  the  Twelfth  of  Sweden  both 
present  in  any  company,  and  Socrates  to  say, 
‘Follow  me,  and  hear  a  lecture  on  philosophy’; 
and  Charles,  laying  his  hand  on  his  sword,  to 
say,  ‘Follow  me,  and  dethrone  the  Czar’;  a  man 
would  be  ashamed  to  follow  Socrates.  Sir,  the 
impression  is  universal;  yet  it  is  strange.  As  to 
the  sailor,  when  you  look  down  from  the  quarter 
deck  to  the  space  below,  you  see  the  utmost  ex¬ 
tremity  of  human  misery;  such  crowding,  such 
filth,  such  stench!”  Boswell.  “Yet  sailors  are 
happy.”  Johnson.  “They  are  happy  as  brutes 
are  happy,  with  a  piece  of  fresh  meat, — with  the 
grossest  sensuality.  But,  Sir,  the  profession  of  sol¬ 
diers  and  sailors  has  the  dignity  of  danger.  Man- 

AVhen  Johnson  told  this  little  anecdote  to  Sir 
Joshua  Reynolds,  he  mentioned  a  circumstance 
which  he  omitted  to-day: — “Why,  (said  Garrick,) 
it  is  as  red  as  blood.” 


kind  reverence  those  who  have  got  over  fear, 
which  is  so  general  a  weakness.”  Scott.  “But  is 
not  courage  mechanical,  and  to  be  acquired?” 
Johnson.  “Why  yes,  Sir,  in  a  collective  sense. 
Soldiers  consider  themselves  only  as  parts  of  a 
great  machine.”  Scott.  “We  find  people  fond 
of  being  sailors.”  Johnson.  “I  cannot  account 
for  that,  any  more  than  I  can  account  for  other 
strange  perversions  of  imagination.” 

His  abhorrence  of  the  profession  of  a  sailor 
was  uniformly  violent;  but  in  conversation  he 
always  exalted  the  profession  of  a  soldier.  And 
yet  I  have,  in  my  large  and  various  collection  of 
his  writings,  a  letter  to  an  eminent  friend,  in 
which  he  expresses  himself  thus:  “My  god-son 
called  on  me  lately.  He  is  weary,  and  rationally 
weary,  of  a  military  life.  If  you  can  place  him  in 
some  other  state,  I  think  you  may  increase  his 
happiness,  and  secure  his  virtue.  A  soldier’s  time 
is  passed  in  distress  and  danger,  or  in  idleness 
and  corruption.”  Such  was  his  cool  reflection  in 
his  study;  but  whenever  he  was  warmed  and  ani¬ 
mated  by  the  presence  of  company,  he,  like  other 
philosophers,  whose  minds  are  impregnated  with 
poetical  fancy,  caught  the  common  enthusiasm 
for  splendid  renown. 

He  talked  of  Mr.  Charles  Fox,  of  whose  abili¬ 
ties  he  thought  highly,  but  observed,  that  he  did 
not  talk  much  at  our  Club.  I  have  heard  Mr. 
Gibbon  remark,  “that  Mr.  Fox  could  not  be 
afraid  of  Dr.  Johnson;  yet  he  certainly  was  very 
shy  of  saying  any  thing  in  Dr.  Johnson’s  pres¬ 
ence.”  Mr.  Scott  now  quoted  what  was  said  of 
Alcibiades  by  a  Greek  poet,  to  which  Johnson 
assented. 

He  told  us,  that  he  had  given  Mrs.  Montagu 
a  catalogue  of  all  Daniel  Defoe’s  works  of  imagi¬ 
nation;  most,  if  not  all  of  which,  as  well  as  of  his 
other  works,  he  now  enumerated,  allowing  a 
considerable  share  of  merit  to  a  man,  who,  bred 
a  tradesman,  had  written  so  variously  and  so 
well.  Indeed,  his  Robinson  Crusoe  is  enough  of  it¬ 
self  to  establish  his  reputation. 

He  expressed  great  indignation  at  the  impos¬ 
ture  of  the  Cock-lane  Ghost,  and  related,  with 
much  satisfaction,  how  he  had  assisted  in  detect¬ 
ing  the  cheat,  and  had  published  an  account  of 
it  in  the  news-papers.  Upon  this  subject  I  in¬ 
cautiously  offended  him,  by  pressing  him  with 
too  many  questions,  and  he  shewed  his  displeas¬ 
ure.  I  apologised,  saying  that  “I  asked  questions 
in  order  to  be  instructed  and  entertained;  I  re¬ 
paired  eagerly  to  the  fountain;  but  that  the  mo¬ 
ment  he  gave  me  a  hint,  the  moment  he  put  a 
lock  upon  the  well,  I  desisted.” — “But,  Sir,  (said 
he,)  that  isforcing  one  to  do  a  disagreeable  thing’  ’ : 


1778]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  385 


and  he  continued  to  rate  me.  “Nay,  Sir,  (said 
I,)  when  you  have  put  a  lock  upon  the  well,  so 
that  I  can  no  longer  drink,  do  not  make  the 
fountain  of  your  wit  play  upon  me  and  wet  me.55 

He  sometimes  could  not  bear  being  teazed 
with  questions.  I  was  once  present  when  a  gen¬ 
tleman  asked  so  many  as,  “What  did  you  do, 
Sir?55  “What  did  you  say,  Sir?55  that  he  at  last 
grew  enraged,  and  said,  “I  will  not  be  put  to  the 
question.  Don’t  you  consider,  Sir,  that  these  are 
not  the  manners  of  a  gentleman?  I  will  not  be 
baited  with  whatz  and  why ;  what  is  this?  what  is 
that?  why  is  a  cow’s  tail  long?  why  is  a  fox’s  tail 
bushy?”  The  gentleman,  who  was  a  good  deal 
out  of  countenance,  said,  “Why,  Sir,  you  are  so 
good,  that  I  venture  to  trouble  you.”  Johnson. 
“Sir,  my  being  so  good  is  no  reason  why  you 
should  be  so  ill” 

Talking  of  the  Justitia  hulk  at  Woolwich,  in 
which  criminals  were  punished,  by  being  con¬ 
fined  to  labour,  he  said,  “I  do  not  see  that  they 
are  punished  by  this:  they  must  have  worked 
equally  had  they  never  been  guilty  of  stealing. 
They  now  only  work;  so,  after  all,  they  have 
gained;  what  they  stole  is  clear  gain  to  them;  the 
confinement  is  nothing.  Every  man  who  works  is 
confined:  the  smith  to  his  shop,  the  tailor  to  his 
garret.”  Boswell.  “And  Lord  Mansfield  to  his 
Court.”  Johnson.  “Yes,  Sir,  you  know  the  no¬ 
tion  of  confinement  may  be  extended,  as  in  the 
song,  ‘Every  island  is  a  prison.5  There  is,  in 
Dodsley’s  Collection ,  a  copy  of  verses  to  the  au- 
thour  of  that  song.” 

Smith’s  Latin  verses  on  Pococke,  the  great 
traveller,  were  mentioned.  He  repeated  some  of 
them,  and  said  they  were  Smith’s  best  verses. 

He  talked  with  an  uncommon  animation  of 
travelling  into  distant  countries;  that  the  mind 
was  enlarged  by  it,  and  that  an  acquisition  of 
dignity  of  character  was  derived  from  it.  He  ex¬ 
pressed  a  particular  enthusiasm  with  respect  to 
visiting  the  wall  of  China.  I  catched  it  for  the 
moment,  and  said  I  really  believed  I  should  go 
and  see  the  wall  of  China  had  I  not  children,  of 
whom  it  was  my  duty  to  take  care.  “Sir,  (said 
he,)  by  doing  so,  you  would  do  what  would  be 
of  importance  in  raising  your  children  to  emi¬ 
nence.  There  would  be  a  lustre  reflected  upon 
them  from  your  spirit  and  curiosity.  They  would 
be  at  all  times  regarded  as  the  children  of  a  man 
who  had  gone  to  view  the  wall  of  China.  I  am 
serious,  Sir.” 

When  we  had  left  Mr.  Scott’s,  he  said,  “Will 
you  go  home  with  me?”  “Sir,  (said  I,)  it  is  late; 
but  I’ll  go  with  you  for  three  minutes.”  John¬ 
son.  “Or  four”  We  went  to  Mrs.  Williams’s 


room,  where  we  found  Mr.  Allen  the  printer, 
who  was  the  landlord  of  his  house  in  Bolt-court, 
a  worthy  obliging  man,  and  his  very  old  ac¬ 
quaintance;  and  what  was  exceedingly  amusing, 
though  he  was  of  a  very  diminutive  size,  he  used, 
even  in  Johnson’s  presence,  to  imitate  the  stately 
periods  and  slow  and  solemn  utterance  of  the 
great  man. — I  this  evening  boasted,  that  although 
I  did  not  write  what  is  called  stenography,  or 
short-hand,  in  appropriated  characters  devised 
for  the  purpose,  I  had  a  method  of  my  own  of 
writing  half  words,  and  leaving  out  some  alto¬ 
gether  so  as  yet  to  keep  the  substance  and  lan¬ 
guage  of  any  discourse  which  I  had  heard  so 
much  in  view,  that  I  could  give  it  very  complete¬ 
ly  soon  after  I  had  taken  it  down.  He  defied  me, 
as  he  had  once  defied  an  actual  short-hand  writ¬ 
er,  and  he  made  the  experiment  by  reading  slowly 
and  distinctly  a  part  of  Robertson’s  History  of 
America ,  while  I  endeavoured  to  write  it  in  my 
way  of  taking  notes.  It  was  found  that  I  had 
it  very  imperfectly;  the  conclusion  from  which 
was,  that  its  excellence  was  principally  owing  to 
a  studied  arrangement  of  words,  which  could 
not  be  varied  or  abridged  without  an  essential 
injury. 

On  Sunday,  April  12,  I  found  him  at  home 
before  dinner;  Dr.  Dodd’s  poem  entitled  Thoughts 
in  Prison  was  lying  upon  his  table.  This  appear¬ 
ing  to  me  an  extraordinary  effort  by  a  man  who 
was  in  Newgate  for  a  capital  crime,  I  was  de¬ 
sirous  to  hear  Johnson’s  opinion  of  it:  to  my  sur¬ 
prize,  he  told  me  he  had  not  read  a  line  of  it.  I 
took  up  the  book  and  read  a  passage  to  him. 
Johnson.  “Pretty  well,  if  you  are  previously  dis¬ 
posed  to  like  them.”  I  read  another  passage, 
with  which  he  was  better  pleased.  He  then  took 
the  book  into  his  own  hands,  and  having  looked 
at  the  prayer  at  the  end  of  it,  he  said,  “What  evi¬ 
dence  is  there  that  this  was  composed  the  night 
before  he  suffered?  I  do  not  believe  it.”  He  then 
read  aloud  where  he  prays  for  the  King,  &c., 
and  observed,  “Sir,  do  you  think  that  a  man  the 
night  before  he  is  to  be  hanged  cares  for  the  suc¬ 
cession  of  a  royal  family? — Though,  he  may  have 
composed  this  prayer,  then.  A  man  who  has 
been  canting  all  his  life,  may  cant  to  the  last. — 
And  yet  a  man  who  has  been  refused  a  pardon 
after  so  much  petitioning,  would  hardly  be  pray¬ 
ing  thus  fervently  for  the  King.” 

He  and  I,  and  Mrs.  Williams,  went  to  dine 
with  the  Reverend  Dr.  Percy.  Talking  of  Gold¬ 
smith,  Johnson  said,  he  was  very  envious.  I  de¬ 
fended  him,  by  observing  that  he  owned  it  frankly 
upon  all  occasions.  Johnson.  “Sir,  you  are  en¬ 
forcing  the  charge.  He  had  so  much  envy,  that 


386  BOSWELL  [1778 


he  could  not  conceal  it.  He  was  so  full  of  it  that 
he  overflowed.  He  talked  of  it  to  be  sure  often 
enough.  Now,  Sir,  what  a  man  avows,  he  is  not 
ashamed  to  think;  though  many  a  man  thinks, 
what  he  is  ashamed  to  avow.  We  are  all  envious 
naturally;  but  by  checking  envy,  we  get  the  bet¬ 
ter  of  it.  So  we  are  all  thieves  naturally;  a  child 
always  tries  to  get  at  what  it  wants,  the  nearest 
way;  by  good  instruction  and  good  habits  this  is 
cured,  till  a  man  has  not  even  an  inclination  to 
seize  what  is  another’s;  has  no  struggle  with  him¬ 
self  about  it.” 

And  here  I  shall  record  a  scene  of  too  much 
heat  between  Dr.  Johnson  and  Dr.  Percy,  which 
I  should  have  suppressed,  were  it  not  that  it 
gave  occasion  to  display  the  truely  tender  and 
benevolent  heart  of  Johnson,  who,  as  soon  as  he 
found  a  friend  was  at  all  hurt  by  any  thing  which 
he  had  “said  in  his  wrath,”  was  not  only  prompt 
and  desirous  to  be  reconciled,  but  exerted  him¬ 
self  to  make  ample  reparation. 

Books  of  Travels  having  been  mentioned, 
Johnson  praised  Pennant  very  highly, as  he  did  at 
Dunvegan,  in  the  Isle  of  Sky.1  Dr.  Percy,  know¬ 
ing  himself  to  be  the  male  heir  of  the  ancient 
Percies, 2  and  having  the  warmest  and  most  duti¬ 
ful  attachment  to  the  noble  House  of  Northum¬ 
berland,  could  not  sit  quietly  and  hear  a  man 
praised,  who  had  spoken  disrespectfully  of  Aln- 
wick-Castle  and  the  Duke’s  pleasure  grounds, 
especially  as  he  thought  meanly  of  his  travels. 
He  therefore  opposed  Johnson  eagerly.  John¬ 
son.  “Pennant  in  what  he  has  said  of  Alnwick, 
has  done  what  he  intended;  he  has  made  you 
very  angry.”  Percy.  “He  has  said  the  garden  is 

1 Journal  of  a  Tour  to  the  Hebrides ,  3rd  edit.,  p.  22 1 
[Sept.  17]. 

2See  this  accurately  stated,  and  the  descent  of 
his  family  from  the  Earls  of  Northumberland  clear¬ 
ly  deduced  in  the  Reverend  Dr.  Nash’s  excellent 
History  of  Worcestershire ,  vol.  ii,  p.  318.  The  Doctor 
has  subjoined  a  note,  in  which  he  says,  “The  Editor 
hath  seen  and  carefully  examined  the  proofs  of  all 
the  particulars  above-mentioned,  now  in  the  pos¬ 
session  of  the  Reverend  Thomas  Percy.”  The  same 
proofs  I  have  also  myself  carefully  examined,  and 
have  seen  some  additional  proofs  which  have  oc¬ 
curred  since  the  Doctor’s  book  was  published;  and 
both  as  a  Lawyer  accustomed  to  the  consideration 
of  evidence,  and  as  a  Genealogist  versed  in  the 
study  of  pedigrees,  I  am  fully  satisfied.  I  cannot 
help  observing,  as  a  circumstance  of  no  small 
moment,  that  in  tracing  the  Bishop  of  Dromore’s 
genealogy,  essential  aid  was  given  by  the  late  Eliz¬ 
abeth,  Duchess  of  Northumberland,  Heiress  of  that 
illustrious  House;  a  lady  not  only  of  high  dignity  of 
spirit,  such  as  became  her  noble  blood,  but  of  ex¬ 
cellent  understanding  and  lively  talents.  With  a 
fair  pride  I  can  boast  of  the  honour  of  her  Grace’s 
correspondence,  specimens  of  which  adorn  my  ar¬ 
chives. 


trim ,  which  is  representing  it  like  a  citizen’s  par¬ 
terre,  when  the  truth  is,  there  is  a  very  large  ex¬ 
tent  of  fine  turf  and  gravel  walks.”  Johnson. 
“According  to  your  own  account,  Sir,  Pennant 
is  right.  It  is  trim.  Here  is  grass  cut  close,  and 
gravel  rolled  smooth.  Is  not  that  trim?  The  ex¬ 
tent  is  nothing  against  that;  a  mile  may  be  as 
trim  as  a  square  yard.  Your  extent  puts  me  in 
mind  of  the  citizen’s  enlarged  dinner,  two  pieces 
of  roast-beef,  and  two  puddings.  There  is  no  va¬ 
riety,  no  mind  exerted  in  laying  out  the  ground, 
no  trees,”  Percy.  “He  pretends  to  give  the  nat¬ 
ural  history  of  Northumberland,  and  yet  takes 
no  notice  of  the  immense  number  of  trees  plant¬ 
ed  there  of  late.”  Johnson.  “That,  Sir,  has  noth¬ 
ing  to  do  with  the  natural  history;  that  is  civil  his¬ 
tory.  A  man  who  gives  the  natural  history  of  the 
oak,  is  not  to  tell  how  many  oaks  have  been 
planted  in  this  place  or  that.  A  man  who  gives 
the  natural  history  of  the  cow,  is  not  to  tell  how 
many  cows  are  milked  at  Islington.  The  animal 
is  the  same,  whether  milked  in  the  Park  or  at 
Islington.”  Percy.  “Pennant  does  not  describe 
well;  a  carrier  who  goes  along  the  side  of  Loch- 
lomond  would  describe  it  better.”  Johnson.  “I 
think  he  describes  very  well.”  Percy.  “I  trav¬ 
elled  after  him.”  Johnson.  “And  /travelled  after 
him.”  Percy.  “But,  my  good  friend,  you  are 
short-sighted,  and  do  not  see  so  well  as  I  do.”  I 
wondered  at  Dr.  Percy’s  venturing  thus.  Dr. 
Johnson  said  nothing  at  the  time;  but  inflam¬ 
mable  particles  were  collecting  for  a  cloud  to 
burst.  In  a  little  while  Dr.  Percy  said  something 
more  in  disparagement  of  Pennant.  Johnson. 
(pointedly,)  “This  is  the  resentment  of  a  narrow 
mind,  because  he  did  not  find  every  thing  in 
Northumberland.”  Percy,  (feeling  the  stroke,) 
“Sir,  you  may  be  as  rude  as  you  please.”  John¬ 
son.  “Hold,  Sir !  Don’t  talk  of  rudeness;  remem¬ 
ber,  Sir,  you  told  me  (puffing  hard  with  passion 
struggling  for  a  vent,)  I  was  short-sighted.  We 
have  done  with  civility.  We  are  to  be  as  rude  as 
we  please.”  Percy.  “Upon  my  honour,  Sir,  I 
did  not  mean  to  be  uncivil.”  Johnson.  “I  can¬ 
not  say  so,  Sir;  for  I  did  mean  to  be  uncivil, 
thinking  you  had  been  uncivil.”  Dr.  Percy  rose, 
ran  up  to  him,  and  taking  him  by  the  hand,  as¬ 
sured  him  affectionately  that  his  meaning  had 
been  misunderstood;  upon  which  a  reconcilia¬ 
tion  instantly  took  place.  Johnson.  “My  dear 
Sir,  I  am  willing  you  shall  hang  Pennant.”  Percy. 
(resuming  the  former  subject,)  “Pennant  com¬ 
plains  that  the  helmet  is  not  hung  out  to  invite 
to  the  hall  of  hospitality.  Now  I  never  heard  that 
it  was  a  custom  to  hang  out  a  helmet .”  Johnson. 
“Hang  him  up,  hang  him  up.”  Boswell,  (hu- 


1773]  LIFE  OF 

mouring  the  joke,)  “Hang  out  his  skull  instead 
of  a  helmet,  and  you  may  drink  ale  out  of  it  in 
your  hall  of  Odin,  as  he  is  your  enemy;  that  will 
be  truly  ancient.  There  will  be  Northern  Antiqui¬ 
ties.”1  Johnson.  “He’s  a  Whig,  Sir;  a  sad  dog. 
(smiling  at  his  own  violent  expressions,  merely 
for  political  difference  of  opinion.)  But  he’s  the 
best  traveller  I  ever  read ;  he  observes  more  things 
than  any  one  else  does.” 

I  could  not  help  thinking  that  this  was  too 
high  praise  of  a  writer  who  had  traversed  a  wide 
extent  of  country  in  such  haste,  that  he  could 
put  together  only  curt  frittered  fragments  of  his 
own,  and  afterwards  procured  supplemental  in¬ 
telligence  from  parochial  ministers,  and  others 
not  the  best  qualified  or  most  impartial  narrators, 
whose  ungenerous  prejudice  against  the  house 
of  Stuart  glares  in  misrepresentation;  a  writer, 
who  at  best  treats  merely  of  superficial  objects, 
and  shews  no  philosophical  investigation  of  char¬ 
acter  and  manners,  such  as  Johnson  has  exhib¬ 
ited  in  his  masterly  Journey,  over  part  of  the  same 
ground;  and  who  it  should  seem  from  a  desire  of 
ingratiating  himself  with  the  Scotch,  has  flat¬ 
tered  the  people  of  North-Britain  so  inordinate¬ 
ly  and  with  so  little  discrimination,  that  the  ju¬ 
dicious  and  candid  amongst  them  must  be  dis¬ 
gusted,  while  they  value  more  the  plain,  just, 
yet  kindly  report  of  Johnson. 

Having  impartially  censured  Mr.  Pennant,  as 
a  Traveller  in  Scotland,  let  me  allow  him,  from 
authorities  much  better  than  mine,  his  deserved 
praise  as  an  able  Zoologist;  and  let  me  also  from 
my  own  understanding  and  feelings,  acknowl¬ 
edge  the  merit  of  his  London,  which,  though  said 
to  be  not  quite  accurate  in  some  particulars,  is 
one  of  the  most  pleasing  topographical  perform¬ 
ances  that  ever  appeared  in  any  language.  Mr. 
Pennant,  like  his  countrymen  in  general,  has  the 
true  spirit  of  a  Gentleman.  As  a  proof  of  it,  I  shall 
quote  from  his  London  the  passage,  in  which  he 
speaks  of  my  illustrious  friend.  “I  must  by  no 
means  omit  Bolt-court ,  the  long  residence  of  Doc¬ 
tor  Samuel  Johnson,  a  man  of  the  strongest  nat¬ 
ural  abilities,  great  learning,  a  most  retentive 
memory,  of  the  deepest  and  most  unaffected  pi¬ 
ety  and  morality,  mingled  with  those  numerous 
weaknesses  and  prejudices  which  his  friends  have 
kindly  taken  care  to  draw  from  their  dread 
abode.”2  I  brought  on  myself  his  transient  an- 

Hhe  title  of  a  book  translated  by  Dr.  Percy. 

2This  is  the  common  cant  against  faithful  Biog¬ 
raphy.  Does  the  worthy  gentleman  mean  that  I, 
who  was  taught  discrimination  of  character  by 
Johnson,  should  have  omitted  his  frailties,  and,  in 
short,  have  bedawbed  him  as  the  worthy  gentleman 
has  bedawbed  Scotland? 


JOHNSON  387 

ger,  by  observing  that  in  his  tour  in  Scotland ,  he 
once  had  “long  and  woeful  experience  of  oats 
being  the  food  of  men  in  Scotland  as  they  were  of 
horses  in  England.”  It  was  a  national  reflection 
unworthy  of  him,  and  I  shot  my  bolt.  In  return 
he  gave  me  a  tender  hug.  Con  amore  he  also  said 
of  me  “  The  dog  is  a  Whig”;  I  admired  the  virtues 
of  Lord  Russell,  and  pitied  his  fall.  I  should  have 
been  a  Whig  at  the  Revolution.  There  have  been 
periods  since,  in  which  I  should  have  been,  what 
I  now  am,  a  moderate  Tory,  a  supporter,  as  far 
as  my  little  influence  extends,  of  a  well-poised  bal¬ 
ance  between  the  crown  and  people:  but  should 
the  scale  preponderate  against  the  Salus  populi , 
that  moment  may  it  be  said  “  The  dog's  a  Whig!” 

We  had  a  calm  after  the  storm,  staid  the  eve¬ 
ning  and  supped,  and  were  pleasant  and  gay. 
But  Dr.  Percy  told  me  he  was  very  uneasy  at 
what  had  passed;  for  there  was  a  gentleman 
there  who  was  acquainted  with  the  Northum¬ 
berland  family,  to  whom  he  hoped  to  have  ap¬ 
peared  more  respectable,  by  shewing  how  inti¬ 
mate  he  was  with  Dr.  Johnson,  and  who  might 
now,  on  the  contrary,  go  away  with  an  opinion 
to  his  disadvantage.  He  begged  I  would  men¬ 
tion  this  to  Dr.  Johnson,  which  I  afterwards  did. 
His  observation  upon  it  was,  “This  comes  of 
stratagem;  had  he  told  me  that  he  wished  to  ap¬ 
pear  to  advantage  before  that  gentleman,  he 
should  have  been  at  the  top  of  the  house,  all  the 
time.”  He  spoke  of  Dr.  Percy  in  the  handsomest 
terms.  “Then,  Sir,  (said  I,)  may  I  be  allowed  to 
suggest  a  mode  by  which  you  may  effectually 
counteract  any  unfavourable  report  of  what 
passed.  I  will  write  a  letter  to  you  upon  the  sub¬ 
ject  of  the  unlucky  contest  of  that  day,  and  you 
will  be  kind  enough  to  put  in  writing  as  an  an¬ 
swer  to  that  letter,  what  you  have  now  said,  and 
as  Lord  Percy  is  to  dine  with  us  at  General  Pa- 
oli’s  soon,  I  will  take  an  opportunity  to  read  the 
correspondence  in  his  Lordship’s  presence.”  This 
friendly  scheme  was  accordingly  carried  into  ex¬ 
ecution  without  Dr.  Percy’s  knowledge.  John¬ 
son’s  letter  placed  Dr.  Percy’s  unquestionable 
merit  in  the  fairest  point  of  view;  and  I  contrived 
that  Lord  Percy  should  hear  the  correspondence, 
by  introducing  it  at  General  Paoli’s,  as  an  in¬ 
stance  of  Dr.  Johnson’s  kind  disposition  towards 
one  in  whom  his  Lordship  was  interested.  Thus 
every  unfavourable  impression  was  obviated  that 
could  possibly  have  been  made  on  those  by 
whom  he  wished  most  to  be  regarded.  I  break¬ 
fasted  the  day  after  with  him,  and  informed  him 
of  my  scheme,  and  its  happy  completion,  for 
which  he  thanked  me  in  the  warmest  terms,  and 
was  highly  delighted  with  Dr.  Johnson’s  letter 


388 

in  his  praise,  of  which  I  gave  him  a  copy.  He 
said,  “I  would  rather  have  this  than  degrees 
from  all  the  Universities  in  Europe.  It  will  be  for 
me,  and  my  children  and  grand-children.”  Dr. 
Johnson  having  afterwards  asked  me  if  I  had 
given  him  a  copy  of  it,  and  being  told  I  had, 
was  offended,  and  insisted  that  I  should  get  it 
back,  which  I  did.  As,  however,  he  did  not  de¬ 
sire  me  to  destroy  either  the  original  or  the  copy, 
or  forbid  me  to  let  it  be  seen,  I  think  myself  at 
liberty  to  apply  to  it  his  general  declaration  to 
me  concerning  his  other  letters,  “That  he  did 
not  choose  they  should  be  published  in  his  life¬ 
time;  but  had  no  objection  to  their  appearing 
after  his  death.”  1  shall  therefore  insert  this  kind¬ 
ly  correspondence,  having  faithfully  narrated 
the  circumstances  accompanying  it. 

To  Dr.  Samuel  Johnson 

My  Dear  Sir,  I  beg  leave  to  address  you  in 
behalf  of  our  friend  Dr.  Percy,  who  was  much 
hurt  by  what  you  said  to  him  that  day  we  dined 
at  his  house;1  when,  in  the  course  of  the  dispute 
as  to  Pennant’s  merit  as  a  traveller,  you  told 
Percy  that  “he  had  the  resentment  of  a  narrow 
mind  against  Pennant,  because  he  did  not  find 
everything  in  Northumberland.”  Percy  is  sensi¬ 
ble  that  you  did  not  mean  to  injure  him;  but  he 
is  vexed  to  think  that  your  behaviour  to  him 
upon  that  occasion  may  be  interpreted  as  a 
proof  that  he  is  despised  by  you,  which  I  know 
is  not  the  case.  I  have  told  him,  that  the  charge 
of  being  narrow-minded  was  only  as  to  the  par¬ 
ticular  point  in  question;  and  that  he  had  the 
merit  of  being  a  martyr  to  his  noble  family. 

Earl  Percy  is  to  dine  with  General  Paoli  next 
Friday;  and  I  should  be  sincerely  glad  to  have 
it  in  my  power  to  satisfy  his  Lordship  how  well 
you  think  of  Dr.  Percy,  who,  I  find,  apprehends 
that  your  good  opinion  of  him  may  be  of  very 
essential  consequence;  and  who  assures  me,  that 
he  has  the  highest  respect  and  the  warmest  af¬ 
fection  for  you. 

I  have  only  to  add,  that  my  suggesting  this 
occasion  for  the  exercise  of  your  candour  and 
generosity,  is  altogether  unknown  to  Dr.  Percy, 
and  proceeds  from  my  good-will  towards  him, 
and  my  persuasion  that  you  will  be  happy  to  do 
him  an  essential  kindness.  I  am,  more  and  more, 
my  dear  Sir,  your  most  faithful  and  affectionate 
humble  servant, 

James  Boswell 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Sir,  The  debate  between  Dr.  Percy  and  me  is 
one  of  those  foolish  controversies,  which  begin 
upon  a  question  of  which  neither  party  cares  how 
it  is  decided,  and  which  is,  nevertheless,  contin- 

JSunday,  April  12,  1778. 


[  1778 

ued  to  acrimony,  by  the  vanity  with  which  every 
man  resists  confutation.  Dr.  Percy’s  warmth 
proceeded  from  a  cause  which,  perhaps,  does 
him  more  honour  than  he  could  have  derived 
from  juster  criticism.  His  abhorrence  of  Pen¬ 
nant  proceeded  from  his  opinion  that  Pennant 
had  wantonly  and  indecently  censured  his  pa¬ 
tron.  His  anger  made  him  resolve,  that,  for  hav¬ 
ing  been  once  wrong,  he  never  should  be  right. 
Pennant  has  much  in  his  notions  that  I  do  not 
like;  but  still  I  think  a  very  intelligent  traveller. 
If  Percy  is  really  offended,  I  am  sorry;  for  he  is  a 
man  whom  I  never  knew  to  offend  any  one.  He 
is  a  man  very  willing  to  learn,  and  very  able  to 
teach;  a  man,  out  of  whose  company  I  never 
go  without  having  learned  something.  It  is  sure 
that  he  vexes  me  sometimes,  but  I  am  afraid  it 
is  by  making  me  feel  my  own  ignorance.  So 
much  extension  of  mind,  and  so  much  minute 
accuracy  of  enquiry,  if  you  survey  your  whole 
circle  of  acquaintance,  you  will  find  so  scarce,  if 
you  find  it  at  all,  that  you  will  value  Percy  by 
comparison.  Lord  Hailes  is  somewhat  like  him: 
but  Lord  Hailes  does  not,  perhaps,  go  beyond 
him  in  research;  and  I  do  not  know  that  he 
equals  him  in  elegance.  Percy’s  attention  to  po¬ 
etry  has  given  grace  and  splendour  to  his  stud¬ 
ies  of  antiquity.  A  mere  antiquarian  is  a  rugged 
being. 

Upon  the  whole,  you  see  that  what  I  might 
say  in  sport  or  petulance  to  him,  is  very  consist¬ 
ent  with  full  conviction  of  his  merit.  I  am,  dear 
Sir,  your  most,  &c. 

Sam.  Johnson 

April  23,  1778 

To  the  Reverend  Dr.  Percy,  Northumber¬ 
land-House 

Dear  Sir,  I  wrote  to  Dr.  Johnson  on  the  sub¬ 
ject  of  the  Pennantian  controversy;  and  have  re¬ 
ceived  from  him  an  answer  which  will  delight 
you.  I  read  it  yesterday  to  Dr.  Robertson,  at  the 
Exhibition;  and  at  dinner  to  Lord  Percy,  Gen¬ 
eral  Oglethorpe,  &c.  who  dined  with  us  at  Gen¬ 
eral  Paoli’s;  who  was  also  a  witness  to  the  high 
testimony  to  your  honour. 

General  Paoli  desires  the  favour  of  your  com¬ 
pany  next  Tuesday  to  dinner,  to  meet  Dr.  John¬ 
son.  If  I  can,  I  will  call  on  you  to-day.  I  am, 
with  sincere  regard,  your  most  obedient  hum¬ 
ble  servant, 

James  Boswell2 

South  Audley-street,  April  25 

2Though  the  Bishop  of  Dromore  kindly  answered 
the  letters  which  I  wrote  to  him,  relative  to  Dr. 
Johnson’s  early  history;  yet,  in  justice  to  him,  I 
think  it  proper  to  add,  that  the  account  of  the  fore¬ 
going  conversation  and  the  subsequent  transac¬ 
tion,  as  well  as  some  other  conversations  in  which 
he  is  mentioned,  has  been  given  to  the  publick 
without  previous  communication  with  his  Lord- 
ship. 


BOSWELL 


177B]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  389 


On  Monday,  April  13,  I  dined  with  Johnson 
at  Mr.  Langton’s,  where  were  Dr.  Porteus,  then 
Bishop  of  Chester,  now  of  London,  and  Dr.  Stin- 
ton.  He  was  at  first  in  a  very  silent  mood.  Before 
dinner  he  said  nothing  but  “Pretty  baby,55  to 
one  of  the  children.  Langton  said  very  well  to 
me  afterwards,  that  he  could  repeat  Johnson’s 
conversation  before  dinner,  as  Johnson  had 
said  that  he  could  repeat  a  complete  chapter  of 
The  Natural  History  of  Iceland,  from  the  Danish  of 
Horrebow ,  the  whole  of  which  was  exactly  thus: 

Chap,  lxxii.  Concerning  snakes . 

“There  are  no  snakes  to  be  met  with  throughout  the  whole 
island.” 

At  dinner  we  talked  of  another  mode  in  the 
newspapers  of  giving  modern  characters  in  sen¬ 
tences  from  the  classicks,  and  of  the  passage 

Parens  deorum  cultor ,  et  infrequens , 

Insanientis  dum  sapientice 
Consultus  erro ,  nunc  retrorsum 
Vela  dare ,  atque  iter  are  cursus 
Cogor  relictos: 

being  well  applied  to  Soame  Jenyns;  who,  after 
having  wandered  in  the  wilds  of  infidelity,  had 
returned  to  the  Christian  faith.  Mr.  Langton 
asked  Johnson  as  to  the  propriety  of  sapientice 
consultus.  Johnson.  “Though  consultus  was  pri¬ 
marily  an  adjective,  like  amicus  it  came  to  be 
used  as  a  substantive.  So  we  have  Juris  consultus , 
a  consult  in  law.55 

We  talked  of  the  styles  of  different  painters, 
and  how  certainly  a  connoisseur  could  distin¬ 
guish  them;  I  asked,  if  there  was  as  clear  a  dif¬ 
ference  of  styles  in  language  as  in  painting,  or 
even  as  in  hand-writing,  so  that  the  composition 
of  every  individual  may  be  distinguished?  John¬ 
son.  “Yes.  Those  who  have  a  style  of  eminent 
excellence,  such  as  Dryden  and  Milton,  can  al¬ 
ways  be  distinguished.55  I  had  no  doubt  of  this, 
but  what  I  wanted  to  know  was,  whether  there 
was  really  a  peculiar  style  to  every  man  what¬ 
ever,  as  there  is  certainly  a  peculiar  hand-writ- 
ing,  a  peculiar  countenace,  not  widely  different 
in  many,  yet  always  enough  to  be  distinctive: — 

- facies  non  omnibus  una , 

Nec  diver sa  tamen. 

The  Bishop  thought  not;  and  said,  he  supposed 
that  many  pieces  in  Dodsley’s  collection  of  po¬ 
ems,  though  all  very  pretty,  had  nothing  appro¬ 
priated  in  their  style,  and  in  that  particular  could 
not  be  at  all  distinguished.  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir, 
I  think  every  man  whatever  has  a  peculiar  style, 
which  may  be  discovered  by  nice  examination 


and  comparison  with  others:  but  a  man  must 
write  a  great  deal  to  make  his  style  obviously 
discernible.  As  logicians  say,  this  appropria¬ 
tion  of  style  is  infinite  in  potestate ,  limited  in 
actu.” 

Mr.  Topham  Beauclerk  came  in  the  evening, 
and  he  and  Dr.  Johnson  and  I  staid  to  supper. 
It  was  mentioned  that  Dr.  Dodd  had  once  wished 
to  be  a  member  of  The  Literary  Club.  John¬ 
son.  “I  should  be  sorry  if  any  of  our  Club  were 
hanged.  I  will  not  say  but  some  of  them  deserve 
it.551  Beauclerk.  (supposing  this  to  be  aimed  at 
persons  for  whom  he  had  at  that  time  a  wonder¬ 
ful  fancy,  which,  however,  did  not  last  long,) 
was  irritated,  and  eagerly  said,  “You,  Sir,  have  a 
friend,  (naming  him)  who  deserves  to  be  hanged; 
for  he  speaks  behind  their  backs  against  those 
with  whom  he  lives  on  the  best  terms,  and  at¬ 
tacks  them  in  the  news-papers.  He  certainly  ought 
to  be  kicked.”  Johnson.  “Sir,  we  all  do  this  in 
some  degree,  cVeniam  petimus  damusque  vicissim .5 
To  be  sure  it  may  be  done  so  much,  that  a  man 
may  deserve  to  be  kicked.55  Beauclerk.  “He  is 
very  malignant.55  Johnson.  “No,  Sir;  he  is  not 
malignant.  He  is  mischievous,  if  you  will.  He 
would  do  no  man  an  essential  injury;  he  may, 
indeed,  love  to  make  sport  of  people  by  vexing 
their  vanity.  I,  however,  once  knew  an  old  gen¬ 
tleman  who  was  absolutely  malignant.  He  really 
wished  evil  to  others,  and  rejoiced  at  it.55  Bos¬ 
well.  “The  gentleman,  Mr.  Beauclerk,  against 
whom  you  are  so  violent,  is,  I  know,  a  man  of 
good  principles.55  Beauclerk.  “Then  he  does 
not  wear  them  out  in  practice.55 

Dr.  Johnson,  who,  as  I  have  observed  before, 
delighted  in  discrimination  of  character,  and 
having  a  masterly  knowledge  of  human  nature, 
was  willing  to  take  men  as  they  are,  imperfect 
and  with  a  mixture  of  good  and  bad  qualities, 
I  suppose  thought  he  had  said  enough  in  de¬ 
fence  of  his  friend,  of  whose  merits,  notwithstand¬ 
ing  his  exceptional  points,  he  had  a  just  value; 
and  added  no  more  on  the  subject. 

On  Tuesday,  April  14,  I  dined  with  him  at 
General  Oglethorpe’s,  with  General  Paoli  and 
Mr.  Langton.  General  Oglethorpe  declaimed 
against  luxury.  Johnson.  “Depend  upon  it,  Sir, 
every  state  of  society  is  as  luxurious  as  it  can  be. 
Men  always  take  the  best  they  can  get.55  Ogle¬ 
thorpe.  “But  the  best  depends  much  upon  our¬ 
selves;  and  if  we  can  be  as  well  satisfied  with 
plain  things,  we  are  in  the  wrong  to  accustom 
our  palates  to  what  is  high-seasoned  and  ex¬ 
pensive.  What  says  Addison  in  his  Cato ,  speak¬ 
ing  of  the  Numidian? 

JSee  note,  ante .  p.  330. 


39° 

Coarse  are  his  meals ,  the  fortune  of  the  chace , 

Amid  the  running  stream  he  slakes  his  thirst , 

Toils  all  the  day ,  and  at  the  approach  of  night , 

On  the  first  friendly  bank  he  throws  him  down , 

Or  rests  his  head  upon  a  rock  till  morn; 

And  if  the  following  day  he  chance  to  find 
A  new  repast ,  or  an  untasted  spring , 

Blesses  his  stars ,  and  thinks  it's  luxury . 

Let  us  have  that  kind  of  luxury,  Sir,  if  you  will.” 
Johnson.  “But  hold.  Sir;  to  be  merely  satisfied 
is  not  enough.  It  is  in  refinement  and  elegance 
that  the  civilized  man  differs  from  the  savage. 
A  great  part  of  our  industry,  and  all  our  ingenu¬ 
ity  is  exercised  in  procuring  pleasure;  and,  Sir,  a 
hungry  man  has  not  the  same  pleasure  in  eating 
a  plain  dinner,  that  a  hungry  man  has  in  eating 
a  luxurious  dinner.  You  see  I  put  the  case  fairly. 
A  hungry  man  may  have  as  much,  nay  more 
pleasure  in  eating  a  plain  dinner,  than  a  man 
grown  fastidious  has  in  eating  a  luxurious  din¬ 
ner.  But  I  suppose  the  man  who  decides  between 
the  two  dinners,  to  be  equally  a  hungry  man.” 

Talking  of  different  governments, — Johnson. 
“The  more  contracted  that  power  is,  the  more 
easily  it  is  destroyed.  A  country  governed  by  a 
despot  is  an  inverted  cone.  Government  there 
cannot  be  so  firm,  as  when  it  rests  upon  a  broad 
basis  gradually  contracted,  as  the  government 
of  Great  Britain,  which  is  founded  on  the  parlia¬ 
ment,  then  is  in  the  privy  council,  then  in  the 
King.”  Boswell.  “Power,  when  contracted 
into  the  person  of  a  despot,  may  be  easily  de¬ 
stroyed,  as  the  prince  may  be  cut  off.  So 
Caligula  wished  that  the  people  of  Rome  had  but 
one  neck,  that  he  might  cut  them  off  at  a  blow.” 
Oglethorpe.  “It  was  of  the  Senate  he  wished 
that.  The  Senate  by  its  usurpation  controuled 
both  the  Emperour  and  the  people.  And  don’t 
you  think  that  we  see  too  much  of  that  in  our 
own  Parliament?” 

Dr.  Johnson  endeavoured  to  trace  the  ety¬ 
mology  of  Maccaronick  verses,  which  he  thought 
were  of  Italian  invention  from  Maccaroni;  but 
on  being  informed  that  this  would  infer  that  they 
were  the  most  common  and  easy  verses,  mac¬ 
caroni  being  the  most  ordinary  and  simple  food, 
he  was  at  a  loss;  for  he  said,  “He  rather  should 
have  supposed  it  to  import  in  its  primitive  sig¬ 
nification,  a  composition  of  several  things;  for 
Maccaronick  verses  are  verses  made  out  of  a 
mixture  of  different  languages,  that  is,  of  one 
language  with  the  termination  of  another.”  I 
suppose  we  scarcely  know  of  a  language  in  any 
country  where  there  is  any  learning,  in  which 
that  motley  ludicrous  species  of  composition  may 
not  be  found.  1 1  is  particularly  droll  in  Low  Dutch. 


[ 1 778 

The  Polemomiddinia  of  Drummond  of  Hawthorn- 
den,  in  which  there  is  a  jumble  of  many  lan¬ 
guages  moulded,  as  if  it  were  all  in  Latin,  is  well 
known.  Mr.  Langton  made  us  laugh  heartily  at 
one  in  the  Grecian  mould,  by  Joshua  Barnes,  in 
which  are  to  be  found  such  comical  Anglo-Ellen- 
isms  as  KXu/3/3ot<ru'  e^av\Bev :  they  were  banged 
with  clubs. 

On  Wednesday,  April  15,  I  dined  with  Dr. 
Johnson  at  Mr.  Dilly’s,  and  was  in  high  spirits, 
for  I  had  been  a  good  part  of  the  morning  with 
Mr.  Orme,  the  able  and  eloquent  historian  of 
Hindostan,  who  expressed  a  great  admiration  of 
Johnson.  “I  do  not  care  (said  he,)  on  what  sub¬ 
ject  Johnson  talks;  but  I  love  better  to  hear  him 
talk  than  any  body.  He  either  gives  you  new 
thoughts,  or  a  new  colouring.  It  is  a  shame  to 
the  nation  that  he  has  not  been  more  liberally 
rewarded.  Had  I  been  George  the  Third,  and 
thought  as  he  did  about  America,  I  would  have 
given  Johnson  three  hundred  a  year  for  his  Taxa¬ 
tion  no  Tyranny  alone.”  I  repeated  this,  and  John¬ 
son  was  much  pleased  with  such  praise  from 
such  a  man  as  Orme. 

At  Mr.  Dilly’s  to-day  were  Mrs.  Knowles,  the 
ingenious  Quaker  lady,1  Miss  Seward,  the  po¬ 
etess  of  Lichfield,  the  Reverend  Dr.  Mayo,  and 
the  Rev.  Mr.  Beresford,  Tutor  to  the  Duke  of 
Bedford.  Before  dinner  Dr.  Johnson  seized  upon 
Mr.  Charles  Sheridan’s  Account  of  the  late  Revolu¬ 
tion  in  Sweden ,  and  seemed  to  read  it  ravenously, 
as  if  he  devoured  it,  which  was  to  all  appearance 
his  method  of  studying.  “He  knows  how  to  read 
better  than  any  one  (said  Mrs.  Knowles;)  he 
gets  at  the  substance  of  a  book  directly;  he  tears 
out  the  heart  of  it.”  He  kept  it  wrapt  up  in  the 
tablecloth  in  his  lap  during  the  time  of  dinner, 
from  an  avidity  to  have  one  entertainment  in 
readiness  when  he  should  have  finished  another; 
resembling  (if  I  may  use  so  coarse  a  simile)  a 
dog  who  holds  a  bone  in  his  paws  in  reserve, 
while  he  eats  something  else  which  has  been 
thrown  to  him. 

The  subject  of  cookery  having  been  very  nat¬ 
urally  introduced  at  a  table  where  Johnson, 
who  boasted  of  the  niceness  of  his  palate,  owned 
that  “he  always  found  a  good  dinner,”  he  said, 
“I  could  write  a  better  book  of  cookery  than  has 
ever  yet  been  written;  it  should  be  a  book  upon 
philosophical  principles.  Pharmacy  is  now  made 
much  more  simple.  Cookery  may  be  made  so 

xDr.  Johnson,  describing  her  needle-work  in  one 
of  his  letters  to  Mrs.  Thrale,  i,  p.  326,  uses  the 
learned  word  sutile;  which  Mrs.  Thrale  has  mis¬ 
taken,  and  made  the  phrase  injurious  by  writing 
“futile  pictures.” 


BOSWELL 


1778]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  391 


too.  A  prescription  which  is  now  compounded 
of  five  ingredients,  had  formerly  fifty  in  it.  So  in 
cookery,  if  the  nature  of  the  ingredients  be  well 
known,  much  fewer  will  do.  Then  as  you  cannot 
make  bad  meat  good,  I  would  tell  what  is  the 
best  butcher’s  meat,  the  best  beef,  the  best  pieces; 
how  to  choose  young  fowls;  the  proper  seasons 
of  different  vegetables;  and  then  how  to  roast 
and  boil,  and  compound.”  Dilly.  “Mrs.  Glasse’s 
Cookery ,  which  is  the  best,  was  written  by  Dr. 
Hill.  Half  the  trade 1  know  this.”  Johnson.  “Well, 
Sir.  This  shews  how  much  better  the  subject  of 
cookery  may  be  treated  by  a  philosopher.  I 
doubt  if  the  book  be  written  by  Dr.  Hill;  for,  in 
Mrs.  Glasse’s  Cookery ,  which  I  have  looked  into, 
salt-petre  and  sal-prunella  are  spoken  of  as  dif¬ 
ferent  substances,  whereas  sal-prunella  is  only 
salt-petre  burnt  on  charcoal;  and  Hill  could  not 
be  ignorant  of  this.  However,  as  the  greatest  part 
of  such  a  book  is  made  by  transcription,  this 
mistake  may  have  been  carelessly  adopted.  But 
you  shall  see  what  a  Book  of  Cookery  I  shall 
make !  I  shall  agree  with  Mr.  Dilly  for  the  copy¬ 
right.”  Miss  Seward.  “That  would  be  Hercules 
with  the  distaff  indeed.”  Johnson.  “No,  Ma¬ 
dam.  Women  can  spin  very  well;  but  they  can¬ 
not  make  a  good  book  of  Cookery.” 

Johnson.  “O !  Mr.  Dilly — you  must  know  that 
an  English  Benedictine  Monk  at  Paris  has  trans¬ 
lated  The  Duke  of  Berwick's  Memoirs ,  from  the 
original  French,  and  has  sent  them  to  me  to  sell. 
I  offered  them  to  Strahan,  who  sent  them  back 
with  this  answer: — ‘That  the  first  book  he  had 
published  was  the  Duke  of  Berwick's  Life ,  by  which 
he  had  lost:  and  he  hated  the  name.’— Now  I 
honestly  tell  you,  that  Strahan  has  refused  them; 
but  I  also  honestly  tell  you,  that  he  did  it  upon 
no  principle,  for  he  never  looked  into  them.” 
Dilly.  “Are  they  well  translated,  Sir?”  John¬ 
son.  “Why,  Sir,  very  well — in  a  style  very  cur¬ 
rent  and  very  clear.  I  have  written  to  the  Bene¬ 
dictine  to  give  me  an  answer  upon  two  points — 
What  evidence  is  there  that  the  letters  are  au- 
thentick?  (for  if  they  are  not  authentick  they  are 
nothing;) — And  how  long  will  it  be  before  the 
original  French  is  published?  For  if  the  French 
edition  is  not  to  appear  for  a  considerable  time, 
the  translation  will  be  almost  as  valuable  as  an 
original  book.  They  will  make  two  volumes  in 
octavo;  and  I  have  undertaken  to  correct  every 
sheet  as  it  comes  from  the  press.”  Mr.  Dilly  de¬ 
sired  to  see  them,  and  said  he  would  send  for 

xAs  Physicians  are  called  the  Faculty ,  and  Coun¬ 
sellors  at  Law  the  Profession;  the  Booksellers  of  Lon¬ 
don  are  denominated  the  Trade.  Johnson  disap¬ 
proved  of  these  denominations. 


them.  He  asked  Dr.  Johnson  if  he  would  write  a 
Preface  to  them.  Johnson.  “No,  Sir.  The  Bene¬ 
dictines  were  very  kind  to  me,  and  I’ll  do  what 
I  undertook  to  do;  but  I  will  not  mingle  my 
name  with  them.  I  am  to  gain  nothing  by  them. 
I’ll  turn  them  loose  upon  the  world,  and  let  them 
take  their  chance.”  Dr.  Mayo.  “Pray,  Sir,  are 
Ganganelli’s  letters  authentick?”  Johnson.  “No, 
Sir.  Voltaire  put  the  same  question  to  the  editor 
of  them,  that  I  did  to  Macpherson — Where  are 
the  originals?” 

Mrs.  Knowles  affected  to  complain  that  men 
had  much  more  liberty  allowed  them  than  wom¬ 
en.  Johnson.  “Why,  Madam,  women  have  all 
the  liberty  they  should  wish  to  have.  We  have 
all  the  labour  and  the  danger,  and  the  women 
all  the  advantage.  We  go  to  sea,  we  build  houses, 
we  do  everything,  in  short,  to  pay  our  court  to 
the  women.”  Mrs.  Knowles.  “The  Doctor  rea¬ 
sons  very  wittily,  but  not  convincingly.  Now, 
take  the  instance  of  building;  the  mason’s  wife, 
if  she  is  ever  seen  in  liquor,  is  ruined;  the  mason 
may  get  himself  drunk  as  often  as  he  pleases, 
with  little  loss  of  character;  nay  may  let  his  wife 
and  children  starve.”  Johnson.  “Madam,  you 
must  consider,  if  the  mason  does  get  himself 
drunk,  and  let  his  wife  and  children  starve,  the 
parish  will  oblige  him  to  find  security  for  their 
maintenance.  We  have  different  modes  of  re¬ 
straining  evil.  Stocks  for  the  men,  a  ducking- 
stool  for  women,  and  a  pound  for  beasts.  If  we 
requre  more  perfection  from  women  than  from 
ourselves,  it  is  doing  them  honour.  And  women 
have  not  the  same  temptations  that  we  have: 
they  may  always  live  in  virtuous  company;  men 
must  mix  in  the  world  indiscriminately.  If  a 
woman  has  no  inclination  to  do  what  is  wrong, 
being  secured  from  it  is  no  restraint  to  her.  I  am 
at  liberty  to  walk  into  the  Thames;  but  if  I  were 
to  try  it,  my  friends  would  restrain  me  in  Bed¬ 
lam,  and  I  should  be  obliged  to  them.”  Mrs. 
Knowles.  “Still,  Doctor,  I  cannot  help  thinking 
it  a  hardship  that  more  indulgence  is  allowed  to 
men  than  to  women.  It  gives  a  superiority  to 
men,  to  which  I  do  not  see  how  they  are  enti¬ 
tled.”  Johnson.  “It  is  plain,  Madam,  one  or 
other  must  have  the  superiority.  As  Shakspeare 
says,  ‘If  two  men  ride  on  a  horse,  one  must 
ride  behind.’  ”  Dilly.  “I  suppose,  Sir,  Mrs. 
Knowles  would  have  them  to  ride  in  panniers, 
one  on  each  side.”  Johnson.  “Then,  Sir,  the 
horse  would  throw  them  both.”  Mrs.  Knowles. 
“Well,  I  hope  that  in  another  world  the  sexes 
will  be  equal.”  Boswell.  “That  is  being  too  am¬ 
bitious,  Madam.  We  might  as  well  desire  to  be 
equal  with  the  angels.  We  shall  all,  I  hope,  be 


392 

happy  in  a  future  state,  but  we  must  not  expect 
to  be  all  happy  in  the  same  degree.  It  is  enough 
if  we  be  happy  according  to  our  several  capaci¬ 
ties.  A  worthy  carman  will  get  to  heaven  as  well 
as  Sir  Isaac  Newton.  Yet,  though  equally  good, 
they  will  not  have  the  same  degrees  of  happi¬ 
ness.”  Johnson.  “Probably  not.” 

Upon  this  subject  I  had  once  before  sounded 
him,  by  mentioning  the  late  Reverend  Mr.  Brown, 
of  Utrecht’s,  image;  that  a  great  and  small  glass, 
though  equally  full,  did  not  hold  an  equal  quan¬ 
tity;  which  he  threw  out  to  refute  David  Hume’s 
saying,  that  a  little  miss,  going  to  dance  at  a 
ball,  in  a  fine  dress,  was  as  happy  as  a  great  ora- 
tour,  after  having  made  an  eloquent  and  ap¬ 
plauded  speech.  After  some  thought,  Johnson 
said,  “I  come  over  to  the  parson.”  As  an  in¬ 
stance  of  coincidence  of  thinking,  Mr.  Dilly  told 
me,  that  Dr.  King,  a  late  dissenting  minister  in 
London,  said  to  him,  upon  the  happiness  in  a 
future  state  of  good  men  of  different  capacities, 
“A  pail  does  not  hold  so  much  as  a  tub;  but,  if 
it  be  equally  full,  it  has  no  reason  to  complain. 
Every  Saint  in  heaven  will  have  as  much  happi¬ 
ness  as  he  can  hold.”  Mr.  Dilly  thought  this  a 
clear,  though  a  familiar  illustration  of  the  phrase, 
“One  star  differed!  from  another  in  brightness.” 

Dr.  Mayo  having  asked  Johnson’s  opinion  of 
Soame  Jenyns’s  View  of  the  Internal  Evidence  of  the 
Christian  Religion;— Johnson.  “I  think  it  a  pretty 
book;  not  very  theological  indeed;  and  there 
seems  to  be  an  affectation  of  ease  and  careless¬ 
ness,  as  if  it  were  not  suitable  to  his  character  to 
be  very  serious  about  the  matter.  ’  ’  Boswell.  c  4 He 
may  have  intended  this  to  introduce  his  book 
the  better  among  genteel  people,  who  might  be 
unwilling  to  read  too  grave  a  treatise.  There  is  a 
general  levity  in  the  age.  We  have  physicians 
now  with  bag-wigs;  may  we  not  have  airy  di¬ 
vines,  at  least  somewhat  less  solemn  in  their  ap¬ 
pearance  than  they  used  to  be?”  Johnson.  “Jen- 
yns  might  mean  as  you  say.”  Boswell.  CiTou 
should  like  his  book,  Mrs.  Knowles,  as  it  main¬ 
tains,  as  you  friends  do,  that  courage  is  not  a 
Christian  virtue.”  Mrs.  Knowles.  “Yes,  indeed, 
I  like  him  there;  but  I  cannot  agree  with  him, 
that  friendship  is  not  a  Christian  virtue.”  John¬ 
son.  “Why,  Madam,  strictly  speaking,  he  is  right. 
All  friendship  is  preferring  the  interest  of  a  friend, 
to  the  neglect,  or,  perhaps,  against  the  interest 
of  others;  so  that  an  old  Greek  said,  ‘He  that 
has  friends  has  no  friend .’  Now  Christianity  rec¬ 
ommends  universal  benevolence,  to  consider  all 
men  as  our  brethren,  which  is  contrary  to  the 
virtue  of  friendship,  as  described  by  the  ancient 
philosophers.  Surely,  Madam,  your  sect  must 


[ 1 778 

approve  of  this;  for,  you  call  all  men  friends” 
Mrs.  Knowles.  “We  are  commanded  to  do  good 
to  all  men,  ‘but  especially  to  them  who  are  of  the 
household  of  Faith.’  ’’Johnson.  “Well,  Madam. 
The  household  of  Faith  is  wide  enough.”  Mrs. 
Knowles.  “But,  Doctor,  our  Saviour  had  twelve 
Apostles,  yet  there  was  one  whom  he  loved.  John 
was  called4  thedisciple  whomjESus  loved. ’  ’’John¬ 
son.  (with  eyes  sparkling  benignantly,)  “Very 
well,  indeed,  Madam.  You  have  said  very  well.” 
Boswell.  “A  fine  application.  Pray,  Sir,  had  you 
ever  thought  of  it?”  Johnson.  “I  had  not,  Sir.” 

From  this  pleasing  subject,  he,  I  know  not 
how  or  why,  made  a  sudden  transition  to  one 
upon  which  he  was  a  violent  aggressor;  for  he 
said,  “I  am  willing  to  love  all  mankind,  except  an 
American and  his  inflammable  corruption  burst¬ 
ing  into  horrid  fire,  he  “breathed  out  threaten- 
ings  and  slaughter”;  calling  them,  “Rascals — 
Robbers — Pirates”;  and  exclaiming,  he’d  “burn 
and  destroy  them.”  Miss  Seward,  looking  to  him 
with  mild  but  steady  astonishment,  said,  “Sir, 
this  is  an  instance  that  we  are  always  most  violent 
against  those  whom  we  have  injured.” — He  was 
irritated  still  more  by  this  delicate  and  keen  re¬ 
proach;  and  roared  out  another  tremendous  vol¬ 
ley,  which  one  might  fancy  could  be  heard  across 
the  Atlantick.  During  this  tempest  I  sat  in  great 
uneasiness,  lamenting  his  heat  of  temper;  till,  by 
degrees,  I  diverted  his  attention  to  other  topicks. 

Dr.  Mayo,  (to  Dr.  Johnson,)  “Pray,  Sir,  have 
you  read  Edwards ,  of  New  England ,  on  Grace!” 
Johnson.  “No,  Sir.”  Boswell.  “It  puzzled  me 
so  much  as  to  the  freedom  of  the  human  will,  by 
stating,  with  wonderful  acute  ingenuity,  our  be¬ 
ing  actuated  by  a  series  of  motives  which  we 
cannot  resist,  that  the  only  relief  I  had  was  to 
forget  it.”  Mayo.  “But  he  makes  the  proper  dis¬ 
tinction  between  moral  and  physical  necessity.” 
Boswell.  “Alas,  Sir,  they  come  both  to  the  same 
thing.  You  may  be  bound  as  hard  by  chains 
when  covered  by  leather,  as  when  the  iron  ap¬ 
pears.  The  argument  for  the  moral  necessity  of 
human  actions  is  always,  I  observe,  fortified  by 
supposing  universal  prescience  to  be  one  of  the 
attributes  of  the  Deity.”  Johnson.  “You  are  sur¬ 
er  that  you  are  free,  than  you  are  of  prescience; 
you  are  surer  that  you  can  lift  up  your  finger  or 
not  as  you  please,  than  you  are  of  any  conclusion 
from  a  deduction  of  reasoning.  But  let  us  consid¬ 
er  a  little  the  objection  from  prescience.  It  is  cer¬ 
tain  I  am  either  to  go  home  to-night  or  not;  that 
does  not  prevent  my  freedom.”  Boswell.  “That 
it  is  certain  you  are  either  to  go  home  or  not,  does 
not  prevent  your  freedom;  because  the  liberty 
of  choice  between  the  two  is  compatible  with 


BOSWELL 


i778  ] 

that  certainty.  But  if  one  of  these  events  be  cer¬ 
tain  now ,  you  have  no  future  power  of  volition.  If 
it  be  certain  you  are  to  go  home  to-night,  you 
must  go  home”  Johnson.  4  £  If  I  am  well  acquainted 
with  a  man,  I  can  judge  with  great  probability 
how  he  will  act  in  any  case,  without  his  being 
restrained  by  my  judging.  God  may  have  this 
probability  increased  to  certainty.”  Boswell. 
£C  When  it  is  increased  to  certainty ,  freedom  ceases, 
because  that  cannot  be  certainly  foreknown, 
which  is  not  certain  at  the  time;  but  if  it  be  cer¬ 
tain  at  the  time,  it  is  a  contradiction  in  terms  to 
maintain  that  there  can  be  afterwards  any  con¬ 
tingency  dependent  upon  the  exercise  of  will  or 
any  thing  else.”  Johnson.  “All  theory  is  against 
the  freedom  of  the  will;  all  experience  for  it.” — 
I  did  not  push  the  subject  any  farther.  I  was  glad 
to  find  him  so  mild  in  discussing  a  question  of 
the  most  abstract  nature,  involved  with  theo¬ 
logical  tenets,  which  he  generally  would  not  suf¬ 
fer  to  be  in  any  degree  opposed.1 

He  as  usual  defended  luxury;  “You  cannot 
spend  money  in  luxury  without  doing  good  to 
the  poor.  Nay,  you  do  more  good  to  them  by 
spending  it  in  luxury,  than  by  giving  it:  for  by 
spending  it  in  luxury,  you  make  them  exert  in¬ 
dustry,  whereas  by  giving  it,  you  keep  them  idle. 
I  own,  indeed,  there  may  be  more  virtue  in  giv¬ 
ing  it  immediately  in  charity,  than  in  spending 
it  in  luxury;  though  there  may  be  a  pride  in  that 
too.”  Miss  Seward  asked,  if  this  was  not  Mande- 
ville’s  doctrine  of  “private  vices  publick  bene¬ 
fits.”  Johnson.  “The  fallacy  of  that  book  is,  that 
Mandeville  defines  neither  vices  nor  benefits. 
He  reckons  among  vices  everything  that  gives 
pleasure.  He  takes  the  narrowest  system  of  mo¬ 
rality,  monastick  morality,  which  holds  pleasure 
itself  to  be  a  vice,  such  as  eating  salt  with  our  fish, 
because  it  makes  it  eat  better;  and  he  reckons 
wealth  as  a  publick  benefit,  which  is  by  no 
means  always  true.  Pleasure  of  itself  is  not  a  vice. 
Having  a  garden,  which  we  all  know  to  be  per¬ 
fectly  innocent,  is  a  great  pleasure.  At  the  same 
time,  in  this  state  of  being  there  are  many  pleas¬ 
ures  vices,  which  however  are  so  immediately 
agreeable  that  we  can  hardly  abstain  from  them. 
The  happiness  of  Heaven  will  be,  that  pleasure 
and  virtue  will  be  perfectly  consistent.  Mande¬ 
ville  puts  the  case  of  a  man  who  gets  drunk  in 
an  alehouse;  and  says  it  is  a  publick  benefit,  be¬ 
cause  so  much  money  is  got  by  it  to  the  publick. 

xIf  any  of  my  readers  are  disturbed  by  this  thorny 
question,  I  beg  leave  to  recommend  to  them  Letter 
69  of  Montesquieu’s  Lettres  Persanes;  and  the  late 
Mr.  John  Palmer  of  Islington’s  Answer  to  Dr. 
Priestley’s  mechanical  arguments  for  what  he  ab¬ 
surdly  calls  “Philosophical  Necessity.” 


393 

But  it  must  be  considered,  that  all  the  good 
gained  by  this,  through  the  gradation  of  ale¬ 
house-keeper,  brewer,  maltster,  and  farmer,  is 
overbalanced  by  the  evil  caused  to  the  man  and 
his  family  by  his  getting  drunk.  This  is  the  way 
to  try  what  is  vicious,  by  ascertaining  whether 
more  evil  than  good  is  produced  by  it  upon  the 
whole,  which  is  the  case  in  all  vice.  It  may  hap¬ 
pen  that  good  is  produced  by  vice;  but  not  as 
vice;  for  instance,  a  robber  may  take  money 
from  its  owner,  and  give  it  to  one  who  will  make 
a  better  use  of  it.  Here  is  good  produced;  but 
not  by  the  robbery  as  robbery,  but  as  transla¬ 
tion  of  property.  I  read  Mandeville  forty,  or,  I 
believe,  fifty  years  ago.  He  did  not  puzzle  me; 
he  opened  my  views  into  real  life  very  much.  No, 
it  is  clear  that  the  happiness  of  society  depends 
on  virtue.  In  Sparta,  theft  was  allowed  by  gen¬ 
eral  consent:  theft,  therefore,  was  there  not  a 
crime,  but  then  there  was  no  security;  and  what 
a  life  must  they  have  had,  when  there  was  no  se¬ 
curity.  Without  truth  there  must  be  a  dissolu¬ 
tion  of  society.  As  it  is,  there  is  so  little  truth, 
that  we  are  almost  afraid  to  trust  our  ears;  but 
how  should  we  be,  if  falsehood  were  multiplied 
ten  times?  Society  is  held  together  by  communi¬ 
cation  and  information;  and  I  remember  this 
remark  of  Sir  Thomas  Brown’s,  £Do  the  devils 
lie?  No;  for  then  Hell  could  not  subsist.’  ” 

Talking  of  Miss  - ,  a  literary  lady,  he 

said,  “I  was  obliged  to  speak  to  Miss  Reynolds, 
to  let  her  know  that  I  desired  she  would  not  flat¬ 
ter  me  so  much.”  Somebody  now  observed,  “She 
flatters  Garrick.”  Johnson.  “She  is  in  the  right 
to  flatter  Garrick.  She  is  in  the  right  for  two 
reasons;  first,  because  she  has  the  world  with 
her,  who  have  been  praising  Garrick  these  thirty 
years;  and  secondly,  because  she  is  rewarded  for 
it  by  Garrick.  Why  should  she  flatter  me?  I  can 
do  nothing  for  her.  Let  her  carry  her  praise  to  a 
better  market.  (Then  turning  to  Mrs.  Knowles.) 
You,  Madam,  have  been  flattering  me  all  the 
evening;  I  wish  you  would  give  Boswell  a  little 
now.  If  you  knew  his  merit  as  well  as  I  do,  you 
would  say  a  great  deal;  he  is  the  best  travelling 
companion  in  the  world.” 

Somebody  mentioned  the  Reverend  Mr.  Ma¬ 
son’s  prosecution  of  Mr.  Murray,  the  bookseller, 
for  having  inserted  in  a  collection  of  Grafs  Po¬ 
ems ,  only  fifty  lines,  of  which  Mr.  Mason  had 
still  the  exclusive  property,  under  the  statute  of 
Queen  Anne;  and  that  Mr.  Mason  had  perse¬ 
vered,  notwithstanding  his  being  requested  to 
name  his  own  terms  of  compensation.2  Johnson 

2See  A  Letter  to  W.  Mason,  A. M.,  from  J.  Murray y 
Bookseller  in  London;  2nd  edit.,  p.  20. 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


394  BOSWELL  [  1778 


signified  his  displeasure  at  Mr.  Mason’s  conduct 
very  strongly;  but  added,  by  way  of  shewing 
that  he  was  not  surprized  at  it,  “Mason’s  a 
Whig.”  Mrs.  Knowles,  (not  hearing  distinct- 
ly,)  “What!  a  Prig,  Sir?”  Johnson.  “Worse, 
Madam;  a  Whig!  But  he  is  both.” 

I  expressed  a  horrour  at  the  thought  of  death. 
Mrs.  Knowles.  “Nay,  thou  should’st  not  have 
a  horrour  for  what  is  the  gate  of  life.”  Johnson. 
(standing  upon  the  hearth  rolling  about,  with  a 
serious,  solemn,  and  somewhat  gloomy  air,)  “No 
rational  man  can  die  without  uneasy  apprehen¬ 
sion.”  Mrs.  Knowles.  “The  Scriptures  tell  us, 
‘The  righteous  shall  have  hope  in  his  death.’  ” 
Johnson.  “Yes,  Madam;  that  is,  he  shall  not 
have  despair.  But,  consider,  his  hope  of  salva¬ 
tion  must  be  founded  on  the  terms  on  which  it  is 
promised  that  the  mediation  of  our  Saviour 
shall  be  applied  to  us, — namely,  obedience;  and 
where  obedience  has  failed,  then,  as  suppletory 
to  it,  repentance.  But  what  man  can  say  that  his 
obedience  has  been  such,  as  he  would  approve 
of  in  another,  or  even  in  himself  upon  close  ex¬ 
amination,  or  that  his  repentance  has  not  been 
such  as  to  require  being  repented  of?  No  man 
can  be  sure  that  his  obedience  and  repentance 
will  obtain  salvation.”  Mrs.  Knowles.  “But  di¬ 
vine  intimation  of  acceptance  may  be  made  to 
the  soul.”  Johnson.  “Madam,  it  may;  but  I 
should  not  think  the  better  of  a  man  who  should 
tell  me  on  his  death-bed  he  was  sure  of  salva¬ 
tion.  A  man  cannot  be  sure  himself  that  he  has 
divine  intimation  of  acceptance;  much  less  can 
he  make  others  sure  that  he  has  it.”  Boswell. 
“Then,  Sir,  we  must  be  contented  to  acknowl¬ 
edge  that  death  is  a  terrible  thing.”  Johnson. 
“Yes,  Sir.  I  have  made  no  approaches  to  a  state 
which  can  look  on  it  as  not  terrible.”  Mrs. 
Knowles,  (seeming  to  enjoy  a  pleasing  serenity  in 
the  persuasion  of  benignant  divine  light,)  “Does 
not  St.  Paul  say,  T  have  fought  the  good  fight  of 
faith,  I  have  finished  my  course;  henceforth  is 
laid  up  for  me  a  crown  of  life?’  ’’Johnson.  “Yes, 
Madam;  but  here  was  a  man  inspired,  a  man 
who  had  been  converted  by  supernatural  inter¬ 
position.”  Boswell.  “In  prospect  death  is  dread¬ 
ful;  but  in  fact  we  find  that  people  die  easy.” 
Johnson. “Why,  Sir,  most  people  have  not  thought 
much  of  the  matter,  so  cannot  say  much,  and  it 
is  supposed  they  die  easy.  Few  believe  it  certain 
they  are  then  to  die;  and  those  who  do,  set  them¬ 
selves  to  behave  with  resolution,  as  a  man  does 
who  is  going  to  be  hanged.  He  is  not  the  less  un¬ 
willing  to  be  hanged.”  Miss  Seward.  “There  is 
one  mode  of  the  fear  of  death,  which  is  certainly 
absurd;  and  that  is  the  dread  of  annihilation, 


which  is  only  a  pleasing  sleep  without  a  dream.” 
Johnson.  “It  is  neither  pleasing,  nor  sleep;  it  is 
nothing.  Now  mere  existence  is  so  much  better 
than  nothing,  that  one  would  rather  exist  even 
in  pain,  than  not  exist.”  Boswell.  “If  annihila¬ 
tion  be  nothing,  then  existing  in  pain  is  not  a 
comparative  state,  but  is  a  positive  evil,  which  I 
cannot  think  we  should  choose.  I  must  be  al¬ 
lowed  to  differ  here;  and  it  would  lessen  the 
hope  of  a  future  state  founded  on  the  argument, 
that  the  Supreme  Being,  who  is  good  as  he  is 
great,  will  hereafter  compensate  for  our  present 
sufferings  in  this  life.  For  if  existence,  such  as  we 
have  it  here,  be  comparatively  a  good,  we  have 
no  reason  to  complain,  though  no  more  of  it 
should  be  given  to  us.  But  if  our  only  state  of  ex¬ 
istence  were  in  this  world,  then  we  might  with 
some  reason  complain  that  we  are  so  dissatisfied 
with  our  enjoyments  compared  with  our  de¬ 
sires.”  Johnson.  “The  lady  confounds  annihila¬ 
tion,  which  is  nothing,  with  the  apprehension  of 
it,  which  is  dreadful.  It  is  in  the  apprehension  of 
it  that  the  horrour  of  annihilation  consists.” 

Of  John  Wesley,  he  said,  “He  can  talk  well 
on  any  subject.”  Boswell.  “Pray,  Sir,  what  has 
he  made  of  his  story  of  a  ghost?”  Johnson.  “Why, 
Sir,  he  believes  it;  but  not  on  sufficient  author¬ 
ity.  He  did  not  take  time  enough  to  examine  the 
girl.  It  was  at  Newcastle,  where  the  ghost  was 
said  to  have  appeared  to  a  young  woman  several 
times,  mentioning  something  about  the  right  to 
an  old  house,  advising  application  to  be  made  to 
an  attorney,  which  was  done;  and,  at  the  same 
time,  saying  the  attorney  would  do  nothing, 
which  proved  to  be  the  fact.  ‘This  (says  John,)  is 
a  proof  that  a  ghost  knows  our  thoughts.’  Now 
(laughing,)  it  is  not  necessary  to  know  our 
thoughts,  to  tell  that  an  attorney  will  sometimes 
do  nothing.  Charles  Wesley,  who  is  a  more  sta¬ 
tionary  man,  does  not  believe  the  story.  I  am 
sorry  that  John  did  not  take  more  pains  to  in¬ 
quire  into  the  evidence  for  it.”  Miss  Seward. 
(with  an  incredulous  smile,)  “What,  Sir!  about 
a  ghost?”  Johnson,  (with  solemn  vehemence,) 
“Yes,  Madam:  this  is  a  question  which,  after 
five  thousand  years,  is  yet  undecided;  a  ques¬ 
tion,  whether  in  theology  or  philosophy,  one  of 
the  most  important  that  can  come  before  the 
human  understanding.” 

Mrs.  Knowles  mentioned,  as  a  proselyte  to 

Quakerism,  Miss - ,  a  young  lady  well  known 

to  Dr.  Johnson,  for  whom  he  had  shewn  much 
affection;  while  she  ever  had,  and  still  retained, 
a  great  respect  for  him.  Mrs.  Knowles  at  the 
same  time  took  an  opportunity  of  letting  him 
know  “that  the  amiable  young  creature  was  sor- 


1778] 

ry  at  finding  that  he  was  offended  at  her  leaving 
the  Church  of  England  and  embracing  a  sim¬ 
pler  faith”;  and,  in  the  gentlest  and  most  per¬ 
suasive  manner,  solicited  his  kind  indulgence  for 
what  was  sincerely  a  matter  of  conscience.  John¬ 
son,  (frowning  very  angrily,)  4 ‘Madam,  she  is 
an  odious  wench.  She  could  not  have  any  prop¬ 
er  conviction  that  it  was  her  duty  to  change  her 
religion,  which  is  the  most  important  of  all  sub¬ 
jects,  and  should  be  studied  with  all  care,  and 
with  all  the  helps  we  can  get.  She  knew  no  more 
of  the  Church  which  she  left,  and  that  which  she 
embraced,  than  she  did  of  the  difference  between 
the  Copernican  and  Ptolemaick  systems.”  Mrs. 
Knowles.  “She  had  the  New  Testament  before 
her.”  Johnson.  “Madam,  she  could  not  under¬ 
stand  the  New  Testament,  the  most  difficult 
book  in  the  world,  for  which  the  study  of  a  life 
is  required.”  Mrs.  Knowles.  “It  is  clear  as  to 
essentials.”  Johnson.  “But  not  as  to  controversi¬ 
al  points.  The  heathens  were  easily  converted, 
because  they  had  nothing  to  give  up;  but  we 
ought  not,  without  very  strong  conviction  in¬ 
deed,  to  desert  the  religion  in  which  we  have 
been  educated.  That  is  the  religion  given  you, 
the  religion  in  which  it  may  be  said  Providence 
has  placed  you.  If  you  live  conscientiously  in 
that  religion,  you  may  be  safe.  But  errour  is  dan¬ 
gerous  indeed,  if  you  err  when  you  choose  a  re¬ 
ligion  for  yourself.”  Mrs.  Knowles.  “Must  we 
then  go  by  implicit  faith?”  Johnson.  “Why, 
Madam,  the  greatest  part  of  our  knowledge  is 
implicit  faith;  and  as  to  religion,  have  we  heard 
all  that  a  disciple  of  Confucius,  all  that  a  Ma¬ 
hometan,  can  say  for  himself?”  He  then  rose 
again  into  passion,  and  attacked  the  young  pro¬ 
selyte  in  the  severest  terms  of  reproach,  so  that 
both  the  ladies  seemed  to  be  much  shocked.1 

1Mrs.  Knowles,  not  satisfied  with  the  fame  of  her 
needlework,  the  “sutile  pictures”  mentioned  by  John¬ 
son,  in  which  she  has  indeed  displayed  much  dex¬ 
terity,  nay,  with  the  fame  of  reasoning  better  than 
women  generally  do,  as  I  have  fairly  shewn  her  to 
have  done,  communicated  to  me  a  Dialogue  of 
considerable  length,  which  after  many  years  had 
elapsed,  she  wrote  down  as  having  passed  between 
Dr.  Johnson  and  herself  at  this  interview.  As  I  had 
not  the  least  recollection  of  it,  and  did  not  find  the 
smallest  trace  of  it  in  my  Record  taken  at  the  time,  I 
could  not  in  consistency  with  my  firm  regard  to 
authenticity,  insert  it  in  my  work.  It  has,  however, 
been  published  in  The  Gentleman's  Magazine  for 
June,  1 791 .  It  chiefly  relates  to  the  principles  of  the 
sect  called  Quakers;  and  no  doubt  the  Lady  appears 
to  have  greatly  the  advantage  of  Dr.  Johnson  in 
argument  as  well  as  expression.  From  what  I  have 
now  stated,  and  from  the  internal  evidence  of  the 
paper  itself,  any  one  who  may  have  the  curiosity 
to  peruse  it,  will  judge  whether  it  was  wrong  in  me 
to  reject  it,  however  willing  to  gratify  Mrs.  Knowles. 


395 

We  remained  together  till  it  was  pretty  late. 
Notwithstanding  occasional  explosions  of  vio¬ 
lence,  we  were  all  delighted  upon  the  whole 
with  Johnson.  I  compared  him  at  this  time  to  a 
warm  West- Indian  climate,  where  you  have  a 
bright  sun,  quick  vegetation,  luxuriant  foliage, 
luscious  fruits;  but  where  the  same  heat  some¬ 
times  produces  thunder,  lightning,  earthquakes, 
in  a  terrible  degree. 

April  17,  being  Good  Friday,  I  waited  on 
Johnson,  as  usual.  I  observed  at  breakfast  that 
although  it  was  a  part  of  his  abstemious  disci¬ 
pline  on  this  most  solemn  fast,  to  take  no  milk 
in  his  tea,  yet  when  Mrs.  Desmoulins  inadvert¬ 
ently  poured  it  in,  he  did  not  reject  it.  I  talked 
of  the  strange  indecision  of  mind,  and  imbecility 
in  the  common  occurrences  of  life,  which  we 
may  observe  in  some  people.  Johnson.  “Why, 
Sir,  I  am  in  the  habit  of  getting  others  to  do 
things  for  me.”  Boswell.  “What,  Sir!  have  you 
that  weakness?”  Johnson.  “Yes,  Sir.  But  I  al¬ 
ways  think  afterwards  I  should  have  done  better 
for  myself.” 

I  told  him  that  at  a  gentleman’s  house  where 
there  was  thought  to  be  such  extravagance  or 
bad  management,  that  he  was  living  much  be¬ 
yond  his  income,  his  lady  had  objected  to  the 
cutting  of  a  pickled  mango,  and  that  I  had  taken 
an  opportunity  to  ask  the  price  of  it,  and  found 
it  was  only  two  shillings;  so  here  was  a  very  poor 
saving.  Johnson.  “Sir,  that  is  the  blundering 
ceconomy  of  a  narrow  understanding.  It  is  stop¬ 
ping  one  hole  in  a  sieve.” 

I  expressed  some  inclination  to  publish  an  ac¬ 
count  of  my  Travels  upon  the  continent  of  Eur¬ 
ope,  for  which  I  had  a  variety  of  materials  col¬ 
lected.  Johnson.  “I  do  not  say,  Sir,  you  may 
not  publish  your  travels;  but  I  give  you  my  opin¬ 
ion,  that  you  would  lessen  yourself  by  it.  What 
can  you  tell  of  countries  so  well  known  as  those 
upon  the  continent  of  Europe,  which  you  have 
visited?”  Boswell.  “But  I  can  give  an  enter¬ 
taining  narrative,  with  many  incidents,  anec¬ 
dotes,  jeux  di esprit,  and  remarks,  so  as  to  make 
very  pleasant  reading.”  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir, 
most  modern  travellers  in  Europe  who  have  pub¬ 
lished  their  travels,  have  been  laughed  at:  I  would 
not  have  you  added  to  the  number.2  The  world 
is  now  not  contented  to  be  merely  entertained 
by  a  traveller’s  narrative;  they  want  to  learn 
something.  Now  some  of  my  friends  asked  me, 
why  I  did  not  give  some  account  of  my  travels 
in  France.  The  reason  is  plain;  intelligent  read- 

2I  believe,  however,  I  shall  follow  my  own  opin¬ 
ion;  for  the  world  has  shewn  a  very  flattering  par¬ 
tiality  to  my  writings,  on  many  occasions. 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


396  BOSWELL  [1778 

ers  had  seen  more  of  France  than  I  had.  You  It  was  in  Butcher-row  that  this  meeting  hap- 


might  have  liked  my  travels  in  France,  and  The 
Club  might  have  liked  them;  but,  upon  the  whole, 
there  would  have  been  more  ridicule  than  good 
produced  by  them.”  Boswell.  “I  cannot  agree 
with  you,  Sir.  People  would  like  to  read  what 
you  say  of  any  thing.  Suppose  a  face  has  been 
painted  by  fifty  painters  before;  still  we  love  to 
see  it  done  by  Sir  Joshua.”  Johnson.  “True,  Sir, 
but  Sir  Joshua  cannot  paint  a  face  when  he  has 
not  tune  to  look  on  it.”  Boswell.  Sir,  a  sketch 
of  any  sort  by  him  is  valuable.  And,  Sir,  to  talk 
to  you  in  your  own  style  (raising  my  voice,  and 
shaking  my  head,)  you  should  have  given  us  your 
travels  in  France.  I  am  sure  I  am  right,  and 
there's  an  end  on't .” 

I  said  to  him  that  it  was  certainly  true,  as  my 
friend  Dempster  had  observed  in  his  letter  to  me 
upon  the  subject,  that  a  great  part  of  what  was 
in  his  Journey  to  the  Western  Islands  of  Scotland  had 
been  in  his  mind  before  he  left  London.  John¬ 
son.  “Why  yes,  Sir,  the  topicks  were;  and  books 
of  travels  will  be  good  in  proportion  to  what  a 
man  has  previously  in  his  mind;  his  knowing 
what  to  observe;  his  power  of  contrasting  one 
mode  of  life  with  another.  As  the  Spanish  prov¬ 
erb  says, c  He,  who  would  bring  home  the  wealth 
of  the  Indies,  must  carry  the  wealth  of  the  In¬ 
dies  with  him.’  So  it  is  in  travelling;  a  man  must 
carry  knowledge  with  him,  if  he  would  bring 
home  knowledge.”  Boswell.  “The  proverb,  I 
suppose,  Sir,  means,  he  must  carry  a  large 
stock  with  him  to  trade  with.”  Johnson.  “Yes, 
Sir.” 

It  was  a  delightful  day:  as  we  walked  to  St. 
Clement’s  church,  I  again  remarked  that  Fleet- 
street  was  the  most  cheerful  scene  in  the  world. 
“Fleet-street  (said  I,)  is  in  my  mind  more  de¬ 
lightful  than  Tempe.”  Johnson.  “Ay,  Sir;  but 
let  it  be  compared  with  Mull.” 

There  was  a  very  numerous  congregation  to¬ 
day  at  St.  Clement’s  church,  which  Dr.  John¬ 
son  said  he  observed  with  pleasure. 

And  now  I  am  to  give  a  pretty  full  account  of 
one  of  the  most  curious  incidents  in  Johnson’s 
life,  of  which  he  himself  has  made  the  following 
minute  on  this  day:  “In  my  return  from  church, 
I  was  accosted  by  Edwards,  an  old  fellow-colle¬ 
gian,  who  had  not  seen  me  since  1 729.  He  knew 
me,  and  asked  if  I  remembered  one  Edwards;  I 
did  not  at  first  recollect  the  name,  but  gradually 
as  we  walked  along,  recovered  it,  and  told  him 
a  conversation  that  had  passed  at  an  alehouse 
between  us.  My  purpose  is  to  continue  our  ac¬ 
quaintance.”1 

1Prayers  and  Meditations ,  p.  164. 


pened.  Mr.  Edwards,  who  was  a  decent-looking 
elderly  man  in  grey  clothes,  and  a  wig  of  many 
curls,  accosted  Johnson  with  familiar  confidence, 
knowing  who  he  was,  while  Johnson  returned 
his  salutation  with  a  courteous  formality,  as  to 
a  stranger.  But  as  soon  as  Edwards  had  brought 
to  his  recollection  their  having  been  at  Pembroke- 
College  together  nine-and-forty  years  ago,  he 
seemed  much  pleased,  asked  where  he  lived,  and 
said  he  should  be  glad  to  see  him  in  Bolt-court. 
Edwards.  “Ah,  Sir !  we  are  old  men  now.”  John¬ 
son.  (who  never  liked  to  think  of  being  old,) 
“Don’t  let  us  discourage  one  another.”  Edwards. 
“Why,  Doctor,  you  look  stout  and  hearty,  I  am 
happy  to  see  you  so;  for  the  news-papers  told  us 
you  were  very  ill.”  Johnson.  “Ay,  Sir,  they  are 
always  telling  lies  of  us  old  fellows .” 

Wishing  to  be  present  at  more  of  so  singular  a 
conversation  as  that  between  two  fellow-colle¬ 
gians,  who  had  lived  forty  years  in  London  with¬ 
out  ever  having  chanced  to  meet,  I  whispered 
to  Mr.  Edwards  that  Dr.  Johnson  was  going 
home,  and  that  he  had  better  accompany  him 
now.  So  Edwards  walked  along  with  us,  I  eager¬ 
ly  assisting  to  keep  up  the  conversation.  Mr.  Ed¬ 
wards  informed  Dr.  Johnson  that  he  had  prac¬ 
tised  long  as  a  solicitor  in  Chancery,  but  that  he 
now  lived  in  the  country  upon  a  little  farm, 
about  sixty  acres,  just  by  Stevenage  in  Hertford¬ 
shire,  and  that  he  came  to  London  (to  Barnard’s 
Inn,  No.  6),  generally  twice  a  week.  Johnson 
appearing  to  me  in  a  reverie,  Mr.  Edwards  ad¬ 
dressed  himself  to  me,  and  expatiated  on  the 
pleasure  of  living  in  the  country.  Boswell.  “I 
have  no  notion  of  this,  Sir.  What  you  have  to 
entertain  you,  is,  I  think,  exhausted  in  half  an 
hour.”  Edwards.  “What?  don’t  you  love  to  have 
hope  realized?  I  see  my  grass,  and  my  corn,  and 
my  trees  growing.  Now,  for  instance,  I  am  curi¬ 
ous  to  see  if  this  frost  has  not  nipped  my  fruit- 
trees.”  Johnson,  (who  we  did  not  imagine  was 
attending,)  “You  find,  Sir,  you  have  fears  as 
well  as  hopes.” — So  well  did  he  see  the  whole, 
when  another  saw  but  the  half  of  a  subject. 

When  we  got  to  Dr.  Johnson’s  house,  and  were 
seated  in  his  library,  the  dialogue  went  on  ad¬ 
mirably.  Edwards.  “Sir,  I  remember  you  would 
not  let  us  say  prodigious  at  College.  For  even 
then,  Sir,  (turning  to  me,)  he  was  delicate  in 
language,  and  we  all  feared  him.”2  Johnson,  (to 
Edwards,)  “From  your  having  practised  the  law 

2Johnson  said  to  me  afterwards,  “Sir,  they  re¬ 
spected  me  for  my  literature;  and  yet  it  was  not 
great  but  by  comparison.  Sir,  it  is  amazing  how 
little  literature  there  is  in  the  world.” 


1778] 

long,  Sir,  I  presume  you  must  be  rich.’5  Ed¬ 
wards.  “No,  Sir;  I  got  a  good  deal  of  money; 
but  I  had  a  number  of  poor  relations  to  whom  I 
gave  a  great  part  of  it.”  Johnson.  “Sir,  you  have 
been  rich  in  the  most  valuable  sense  of  the  word.” 
Edwards.  “But  I  shall  not  die  rich.”  Johnson. 
“Nay,  sure,  Sir,  it  is  better  to  live  rich  than  to  die 
rich.”  Edwards.  “I  wish  I  had  continued  at 
College.”  Johnson.  “Why  do  you  wish  that, 
Sir?”  Edwards.  “Because  I  think  I  should  have 
had  a  much  easier  life  than  mine  has  been.  I 
should  have  been  a  parson,  and  had  a  good  liv¬ 
ing,  like  Bloxam  and  several  others,  and  lived 
comfortably.”  Johnson.  “Sir,  the  life  of  a  par¬ 
son,  of  a  conscientious  clergyman,  is  not  easy.  I 
have  always  considered  a  clergyman  as  the  fa¬ 
ther  of  a  larger  family  than  he  is  able  to  main¬ 
tain.  I  would  rather  have  Chancery  suits  upon 
my  hands  than  the  cure  of  souls.  No,  Sir,  I  do 
not  envy  a  clergyman’s  life  as  an  easy  life,  nor 
do  I  envy  the  clergyman  who  makes  it  an  easy 
life.”  Here  taking  himself  up  all  of  a  sudden,  he 
exclaimed,  “O !  Mr.  Edwards!  I’ll  convince  you 
that  I  recollect  you.  Do  you  remember  our  drink¬ 
ing  together  at  an  alehouse  near  Pembroke  gate? 
At  that  time,  you  told  me  of  the  Eton  boy,  who, 
when  verses  on  our  Saviour’s  turning  water 
into  wine  were  prescribed  as  an  exercise,  brought 
up  a  single  line,  which  was  highly  admired, — 

Vidit  et  erubuit  lympha  pudica  Deum,1 

and  I  told  you  of  another  fine  line  in  Camden’s 
Remains ,  an  eulogy  upon  one  of  our  Kings,  who 
was  succeeded  by  his  son,  a  prince  of  equal 
merit: — 

Mira  cano ,  Sol  occubuit ,  nox  nulla  secuta  est .” 

Edwards.  “You  are  a  philosopher,  Dr.  John¬ 
son.  I  have  tried  too  in  my  time  to  be  a  philoso¬ 
pher;  but,  I  don’t  know  how,  cheerfulness  was 
always  breaking  in.” — Mr.  Burke,  Sir  Joshua 
Reynolds,  Mr.  Courtenay,  Mr.  Malone,  and, 
indeed,  all  the  eminent  men  to  whom  I  have 
mentioned  this,  have  thought  it  an  exquisite  trait 
of  character.  The  truth  is,  that  philosophy,  like 
religion,  is  too  generally  supposed  to  be  hard 

Hhis  line  has  frequently  been  attributed  to  Dry- 
den,  when  a  King’s  Scholar  at  Westminster.  But 
neither  Eton  nor  Westminster  have  in  truth  any 
claim  to  it,  the  line  being  borrowed,  with  a  slight 
change,  from  an  Epigram  by  Crashaw: 

Joann.  2 

Aqua  in  vinum  versa 

Unde  rubor  vestris  et  non  sua  purpura  lymphis? 

Qua  rosa  mirantes  tam  nova  mutat  aquas? 

Numen ,  conviva,  prcesens  agnoscite  numen , 

Nympha  pudica  Deum  vidit ,  et  erubuit.  [Mj 


397 

and  severe,  at  least  so  grave  as  to  exclude  all 
gaiety. 

Edwards.  “I  have  been  twice  married,  Doc¬ 
tor.  You,  I  suppose,  have  never  known  what  it 
was  to  have  a  wife.”  Johnson.  “Sir,  I  have  known 
what  it  was  to  have  a  wife,  and  (in  a  solemn, 
tender,  faultering  tone)  I  have  known  what  it 
was  to  lose  a  wife. — It  had  almost  broke  my 
heart.” 

Edwards.  “How  do  you  live,  Sir?  For  my 
part,  I  must  have  my  regular  meals,  and  a  glass 
of  good  wine.  I  find  I  require  it.”  Johnson.  “I 
now  drink  no  wine,  Sir.  Early  in  life  I  drank 
wine:  for  many  years  I  drank  none.  I  then  for 
some  years  drank  a  great  deal.”  Edwards.  “Some 
hogsheads,  I  warrant  you.”  Johnson.  “I  then 
had  a  severe  illness,  and  left  it  off,  and  I  have 
never  begun  it  again.  I  never  felt  any  difference 
upon  myself  from  eating  one  thing  rather  than 
another,  nor  from  one  kind  of  weather  rather 
than  another.  There  are  people,  I  believe,  who 
feel  a  difference;  but  I  am  not  one  of  them.  And 
as  to  regular  meals,  I  have  fasted  from  the 
Sunday’s  dinner  to  the  Tuesday’s  dinner,  with¬ 
out  any  inconvenience.  I  believe  it  is  best  to  eat 
just  as  one  is  hungry:  but  a  man  who  is  in  bus¬ 
iness,  or  a  man  who  has  a  family,  must  have 
stated  meals.  I  am  a  straggler.  I  may  leave  this 
town  and  go  to  Grand  Cairo,  without  being 
missed  here  or  observed  there.”  Edwards. 
“Don’t  you  eat  supper,  Sir?”  Johnson.  “No,  Sir.” 
Edwards.  “For  my  part,  now,  I  consider 
supper  as  a  turnpike  through  which  one  must 
pass,  in  order  to  get  to  bed.’52 

Johnson.  “You  are  a  lawyer,  Mr.  Edwards. 
Lawyers  know  life  practically.  A  bookish  man 
should  always  have  them  to  converse  with.  They 
have  what  he  wants.”  Edwards.  “I  am  grown 
old:  I  am  sixty-five.”  Johnson.  “I  shall  be  sixty- 
eight  next  birth-day.  Come,  Sir,  drink  water, 
and  put  in  for  a  hundred.” 

Mr.  Edwards  mentioned  a  gentleman  who 
had  left  his  whole  fortune  to  Pembroke  College. 
Johnson.  “Whether  to  leave  one’s  whole  fortune 
to  a  College  be  right,  must  depend  upon  circum¬ 
stances.  I  would  leave  the  interest  of  the  fortune 
I  bequeathed  to  a  College  to  my  relations  or  my 
friends,  for  their  lives.  It  is  the  same  thing  to  a 
College,  which  is  a  permanent  society,  whether 
it  gets  the  money  now  or  twenty  years  hence; 
and  I  would  wish  to  make  my  relations  or  friends 
feel  the  benefit  of  it.” 

This  interview  confirmed  my  opinion  of  John- 

2I  am  not  absolutely  sure  but  this  was  my  own 
suggestion,  though  it  is  truly  in  the  character  of 
Edwards. 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


398  BOSWELL  [1778 


son’s  most  humane  and  benevolent  heart.  His 
cordial  and  placid  behaviour  to  an  old  fellow- 
collegian,  a  inan  so  different  from  himself;  and 
his  telling  him  that  he  would  go  down  to  his 
farm  and  visit  him,  shewed  a  kindness  of  dis¬ 
position  very  rare  at  an  advanced  age.  He  ob¬ 
served,  “how  wonderful  it  was  that  they  had 
both  been  in  London  forty  years,  without  hav¬ 
ing  ever  once  met,  and  both  walkers  in  the  street 
too !”  Mr.  Edwards,  when  going  away,  again  re¬ 
curred  to  his  consciousness  of  senility,  and  look¬ 
ing  full  in  Johnson’s  face,  said  to  him,  “You’ll 
find  in  Dr.  Young, 

O  my  coevals !  remnants  of  yourselves!” 

Johnson  did  not  relish  this  at  all;  but  shook  his 
head  with  impatience.  Edwards  walked  off, 
seemingly  highly  pleased  with  the  honour  of  hav¬ 
ing  been  thus  noticed  by  Dr.  Johnson.  When  he 
was  gone,  I  said  to  Johnson,  I  thought  him  but 
a  weak  man.  Johnson.  “Why,  yes,  Sir.  Here  is  a 
man  who  has  passed  through  life  without  ex¬ 
perience:  yet  I  should  rather  have  him  with  me 
than  a  more  sensible  man  who  will  not  talk  read¬ 
ily.  This  man  is  always  willing  to  say  what  he 
has  to  say.”  Yet  Dr.  Johnson  had  himself  by  no 
means  that  willingness  which  he  praised  so  much, 
and  I  think  so  justly;  for  who  has  not  felt  the 
painful  effect  of  the  dreary  void,  when  there  is  a 
total  silence  in  a  company,  for  any  length  of 
time;  or,  which  is  as  bad,  or  perhaps  worse, 
when  the  conversation  is  with  difficulty  kept  up 
by  a  perpetual  effort? 

Johnson  once  observed  to  me,  “Tom  Tyers  de¬ 
scribed  me  the  best:  ‘Sir,  (said  he,)  you  are  like 
a  ghost:  you  never  speak  till  you  are  spoken  to.’  ” 

The  gentleman  whom  he  thus  familiarly  men¬ 
tioned  was  Mr.  Thomas  Tyers,  son  of  Mr.  Jona¬ 
than  Tyers,  the  founder  of  that  excellent  place 
of  publick  amusement,  V  auxhall  Gardens,  which 
must  ever  be  an  estate  to  its  proprietor,  as  it  is 
peculiarly  adapted  to  the  taste  of  the  English 
nation;  there  being  a  mixture  of  curious  show, 
— gay  exhibition,  musick,  vocal  and  instrumen¬ 
tal,  not  too  refined  for  the  general  ear; — for  all 
which  only  a  shilling  is  paid;1  and,  though  last, 
not  least,  good  eating  and  drinking  for  those 
who  choose  to  purchase  that  regale.  Mr.  Thom- 

Tn  summer  1792,  additional  and  more  expen¬ 
sive  decorations  having  been  introduced,  the  price 
of  admission  was  raised  to  two  shillings.  I  cannot 
approve  of  this.  The  company  may  be  more  select; 
but  a  number  of  the  honest  commonalty  are,  I  fear, 
excluded  from  sharing  in  elegant  and  innocent  en¬ 
tertainment.  An  attempt  to  abolish  the  one-shilling 
gallery  at  the  playhouse  has  been  very  properly 
counteracted. 


as  Tyers  was  bred  to  the  law;  but  having  a  hand¬ 
some  fortune,  vivacity  of  temper,  and  eccentric¬ 
ity  of  mind,  he  could  not  confine  himself  to  the 
regularity  of  practice.  He  therefore  ran  about 
the  world  with  a  pleasant  carelessness,  amusing 
everybody  by  his  desultory  conversation.  He 
abounded  in  anecdote,  but  was  not  sufficiently 
attentive  to  accuracy.  I  therefore  cannot  ven¬ 
ture  to  avail  myself  much  of  a  biographical  sketch 
of  Johnson  which  he  published,  being  one  among 
the  various  persons  ambitious  of  appending  their 
names  to  that  of  my  illustrious  friend .  That  sketch 
is,  however,  an  entertaining  little  collection  of 
fragments.  Those  which  he  published  of  Pope 
and  Addison  are  of  higher  merit;  but  his  fame 
must  chiefly  rest  upon  his  Political  Conferences ,  in 
which  he  introduces  several  eminent  persons  de¬ 
livering  their  sentiments  in  the  way  of  dialogue, 
and  discovers  a  considerable  share  of  learning, 
various  knowledge,  and  discernment  of  char¬ 
acter.  This  much  may  I  be  allowed  to  say  of  a 
man  who  was  exceedingly  obliging  to  me,  and 
who  lived  with  Dr.  Johnson  in  as  easy  a  man¬ 
ner  as  almost  any  of  his  very  numerous  acquaint¬ 
ance. 

Mr.  Edwards  had  said  to  me  aside,  that  Dr. 
Johnson  should  have  been  of  a  profession.  I  re¬ 
peated  the  remark  to  Johnson  that  I  might  have 
his  own  thoughts  on  the  subject.  Johnson.  “Sir, 
it  would  have  been  better  that  I  had  been  of  a 
profession.  I  ought  to  have  been  a  lawyer.” 
Boswell.  “I  do  not  think,  Sir,  it  would  have 
been  better,  for  we  should  not  have  had  the 
Ejiglish  Dictionary .”  Johnson.  “But  you  would 
have  had  Reports .”  Boswell.  <eAy;  but  there 
would  not  have  been  another,  who  could  have 
written  the  Dictionary.  There  have  been  many 
very  good  Judges.  Suppose  you  had  been  Lord 
Chancellor;  you  would  have  delivered  opinions 
with  more  extent  of  mind,  and  in  a  more  orna¬ 
mented  manner,  than  perhaps  any  Chancellor 
ever  did,  or  ever  will  do.  But,  I  believe,  causes 
have  been  as  judiciously  decided  as  you  could 
have  done.”  Johnson.  “Yes.  Sir.  Property  has 
been  as  well  settled.” 

Johnson,  however,  had  a  noble  ambition  float¬ 
ing  in  his  mind,  and  had,  undoubtedly,  often 
speculated  on  the  possibility  of  his  supereminent 
powers  being  rewarded  in  this  great  and  liberal 
country  by  the  highest  honours  of  the  state.  Sir 
William  Scott  informs  me,  that  upon  the  death 
of  the  late  Lord  Lichfield,  who  was  Chancellor 
of  the  University  of  Oxford,  he  said  to  Johnson, 
“What  a  pity  it  is,  Sir,  that  you  did  not  follow 
the  profession  of  the  law.  You  might  have  been 
Lord  Chancellor  of  Great  Britain,  and  attained 


i778  ]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  399 


to  the  dignity  of  the  peerage;  and  now  that  the 
title  of  Lichfield,  your  native  city,  is  extinct,  you 
might  have  had  it.”  Johnson,  upon  this  seemed 
much  agitated ;  and,  in  an  angry  tone,  exclaimed, 
“Why  will  you  vex  me  by  suggesting  this,  when 
it  is  too  late?” 

But  he  did  not  repine  at  the  prosperity  of  oth¬ 
ers.  The  late  Dr.  Thomas  Leland  told  Mr.  Courte¬ 
nay,  that  when  Mr.  Edmund  Burke  shewed 
Johnson  his  fine  house  and  lands  near  Beacons- 
field,  Johnson  cooly  said,  “Non  equidem  invideo; 
miror  magis.”1 

Yet  no  man  had  a  higher  notion  of  the  dignity 
of  literature  than  Johnson,  or  was  more  deter¬ 
mined  in  maintaining  the  respect  which  he  just¬ 
ly  considered  as  due  to  it.  Of  this,  besides  the 
general  tenor  of  his  conduct  in  society,  some 
characteristical  instances  may  be  mentioned. 

He  told  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  that  once  when 
he  dined  in  a  numerous  company  of  booksellers, 
where  the  room  being  small,  the  head  of  the 
table,  at  which  he  sat,  was  almost  close  to  the 
fire,  he  perservered  in  suffering  a  great  deal  of 
inconvenience  from  the  heat,  rather  than  quit 
his  place,  and  let  one  of  them  sit  above  him. 

Goldsmith,  in  his  diverting  simplicity,  com¬ 
plained  one  day,  in  a  mixed  company,  of  Lord 
Camden.  “I  met  him  (said  he,)  at  Lord  Clare’s 
house  in  the  country,  and  he  took  no  more  no¬ 
tice  of  me  than  if  I  had  been  an  ordinary  man.” 
The  company  having  laughed  heartily,  Johnson 

T  am  not  entirely  without  suspicion  that  John¬ 
son  may  have  felt  a  little  momentary  envy;  for  no 
man  loved  the  good  things  of  this  life  better  than 
he  did;  and  he  could  not  but  be  conscious  that  he 
deserved  a  much  larger  share  of  them,  than  he  ever 
had.  I  attempted  in  a  news-paper  to  comment  on 
the  above  passage,  in  the  manner  of  Warburton, 
who  must  be  allowed  to  have  shewn  uncommon 
ingenuity,  in  giving  to  any  authour’s  text  whatever 
meaning  he  chose  it  should  carry.  As  this  imitation 
may  amuse  my  readers,  I  shall  here  introduce  it: 

“No  saying  of  Dr.  Johnson’s  has  been  more  mis¬ 
understood  than  his  applying  to  Mr.  Burke  when 
he  first  saw  him  at  his  fine  place  at  Beaconsfield, 
Non  equidem  invideo;  miror  magis.  These  two  cele¬ 
brated  men  had  been  friends  for  many  years  be¬ 
fore  Mr.  Burke  entered  on  his  parliamentary  ca¬ 
reer.  They  were  both  writers,  both  members  of 
The  Literary  Club;  when,  therefore.  Dr.  John¬ 
son  saw  Mr.  Burke  in  a  situation  so  much  more 
splendid  than  that  to  which  he  himself  had  at¬ 
tained,  he  did  not  mean  to  express  that  he  thought 
it  a  disproportionate  prosperity;  but  while  he,  as  a 
philosopher,  asserted  an  exemption  from  envy,  non 
equidem  invideo ,  he  went  on  in  the  words  of  the  poet 
miror  magis;  thereby  signifying,  either  that  he  was 
occupied  in  admiring  what  he  was  glad  to  see;  or, 
perhaps,  that  considering  the  general  lot  of  men  of 
superiour  abilities,  he  wondered  that  Fortune,  who 
is  represented  as  blind,  should,  in  this  instance, 
have  been  so  just.” 


stood  forth  in  defence  of  his  friend.  “Nay,  Gen¬ 
tlemen,  (said  he,)  Dr.  Goldsmith  is  in  the  right. 
A  nobleman  ought  to  have  made  up  to  such  a 
man  as  Goldsmith;  and  I  think  it  is  much  against 
Lord  Camden  that  he  neglected  him.” 

Nor  could  he  patiently  endure  to  hear  that 
such  respect  as  he  thought  due  only  to  higher 
intellectual  qualities,  should  be  bestowed  on  men 
of  slighter,  though  perhaps  more  amusing  tal¬ 
ents.  I  told  him,  that  one  morning,  when  I  went 
to  breakfast  with  Garrick,  who  was  very  vain  of 
his  intimacy  with  Lord  Camden,  he  accosted  me 
thus: — “Pray  now,  did  you — did  you  meet  a  lit¬ 
tle  lawyer  turning  the  corner,  eh?” — “No,  Sir, 
(said  I.)  Pray  what  do  you  mean  by  the  ques¬ 
tion?” — “Why,  (replied  Garrick,  with  an  af¬ 
fected  indifference,  yet  as  if  standing  on  tip-toe,) 
Lord  Camden  has  this  moment  left  me.  We  have 
had  a  long  walk  together.”  Johnson.  “Well,  Sir, 
Garrick  talked  very  properly.  Lord  Camden  was 
a  little  lawyer  to  be  associating  so  familiarly  with 
a  player.” 

Sirjoshua  Reynolds  observed,  with  great  truth, 
that  Johnson  considered  Garrick  to  be  as  it  were 
his  property .  He  would  allow  no  man  either  to 
blame  or  to  praise  Garrick  in  his  presence,  with¬ 
out  contradicting  him. 

Having  fallen  into  a  very  serious  frame  of 
mind,  in  which  mutual  expressions  of  kindness 
passed  between  us,  such  as  would  be  thought  too 
vain  in  me  to  repeat,  I  talked  with  regret  of  the 
sad  inevitable  certainty  that  one  of  us  must  sur¬ 
vive  the  other.  Johnson.  “Yes,  Sir,  that  is  an  af¬ 
fecting  consideration.  I  remember  Swift,  in  one 
of  his  letters  to  Pope,  says,  T  intend  to  come 
over,  that  we  may  meet  once  more;  and  when 
we  must  part,  it  is  what  happens  to  all  human 
beings.’  ”  Boswell.  “The  hope  that  we  shall 
see  our  departed  friends  again  must  support  the 
mind.”  Johnson.  “Why  yes,  Sir.”  Boswell. 
“There  is  a  strange  unwillingness  to  part  with 
life,  independent  of  serious  fears  as  to  futurity. 
A  reverend  friend  of  ours  (naming  him)  tells  me, 
that  he  feels  an  uneasiness  at  the  thoughts  of 
leaving  his  house,  his  study,  his  books.”  John¬ 
son.  “This  is  foolish  in  *****  A  man  need  not 
be  uneasy  on  these  grounds;  for,  as  he  will  retain 
his  consciousness,  he  may  say  with  the  philoso¬ 
pher,  Omnia  mea  mecum  porto.”  Boswell.  “True, 
Sir:  we  may  carry  our  books  in  our  heads;  but 
still  there  is  something  painful  in  the  thought  of 
leaving  for  ever  what  has  given  us  pleasure.  I  re¬ 
member,  many  years  ago,  when  my  imagination 
was  warm,  and  I  happened  to  be  in  a  melan¬ 
choly  mood,  it  distressed  me  to  think  of  going 
into  a  state  of  being  in  which  Shakspeare’s  po- 


BOSWELL 


400 

etry  did  not  exist.  A  lady  whom  I  then  much  ad¬ 
mired,  a  very  amiable  woman,  humoured  my 
fancy,  and  relieved  me  by  saying,  ‘The  first  thing 
you  will  meet  in  the  other  world,  will  be  an  ele¬ 
gant  copy  of  Shakespeare’s  works  presented  to 
you.  5  5  5  Dr.  Johnson  smiled  bcnignantly  at  this, 
and  did  not  appear  to  disapprove  of  the  notion. 

We  went  to  St.  Clement’s  church  again  in  the 
afternoon,  and  then  returned  and  drank  tea  and 
cofFee  in  Mrs.  Williams’s  room;  Mrs.  Desmou¬ 
lins  doing  the  honours  of  the  tea-table.  I  ob¬ 
served  that  he  would  not  even  look  at  a  proof- 
sheet  of  his  Life  of  Waller  on  Good-Friday. 

Mr.  Allen,  the  printer,  brought  a  book  on  ag¬ 
riculture,  which  was  printed,  and  was  soon  to  be 
published.  It  was  a  very  strange  performance, 
the  authour  having  mixed  in  it  his  own  thoughts 
upon  various  topicks,  along  with  his  remarks  on 
ploughing,  sowing,  and  other  farming  opera¬ 
tions.  He  seemed  to  be  an  absurd  profane  fellow, 
and  had  introduced  in  his  book  many  sneers  at 
religion,  with  equal  ignorance  and  conceit.  Dr. 
Johnson  permitted  me  to  read  some  passages 
aloud.  One  was,  that  he  resolved  to  work  on 
Sunday,  and  did  work,  but  he  owned  he  felt 
some  weak  compunction;  and  he  had  this  very 
curious  reflection: — “I  was  born  in  the  wilds  of 
Christianity,  and  the  briars  and  thorns  still  hang 
about  me.”  Dr.  Johnson  could  not  help  laugh¬ 
ing  at  this  ridiculous  image,  yet  was  very  angry 
at  the  fellow’s  impiety.  “However,  (said  he,)  the 
Reviewers  will  make  him  hang  himself.”  He, 
however,  observed,  “that  formerly  there  might 
have  been  a  dispensation  obtained  for  working 
on  Sunday  in  the  time  of  harvest.”  Indeed  in 
ritual  observances,  were  all  the  ministers  of  re¬ 
ligion  what  they  should  be,  and  what  many  of 
them  are,  such  a  power  might  be  wisely  and 
safely  lodged  with  the  Church. 

On  Saturday,  April  14,  I  drank  tea  with  him. 
He  praised  the  late  Mr.  Duncombe,1  of  Canter¬ 
bury,  as  a  pleasing  man.  “He  used  to  come  to 
me:  I  did  not  seek  much  after  him.  Indeed  I 
never  sought  much  after  any  body.”  Boswell. 
“Lord  Orrery,  I  suppose.”  Johnson.  “No,  Sir; 
I  never  went  to  him  but  when  he  sent  for  me.” 
Boswell.  “Richardson?”  Johnson.  “Yes,  Sir. 
But  I  sought  after  George  Psalmanazar  the  most. 
I  used  to  go  and  sit  with  him  at  an  alehouse  in 
the  city.” 

I  am  happy  to  mention  another  instance  which 
I  discovered  of  his  seeking  after  a  man  of  merit. 

1William  Duncombe,  Esq.  He  married  the  sister 
of  John  Hughes  the  poet;  was  the  authour  of  two 
tragedies  and  other  ingenious  productions;  and 
died  26th  Feb.,  1769,  aged  79.  [M.] 


[  1 77s 

Soon  after  the  Honourable  Daines  Barrington 
had  published  his  excellent  Observations  on  the  Stat¬ 
utes?  Johnson  waited  on  that  worthy  and  learned 
gentleman;  and,  having  told  him  his  name,  cour¬ 
teously  said,  “I  have  read  your  book,  Sir,  with 
great  pleasure,  and  wish  to  be  better  known  to 
you.”  Thus  began  an  acquaintance,  which  was 
continued  with  mutual  regard  as  long  as  John¬ 
son  lived. 

Talking  of  a  recent  seditious  delinquent,  he 
said,  “They  should  set  him  in  the  pillory,  that 
he  may  be  punished  in  a  way  that  would  dis¬ 
grace  him.”  I  observed,  that  the  pillory  does  not 
always  disgrace.  And  I  mentioned  an  instance 
of  a  gentleman  who  I  thought  was  not  dishon¬ 
oured  by  it.  Johnson.  “Ay,  but  he  was,  Sir.  He 
could  not  mouth  and  strut  as  he  used  to  do,  after 
having  been  there.  People  are  not  willing  to  ask 
a  man  to  their  tables  who  has  stood  in  the  pil¬ 
lory.” 

The  Gentleman  who  had  dined  with  us  at  Dr. 
Percy’s2  came  in.  Johnson  attacked  the  Ameri¬ 
cans  with  intemperate  vehemence  of  abuse.  I 
said  something  in  their  favour;  and  added,  that 
I  was  always  sorry  when  he  talked  on  that  sub¬ 
ject.  This,  it  seems,  exasperated  him;  though  he 
said  nothing  at  the  time.  The  cloud  was  charged 
with  sulphureous  vapour,  which  was  afterwards 
to  burst  in  thunder. — We  talked  of  a  gentleman 
who  was  running  out  his  fortune  in  London;  and 
I  said,  “We  must  get  him  out  of  it.  All  his  friends 
must  quarrel  with  him,  and  that  will  soon  drive 
him  away.”  Johnson.  “Nay,  Sir;  we’ll  send_yow 
to  him.  If  your  company  does  not  drive  a  man 
out  of  his  house,  nothing  will.”  This  was  a  horri¬ 
ble  shock,  for  which  there  was  no  visible  cause. 
I  afterwards  asked  him  why  he  had  said  so  harsh 
a  thing.  Johnson.  “Because,  Sir,  you  made  me 
angry  about  the  Americans.”  Boswell.  “But 
why  did  you  not  take  your  revenge  directly?” 
Johnson,  (smiling,)  “Because,  Sir,  I  had  noth¬ 
ing  ready.  A  man  cannot  strike  till  he  has  his 
weapons.”  This  was  a  candid  and  pleasant  con¬ 
fession. 

He  shewed  me  to-night  his  drawing-room, 
very  genteelly  fitted  up;  and  said,  “Mrs.  Thrale 
sneered  when  I  talked  of  my  having  asked  you 
and  your  lady  to  live  at  my  house.  I  was  obliged 
to  tell  her,  that  you  would  be  in  as  respectable  a 
situation  in  my  house  as  in  hers.  Sir,  the  inso¬ 
lence  of  wealth  will  creep  out.”  Boswell.  “She 
has  a  little  both  of  the  insolence  of  wealth,  and 
the  conceit  of  parts.”  Johnson.  “The  insolence 
of  wealth  is  a  wretched  thing;  but  the  conceit  of 
parts  has  some  foundation.  To  be  sure  it  should 

2See  ante ,  p.  387. 


1778] 

not  be.  But  who  is  without  it?”  Boswell.  “Your¬ 
self,  Sir.”  Johnson.  “Why,  I  play  no  tricks:  I  lay 
no  traps.”  Boswell.  “No,  Sir.  You  are  six  feet 
high,  and  you  only  do  not  stoop.” 

We  talked  of  the  numbers  of  people  that  some¬ 
times  have  composed  the  household  of  great 
families.  I  mentioned  that  there  were  a  hundred 
in  the  family  of  the  present  Earl  of  Eglintoune’s 
father.  Dr.  Johnson  seeming  to  doubt  it,  I  began 
to  enumerate.  “Let  us  see:  my  Lord  and  my 
Lady  two.”  Johnson.  “Nay,  Sir,  if  you  are  to 
count  by  twos,  you  may  be  long  enough.”  Bos¬ 
well.  “Well,  but  now  I  add  two  sons  and  seven 
daughters,  and  a  servant  for  each,  that  will  make 
twenty;  so  we  have  the  fifth  part  already.”  John¬ 
son.  “Very  true.  You  get  at  twenty  pretty  read¬ 
ily;  but  you  will  not  so  easily  get  further  on. 
We  grow  to  five  feet  pretty  readily;  but  is  not  so 
easy  to  grow  to  seven.” 

On  Sunday,  April  19,  being  Easter-day,  after 
the  solemnities  of  the  festival  in  St.  Paul’s  Church, 
I  visited  him,  but  could  not  stay  to  dinner.  I  ex¬ 
pressed  a  wish  to  have  the  arguments  for  Chris¬ 
tianity  always  in  readiness,  that  my  religious 
faith  might  be  as  firm  and  clear  as  any  proposi¬ 
tion  whatever,  so  that  I  need  not  be  under  the 
least  uneasiness,  when  it  should  be  attacked. 
Johnson.  “Sir,  you  cannot  answer  all  objections. 
You  have  demonstration  for  a  First  Cause:  you 
see  he  must  be  good  as  well  as  powerful,  because 
there  is  nothing  to  make  him  otherwise,  and 
goodness  of  itself  is  preferable.  Yet  you  have 
against  this,  what  is  very  certain,  the  unhappi¬ 
ness  of  human  life.  This,  however,  gives  us  red- 
son  to  hope  for  a  future  state  of  compensation, 
that  there  may  be  a  perfect  system.  But  of  that 
we  were  not  sure,  till  we  had  a  positive  revela¬ 
tion.”  I  told  him,  that  his  Rasselas  had  often 
made  me  unhappy;  for  it  represented  the  misery 
of  human  life  so  well,  and  so  convincingly  to  a 
thinking  mind,  that  if  at  any  time  the  impression 
wore  off,  and  I  felt  myself  easy,  I  began  to  sus¬ 
pect  some  delusion. 

On  Monday,  April  20,  I  found  him  at  home 
in  the  morning.  We  talked  of  a  gentleman  who 
we  apprehended  was  gradually  involving  his 
circumstances  by  bad  management.  Johnson. 
“Wasting  a  fortune  is  evaporation  by  a  thou¬ 
sand  imperceptible  means.  If  it  were  a  stream, 
they’d  stop  it.  You  must  speak  to  him.  It  is  real¬ 
ly  miserable.  Were  he  a  gamester,  it  could  be 
said  he  had  hopes  of  winning.  Were  he  a  bank¬ 
rupt  in  trade,  he  might  have  grown  rich;  but  he 
has  neither  spirit  to  spend  nor  resolution  to  spare. 
He  does  not  spend  fast  enough  to  have  pleas¬ 
ure  from  it.  He  has  the  crime  of  prodigality,  and 


401 

the  wretchedness  of  parsimony.  If  a  man  is  killed 
in  a  duel,  he  is  killed  as  many  a  one  has  been 
killed;  but  it  is  a  sad  thing  for  a  man  to  lie  down 
and  die;  to  bleed  to  death,  because  he  has  not 
fortitude  enough  to  sear  the  wound,  or  even  to 
stitch  it  up.”  I  cannot  but  pause  a  moment  to 
admire  the  fecundity  of  fancy,  and  choice  of  lan¬ 
guage,  which  in  this  instance,  and,  indeed,  on 
almost  all  occasions,  he  displayed.  It  was  well 
observed  by  Dr.  Percy,  now  Bishop  of  Dromore, 
“The  conversation  of  Johnson  is  strong  and  clear, 
and  may  be  compared  to  an  antique  statue,  where 
every  vein  and  muscle  is  distinct  and  bold.  Or¬ 
dinary  conversation  resembles  an  inferiour  cast.” 

On  Saturday,  April  25,  I  dined  with  him  at 
Sir  Joshua  Reynolds’s,  with  the  learned  Dr.  Mus- 
grave,  Counsellor  Leland  of  Ireland,  son  to  the 
historian,  Mrs.  Cholmondeley,  and  some  more 
ladies.  The  Project ,  a  new  poem,  was  read  to  the 
company  by  Dr.  Musgrave.  Johnson.  “Sir,  it 
has  no  power.  Were  it  not  for  the  well-known 
names  with  which  it  is  filled,  it  would  be  noth¬ 
ing:  the  names  carry  the  poet,  not  the  poet  the 
names.”  Musgrave.  “A  temporary  poem  always 
entertains  us.”  Johnson.  “So  does  an  account  of 
criminals  hanged  yesterday  entertain  us.” 

He  proceeded: — “Demosthenes  Taylor,  as  he 
was  called,  (that  is,  the  Editor  of  Demosthenes) 
was  the  most  silent  man,  the  merest  statue  of  a 
man  that  I  have  ever  seen.  I  once  dined  in  com¬ 
pany  with  him,  and  all  he  said  during  the  whole 
time  was  no  more  than  Richard .  How  a  man 
should  say  only  Richard,  it  is  not  easy  to  imag¬ 
ine.  But  it  was  thus:  Dr.  Douglas  was  talking  of 
Dr.  Zachary  Grey,  and  ascribing  to  him  some¬ 
thing  that  was  written  by  Dr.  Richard  Grey.  So 
to  correct  him,  Taylor  said,  (imitating  his  af¬ 
fected  sententious  emphasis  and  nod,) 4 Richard.’” 

Mrs.  Cholmondeley,  in  a  high  flow  of  spirits, 
exhibited  some  lively  sallies  of  hyperbolical  com¬ 
pliment  to  Johnson  with  whom  she  had  been 
long  acquainted,  and  was  very  easy.  He  was 
quick  in  catching  the  manner  of  the  moment,  and 
answered  her  somewhat  in  the  style  of  the  hero 
of  a  romance, £  4 Madam,  you  crown  me  with  un¬ 
fading  laurels.” 

I  happened,  I  know  not  how,  to  say  that  a 
pamphlet  meant  a  prose  piece.  Johnson.  “No, 
Sir.  A  few  sheets  of  poetry  unbound  are  a  pam¬ 
phlet,1  as  much  as  a  few  sheets  of  prose.”  Mus- 

*Dr.  Johnson  is  supported  by  the  usage  of  pre¬ 
ceding  writers.  So  in  Musarum  Delicice ,  8vo.,  1656 
(the  writer  is  speaking  of  Suckling’s  play  entitled 
Aglaura ,  printed  in  folio): — 

This  great  voluminous  pamphlet  may  be  said 
To  be  like  one  that  hath  more  hair  than  head . 

[M.] 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


BOSWELL 


402 

grave.  “A  pamphlet  may  be  understood  to  mean 
a  poetical  piece  in  Wcstminster-Hall,  that  is,  in 
formal  language;  but  in  common  language  it  is 
understood  to  mean  prose.”  Johnson,  (and  here 
was  one  of  the  many  instances  of  his  knowing 
clearly  and  telling  exactly  how  a  thing  is,)  “A 
pamphlet  is  understood  in  common  language  to 
mean  prose,  only  from  this,  that  there  is  so  much 
more  prose  written  than  poetry;  as  when  we  say 
a  book ,  prose  is  understood  for  the  same  reason, 
though  a  book  may  as  well  be  in  poetry  as  in 
prose.  We  understand  what  is  most  general,  and 
we  name  what  is  less  frequent.” 

We  talked  of  a  lady’s  verses  on  Ireland.  Miss 
Reynolds.  “Have  you  seen  them,  Sir?”  John¬ 
son.  “No,  Madam.  I  have  seen  a  translation  from 
Horace,  by  one  of  her  daughters.  She  shewed  it 
me.”  Miss  Reynolds.  “And  how  was  it,  Sir?” 
Johnson.  “Why,  very  well  for  a  young  Miss’s 
verses; — that  is  to  say,  compared  with  excellence, 
nothing;  but,  very  well,  for  the  person  who  wrote 
them.  I  am  vexed  at  being  shewn  verses  in  that 
manner.”  Miss  Reynolds.  “But  if  they  should 
be  good,  why  not  give  them  hearty  praise?” 
Johnson.  “Why,  Madam,  because  I  have  not 
then  got  the  better  of  my  bad  humour  from  hav¬ 
ing  been  shewn  them.  You  must  consider,  Mad¬ 
am;  beforehand  they  may  be  bad,  as  well  as 
good.  Nobody  has  a  right  to  put  another  under 
such  a  difficulty,  that  he  must  either  hurt  the 
person  by  telling  the  truth,  or  hurt  himself  by 
telling  what  is  not  true.”  Boswell.  “A  man  of¬ 
ten  shews  his  writings  to  people  of  eminence,  to 
obtain  from  them,  either  from  their  good-nature, 
or  from  their  not  being  able  to  tell  the  truth 
firmly,  a  commendation,  of  which  he  may  after¬ 
wards  avail  himself.”  Johnson.  “Very  true,  Sir. 
Therefore  the  man,  who  is  asked  by  an  authour, 
what  he  thinks  of  his  work,  is  put  to  the  torture, 
and  is  not  obliged  to  speak  the  truth;  so  that 
what  he  says  is  not  considered  as  his  opinion; 
yet  he  has  said  it,  and  cannot  retract  it;  and  this 
authour,  when  mankind  are  hunting  him  with 
a  cannister  at  his  tail,  can  say,  ‘I  would  not  have 
published,  had  not  Johnson,  or  Reynolds,  or  Mus- 
grave,  or  some  other  good  judge  commended  the 
work.’  Yet  I  consider  it  as  a  very  difficult  ques¬ 
tion  in  conscience,  whether  one  should  advise  a 
man  not  to  publish  a  work,  if  profit  be  his  ob¬ 
ject;  for  the  man  may  say,  ‘Had  it  not  been  for 
you,  I  should  have  had  the  money.’  Now  you 
cannot  be  sure;  for  you  have  only  your  own 
opinion,  and  the  publick  may  think  very  differ¬ 
ently.”  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds.  “You  must  upon 
such  an  occasion  have  two  judgements;  one  as  to 
the  real  value  of  the  work,  the  other  as  to  what 


[1778 

may  please  the  general  taste  at  the  time.”  John¬ 
son.  “But  you  can  be  sure  of  neither;  and  there¬ 
fore  I  should  scruple  much  to  give  a  suppressive 
vote.  Both  Goldsmith’s  comedies  were  once  re¬ 
fused;  his  first  by  Garrick,  his  second  by  Colman, 
who  was  prevailed  on  at  last  by  much  solicita¬ 
tion,  nay,  a  kind  of  force,  to  bring  it  on.  His 
Vicar  oj  Wakefield  I  myself  did  not  think  would 
have  had  much  success.  It  was  written  and  sold 
to  a  bookseller  before  his  Traveller;  but  published 
after;  so  little  expectation  had  the  bookseller 
from  it.  Had  it  been  sold  after  the  Traveller ,  he 
might  have  had  twice  as  much  money  for  it, 
though  sixty  guineas  was  no  mean  price.  The 
bookseller  had  the  advantage  of  Goldsmith’s  rep¬ 
utation  from  The  Traveller  in  the  sale,  though 
Goldsmith  had  it  not  in  selling  the  copy.”  Sir 
Joshua  Reynolds.  “  The  Beggar’s  Opera  affords  a 
proof  how  strangely  people  will  differ  in  opinion 
about  a  literary  performance.  Burke  thinks  it  has 
no  merit.”  Johnson.  “It  was  refused  by  one  of 
the  houses;  but  I  should  have  thought  it  would 
succeed,  not  from  any  great  excellence  in  the 
writing,  but  from  the  novelty,  and  the  general 
spirit  and  gaiety  of  the  piece,  which  keeps  the 
audience  always  attentive,  and  dismisses  them 
in  good  humour.” 

We  went  to  the  drawing-room,  where  was  a 
considerable  increase  of  company.  Several  of  us 
got  round  Dr.  Johnson,  and  complained  that  he 
would  not  give  us  an  exact  catalogue  of  his  works, 
that  there  might  be  a  complete  edition.  He  smiled, 
and  evaded  our  entreaties.  That  he  intended  to 
dfe  it,  I  have  no  doubt,  because  I  have  heard  him 
say  so;  and  I  have  in  my  possession  an  imperfect 
list,  fairly  written  out,  which  he  entitles  Historia 
Studiorum.  I  once  got  from  one  of  his  friends  a 
list,  which  there  was  pretty  good  reason  to  sup¬ 
pose  was  accurate,  for  it  was  written  down  in  his 
presence  by  this  friend,  who  enumerated  each 
article  aloud,  and  had  some  of  them  mentioned 
to  him  by  Mr.  Levett,  in  concert  with  whom  it 
was  made  out;  and  Johnson,  who  heard  all  this, 
did  not  contradict  it.  But  when  I  shewed  a  copy 
of  this  list  to  him,  and  mentioned  the  evidence 
for  its  exactness,  he  laughed,  and  said,  “I  was 
willing  to  let  them  go  on  as  they  pleased,  and 
never  interfered.”  Upon  which  I  read  it  to  him, 
article  by  article,  and  got  him  positively  to  own 
or  refuse;  and  then,  having  obtained  certainty 
so  far,  I  got  some  other  articles  confirmed  by 
him  directly;  and  afterwards,  from  time  to  time, 
made  additions  under  his  sanction. 

His  friend  Edward  Gave  having  been  men¬ 
tioned,  he  told  us,  “Gave  used  to  sell  ten  thou¬ 
sand  of  The  Gentleman’s  Magazine ;  yet  such  was 


1 778  ]  L I F  E  O  F 

then  his  minute  attention  and  anxiety  that  the 
sale  should  not  suffer  the  smallest  decrease,  that 
he  would  name  a  particular  person  who  he  heard 
had  talked  of  leaving  off  the  Magazine ,  and 
would  say,  ‘Let  us  have  something  good  next 
month.’ 55 

It  was  observed,  that  avarice  was  inherent  in 
some  dispositions.  Johnson.  “No  man  was  born 
a  miser,  because  no  man  was  born  to  possession. 
Every  man  is  born  cupidus — desirous  of  getting; 
but  not  avarus — desirous  of  keeping.”  Boswell. 
“I  have  heard  old  Mr.  Sheridan  maintain,  with 
much  ingenuity,  that  a  complete  miser  is  a  hap¬ 
py  man;  a  miser  who  gives  himself  wholly  to  the 
one  passion  of  saving.”  Johnson.  “That  is  fly¬ 
ing  in  the  face  of  all  the  world,  who  have  called 
an  avaricious  man  a  miser ,  because  he  is  misera¬ 
ble.  No,  Sir;  a  man  who  both  spends  and  saves 
money  is  the  happiest  man,  because  he  has  both 
enjoyments.” 

The  conversation  having  turned  on  Bon-Mots , 
he  quoted,  from  one  of  the  Ana ,  an  exquisite  in¬ 
stance  of  flattery  in  a  maid  of  honour  in  France, 
who  being  asked  by  the  Queen  what  o’clock  it 
was,  answered,  “What  your  Majesty  pleases.” 
He  admitted  that  Mr.  Burke’s  classical  pun  up¬ 
on  Mr.  Wilkes’s  being  carried  on  the  shoulders 
of  the  mob, 

- JVumerisque  fertur 

Lege  solutus , 

was  admirable;  and  though  he  was  strangely  un¬ 
willing  to  allow  to  that  extraordinary  man  the 
talent  of  wit1,  he  also  laughed  with  approbation 
at  another  of  his  playful  conceits;  which  was, 
that  “Horace  has  in  one  line  given  a  description 
of  a  good  desirable  manour: 

Est  modus  in  rebus,  sunt  certi  denique fines; 

that  is  to  say,  a  modus  as  to  the  tithes  and  certain 
fines” 

He  observed,  “A  man  cannot  with  propriety 
speak  of  himself,  except  he  relates  simple  facts; 
as,  T  was  at  Richmond’:  or  what  depends  on 
mensuration;  as,  T  am  six  feet  high.’  He  is  sure 

1See  this  question  fully  investigated  in  the  Notes 
upon  my  Journal  of  a  Tour  to  the  Hebrides ,  3rd  edit., 
p.  21  ,et  seq.  [Aug.  1 5].  And  here,  as  a  lawyer  mind¬ 
ful  of  the  maxim  Suum  cuique  tribuito ,  I  cannot  for¬ 
bear  to  mention,  that  the  additional  Note  begin¬ 
ning  with  ST  find  since  the  former  edition,”  is  not 
mine,  but  was  obligingly  furnished  by  Mr.  Malone, 
who  was  so  kind  as  to  superintend  the  press  while 
I  was  in  Scotland,  and  the  first  part  of  the  second 
edition  was  printing.  He  would  not  allow  me  to 
ascribe  it  to  its  proper  authour;  but,  as  it  is  ex¬ 
quisitely  acute  and  elegant,  I  take  this  opportun¬ 
ity,  without  his  knowledge,  to  do  him  justice. 


JOHNSON  403 

he  has  been  at  Richmond;  he  is  sure  he  is  six 
feet  high:  but  he  cannot  be  sure  he  is  wise,  or 
that  he  has  any  other  excellence.  Then,  all  cen¬ 
sure  of  a  man’s  self  is  oblique  praise.  It  is  in  order 
to  shew  how  much  he  can  spare.  It  has  all  the 
invidiousness  of  self-praise,  and  aJl  the  reproach 
of  falsehood.”  Boswell.  “Sometimes  it  may  pro¬ 
ceed  from  a  man’s  strong  consciousness  of  his 
faults  being  observed.  He  knows  that  others 
would  throw  him  down,  and  therefore  he  had 
better  lye  down  softly  of  his  own  accord.” 

On  Tuesday,  April  28,  he  was  engaged  to  dine 
at  General  Paoli’s,  where,  as  I  have  already  ob¬ 
served,  I  was  still  entertained  in  elegant  hospi¬ 
tality,  and  with  all  the  ease  and  comfort  of  a 
home.  I  called  on  him,  and  accompanied  him 
in  a  hackney-coach.  We  stopped  first  at  the  bot¬ 
tom  of  Hedge-lane,  into  which  he  went  to  leave 
a  letter,  “with  good  news  for  a  poor  man  in  dis¬ 
tress,”  as  he  told  me.  I  did  not  question  him  par¬ 
ticularly  as  to  this.  He  himself  often  resembled 
Lady  Bolingbroke’s  lively  description  of  Pope; 
that  “he  was  un  politique  aux  choux  et  aux  raves.” 
He  would  say,  “I  dine  to-day  in  Grosvenor- 
square”;  this  might  be  with  a  Duke:  or,  per¬ 
haps,  “I  dine  to-day  at  the  other  end  of  the 
town”:  or,  “A  gentleman  of  great  eminence 
called  on  me  yesterday.”  He  loved  thus  to  keep 
things  floating  in  conjecture:  Omne  ignotum  pro 
magnifico  est.  I  believe  I  ventured  to  dissipate  the 
cloud,  to  unveil  the  mystery,  more  freely  and 
frequently  than  any  of  his  friends.  We  stopped 
again  at  Wirgman’s,  the  well-known  toy-shop,  in 
St.  James’s-street,  at  the  corner  of  St.  James’s- 
place,  to  which  he  had  been  directed,  but  not 
clearly,  for  he  searched  about  some  time,  and 
could  not  find  it  at  first;  and  said,  “To  direct 
one  only  to  a  corner  shop  is  toying  with  one.”  I 
suppose  he  meant  this  as  a  play  upon  the  word 
toy:  it  was  the  first  time  that  I  knew  him  stoop 
to  such  sport.  After  he  had  been  some  time  in 
the  shop,  he  sent  for  me  to  come  out  of  the  coach, 
and  help  him  to  choose  a  pair  of  silver  buckles, 
as  those  he  had  were  too  small.  Probably  this 
alteration  in  dress  had  been  suggested  by  Mrs. 
Thrale,  by  associating  with  whom,  his  external 
appearance  was  much  improved.  He  got  better 
cloaths;  and  the  dark  colour,  from  which  he 
never  deviated,  was  enlivened  by  metal  buttons. 
His  wigs,  too,  were  much  better;  and  during 
their  travels  in  France,  he  was  furnished  with  a 
Paris-made  wig,  of  handsome  construction.  This 
choosing  of  silver  buckles  was  a  negotiation: 
“Sir,  (said  he,)  I  will  not  have  the  ridiculous 
large  ones  now  in  fashion;  and  I  will  give  no  more 
than  a  guinea  for  a  pair.”  Such  were  th eprinci- 


BOSWELL 


404 

pies  of  the  business;  and,  after  some  examination, 
he  was  fitted.  As  we  drove  along,  I  found  him  in 
a  talking  humour,  of  which  I  availed  myself. 
Boswell.  “I  was  this  morning  in  Ridley’s  shop, 
Sir;  and  was  told,  that  the  collection  called 
Johnsoniana  has  sold  very  much.”  Johnson.  “Yet 
the  Journey  to  the  Hebrides  has  not  had  a  great 
sale.”1  Boswell.  “That  is  strange.”  Johnson. 
“Yes,  Sir;  for  in  that  book  I  have  told  the  world 
a  great  deal  that  they  did  not  know  before.” 

Boswell.  “I  drank  chocolate,  Sir,  this  morn¬ 
ing  with  Mr.  Eld;  and,  to  my  no  small  surprize, 
found  him  to  be  a  Staffordshire  Whig ,  a  being 
which  I  did  not  believe  had  existed.”  Johnson. 
“Sir,  there  are  rascals  in  all  countries.”  Boswell. 
“Eld  said,  a  Tory  was  a  creature  generated  be¬ 
tween  a  non-juring  parson  and  one’s  grand¬ 
mother.”  Johnson.  “And  I  have  always  said, 
the  first  Whig  was  the  Devil.”  Boswell.  “He 
certainly  was,  Sir.  The  Devil  was  impatient  of 
subordination;  he  was  the  first  who  resisted 
power: 

Better  to  reign  in  Helf  than  serve  in  Heaven .” 

At  General  Paoli’s  were  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds, 
Mr.  Langton,  Marchese  Gherardi  of  Lombardy, 
and  Mr.  John  Spottiswoode  the  younger,  of 
Spottiswoode,2  the  solicitor.  At  this  time  fears  of 
an  invasion  were  circulated;  to  obviate  which, 
Mr.  Spottiswoode  observed,  that  Mr.  Fraser  the 
engineer,  who  had  lately  come  from  Dunkirk, 
said,  that  the  French  had  the  same  fears  of  us. 
Johnson.  “It  is  thus  that  mutual  cowardice  keeps 
us  in  peace.  Were  one  half  of  mankind  brave, 
and  one  half  cowards,  the  brave  would  be  al¬ 
ways  beating  the  cowards.  Were  all  brave,  they 
would  lead  a  very  uneasy  life;  all  would  be  con¬ 
tinually  fighting:  but  being  all  cowards,  we  go 
on  very  well.” 

We  talked  of  drinking  wine.  Johnson.  “I  re¬ 
quire  wine,  only  when  I  am  alone.  I  have  then 
often  wished  for  it,  and  often  taken  it.”  Spottis¬ 
woode.  “What,  by  way  of  a  companion,  Sir?” 
Johnson.  “To  get  rid  of  myself,  to  send  myself 
away.  Wine  gives  great  pleasure;  and  every 

JHere  he  either  was  mistaken,  or  had  a  different 
notion  of  an  extensive  sale  from  what  is  generally 
entertained:  for  the  fact  is,  that  four  thousand  cop¬ 
ies  of  that  excellent  work  were  sold  very  quickly. 
A  new  edition  has  been  printed  since  his  death,  be¬ 
sides  that  in  the  collection  of  his  works. 

2In  the  phraseology  of  Scotland,  I  should  have 
said,  “Mr.  John  Spottiswoode  the  younger,  of  that 
ilk”  Johnson  knew  that  sense  of  the  word  very 
well,  and  has  thus  explained  it  in  his  Dictionary , 
voce  Ilk: — “It  also  signifies  ‘the  same’;  as,  Mackin¬ 
tosh  of  that  ilk ,  denotes  a  gentleman  whose  surname 
and  the  title  of  his  estate  are  the  same.” 


1 1778 

pleasure  is  of  itself  a  good.  It  is  a  good,  unless 
counter-balanced  by  evil.  A  man  may  have  a 
strong  reason  not  to  drink  wine;  and  that  may 
be  greater  than  the  pleasure.  Wine  makes  a  man 
better  pleased  with  himself.  I  do  not  say  that  it 
makes  him  more  pleasing  to  others.  Sometimes 
it  does.  But  the  danger  is,  that  while  a  man 
grows  better  pleased  with  himself,  he  may  be 
growing  less  pleasing  to  others.3  Wine  gives  a 
man  nothing.  It  neither  gives  him  knowledge 
nor  wit;  it  only  animates  a  man,  and  enables 
him  to  bring  out  what  a  dread  of  the  company 
has  repressed.  It  only  puts  in  motion  what  has 
been  locked  up  in  frost.  But  this  may  be  good, 
or  it  may  be  bad.”  Spottiswoode.  “So,  Sir,  wine 
is  a  key  which  opens  a  box;  but  this  box  maybe 
either  full  or  empty.”  Johnson.  “Nay,  Sir,  con¬ 
versation  is  the  key:  wine  is  a  picklock,  which 
forces  open  the  box  and  injures  it.  A  man  should 
cultivate  his  mind  so  as  to  have  that  confidence 
and  readiness  without  wine,  which  wine  gives.” 
Boswell.  “The  great  difficulty  of  resisting  wine 
is  from  benevolence.  For  instance,  a  good  worthy 
man  asks  you  to  taste  his  wine,  which  he  has  had 
twenty  years  in  his  cellar.”  Johnson.  “Sir,  all 
this  notion  about  benevolence  arises  from  a 
man’s  imagining  himself  to  be  of  more  impor¬ 
tance  to  others,  than  he  really  is.  They  don’t 
care  a  farthing  whether  he  drinks  wine  or  not.” 
Sir  Joshua  Reynolds.  “Yes,  they  do  for  the 
time.”  Johnson.  “For  the  time! — If  they  care 
this  minute,  they  forget  it  the  next.  And  as  for 
the  good  worthy  man;  how  do  you  know  he  is 
good  and  worthy?  No  good  and  worthy  man  will 
insist  upon  another  man’s  drinking  wine.  As  to 
the  wine  twenty  years  in  the  cellar, — of  ten  men, 
three  say  this,  merely  because  they  must  say 
something; — three  are  telling  a  lie,  when  they 
say  they  have  had  the  wine  twenty  years; — three 
would  rather  save  the  wine; — one,  perhaps 
cares.  I  allow  it  is  something  to  please  one’s  com¬ 
pany:  and  people  are  always  pleased  with  those 
who  partake  pleasure  with  them.  But  after  a  man 
has  brought  himself  to  relinquish  the  great  per¬ 
sonal  pleasure  which  arises  from  drinking  wine, 
any  other  consideration  is  a  trifle.  To  please  oth¬ 
ers  by  drinking  wine,  is  something  only,  if  there 
be  nothing  against  it.  I  should,  however,  be  sor¬ 
ry  to  offend  worthy  men: 

3It  is  observed  in  Waller’s  Life ,  in  the  Biographia 
Britannica,  that  he  drank  only  water;  and  that  while 
he  sat  in  a  company  who  were  drinking  wine,  “he 
had  the  dexterity  to  accommodate  his  discourse  to 
the  pitch  of  theirs  as  it  sunk”  If  excess  in  drinking 
be  meant,  the  remark  is  acutely  just.  But  surely,  a 
moderate  use  of  wine  gives  a  gaiety  of  spirits  which 
water-drinkers  know  not. 


1778] 

Curst  be  the  verse ,  how  well  so  e'er  it flow , 

That  tends  to  make  one  worthy  man  my  Joe." 
Boswell.  “Curst  be  the  spring ,  the  water. ”  John¬ 
son.  “But  let  us  consider  what  a  sad  thing  it 
would  be,  if  we  were  obliged  to  drink  or  do  any 
thing  else  that  may  happen  to  be  agreeable  to 
the  company  where  we  are.55  Langton.  “By  the 
same  rule  you  must  join  with  a  gang  of  cut-purs¬ 
es.55  Johnson.  “Yes,  Sir:  but  yet  we  must  do  jus¬ 
tice  to  wine;  we  must  allow  it  the  power  it  pos¬ 
sesses.  To  make  a  man  pleased  with  himself,  let 
me  tell  you,  is  doing  a  very  great  thing; 

Si patrice  volumus ,  si  Nobis  vivere  cari." 

I  was  at  this  time  myself  a  water-drinker  up¬ 
on  trial,  by  Johnson’s  recommendation.  John¬ 
son.  “Boswell  is  a  bolder  combatant  than  Sir 
Joshua:  he  argues  for  wine  without  the  help  of 
wine;  but  Sir  Joshua  with  it.55  Sir  Joshua  Rey¬ 
nolds.  “But  to  please  one’s  company  is  a  strong 
motive.55  Johnson,  (who,  from  drinking  only  wa¬ 
ter,  supposed  every  body  who  drank  wine  to  be 
elevated,)  CCI  won’t  argue  any  more  with  you, 
Sir.  You  are  too  far  gone.55  Sir  Joshua.  “I  should 
have  thought  so  indeed,  Sir,  had  I  made  such  a 
speech  as  you  have  now  done.”  Johnson,  (draw¬ 
ing  himself  in,  and,  I  really  thought  blushing,) 
“Nay,  don’t  be  angry.  I  did  not  mean  to  offend 
you.”  Sir  Joshua.  “At  first  the  taste  of  wine  was 
disagreeable  to  me;  but  I  brought  myself  to 
drink  it,  that  I  might  be  like  other  people.  The 
pleasure  of  drinking  wine  is  so  connected  with 
pleasing  your  company,  that  altogether  there  is 
something  of  social  goodness  in  it.”  Johnson. 
“Sir,  this  is  only  saying  the  same  thing  over 
again.”  Sir  Joshua.  “No,  this  is  new.”  John¬ 
son.  “You  put  it  in  new  words,  but  it  is  an  old 
thought.  This  is  one  of  the  disadvantages  of  wine. 
It  makes  a  man  mistake  words  for  thoughts.” 
Boswell.  “I  think  it  is  a  new  thought;  at  least, 
it  is  in  a  new  attitude .”  Johnson.  “Nay,  Sir,  it  is 
only  in  a  new  coat;  or  an  old  coat  with  a  new 
facing.  (Then  laughing  heartily,)  It  is  the  old 
dog  in  a  new  doublet. — An  extraordinary  in¬ 
stance  however  may  occur  where  a  man’s  patron 
will  do  nothing  for  him,  unless  he  will  drink: 
there  may  be  a  good  reason  for  drinking.” 

I  mentioned  a  nobleman,  who  I  believed  was 
really  uneasy  if  his  company  would  not  drink 
hard.  Johnson.  “That  is  from  having  had  peo¬ 
ple  about  him  whom  he  has  been  accustomed  to 
command.”  Boswell.  “Supposing  I  should  be 
tete-a-tete  with  him  at  table.”  Johnson.  “Sir,  there 
is  no  more  reason  for  your  drinking  with  him> 
than  his  being  sober  withjyozz.”  Boswell.  “Why, 
that  is  true;  for  it  would  do  him  less  hurt  to  be 


405 

sober,  than  it  would  do  me  to  get  drunk.”  John¬ 
son.  “Yes,  Sir;  and  from  what  I  have  heard  of 
him,  one  would  not  wish  to  sacrifice  himself  to 
such  a  man.  If  he  must  always  have  somebody 
to  drink  with  him,  he  should  buy  a  slave,  and 
then  he  would  be  sure  to  have  it.  They  who  sub¬ 
mit  to  drink  as  another  pleases,  make  themselves 
his  slaves.”  Boswell.  “But,  Sir,  you  will  surely 
make  allowance  for  the  duty  of  hospitality.  A 
gentleman  who  loves  drinking,  comes  to  visit 
me.”  Johnson.  “Sir,  a  man  knows  whom  he  vis¬ 
its;  he  comes  to  the  table  of  a  sober  man.”  Bos¬ 
well.  “But,  Sir,  you  and  I  should  not  have  been 
so  well  received  in  the  Highlands  and  Hebrides, 
if  I  had  not  drunk  with  our  worthy  friends.  Had 
I  drunk  water  only  as  you  did,  they  would  not 
have  been  so  cordial.”  Johnson.  “Sir  William 
Temple  mentions  that  in  his  travels  through  the 
Netherlands  he  had  two  or  three  gentlemen  with 
him;  and  when  a  bumper  was  necessary,  he  put 
it  on  them.  Were  I  to  travel  again  through  the 
islands,  I  would  have  Sir  Joshua  with  me  to  take 
the  bumpers.”  Boswell.  “But,  Sir,  let  me  put 
a  case.  Suppose  Sir  Joshua  should  take  a  jaunt 
into  Scotland;  he  does  me  the  honour  to  pay  me 
a  visit  at  my  house  in  the  country;  I  am  over¬ 
joyed  at  seeing  him;  we  are  quite  by  ourselves, 
shall  I  unsociably  and  churlishly  let  him  sit 
drinking  by  himself?  No,  no,  my  dear  Sir  Joshua, 
you  shall  not  be  treated  so,  I  will  take  a  bottle 
with  you.” 

The  celebrated  Mrs.  Rudd  being  mentioned. 
Johnson.  “Fifteen  years  ago  I  should  have  gone 
to  see  her.”  Spottiswoode.  “Because  she  was 
fifteen  years  younger?”  Johnson.  “No,  Sir;  but 
now  they  have  a  trick  of  putting  every  thing  in¬ 
to  the  news-papers.” 

He  begged  General  Paoli  to  repeat  one  of  the 
introductory  stanzas  of  the  first  book  of  Tasso’s 
Jerusalem ,  which  he  did,  and  then  Johnson  found 
fault  with  the  simile  of  sweetening  the  edges  of 
a  cup  for  a  child,  being  transferred  from  Lucre¬ 
tius  into  an  epick  poem.  The  General  said  he 
did  not  imagine  Homer’s  poetry  was  so  ancient 
as  is  supposed,  because  he  ascribes  to  a  Greek 
colony  circumstances  of  refinement  not  found  in 
Greece  itself  at  a  later  period,  when  Thucydides 
wrote.  Johnson.  “I  recollect  but  one  passage 
quoted  by  Thucydides  from  Homer,  which  is  not 
to  be  found  in  our  copies  of  Homer’s  works;  I 
am  for  the  antiquity  of  Homer,  and  think  that 
a  Grecian  colony,  by  being  nearer  Persia,  might 
be  more  refined  than  the  mother  country.” 

On  Wednesday,  April  29,  I  dined  with  him 
at  Mr.  Allan  Ramsay’s,  where  were  Lord  Bin¬ 
ning,  Dr.  Robertson  the  historian,  Sir  Joshua 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


BOSWELL 


406 

Reynolds,  and  the  Honourable  Mrs.  Boscawen, 
widow  of  the  Admiral,  and  mother  of  the  pres¬ 
ent  Viscount  Falmouth;  of  whom,  if  it  be  not 
presumptuous  in  me  to  praise  her,  I  would  say, 
that  her  manners  are  the  most  agreeable,  and 
her  conversation  the  best,  of  any  lady  with  whom 
I  ever  had  the  happiness  to  be  acquainted.  Be¬ 
fore  Johnson  came  we  talked  a  good  deal  of  him; 
Ramsay  said  he  had  always  found  him  a  very 
polite  man,  and  that  he  treated  him  with  great 
respect,  which  he  did  very  sincerely.  I  said  I 
worshipped  him.  Robertson.  “But  some  of  you 
spoil  him;  you  should  not  worship  him;  you 
should  worship  no  man.”  Boswell.  “I  cannot 
help  worshipping  him,  he  is  so  much  superiour 
to  other  men.”  Robertson.  “In  criticism,  and 
in  wit  in  conversation,  he  is  no  doubt  very  ex¬ 
cellent  ;  but  in  other  respects  he  is  not  above  other 
men;  he  will  believe  any  thing,  and  will  strenu¬ 
ously  defend  the  most  minute  circumstance  con¬ 
nected  with  the  Church  of  England.”  Boswell. 
“Believe  me,  Doctor,  you  are  much  mistaken  as 
to  this;  for  when  you  talk  with  him  calmly  in 
private,  he  is  very  liberal  in  his  way  of  thinking.” 
Robertson.  “He  and  I  have  been  always  very 
gracious;  the  first  time  I  met  him  was  one  eve¬ 
ning  at  Strahan’s,  when  he  had  just  had  an  un¬ 
lucky  altercation  with  Adam  Smith,  to  whom  he 
had  been  so  rough,  that  Strahan,  after  Smith 
was  gone,  had  remonstrated  with  him,  and  told 
him  that  I  was  coming  soon,  and  that  he  was 
uneasy  to  think  that  he  might  behave  in  the  same 
manner  to  me.  ‘No,  no,  Sir,  (said  Johnson,)  I 
’warrant  you  Robertson  and  I  shall  do  very  well.5 
Accordingly  he  was  gentle  and  good-humoured, 
and  courteous  with  me  the  whole  evening;  and 
he  has  been  so  upon  every  occasion  that  we  have 
met  since.  I  have  often  said  (laughing,)  that  I 
have  been  in  a  great  measure  indebted  to  Smith 
for  my  good  reception.55  Boswell.  “His  power 
of  reasoning  is  very  strong,  and  he  has  a  peculiar 
art  of  drawing  characters,  which  is  as  rare  as 
good  portrait  painting.55  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds. 
“He  is  undoubtedly  admirable  in  this;  but,  in 
order  to  mark  the  characters  which  he  draws, 
he  overcharges  them,  and  gives  people  more 
than  they  really  have,  whether  of  good  or  bad.” 

No  sooner  did  he,  of  whom  we  had  been  thus 
talking  so  easily,  arrive,  than  we  were  all  as  qui¬ 
et  as  a  school  upon  the  entrance  of  the  head¬ 
master;  and  were  very  soon  set  down  to  a  table 
covered  with  such  a  variety  of  good  things,  as 
contributed  not  a  little  to  dispose  him  to  be 
pleased. 

Ramsay.  “I  am  old  enough  to  have  been  a 
contemporary  of  Pope.  His  poetry  was  highly 


[  t778 

admired  in  his  life-time,  more  a  great  deal  than 
after  his  death.”  Johnson.  “Sir,  it  has  not  been 
less  admired  since  his  death;  no  authours  ever 
had  so  much  fame  in  their  own  life-time  as  Pope 
and  Voltaire;  and  Pope’s  poetry  has  been  as 
much  admired  since  his  death  as  during  his  life; 
it  has  only  not  been  as  much  talked  of,  but  that 
is  owing  to  its  being  now  more  distant,  and  peo¬ 
ple  having  other  writings  to  talk  of.  Virgil  is  less 
talked  of  than  Pope,  and  Homer  is  less  talked  of 
than  Virgil;  but  they  are  not  less  admired.  We 
must  read  what  the  world  reads  at  the  moment. 
It  has  been  maintained  that  this  superfoetation, 
this  teeming  of  the  press  in  modern  times,  is  preju¬ 
dicial  to  good  literature,  because  it  obliges  us 
to  read  so  much  of  what  is  of  inferiour  value,  in 
order  to  be  in  the  fashion;  so  that  better  works 
are  neglected  for  want  of  time,  because  a  man 
will  have  more  gratification  of  his  vanity  in  con¬ 
versation,  from  having  read  modern  books,  than 
from  having  read  the  best  works  of  antiquity. 
But  it  must  be  considered,  that  we  have  now 
more  knowledge  generally  diffused;  all  our  la¬ 
dies  read  now,  which  is  a  great  extension.  Mod¬ 
ern  writers  are  the  moons  of  literature ;  they  shine 
with  reflected  light,  with  light  borrowed  from 
the  ancients.  Greece  appears  to  me  to  be  the 
fountain  of  knowledge;  Rome  of  elegance.55 
Ramsay.  “I  suppose  Homer’s  Iliad  to  be  a  col¬ 
lection  of  pieces  which  had  been  written  before 
his  time.  I  should  like  to  see  a  translation  of  it  in 
poetical  prose  like  the  book  of  Ruth  or  Job.55 
Robertson.  “Would  you,  Dr.  Johnson,  who  are 
master  of  the  English  language,  but  try  your 
hand  upon  a  part  of  it.55  Johnson.  “Sir,  you 
could  not  read  it  without  the  pleasure  of  verse.”1 

We  talked  of  antiquarian  researches.  John¬ 
son.  “All  that  is  really  known  of  the  ancient  state 
of  Britain  is  contained  in  a  few  pages.  We  can 
know  no  more  than  what  the  old  writers  have 
told  us;  yet  what  large  books  have  we  upon  it, 
the  whole  of  which,  excepting  such  parts  as  are 
taken  from  those  old  writers,  is  all  a  dream,  such 
as  Whitaker’s  Manchester.  I  have  heard  Plenry’s 
History  of  Britain  well  spoken  of:  I  am  told  it  is 
carried  on  in  separate  divisions,  as  the  civil,  the 
military,  the  religious  history:  I  wish  much  to 
have  one  branch  well  done,  and  that  is  the  his¬ 
tory  of  manners,  of  common  life.”  Robertson. 
“Henry  should  have  applied  his  attention  to  that 

lrThis  experiment  which  Madame  Dacier  made 
in  vain,  has  since  been  tried  in  our  own  language, 
by  the  editor  of  Ossiar? ,  and  we  must  either  think 
very  meanly  of  his  abilities,  or  allow  that  Dr.  John¬ 
son  was  in  the  right.  And  Mr.  Cowper,  a  man  of 
real  genius,  has  miserably  failed  in  his  blank  verse 
translation. 


1778] 

alone,  which  is  enough  for  any  man;  and  he 
might  have  found  a  great  deal  scattered  in  vari¬ 
ous  books,  had  he  read  solely  with  that  view. 
Henry  erred  in  not  selling  his  first  volume  at  a 
moderate  price  to  the  booksellers,  that  they 
might  have  pushed  him  on  till  he  had  got  repu¬ 
tation.  I  sold  my  History  of  Scotland  at  a  moder¬ 
ate  price,  as  a  work  by  which  the  booksellers 
might  either  gain  or  not;  and  Cadell  has  told 
me  that  Millar  and  he  have  got  six  thousand 
pounds  by  it.  I  afterwards  received  a  much  high¬ 
er  price  for  my  writings.  An  authour  should  sell 
his  first  work  for  what  the  booksellers  will  give, 
till  it  shall  appear  whether  he  is  an  authour  of 
merit,  or,  which  is  the  same  thing  as  to  purchase- 
money,  an  authour  who  pleases  the  publick.” 

Dr.  Robertson  expatiated  on  the  character  of 
a  certain  nobleman ;  that  he  was  one  of  the  strong¬ 
est-minded  men  that  ever  lived;  that  he  would 
sit  in  company  quite  sluggish,  while  there  was 
nothing  to  call  forth  his  intellectual  vigour;  but 
the  moment  that  any  important  subject  was 
started,  for  instance,  how  this  country  is  to  be 
defended  against  a  French  invasion,  he  would 
rouse  himself,  and  shew  his  extraordinary  tal¬ 
ents  with  the  most  powerful  ability  and  anima¬ 
tion.  Johnson.  “Yet  this  man  cut  his  own  throat. 
The  true  strong  and  sound  mind  is  the  mind  that 
can  embrace  equally  great  things  and  small. 
Now  I  am  told  the  King  of  Prussia  will  say  to  a 
servant,  ‘Bring  me  a  bottle  of  such  a  wine,  which 
came  in  such  a  year;  it  lies  in  such  a  corner  of 
the  cellars.’  I  would  have  a  man  great  in  great 
things,  and  elegant  in  little  things.”  He  said  to 
me  afterwards,  when  we  were  by  ourselves, 
“Robertson  was  in  a  mighty  romantick  humour, 
he  talked  of  one  whom  he  did  not  know;  but  I 
downed  him  with  the  King  of  Prussia.”  “Yes,  Sir, 
(said  I,)  you  threw  a  bottle  at  his  head.” 

An  ingenious  gentleman  was  mentioned,  con¬ 
cerning  whom  both  Robertson  and  Ramsay 
agreed  that  he  had  a  constant  firmness  of  mind; 
for  after  a  laborious  day,  and  amidst  a  multi¬ 
plicity  of  cares  and  anxieties,  he  would  sit  down 
with  his  sisters  and  be  quite  cheerful  and  good- 
humoured.  Such  a  disposition,  it  was  observed, 
was  a  happy  gift  of  nature.  Johnson.  “I  do  not 
think  so;  a  man  has  from  nature  a  certain  por¬ 
tion  of  mind;  the  use  he  makes  of  it  depends  up¬ 
on  his  own  free  will.  That  a  man  has  always  the 
same  firmness  of  mind  I  do  not  say;  because  ev¬ 
ery  man  feels  his  mind  less  firm  at  one  time  than 
another;  but  I  think  a  man’s  being  in  a  good  or 
bad  humour  depends  upon  his  will.”  I,  however, 
could  not  help  thinking  that  a  man’s  humour 
is  often  uncontroulable  by  his  will. 


407 

Johnson  harangued  against  drinking  wine.“A 
man  (said  he,)  may  choose  whether  he  will  have 
abstemiousness  and  knowledge,  or  claret  and 
ignorance.”  Dr.  Robertson,  (who  is  very  com¬ 
panionable,)  was  beginning  to  dissent  as  to  the 
proscription  of  claret.  Johnson,  (with  a  placid 
smile,)  “Nay,  Sir,  you  shall  not  differ  with  me; 
as  I  have  said  that  the  man  is  most  perfect  who 
takes  in  the  most  things,  I  am  for  knowledge  and 
claret.”  Robertson,  (holding  a  glass  of  gener¬ 
ous  claret  in  his  hand,)  “Sir,  I  can  only  drink 
your  health.”  Johnson.  “Sir,  I  should  be  sorry 
if you  should  be  ever  in  such  a  state  as  to  be  able 
to  do  nothing  more.”  Robertson.  “Dr.  John¬ 
son,  allow  me  to  say,  that  in  one  respect  I  have 
the  advantage  of  you;  when  you  were  in  Scot¬ 
land  you  would  not  come  to  hear  any  of  our 
preachers,  whereas,  when  I  am  here,  I  attend 
your  publick  worship  without  scruple,  and  in¬ 
deed,  with  great  satisfaction.”  Johnson.  “Why, 
Sir,  that  is  not  so  extraordinary:  the  King  of  Si¬ 
am  sent  ambassadors  to  Louis  the  Fourteenth; 
but  Louis  the  Fourteenth  sent  none  to  the  King 
of  Siam.”1 

Here  my  friend  for  once  discovered  a  want  of 
knowledge  or  forgetfulness;  for  Louis  the  Four¬ 
teenth  did  send  an  embassy  to  the  King  of  Siam, 
and  the  Abbe  Choisi,  who  was  employed  in  it, 
published  an  account  of  it  in  two  volumes. 

Next  day,  Thursday,  April  30, 1  found  him  at 
home  by  himself.  Johnson.  “Well,  Sir,  Ramsay 
gave  us  a  splendid  dinner.  I  love  Ramsay.  You 
will  not  find  a  man  in  whose  conversation  there 
is  more  instruction,  more  information,  and  more 
elegance,  than  in  Ramsay’s.”  Boswell.  “What 
I  admire  in  Ramsay,  is  his  continuing  to  be  so 
young.”  Johnson.  “Why,  yes,  Sir,  it  is  to  be  ad¬ 
mired.  I  value  myself  upon  this,  that  there  is 
nothing  of  the  old  man  in  my  conversation.  I 
am  now  sixty-eight,  and  I  have  no  more  of  it 
than  at  twenty-eight.”  Boswell.  “But,  Sir, 
would  not  you  wish  to  know  old  age?  He  who  is 
never  an  old  man,  does  not  know  the  whole  of 
human  life;  for  old  age  is  one  of  the  divisions  of 
it.”  Johnson.  “Nay,  Sir,  what  talk  is  this?”  Bos¬ 
well.  “I  mean,  Sir,  the  Sphinx’s  description  of 
it; — morning,  noon,  and  night.  I  would  know 
night  as  well  as  morning  and  noon.”  Johnson. 
“What,  Sir,  would  you  know  what  it  is  to  feel 
the  evils  of  old  age?  Would  you  have  the  gout? 
Would  you  have  decrepitude?” — Seeing  him 
heated,  I  would  not  argue  any  further;  but  I 
was  confident  that  I  was  in  the  right.  I  would, 
in  due  time,  be  a  Nestor,  an  elder  of  the  people; 

1Mrs.  Piozzi  confidently  mentions  this  as  having 
passed  in  Scotland.  Anecdotes ,  p.  62. 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


408 

and  there  should  be  some  difference  between  the 
conversation  of  twenty-eight  and  sixty-eight.  A 
grave  picture  should  not  be  gay.  There  is  a  se¬ 
rene,  solemn,  placid  old  age.  Johnson.  “Mrs. 
Thrale’s  mother  said  of  me  what  flattered  me 
much.  A  clergyman  was  complaining  of  want  of 
society  in  the  country  where  he  lived;  and  said, 
‘They  talk  of  runts';  (that  is,  young  cows).  £Sir, 
(said  Mrs.  Salusbury,)  Mr.  Johnson  would  learn 
to  talk  of  runts5;  meaning  that  I  was  a  man  who 
would  make  the  most  of  my  situation,  whatever 
it  was.”  He  added,  “I  think  myself  a  very  polite 
man.” 

On  Saturday,  May  2, 1  dined  with  him  at  Sir 
Joshua  Reynolds’s,  where  there  was  a  very  large 
company,  and  a  great  deal  of  conversation;  but 
owing  to  some  circumstance  which  I  cannot  now 
recollect,  I  have  no  record  of  any  part  of  it,  ex¬ 
cept  that  there  were  several  people  there  by  no 
means  of  the  Johnsonian  school;  so  that  less  at¬ 
tention  was  paid  to  him  than  usual,  which  put 
him  out  of  humour;  and  upon  some  imaginary 
offence  from  me,  he  attacked  me  with  such  rude¬ 
ness,  that  I  was  vexed  and  angry,  because  it  gave 
those  persons  an  opportunity  of  enlarging  upon 
his  supposed  ferocity,  and  ill  treatment  of  his 
best  friends.  I  was  so  much  hurt,  and  had  my 
pride  so  much  roused,  that  I  kept  away  from 
him  for  a  week;  and,  perhaps,  might  have  kept 
away  much  longer,  nay,  gone  to  Scotland  with¬ 
out  seeing  him  again,  had  not  we  fortunately 
met  and  been  reconciled.  To  such  unhappy 
chances  are  human  friendships  liable. 

On  Friday,  May  8,  I  dined  with  him  at  Mr. 
Langton’s.  I  was  reserved  and  silent,  which  I 
suppose  he  perceived,  and  might  recollect  the 
cause.  After  dinner  when  Mr.  Langton  was  called 
out  of  the  room,  and  we  were  by  ourselves,  he 
drew  his  chair  near  to  mine,  and  said,  in  a  tone 
of  conciliating  courtesy,  “Well,  how  have  you 
done?”  Boswell.  “Sir,  you  have  made  me  very 
uneasy  by  your  behaviour  to  me  when  we  were 
last  at  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds’s.  You  know,  my 
dear  Sir,  no  man  has  a  greater  respect  and  affec¬ 
tion  for  you,  or  would  sooner  go  to  the  end  of 
the  world  to  serve  you.  Now  to  treat  me  so — .” 
He  insisted  that  I  had  interrupted  him,  which  I 
assured  him  was  not  the  case;  and  proceeded — 
“But  why  treat  me  so  before  people  who  neither 
love  you  nor  me?”  Johnson.  “Well,  I  am  sorry 
for  it.  I’ll  make  it  up  to  you  twenty  different 
ways,  as  you  please.”  Boswell.  “I  said  to-day 
to  Sir  Joshua,  when  he  observed  that  you  tossed 
me  sometimes — I  don’t  care  how  often,  or  how 
high  he  tosses  me,  when  only  friends  are  pres¬ 
ent,  for  then  I  fall  upon  soft  ground:  but  I  do 


[  1 77s 

not  like  falling  on  stones,  which  is  the  case  when 
enemies  are  present.  —  I  think  this  a  pretty  good 
image,  Sir.”  Johnson.  “Sir,  it  is  one  of  the  hap¬ 
piest  I  have  ever  heard.” 

The  truth  is,  there  was  no  venom  in  the 
wounds  which  he  inflicted  at  any  time,  unless 
they  were  irritated  by  some  malignant  infusion 
by  other  hands.  We  were  instantly  as  cordial 
again  as  ever,  and  joined  in  hearty  laugh  at  some 
ludicrous  but  innocent  peculiarities  of  one  of 
our  friends.  Boswell.  “Do  you  think,  Sir,  it  is 
always  culpable  to  laugh  at  a  man  to  his  face?” 
Johnson.  “ Why,  Sir,  that  depends  upon  the  man 
and  the  thing.  If  it  is  a  slight  man,  and  a  slight 
thing,  you  may;  for  you  take  nothing  valuable 
from  him.” 

He  said,  “I  read  yesterday  Dr.  Blair’s  sermon 
on  Devotion,  from  the  text  *  Cornelius ,  a  devout 
man'  His  doctrine  is  the  best  limited,  the  best 
expressed:  there  is  the  most  warmth  without  fa¬ 
naticism,  the  most  rational  transport.  There  is 
one  part  of  it  which  I  disapprove,  and  I’d  have 
him  correct  it;  which  is,  that  che  who  does  not 
feel  joy  in  religion  is  far  from  the  kingdom  of 
heaven !’  There  are  many  good  men  whose  fear 
of  God  predominates  over  their  love.  It  maydis- 
courage.  It  was  rashly  said.  A  noble  sermon  it  is 
indeed.  I  wish  Blair  would  come  over  to  the 
Church  of  England.” 

When  Mr.  Langton  returned  to  us,  the  “flow 
of  talk”  went  on.  An  eminent  authour  being  men¬ 
tioned; — Johnson.  “He  is  not  a  pleasant  man. 
His  conversation  is  neither  instructive  nor  bril¬ 
liant.  He  does  not  talk  as  if  impelled  by  any  ful¬ 
ness  of  knowledge  or  vivacity  of  imagination.  His 
conversation  is  like  that  of  any  other  sensible 
man.  He  talks  with  no  wish  either  to  inform  or 
to  hear,  but  only  because  he  thinks  it  does  not 

become - to  sit  in  a  company  and 

say  nothing.” 

Mr.  Langton  having  repeated  the  anecdote 
of  Addison  having  distinguished  between  his 
powers  in  conversation  and  in  writing,  by  saying 
“I  have  only  nine-pence  in  my  pocket;  but  I  can 
draw  for  a  thousand  pounds”; — Johnson.  “He 
had  not  that  retort  ready,  Sir;  he  had  prepared 
it  before-hand.”  Langton.  (turning  to  me,)  “A 
fine  surmise.  Set  a  thief  to  catch  a  thief.” 

Johnson  called  the  East-Indians  barbarians. 
Boswell.  “You  will  except  the  Chinese,  Sir?” 
Johnson.  “No,  Sir.”  Boswell.  “Have  they  not 
arts?”  Johnson.  “They  have  pottery.”  Boswell. 
“What  do  you  say  to  the  written  characters  of 
their  language?”  Johnson.  “Sir,  they  have  not 
an  alphabet.  They  have  not  been  able  to  form 
what  all  other  nations  have  formed.”  Boswell. 


BOSWELL 


177B]  LIFE  OF 

“There  is  more  learning  in  their  language  than 
in  any  other,  from  the  immense  number  of  their 
characters.”  Johnson.  “It  is  only  more  difficult 
from  its  rudeness;  as  there  is  more  labour  in  hew¬ 
ing  down  a  tree  with  a  stone  than  with  an  axe.” 

He  said,  “I  have  been  reading  Lord  Karnes’s 
Sketches  of  the  History  of  Man.  In  treating  of  se¬ 
verity  of  punishment,  he  mentions  that  of  Ma¬ 
dame  Lapouchin,  in  Russia,  but  he  does  not  give 
it  fairly;  for  I  have  looked  at  Chappe  D’ Auteroche, 
from  whom  he  has  taken  it.  He  stops  where  it  is 
said  that  the  spectators  thought  her  innocent, 
and  leaves  out  what  follows;  that  she  neverthe¬ 
less  was  guilty.  Now  this  is  being  as  culpable 
as  one  can  conceive,  to  misrepresent  fact  in  a 
book,  and  for  what  motive?  It  is  like  one  of 
those  lies  which  people  tell,  one  cannot  see  why. 
The  woman’s  life  was  spared;  and  no  punish¬ 
ment  was  too  great  for  the  favourite  of  an  Em¬ 
press  who  had  conspired  to  dethrone  her  mis¬ 
tress.”  Boswell.  “He  was  only  giving  a  picture 
of  the  lady  in  her  sufferings.”  Johnson.  “Nay, 
don’t  endeavour  to  palliate  this.  Guilt  is  a  prin¬ 
cipal  feature  in  the  picture.  Karnes  is  puzzled 
with  a  question  that  puzzled  me  when  I  was  a 
very  young  man.  Why  is  it  that  the  interest  of 
money  is  lower,  when  money  is  plentiful;  for  five 
pounds  has  the  same  proportion  of  value  to  a 
hundred  pounds  when  money  is  plentiful,  as 
when  it  is  scarce?  A  lady  explained  it  to  me.  Tt 
is  (said  she,)  because  when  money  is  plentiful 
there  are  so  many  more  who  have  money  to  lend, 
that  they  bid  down  one  another.  Many  have  then 
a  hundred  pounds;  and  one  says, — Take  mine 
rather  than  another’s,  and  you  shall  have  it  at 
four  percent’”  Boswell.  “Does  Lord  Karnes  de¬ 
cide  the  question?”  Johnson.  “I  think  he  leaves 
it  as  he  found  it.”  Boswell.  “This  must  have 
been  an  extraordinary  lady  who  instructed  you, 
Sir.  May  I  ask  who  she  was?”  Johnson.  “Molly 
Aston,1  Sir,  the  sister  of  those  ladies  with 
whom  you  dined  at  Lichfield.  I  shall  be  at 
home  to-morrow.”  Boswell.  “Then  let  us  dine 
by  ourselves  at  the  Mitre,  to  keep  up  the  old 

1Johnson  had  an  extraordinary  admiration  of 
this  lady,  notwithstanding  she  was  a  violent  Whig. 
In  answer  to  her  high-flown  speeches  for  Liberty , 
he  addressed  to  her  the  following  Epigram,  of 
which  I  presume  to  offer  a  translation: 

Liber  ut  esse  velim  suasisti  pulchra  Maria , 

Ut  maneam  liber  pulchra  Maria  vale . 

Adieu,  Maria!  since  you’d  have  me  free; 

For,  who  beholds  thy  charms  a  slave  must  be. 

A  correspondent  of  The  Gentleman's  Magazine , 
who  subscribes  himself  Sciolus,  to  whom  I  am  in¬ 
debted  for  several  excellent  remarks,  observes,  “The 
turn  of  Dr.  Johnson’s  lines  to  Miss  Aston,  whose 
Whig  principles  he  had  been  combating,  appears 


JOHNSON  409 

custom,  ‘the  custom  of  the  manor,’  the  custom 
of  the  mitre.”  Johnson.  “Sir,  so  it  shall  be.” 

On  Saturday,  May  9,  we  fulfilled  our  purpose 
of  dining  by  ourselves  at  the  Mitre,  according 
to  old  custom.  There  was,  on  these  occasions,  a 
little  circumstance  of  kind  attention  to  Mrs. 
Williams,  which  must  not  be  omitted.  Before 
coming  out,  and  leaving  her  to  dine  alone,  he 
gave  her  her  choice  of  a  chicken,  a  sweetbread, 
or  any  other  little  nice  thing,  which  was  care¬ 
fully  sent  to  her  from  the  tavern,  ready-drest. 

Our  conversation  to-day,  I  know  not  how, 
turned,  (I  think  for  the  only  time  at  any  length, 
during  our  long  acquaintance,)  upon  the  sensual 
intercourse  between  the  sexes,  the  delight  of 
which  he  ascribed  chiefly  to  imagination.  “Were 
it  not  for  imagination,  Sir,  (said  he,)  a  man  would 
be  as  happy  in  the  arms  of  a  chambermaid  as  of 
a  Duchess.  But  such  is  the  adventitious  charm 
of  fancy,  that  we  find  men  who  have  violated 
the  best  principles  of  society,  and  ruined  their 
fame  and  their  fortune,  that  they  might  possess 
a  woman  of  rank.”  It  would  not  be  proper  to  re¬ 
cord  the  particulars  of  such  a  conversation  in 
moments  of  unreserved  frankness,  when  nobody 
was  present  on  whom  it  could  have  any  hurtful 
effect.  That  subject,  when  philosophically  treat¬ 
ed,  may  surely  employ  the  mind  in  as  curious 
discussion,  and  as  innocently,  as  anatomy;  pro¬ 
vided  that  those  who  do  treat  it  keep  clear  of 
inflammatory  incentives. 

“From  grave  to  gay,  from  lively  to  severe,” — 
we  were  soon  engaged  in  very  different  specu¬ 
lation;  humbly  and  reverently  considering  and 
wondering  at  the  universal  mystery  of  all  things, 
as  our  imperfect  faculties  can  now  judge  of  them. 
“There  are  (said  he,)  innumerable  questions  to 
which  the  inquisitive  mind  can  in  this  state  re¬ 
ceive  no  answer:  Why  do  you  and  I  exist?  Why 
was  this  world  created?  Since  it  was  to  be  cre¬ 
ated,  why  was  it  not  created  sooner?” 

On  Sunday,  May  10,  I  supped  with  him  at 
Mr.  Hoole’s,  with  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds.  I  have 
neglected  the  memorial  of  this  evening,  so  as  to 
remember  no  more  of  it  than  two  particulars; 
one,  that  he  strenuously  opposed  an  argument 
by  Sir  Joshua,  that  virtue  was  preferable  to  vice, 

to  me  to  be  taken  from  an  ingenious  epigram  in 
the  Menagiana  on  a  young  lady  who  appeared  at  a 
masquerade,  habillee  en  Jesuite ,  during  the  fierce 
contentions  of  the  followers  of  Molinos  and  Jan- 
senius  concerning  free-will: 

On  s'etonne  ici  que  Caliste 
Aitpris  V habit  de  Moliniste. 

Puisque  cette  jeune  beaute 

Ote  a  chacun  sa  liberte , 

N'est-ce  pas  une  Janseniste ?” 


BOSWELL 


410 

considering  this  life  only;  and  that  a  man  would 
be  virtuous  were  it  only  to  preserve  his  character: 
and  that  he  expressed  much  wonder  at  the  curi¬ 
ous  formation  of  the  bat,  a  mouse  with  wings;  say¬ 
ing,  that  “it  was  almost  as  strange  a  thing  in  physi¬ 
ology,  as  if  the  fabulous  dragon  could  be  seen.” 

On  Tuesday,  May  12,  I  waited  on  the  Earl  of 
Marchmont,  to  know  if  his  Lordship  would  fa¬ 
vour  Dr.  Johnson  with  information  concerning 
Pope,  whose  Life  he  was  about  to  write.  John¬ 
son  had  not  flattered  himself  with  the  hopes  of 
receiving  any  civility  from  this  nobleman;  for  he 
said  to  me,  when  I  mentioned  Lord  Marchmont 
as  one  who  could  tell  him  a  great  deal  about 
Pope, — “Sir,  he  will  tell  me  nothing.”  I  had  the 
honour  of  being  known  to  his  Lordship,  and  ap¬ 
plied  to  him  of  myself,  without  being  commis¬ 
sioned  by  Johnson.  His  Lordship  behaved  in  the 
most  polite  and  obliging  manner,  promised  to 
tell  all  he  recollected  about  Pope,  and  was  so 
very  courteous  as  to  say,  “Tell  Dr.  Johnson  I 
have  a  great  respect  for  him,  and  am  ready  to 
shew  it  in  any  way  I  can.  I  am  to  be  in  the  city 
to-morrow,  and  will  call  at  his  house  as  I  re¬ 
turn.”  His  Lordship  however  asked,  “Will  he 
write  the  Lives  of  the  Poets  impartially?  He  was 
the  first  that  brought  Whig  and  Tory  into  a  Dic¬ 
tionary.  And  what  do  you  think  of  his  definition 
of  Excise?  Do  you  know  the  history  of  his  aver¬ 
sion  to  the  word  transpire ?”  Then  taking  down 
the  folio  Dictionary ,  he  shewed  it  with  this  censure 
on  its  secondary  sense:  “To  escape  from  secrecy 
to  notice;  a  sense  lately  innovated  from  France, 
without  necessity.”  “The  truth  was  Lord  Boling- 
broke,  who  left  the  Jacobites,  first  used  it;  there¬ 
fore,  it  was  to  be  condemned.  He  should  have 
shewn  what  word  would  do  for  it,  if  it  was  un¬ 
necessary.”  I  afterwards  put  the  question  to 
Johnson:  “Why,  Sir,  (said  he,)  get  abroad Bos¬ 
well.  “That,  Sir,  is  using  two  words. ’’Johnson. 
“Sir,  there  is  no  end  of  this.  You  may  as  well  in¬ 
sist  to  have  a  word  for  old  age.”  Boswell.  “Well, 
Sir,  Senectus .”  Johnson.  “Nay,  Sir,  to  insist  al¬ 
ways  that  there  should  be  one  word  to  express 
a  thing  in  English,  because  there  is  one  in  an¬ 
other  language,  is  to  change  the  language.” 

I  availed  myself  of  this  opportunity  to  hear 
from  his  Lordship  many  particulars  both  of  Pope 
and  Lord  Bolingbroke,  which  I  have  in  writing. 

I  proposed  to  Lord  Marchmont  that  he  should 
revise  Johnson’s  Life  of  Pope :  “So  (said  his  Lord- 
ship,)  you  would  put  me  in  a  dangerous  situa¬ 
tion.  You  know  he  knocked  down  Osborne  the 
bookseller.” 

Elated  with  the  success  of  my  spontaneous  ex¬ 
ertion  to  procure  material  and  respectable  aid 


[  1778 

to  Johnson  for  his  very  favourite  work,  The  Lives 
of  the  Poets ,  I  hastened  down  to  Mr.  Thrale’s  at 
Streatham,  where  he  now  was,  that  I  might  in¬ 
sure  his  being  at  home  next  day;  and  after  din¬ 
ner,  when  I  thought  he  would  receive  the  good 
news  in  the  best  humour,  I  announced  it  eager¬ 
ly:  “I  have  been  at  work  for  you  to-day,  Sir.  I 
have  been  with  Lord  Marchmont.  He  bade  me 
tell  you  he  has  a  great  respect  for  you,  and  will 
call  on  you  to-morrow  at  one  o’clock,  and  com¬ 
municate  all  he  knows  about  Pope.” — Here  I 
paused,  in  full  expectation  that  he  would  be 
pleased  with  this  intelligence,  would  praise  my 
active  merit,  and  would  be  alert  to  embrace 
such  an  offer  from  a  nobleman.  But  whether  I 
had  shewn  an  over-exultation,  which  provoked 
his  spleen;  or  whether  he  was  seized  with  a  sus¬ 
picion  that  I  had  obtruded  him  on  Lord  March¬ 
mont,  and  humbled  him  too  much;  or  whether 
there  was  any  thing  more  than  an  unlucky  fit  of 
ill-humour,  I  know  not;  but,  to  my  surprize,  the 
result  was, — Johnson.  “I  shall  not  be  in  town 
to-morrow.  I  don’t  care  to  know  about  Pope.” 
Mrs.  Thrale.  (surprized  as  I  was,  and  a  little 
angry,)  “I  suppose,  Sir,  Mr.  Boswell  thought, 
that  as  you  are  to  write  Pope’s  Life ,  you  would 
wish  to  know  about  him.”  Johnson.  “Wish! 
why  yes.  If  it  rained  knowledge  I’d  hold  out  my 
hand;  but  I  would  not  give  myself  the  trouble  to 
go  in  quest  of  it.”  There  was  no  arguing  with 
him  at  the  moment.  Some  time  afterwards  he 
said,  “Lord  Marchmont  will  call  on  me,  and  then 
I  shall  call  on  Lord  Marchmont.”  Mr.  Thrale 
was  uneasy  at  his  unaccountable  caprice;  and 
told  me,  that  if  I  did  not  take  care  to  bring  about 
a  meeting  between  Lord  Marchmont  and  him,  it 
would  never  take  place,  which  would  be  a  great 
pity.  I  sent  a  card  to  his  Lordship,  to  be  left  at 
Johnson’s  house,  acquainting  him,  that  Dr. 
Johnson  could  not  be  in  town  next  day,  but 
would  do  himself  the  honour  of  waiting  on  him 
at  another  time.  I  give  this  account  fairly,  as  a 
specimen  of  that  unhappy  temper  with  which 
this  great  and  good  man  had  occasionally  to 
struggle,  from  something  morbid  in  his  consti¬ 
tution.  Let  the  most  censorious  of  my  readers 
suppose  himself  to  have  a  violent  fit  of  the  tooth¬ 
ache,  or  to  have  received  a  severe  stroke  on  the 
shin-bone,  and  when  in  such  a  state  to  be  asked  a 
question;  and  if  he  has  any  candour,  he  will  not 
be  surprized  at  the  answers  which  J ohnson  some¬ 
times  gave  in  moments  of  irritation,  which,  let 
me  assure  them,  is  exquisitely  painful.  But  it 
must  not  be  erroneously  supposed  that  he  was, 
in  the  smallest  degree,  careless  concerning  any 
work  which  he  undertook,  or  that  he  was  gener- 


1778]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


ally  thus  peevish.  It  will  be  seen,  that  in  the  fol¬ 
lowing  year  he  had  a  very  agreeable  interview 
with  Lord  Marchmont,  at  his  Lordship’s  house; 
and  this  very  afternoon  he  soon  forgot  any  fret¬ 
fulness,  and  fell  into  conversation  as  usual. 

I  mentioned  a  reflection  having  been  thrown 
out  against  four  Peers  for  having  presumed  to 
rise  in  opposition  to  the  opinion  of  the  twelve 
Judges,  in  a  cause  in  the  House  of  Lords,  as  if 
that  were  indecent.  Johnson.  “Sir,  there  is  no 
ground  for  censure.  The  Peers  are  Judges  them¬ 
selves;  and  supposing  them  really  to  be  of  a  dif¬ 
ferent  opinion,  they  might  from  duty  be  in  op¬ 
position  to  the  Judges,  who  were  there  only  to 
be  consulted.” 

In  this  observation  I  fully  concurred  with  him; 
for,  unquestionably,  all  the  Peers  are  vested  with 
the  highest  judicial  powers;  and  when  they  are 
confident  that  they  understand  a  cause,  are  not 
obliged,  nay  ought  not  to  acquiesce  in  the  opin¬ 
ion  of  the  ordinary  Law  Judges,  or  even  in  that 
of  those  who  from  their  studies  and  experience 
are  called  the  Law  Lords.  I  consider  the  Peers 
in  general  as  I  do  a  Jury,  who  ought  to  listen 
with  respectful  attention  to  the  sages  of  the  law; 
but,  if  after  hearing  them,  they  have  a  firm  opin¬ 
ion  of  their  own,  are  bound,  as  honest  men,  to 
decide  accordingly.  Nor  is  it  so  difficult  for  them 
to  understand  even  law  questions,  as  is  general¬ 
ly  thought;  provided  they  will  bestow  sufficient 
attention  upon  them.  This  observation  was  made 
by  my  honoured  relation  the  late  Lord  Cath- 
cart,  who  had  spent  his  life  in  camps  and  courts; 
yet  assured  me,  that  he  could  form  a  clear  opin¬ 
ion  upon  most  of  the  causes  that  came  before 
the  House  of  Lords,  “as  they  were  so  well  enu¬ 
cleated  in  the  Cases.” 

Mrs.  Thrale  told  us,  that  a  curious  clergyman 
of  our  acquaintance  had  discovered  a  licentious 
stanza,  which  Pope  had  originally  in  his  Uni - 
versal  Prayer ,  before  the  stanza, 

What  conscience  dictates  to  be  done , 

Or  warns  us  not  to  do ,  &c. 

It  was  thus: 

Can  sins  of  moment  claim  the  rod 
Of  everlasting  fires? 

And  that  offend  great  Nature’ s  God, 

Which  Nature’s  self  inspires? 

and  that  Dr.  Johnson  observed,  “it  had  been 
borrowed  from  Guarini .”  There  are,  indeed,  in 
Pastor  Fidoy  many  such  flimsy  superficial  reason¬ 
ings,  as  that  in  the  last  two  lines  of  this  stanza. 

Boswell.  “In  that  stanza  of  Pope’s,  ‘rod  of  fires’ 
is  certainly  a  bad  metaphor.”  Mrs.  Thrale. 
“And  ‘sins  of  moment ’  is  a  faulty  expression;  for 
its  true  import  is  momentous ,  which  cannot  be  in¬ 


tended.”  Johnson.  “It  must  have  been  written 
‘of  moments.’  Of  moment ,  is  momentous ;  of  moments , 
momentary.  I  warrant  you,  however,  Pope  wrote 
this  stanza,  and  some  friend  struck  it  out.  Boi- 
leau  wrote  some  such  thing,  and  Arnaud  struck 
it  out,  saying,  ‘  Vous  gagnerez  deux  ou  trois  impies ,  et 
perdrezje  ne  scais  combien  des  honneites  gens?  These 
fellows  want  to  say  a  daring  thing,  and  don’t 
know  how  to  go  about  it.  Mere  poets  know  no 
more  of  fundamental  principles  than — .”  Here 
he  was  interrupted  somehow.  Mrs.  Thrale  men¬ 
tioned  Dryden.  Johnson.  “He  puzzled  himself 
about  predestination. — How  foolish  was  it  in 
Pope  to  give  all  his  friendship  to  Lords,  who 
thought  they  honoured  him  by  being  with  him; 
and  to  choose  such  Lords  as  Burlington,  and 
Cobham,  and  Bolingbroke !  Bathurst  was  nega¬ 
tive,  a  pleasing  man ;  and  I  have  heard  no  ill  of 
Marchmont;  and  then  always  saying,  ‘I  do  not 
value  you  for  being  a  Lord’;  which  was  a  sure 
proof  that  he  did.  I  never  say,  I  do  not  value 
Boswell  more  for  being  born  to  an  estate,  be¬ 
cause  I  do  not  care.”  Boswell.  “Nor  for  being 
a  Scotchman?”  Johnson.  “Nay,  Sir,  I  do  value 
you  more  for  being  a  Scotchman.  You  are  a 
Scotchman  without  the  faults  of  a  Scotchman. 
You  would  not  have  been  so  valuable  as  you 
are,  had  you  not  been  a  Scotchman.” 

Talking  of  divorces,  I  asked  if  Othello’s  doc¬ 
trine  was  not  plausible? 

He  that  is  robb’d ,  not  wanting  what  is  stolen , 

Let  him  not  know’t,  and  he’s  not  robb’d  at  all . 

Dr.  Johnson  and  Mrs.  Thrale  joined  against  this. 
Johnson.  “Ask  any  man  if  he’d  wish  not  to  know 
of  such  an  injury.”  Boswell.  “Would  you  tell 
your  friend  to  make  him  unhappy?”  Johnson. 
“Perhaps,  Sir,  I  should  not;  but  that  would  be 
from  prudence  on  my  own  account.  A  man 
would  tell  his  father.”  Boswell.  “Yes;  because 
he  would  not  have  spurious  children  to  get  any 
share  of  the  family  inheritance.”  Mrs.  Thrale. 
“Or  he  would  tell  his  brother.”  Boswell.  “Cer¬ 
tainly  his  elder  brother.”  Johnson.  “You  would 
tell  your  friend  of  a  woman’s  infamy,  to  prevent 
his  marrying  a  whore:  there  is  the  same  reason 
to  tell  him  of  his  wife’s  infidelity,  when  he  is  mar¬ 
ried,  to  prevent  the  consequences  of  imposition. 
It  is  a  breach  of  confidence  not  to  tell  a  friend.” 
Boswell.  “Would  you  tell  Mr. - ?”  (nam¬ 

ing  a  gentleman  who  assuredly  was  not  in  the 
least  danger  of  such  a  miserable  disgrace,  though 
married  to  a  fine  woman.)  Johnson.  “No,  Sir; 
because  it  would  do  no  good:  he  is  so  sluggish, 
he’d  never  go  to  parliament  and  get  through  a 
divorce.” 


BOSWELL 


412 

He  said  of  one  of  our  friends,  “He  is  ruining 
himself  without  pleasure.  A  man  who  loses  at 
play,  or  who  runs  out  his  fortune  at  court,  makes 
his  estate  less,  in  hopes  of  making  it  bigger:  (I  am 
sure  of  this  word,  which  was  often  used  by  him:) 
but  it  is  a  sad  thing  to  pass  through  the  quagmire 
of  parsimony,  to  the  gulph  of  ruin.  To  pass  over 
the  flowery  path  of  extravagance  is  very  well.” 

Amongst  the  numerous  prints  pasted  on  the 
walls  of  the  dining-room  at  Streatham,  was  Ho¬ 
garth’s  “Modern  Midnight  Conversation.”  I 
asked  him  what  he  knew  of  Parson  Ford,  who 
makes  a  conspicuous  figure  in  the  riotous  group. 
Johnson.  “Sir,  he  was  my  acquaintance  and  re¬ 
lation,  my  mother’s  nephew.  He  had  purchased 
a  living  in  the  country,  but  not  simoniacally.  I 
never  saw  him  but  in  the  country.  I  have  been 
told  he  was  a  man  of  great  parts;  very  profligate, 
but  I  never  heard  he  was  impious.”  Boswell. 
“Was  there  not  a  story  of  his  ghost  having  ap¬ 
peared?”  Johnson.  “Sir,  it  was  believed.  A  waiter 
at  the  Hummums,  in  which  house  Ford  died, 
had  been  absent  for  some  time,  and  returned, 
not  knowing  that  Ford  was  dead.  Going  down 
to  the  cellar,  according  to  the  story, he  met  him; 
going  down  again  he  met  him  a  second  time. 
When  he  came  up,  he  asked  some  of  the  people 
of  the  house  what  Ford  could  be  doing  there. 
They  told  him  Ford  was  dead.  The  waiter  took 
a  fever,  in  which  he  lay  for  some  time.  When  he 
recovered,  he  said  he  had  a  message  to  deliver 
to  some  women  from  Ford;  but  he  was  not  to 
tell  what,  or  to  whom.  He  walked  out;  he  was 
followed;  but  somewhere  about  St.  Paul’s  they 
lost  him.  He  came  back,  and  said  he  had  de¬ 
livered  the  message,  and  the  women  exclaimed, 
cThen  we  are  all  undone!’  Dr.  Pellet,  who  was 
not  a  credulous  man,  inquired  into  the  truth  of 
this  story,  and  he  said,  the  evidence  was  irre¬ 
sistible.  My  wife  went  to  the  Hummums;  (it  is 
a  place  where  people  get  themselves  cupped.)  I 
believe  she  went  with  intention  to  hear  about 
this  story  of  Ford.  At  first  they  were  unwilling 
to  tell  her;  but,  after  they  had  talked  to  her,  she 
came  away  satisfied  that  it  was  true.  To  be  sure 
the  man  had  a  fever;  and  this  vision  may  have 
been  the  beginning  of  it.  But  if  the  message  to  the 
women,  and  their  behaviour  upon  it,  were  true 
as  related,  there  was  something  supernatural. 
That  rests  upon  his  word;  and  there  it  remains.” 

After  Mrs.  Thrale  was  gone  to  bed,  Johnson 
and  I  sat  up  late.  We  resumed  Sir  Joshua  Rey¬ 
nolds’s  argument  on  the  preceding  Sunday,  that 
a  man  would  be  virtuous  though  he  had  no  oth¬ 
er  motive  than  to  preserve  his  character.  John¬ 
son.  “Sir,  it  is  not  true:  for  as  to  this  world  vice 


[  1778 

does  not  hurt  a  man’s  character.”  Boswell. 
“Yes,  Sir,  debauching  a  friend’s  wife  will.” 
Johnson.  “No,  Sir.  Who  thinks  the  worse  of 

- for  it?”  Boswell.  “Lord - was  not 

his  friend.”  Johnson.  “That  is  only  a  circum¬ 
stance,  Sir;  a  slight  distinction.  He  could  not  get 

into  the  house  but  by  Lord  - .  A  man  is 

chosen  Knight  of  the  shire,  not  the  less  for  hav¬ 
ing  debauched  ladies.”  Boswell.  “What,  Sir, 
if  he  debauched  the  ladies  of  gentlemen  in  the 
county,  will  not  there  be  a  general  resentment 
against  him?”  Johnson.  “No,  Sir.  He  will  lose 
those  particular  gentlemen;  but  the  rest  will  not 
trouble  their  heads  about  it,”  (warmly.)  Bos¬ 
well.  “Well,  Sir,  I  cannot  think  so.”  Johnson. 
“Nay,  Sir,  there  is  no  talking  with  a  man  who 
will  dispute  what  every  body  knows,  (angrily.) 
Don’t  you  know  this?”  Boswell.  “No,  Sir;  and 
I  wish  to  think  better  of  your  country  than  you 
represent  it.  I  knew  in  Scotland  a  gentleman 
obliged  to  leave  it  for  debauching  a  lady;  and  in 
one  of  our  counties  an  Earl’s  brother  lost  his 
election,  because  he  had  debauched  the  lady  of 
another  Earl  in  that  county,  and  destroyed  the 
peace  of  a  noble  family.” 

Still  he  would  not  yield.  He  proceeded:  “Will 
you  not  allow,  Sir,  that  vice  does  not  hurt  a  man’s 
character  so  as  to  obstruct  his  prosperity  in  life, 
when  you  know  that - 1  was  load¬ 

ed  with  wealth  and  honours;  a  man  who  had  ac¬ 
quired  his  fortune  by  such  crimes,  that  his  con¬ 
sciousness  of  them  impelled  him  to  cut  his  own 
throat.”  Boswell.  “You  will  recollect,  Sir,  that 
Dr.  Robertson  said,  he  cut  his  throat  because  he 
was  weary  of  still  life;  little  things  not  being  suf¬ 
ficient  to  move  his  great  mind.”  Johnson,  (very 
angry,)  “Nay,  Sir,  what  stuff  is  this !  You  had  no 
more  this  opinion  after  Robertson  said  it,  than 
before.  I  know  nothing  more  offensive  than  re¬ 
peating  what  one  knows  to  be  foolish  things,  by 
way  of  continuing  a  dispute,  to  see  what  a  man 
will  answer, — to  make  him  your  butt!”  (angri¬ 
er  still.)  Boswell.  “My  dear  Sir,  I  had  no  such 
intentions  as  you  seem  to  suspect;  I  had  not  in¬ 
deed.  Might  not  this  nobleman  have  felt  every 
thing  ‘weary,  stale,  flat,  and  unprofitable,’  as 
Hamlet  says?”  Johnson.  “Nay,  if  you  are  to  bring 
in  gabble,  I’ll  talk  no  more.  I  will  not,  upon  my 
honour.” — My  readers  will  decide  upon  this  dis¬ 
pute. 

Next  morning  I  stated  to  Mrs.  Thrale  at  break¬ 
fast,  before  he  came  down,  the  dispute  of  last 
night  as  to  the  influence  of  character  upon  suc¬ 
cess  in  life.  She  said  he  was  certainly  wrong;  and 
told  me,  that  a  Baronet  lost  an  election  in  W ales, 

flLord  Clive.] 


I778  ]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  413 


because  he  had  debauched  the  sister  of  a  gentle¬ 
man  in  the  county,  whom  he  made  one  of  his 
daughters  invite  as  her  companion  at  his  seat  in 
the  country,  when  his  lady  and  his  other  chil¬ 
dren  were  in  London.  But  she  would  not  en¬ 
counter  Johnson  upon  the  subject. 

I  staid  all  this  day  with  him  at  Streatham.  He 
talked  a  great  deal,  in  very  good  humour. 

Looking  at  Messrs.  Dilly’s  splendid  edition  of 
Lord  Chesterfield’s  miscellaneous  works,  he 
laughed,  and  said,  “Here  now  are  two  speeches 
ascribed  to  him,  both  of  which  were  written  by 
me:  and  the  best  of  it  is,  they  have  found  out 
that  one  is  like  Demosthenes,  and  the  other  like 
Cicero.” 

He  censured  Lord  Karnes’s  Sketches  of  the  His¬ 
tory  of  Man ,  for  misrepresenting  Clarendon’s  ac¬ 
count  of  the  appearance  of  Sir  George  Villiers’s 
ghost,  as  if  Clarendon  were  weakly  credulous; 
when  the  truth  is,  that  Clarendon  only  says,  that 
the  story  was  upon  a  better  foundation  of  credit, 
than  usually  such  discourses  are  founded  upon; 
nay,  speaks  thus  of  the  person  who  was  reported 
to  have  seen  the  vision,  “the  poor  man,  if  he  had 
been  at  all  waking which  Lord  Kames  has  omit¬ 
ted.  He  added,  “in  this  book  it  is  maintained 
that  virtue  is  natural  to  man,  and  that  if  we 
would  but  consult  our  own  hearts  we  should  be 
virtuous.  Now  after  consulting  our  own  hearts 
all  we  can,  and  with  all  the  helps  we  have,  we 
find  how  few  of  us  are  virtuous.  This  is  saying  a 
thing  which  all  mankind  know  not  to  be  true.” 
Boswell.  “Is  not  modesty  natural?”  Johnson. 
“I  cannot  say,  Sir,  as  we  find  no  people  quite  in 
a  state  of  nature;  but  I  think  the  more  they  are 
taught,  the  more  modest  they  are.  The  French 
are  a  gross,  ill-bred,  untaught  people ;  a  lady  there 
will  spit  on  the  floor  and  rub  it  with  her  foot. 
What  I  gained  by  being  in  France  was,  learning 
to  be  better  satisfied  with  my  own  country.  Time 
maybe  employed  to  more  advantage  from  nine¬ 
teen  to  twenty-four  almost  in  any  way  than  in 
travelling;  when  you  set  travelling  against  mere 
negation,  against  doing  nothing,  it  is  better  to 
be  sure;  but  how  much  more  would  a  young  man 
improve  were  he  to  study  during  those  years. 
Indeed,  if  a  young  man  is  wild,  and  must  run 
after  women  and  bad  company,  it  is  better  this 
should  be  done  abroad,  as,  on  his  return,  he  can 
break  off  such  connections,  and  begin  at  home 
a  new  man,  with  a  character  to  form,  and  ac¬ 
quaintances  to  make.  How  little  does  travelling 
supply  to  the  conversation  of  any  man  who  has 
travelled;  how  little  to  Beau  clerk!”  Boswell. 

“What  say  you  to  Lord - ?”  Johnson.  “I 

never  but  once  heard  him  talk  of  what  he  had 


seen,  and  that  was  of  a  large  serpent  in  one  of 
the  Pyramids  of  Egypt.”  Boswell.  “Well,  I  hap¬ 
pened  to  hear  him  tell  the  same  thing,  which 
made  me  mention  him.” 

I  talked  of  a  country  life.  Johnson.  “Were  I 
to  live  in  the  country,  I  would  not  devote  my¬ 
self  to  the  acquisition  of  popularity;  I  would  live 
in  a  much  better  way,  much  more  happily;  I 
would  have  my  time  at  my  own  command.” 
Boswell.  “But,  Sir,  is  it  not  a  sad  thing  to  be  at 
a  distance  from  all  our  literary  friends?”  John¬ 
son.  “Sir,  you  will  by  and  by  have  enough  of  this 
conversation,  which  now  delights  you  so  much.” 

As  he  was  a  zealous  friend  of  subordination, 
he  was  at  all  times  watchful  to  repress  the  vulgar 
cant  against  the  manners  of  the  great;  “High 
people,  Sir,  (said  he,)  are  the  best;  take  a  hun¬ 
dred  ladies  of  quality,  you’ll  find  them  better 
wives,  better  mothers,  more  willing  to  sacrifice 
their  own  pleasure  to  their  children  than  a  hun¬ 
dred  other  women.  Tradeswomen  (I  mean  the 
wives  of  tradesmen)  in  the  city,  who  are  worth 
from  ten  to  fifteen  thousand  pounds,  are  the 
worst  creatures  upon  the  earth,  grossly  ignorant, 
and  thinking  viciousness  fashionable.  Farmers, 
I  think,  are  often  worthless  fellows.  Few  lords 
will  cheat;  and,  if  they  do,  they’ll  be  ashamed 
of  it:  farmers  cheat  and  are  not  ashamed  of  it: 
they  have  all  the  sensual  vices  too  of  the  nobili¬ 
ty,  with  cheating  into  the  bargain.  There  is  as 
much  fornication  and  adultery  among  farmers 
as  amongst  noblemen.”  Boswell.  “The  notion 
of  the  world,  Sir,  however  is,  that  the  morals  of 
women  of  quality  are  worse  than  those  in  lower 
stations.”  Johnson.  “Yes,  Sir,  the  licentiousness 
of  one  woman  of  quality  makes  more  noise  than 
that  of  a  number  of  women  in  lower  stations; 
then,  Sir,  you  are  to  consider  the  malignity  of 
women  in  the  city  against  women  of  quality, 
which  will  make  them  believe  any  thing  of  them, 
such  as  that  they  call  their  coachmen  to  bed. 
No,  Sir,  so  far  as  I  have  observed,  the  higher  in 
rank,  the  richer  ladies  are,  they  are  the  better 
instructed  and  the  more  virtuous.” 

This  year  the  Reverend  Mr.  Horne  published 
his  Letter  to  Mr.  Dunning  on  the  English  Particle; 
Johnson  read  it,  and  though  not  treated  in  it 
with  sufficient  respect,  he  had  candour  enough 
to  say  to  Mr.  Seward,  “Were  I  to  make  a  new 
edition  of  my  Dictionary ,  I  would  adopt  several1 

JIn  Mr.  Horne  Tooke’s  enlargement  of  that  Let¬ 
ter ,  which  he  has  since  published  with  the  title  of 
E7rea  irrepo'evTa;  or,  the  Diversions  of  Parley;  he  men¬ 
tions  this  compliment,  as  if  Dr.  Johnson  instead  of 
several  of  his  etymologies  had  said  all.  His  recollec¬ 
tion  having  thus  magnified  it,  shews  how  ambi¬ 
tious  he  was  of  the  approbation  of  so  great  a  man. 


BOSWELL 


414 

of  Mr.  Horne’s  etymologies;  I  hope  they  did  not 
put  the  dog  in  the  pillory  for  his  libel;  he  has  too 
much  literature  for  that.” 

On  Saturday,  May  16,  I  dined  with  him 
at  Mr.  Beauclerk’s  with  Mr.  Langton,  Mr. 
Steevens,  Dr.  Higgins,  and  some  others.  I  regret 
very  feelingly  every  instance  of  my  remissness  in 
recording  his  memorabilia ;  I  am  afraid  it  is  the 
condition  of  humanity  (as  Mr.  Windham,  of 
Norfolk,  once  observed  to  me,  after  having  made 
an  admirable  speech  in  the  House  of  Com¬ 
mons,  which  was  highly  applauded,  but  which 
he  afterwards  perceived  might  have  been 
better:)  “that  we  are  more  uneasy  from  think¬ 
ing  of  our  wants,  than  happy  in  thinking  of  our 
acquisitions.”  This  is  an  unreasonable  mode  of 
disturbing  our  tranquillity,  and  should  be  cor¬ 
rected;  let  me  then  comfort  myself  with  the 
large  treasure  of  Johnson’s  conversation  which  I 
have  preserved  for  my  own  enjoyment  and  that 
of  the  world,  and  let  me  exhibit  what  I  have  up¬ 
on  each  occasion,  whether  more  or  less,  whether 
a  bulse,  or  only  a  few  sparks  of  a  diamond. 

He  said,  “Dr.  Mead  lived  more  in  the  broad 
sunshine  of  life  than  almost  any  man.” 

The  disaster  of  General  Burgoyne’s  army  was 
then  the  common  topic  of  conversation.  It  was 
asked  why  piling  their  arms  was  insisted  upon  as 
a  matter  of  such  consequence,  when  it  seemed 
to  be  a  circumstance  so  inconsiderable  in  itself. 
Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  a  French  authour  says,  6 II 
yabeaucoup  de  puerilites  dans  la  guerre .’  All  distinc¬ 
tions  are  trifles,  because  great  things  can  seldom 
occur,  and  those  distinctions  are  settled  by  cus¬ 
tom.  A  savage  would  as  willingly  have  his  meat 
sent  to  him  in  the  kitchen,  as  eat  it  at  the  table 
here;  as  men  become  civilized,  various  modes  of 
denoting  honourable  preference  are  invented.” 

He  this  day  made  the  observations  upon  the 
similarity  between  Rasselas  and  Candide ,  which  I 
have  inserted  in  its  proper  place,  when  consid¬ 
ering  his  admirable  philosophical  Romance.  He 
said  Candide  he  thought  had  more  power  in  it 
than  any  thing  that  Voltaire  had  written. 

He  said,  “the  lyrical  part  of  Horace  never  can 
be  perfectly  translated;  so  much  of  the  excel¬ 
lence  is  in  the  numbers  and  the  expression.  Fran¬ 
cis  has  done  it  the  best;  I’ll  take  his,  five  out  of 
six,  against  them  all.” 

On  Sunday,  May  1 7,  I  presented  to  him  Mr. 
Fullarton,  of  Fullarton,  who  has  since  distin¬ 
guished  himself  so  much  in  India,  to  whom  he 
naturally  talked  of  travels,  as  Mr.  Brydone  ac¬ 
companied  him  in  his  tour  to  Sicily  and  Malta. 
He  said,  “The  information  which  we  have  from 
modern  travellers  is  much  more  authentick  than 


[  1778 

what  we  had  from  ancient  travellers;  ancient 
travellers  guessed;  modern  travellers  measure. 
The  Swiss  admit  that  there  is  but  one  errour  in 
Stanyan.  If  Brydone  were  more  attentive  to  his 
Bible,  he  would  be  a  good  traveller.” 

He  said,  “Lord  Chatham  was  a  Dictator;  he 
possessed  the  power  of  putting  the  State  in  mo¬ 
tion;  now  there  is  no  power,  all  order  is  relaxed.” 
Boswell.  “Is  there  no  hope  of  a  change  to  the 
better?”  Johnson.  “Why,  yes,  Sir,  when  we  are 
weary  of  this  relaxation.  So  the  City  of  London 
will  appoint  its  Mayors  again  by  seniority.”  Bos¬ 
well.  “But  is  not  that  taking  a  mere  chance  for 
having  a  good  or  a  bad  Mayor?”  Johnson.  “Yes, 
Sir;  but  the  evil  of  competition  is  greater  than 
that  of  the  worst  Mayor  that  can  come;  besides, 
there  is  no  more  reason  to  suppose  that  the  choice 
of  a  rabble  will  be  right,  than  that  chance  will 
be  right.” 

On  Tuesday,  May  1 9, 1  was  to  set  out  for  Scot¬ 
land  in  the  evening.  He  was  engaged  to  dine 
with  me  at  Mr.  Dilly’s,  I  waited  upon  him  to 
remind  him  of  his  appointment  and  attend  him 
thither;  he  gave  me  some  salutary  counsel,  and 
recommended  vigorous  resolution  against  any 
deviation  from  moral  duty.  Boswell.  “But  you 
would  not  have  me  to  bind  myself  by  a  solemn 
obligation?” Johnson,  (much agitated,)  “What! 
a  vow — O,  no,  Sir,  a  vow  is  a  horrible  thing,  it 
is  a  snare  for  sin.  The  man  who  cannot  go  to 
Heaven  without  a  vow — may  go — ”  Here,  stand¬ 
ing  erect,  in  the  middle  of  his  library,  and  roll¬ 
ing  grand,  his  pause  was  truly  a  curious  com¬ 
pound  of  the  solemn  and  the  ludicrous;  he  half- 
whistled  in  his  usual  way,  when  pleasant,  and 
he  paused,  as  if  checked  by  religious  awe.  Me- 
thought  he  would  have  added — to  Hell — but  was 
restrained.  I  humoured  the  dilemma.  “What! 
Sir,  (said  I,)  In  caelum  jusseris  ibit ?”  alluding  to 
his  imitation  of  it, — 

And  bid  him  go  to  Hell t0  Hdl  be  goes, 

I  had  mentioned  to  him  a  slight  fault  in  his 
noble  Imitation  of  the  Tenth  Satire  of  Juvenal,  a  too 
near  recurrence  of  the  verb  spread ,  in  his  descrip¬ 
tion  of  the  young  Enthusiast  at  College: 

Through  all  his  veins  the  fever  of  renown, 

Spreads  from  the  strong  contagion  of  the  gown; 

O'er  Bodley's  dome  his  future  labours  spread, 

And  Bacon's  mansion  trembles  o'er  his  head . 

He  had  desired  me  to  change  spreads  to  burns, 
but  for  perfect  authenticity,  I  now  had  it  done 
with  his  own  hand.1 1  thought  this  alteration  not 

xThe  slip  of  paper  on  which  he  made  the  cor¬ 
rection,  is  deposited  by  me  in  the  noble  library  to 
which  it  relates,  and  to  which  I  have  presented 
other  pieces  of  his  hand-writing. 


i778  ]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  415 


only  cured  the  fault,  but  was  more  poetical,  as 
it  might  carry  an  allusion  to  the  shirt  by  which 
Hercules  was  inflamed. 

We  had  a  quiet  comfortable  meeting  at  Mr. 
Dilly’s;  nobody  there  but  ourselves.  Mr.  Dilly 
mentioned  somebody  having  wished  that  Mil¬ 
ton’s  Tractate  on  Education  should  be  printed  along 
with  his  Poems  in  the  edition  of  The  English  Po¬ 
ets  then  going  on.  Johnson.  “It  would  be  break¬ 
ing  in  upon  the  plan;  but  would  be  of  no  great 
consequence.  So  far  as  it  would  be  any  thing,  it 
would  be  wrong.  Education  in  England  has  been 
in  danger  of  being  hurt  by  two  of  its  greatest 
men,  Milton  and  Locke.  Milton’s  plan  is  imprac¬ 
ticable,  and  I  suppose  has  never  been  tried. 
Locke’s,  I  fancy,  has  been  tried  often  enough, 
but  is  very  imperfect;  it  gives  too  much  to  one 
side,  and  too  little  to  the  other;  it  gives  too  little  to 
literature. — I  shall  do  what  I  can  for  Dr.  Watts; 
but  my  materials  are  very  scanty.  His  poems  are 
by  no  means  his  best  works;  I  cannot  praise  his 
poetry  itself  highly;  but  I  can  praise  its  design.” 

My  illustrious  friend  and  I  parted  with  assur¬ 
ances  of  affectionate  regard. 

I  wrote  to  him  on  the  25th  of  May,  from 
Thorpe  in  Yorkshire,  one  of  the  seats  of  Mr.  Bos- 
ville,  and  gave  him  an  account  of  my  having 
passed  a  day  at  Lincoln,  unexpectedly,  and 
therefore  without  having  any  letters  of  introduc¬ 
tion,  but  that  I  had  been  honoured  with  civili¬ 
ties  from  the  Reverend  Mr.  Simpson,  an  ac¬ 
quaintance  of  his,  and  Captain  Broadley,  of  the 
Lincolnshire  Militia;  but  more  particularly  from 
the  Reverend  Dr.  Gordon,  the  Chancellor,  who 
first  received  me  with  great  politeness  as  a  stran¬ 
ger,  and  when  I  informed  him  who  I  was,  enter¬ 
tained  me  at  his  house  with  the  most  flattering 
attention;  I  also  expressed  the  pleasure  with 
which  I  had  found  that  our  worthy  friend  Lang- 
ton  was  highly  esteemed  in  his  own  county  town. 

To  Dr.  Samuel  Johnson 

Edinburgh,  June  18,  1778 

My  Dear  Sir,  .  .  .  Since  my  return  to  Scot¬ 
land,  I  have  been  again  at  Lanark,  and  have 
had  more  conversation  with  Thomson’s  sister. 
It  is  strange  that  Murdoch,  who  was  his  inti¬ 
mate  friend,  should  have  mistaken  his  mother’s 
maiden  name,  which  he  says  was  Hume,  where¬ 
as  Hume  was  the  name  of  his  grandmother  by 
the  mother’s  side.  His  mother’s  name  was  Bea¬ 
trix  Trotter,1  a  daughter  of  Mr.  Trotter,  of  Fo- 
go,  a  small  proprietor  of  land.  Thomson  had 
one  brother,  whom  he  had  with  him  in  England 

JDr.  Johnson  was  by  no  means  attentive  to  mi¬ 
nute  accuracy  in  his  Lives  of  the  Poets ;  for  notwith¬ 
standing  my  having  detected  this  mistake,  he  has 
continued  it. 


as  his  amanuensis;  but  he  was  seized  with  a  con¬ 
sumption,  and  having  returned  to  Scotland,  to 
try  what  his  native  air  would  do  for  him,  died 
young.  He  had  three  sisters,  one  married  to  Mr. 
Bell,  minister  of  the  parish  of  Strathaven;  one  to 
Mr.  Craig,  father  of  the  ingenious  architect, 
who  gave  the  plan  of  the  New  Town  of  Edin¬ 
burgh;  and  one  to  Mr.  Thomson,  master  of  the 
grammar-school  at  Lanark.  He  was  of  a  humane 
and  benevolent  disposition;  not  only  sent  valu¬ 
able  presents  to  his  sisters,  but  a  yearly  allow¬ 
ance  in  money,  and  was  always  wishing  to  have 
it  in  his  power  to  do  them  more  good.  Lord 
Lyttelton’s  observation,  that  “he  loathed  much 
to  write,”  was  very  true.  His  letters  to  his  sister, 
Mrs.  Thomson,  were  not  frequent,  and  in  one 
of  them  he  says,  “All  my  friends  who  know  me, 
know  how  backward  I  am  to  write  letters;  and 
never  impute  the  negligence  of  my  hand  to  the 
coldness  of  my  heart.”  I  send  you  a  copy  of  the 
last  letter  which  she  had  from  him;  she  never 
heard  that  he  had  any  intention  of  going  into 
holy  orders.  From  this  late  interview  with  his 
sister,  I  think  much  more  favourably  of  him,  as 
I  hope  you  will.  I  am  eager  to  see  more  of  your 
Prefaces  to  the  Poets;  I  solace  myself  with  the 
few  proof-sheets  which  I  have. 

I  send  another  parcel  of  Lord  Hailes’s  Annals , 
which  you  will  please  to  return  to  me  as  soon  as 
you  conveniently  can.  He  says,  “he  wishes  you 
would  cut  a  little  deeper”;  but  he  may  be  proud 
that  there  is  so  little  occasion  to  use  the  critical 
knife.  I  ever  am,  my  dear  Sir,  your  faithful  and 
affectionate,  humble  servant, 

James  Boswell 

Mr.  Langton  has  been  pleased,  at  my  request, 
to  favour  me  with  some  particulars  of  Dr.  John¬ 
son’s  visit  to  Warley-camp,  where  this  gentle¬ 
man  was  at  the  time  stationed  as  a  Captain  in 
the  Lincolnshire  militia.  I  shall  give  them  in  his 
own  words  in  a  letter  to  me. 

“It  was  in  the  summer  of  the  year  1778,  that 
he  complied  with  my  invitation  to  come  down 
to  the  Camp  at  Warley,  and  he  staid  with  me 
about  a  week;  the  scene  appeared,  notwithstand¬ 
ing  a  great  degree  of  ill  health  that  he  seemed 
to  labour  under,  to  interest  and  amuse  him,  as 
agreeing  with  the  disposition  that  I  believe  you 
know  he  constantly  manifested  towards  enquir¬ 
ing  into  subjects  of  the  military  kind.  He  sate, 
with  a  patient  degree  of  attention,  to  observe 
the  proceedings  of  a  regimental  court-martial, 
that  happened  to  be  called,  in  the  time  of  his 
stay  with  us;  and  one  night,  as  late  as  at  eleven 
o’clock,  he  accompanied  the  Major  of  the  regi¬ 
ment  in  going  what  are  styled  the  Rounds ,  where 
he  might  observe  the  forms  of  visiting  the  guards, 
for  the  seeing  that  they  and  their  sentries  are 
ready  in  their  duty  on  their  several  posts.  He 


4i6  BOSWELL  [1778 


took  occasion  to  converse  at  times  on  military 
topicks,  one  in  particular,  that  I  see  the  men¬ 
tion  of,  in  your  Journal  of  a  Tour  to  the  Hebrides , 
which  lies  open  before  me,1  as  to  gun-powder; 
which  he  spoke  of  to  the  same  effect,  in  part, 
that  you  relate. 

“On  one  occasion,  when  the  regiment  were 
going  through  their  exercise,  he  went  quite  close 
to  the  men  at  one  of  the  extremities  of  it,  and 
watched  all  their  practices  attentively;  and, 
when  he  came  away,  his  remark  was,  ‘The  men 
indeed  do  load  their  muskets  and  fire  with  won¬ 
derful  celerity.’  He  was  likewise  particular  in 
requiring  to  know  what  was  the  weight  of  the 
musquet  balls  in  use,  and  within  what  distance 
they  might  be  expected  to  take  effect  when  fired 
off. 

“In  walking  among  the  tents,  and  observing 
the  difference  between  those  of  the  officers  and 
private  men,  he  said  that  the  superiority  of  ac¬ 
commodation  of  the  better  conditions  of  life,  to 
that  of  the  inferiour  ones,  was  never  exhibited 
to  him  in  so  distinct  a  view.  The  civilities  paid 
to  him  in  the  camp  were,  from  the  gentlemen  of 
the  Lincolnshire  regiment,  one  of  the  officers  of 
which  accommodated  him  with  a  tent  in  which 
he  slept;  and  from  General  Hall,  who  very  cour¬ 
teously  invited  him  to  dine  with  him,  where  he 
appeared  to  be  very  well  pleased  with  his  enter¬ 
tainment,  and  the  civilities  he  received  on  the 
part  of  the  General;2  the  attention  likewise,  of 
the  General’s  aide-de-camp,  Captain  Smith, 
seemed  to  be  very  welcome  to  him,  as  appeared 
by  their  engaging  in  a  great  deal  of  discourse  to¬ 
gether.  The  gentlemen  of  the  East  York  regi¬ 
ment  likewise  on  being  informed  of  his  coming, 
solicited  his  company  at  dinner,  but  by  that 
time  he  had  fixed  his  departure,  so  that  he  could 
not  comply  with  the  invitation.” 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  I  have  received  two  letters  from 
you,  of  which  the  second  complains  of  the  neg¬ 
lect  shewn  to  the  first.  You  must  not  tye  your 
friends  to  such  punctual  correspondence.  You 
have  all  possible  assurances  of  my  affection  and 
esteem;  and  there  ought  to  be  no  need  of  re¬ 
iterated  professions.  When  it  may  happen  that 
I  can  give  you  either  counsel  or  comfort,  I  hope 
it  will  never  happen  to  me  that  I  should  neg¬ 
lect  you;  but  you  must  not  think  me  criminal 
or  cold  if  I  say  nothing  when  I  have  nothing  to 
say. 

Hfiird  edition,  p.  1 1 1  [Aug.  28]. 

2  When  I  one  day  at  Court  expressed  to  General 
Hall  my  sense  of  the  honour  he  had  done  my 
friend,  he  politely  answered,  “Sir,  I  did  myself  hon¬ 
our.” 


You  are  now  happy  enough.  Mrs.  Boswell  is 
recovered;  and  I  congratulate  you  upon  the 
probability  of  her  long  life.  If  general  approba¬ 
tion  will  add  anything  to  your  enjoyment,  I  can 
tell  you  that  I  have  heard  you  mentioned  as  a 
man  whom  everybody  likes.  I  think  life  has  little 
more  to  give. 

- has  gone  to  his  regiment.  He  has  laid 

down  his  coach,  and  talks  of  making  more  con¬ 
tractions  of  his  expence:  how  he  will  succeed  I 
know  not.  It  is  difficult  to  reform  a  household 
gradually;  it  may  be  better  done  by  a  system  to¬ 
tally  new.  I  am  afraid  he  has  always  something 

to  hide.  When  we  pressed  him  to  go  to - , 

he  objected  the  necessity  of  attending  his  navi¬ 
gation;  yet  he  could  talk  of  going  to  Aberdeen, 
a  place  not  much  nearer  his  navigation.  I  be¬ 
lieve  he  cannot  bear  the  thought  of  living  at 
- in  a  state  of  diminution;  and  of  appear¬ 
ing  among  the  gentlemen  of  the  neighbourhood 
shorn  of  his  beams .  This  is  natural,  but  it  is  cow¬ 
ardly.  What  I  told  him  of  the  encreasing  ex¬ 
pence  of  a  growing  family  seems  to  have  struck 
him.  He  certainly  had  gone  on  with  very  con¬ 
fused  views,  and  we  have,  I  think,  shewn  him 
that  he  is  wrong;  though,  with  the  common  de- 
ficience  of  advisers,  we  have  not  shewn  him 
how  to  do  right. 

I  wish  you  would  a  little  correct  or  restrain 
your  imagination,  and  imagine  that  happiness, 
such  as  life  admits,  may  be  had  at  other  places 
as  well  as  London.  Without  asserting  Stoicism, 
it  may  be  said,  that  it  is  our  business  to  exempt 
ourselves  as  much  as  we  can  from  the  power  of 
external  things.  There  is  but  one  solid  basis  of 
happiness;  and  that  is,  the  reasonable  hope  of  a 
happy  futurity.  This  may  be  had  every  where. 

I  do  not  blame  your  preference  of  London  to 
other  places,  for  it  is  really  to  be  preferred,  if 
the  choice  is  free;  but  few  have  the  choice  of 
their  place,  or  their  manner  of  life;  and  mere 
pleasure  ought  not  to  be  the  prime  motive  of 
action. 

Mrs.  Thrale,  poor  thing,  has  a  daughter.  Mr. 
Thrale  dislikes  the  times,  like  the  rest  of  us. 
Mrs.  Williams  is  sick;  Mrs.  Desmoulins  is  poor. 
I  have  miserable  nights.  Nobody  is  well  but  Mr. 
Levett.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  most,  &c. 

Sam.  Johnson 

London,  July  3,  1778 

In  the  course  of  this  year  there  was  a  differ¬ 
ence  between  him  and  his  friend  Mr.  Strahan; 
the  particulars  of  which  it  is  unnecessary  to  re¬ 
late.  Their  reconciliation  was  communicated  to 
me  in  a  letter  from  Mr.  Strahan,  in  the  follow¬ 
ing  words: 

“The  notes  I  shewed  you  that  passed  between 
him  and  me  were  dated  in  March  last.  The  mat¬ 
ter  lay  dormant  till  July  27,  when  he  wrote  to 
me  as  follows: 


1778] 


LIFE  OF 

To  William  Strahan,  Esq. 

Sir,  It  would  be  very  foolish  for  us  to  continue 
strangers  any  longer.  You  can  never  by  persist¬ 
ency  make  wrong  right.  If  I  resented  too  acri¬ 
moniously,  I  resented  only  to  yourself.  Nobody 
ever  saw  or  heard  what  I  wrote.  You  saw  that 
my  anger  was  over,  for  in  a  day  or  two  I  came 
to  your  house.  I  have  given  you  longer  time; 
and  I  hope  you  have  made  so  good  use  of  it,  as 
to  be  no  longer  on  evil  terms  with,  Sir,  your,  &c. 

Sam.  Johnson 

On  this  I  called  upon  him;  and  he  has  since 
dined  with  me. 

After  this  time,  the  same  friendship  as  for¬ 
merly  continued  between  Dr.  Johnson  and  Mr. 
Strahan.  My  friend  mentioned  to  me  a  little  cir¬ 
cumstance  of  his  attention,  which,  though  we 
may  smile  at  it,  must  be  allowed  to  have  its  foun¬ 
dation  in  a  nice  and  true  knowledge  of  human 
life.  “When  I  write  to  Scotland,  (said  he,)  I 
employ  Strahan  to  frank  my  letters,  that  he  may 
have  the  consequence  of  appearing  a  Parlia¬ 
ment-man  among  his  countrymen.” 

To  Captain  Langton,1  Warley-gamp 

Dear  Sir,  When  I  recollect  how  long  ago  I 
was  received  with  so  much  kindness  at  Warley 
Common,  I  am  ashamed  that  I  have  not  made 
some  enquiries  after  my  friends. 

Pray  how  many  sheep-stealers  did  you  con¬ 
vict?  and  how  did  you  punish  them?  When  are 
you  to  be  cantoned  in  better  habitations?  The 
air  grows  cold,  and  the  ground  damp.  Longer 
stay  in  the  camp  cannot  be  without  much  dan¬ 
ger  to  the  health  of  the  common  men,  if  even 
the  officers  can  escape. 

You  see  that  Dr.  Percy  is  now  Dean  of  Car¬ 
lisle;  about  five  hundred  a  year,  with  a  power  of 
presenting  himself  to  some  good  living.  He  is 
provided  for. 

The  session  of  the  club  is  to  commence  with 
that  of  the  Parliament.  Mr.  Banks  desires  to  be 
admitted;  he  will  be  a  very  honourable  acces¬ 
sion. 

Did  the  King  please  you?  The  Coxheath  men, 
I  think,  have  some  reason  to  complain:  Rey¬ 
nolds  says  your  camp  is  better  than  theirs. 

I  hope  you  find  yourself  able  to  encounter  this 
weather.  Take  care  of  your  own  health;  and,  as 
you  can,  of  your  men.  Be  pleased  to  make  my 
compliments  to  all  the  gentlemen  whose  notice 
I  have  had,  and  whose  kindness  I  have  experi¬ 
enced.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

October  3i,  1778 

fDr.  Johnson  here  addresses  his  worthy  friend, 
Bennet  Langton,  Esq.,  by  his  title  as  Captain  of 
the  Lincolnshire  militia,  in  which  he  has  since  been 
most  deservedly  raised  to  the  rank  of  Major. 


JOHNSON  417 

I  wrote  to  him  on  the  18th  of  August,  the 
1 8th  of  September,  and  the  6th  of  November; 
informing  him  of  my  having  had  another  son 
born,  whom  I  had  called  James;  that  I  had 
passed  some  time  at  Auchinleck;  that  the  Count¬ 
ess  of  Loudoun,  now  in  her  ninety-ninth  year, 
was  as  fresh  as  when  he  saw  her,  and  remembered 
him  with  respect;  and  that  his  mother  by 
adoption,  the  Countess  of  Eglintoune,  had  said 
to  me,  “Tell  Mr.  Johnson  I  love  him  exceeding¬ 
ly”;  that  I  had  again  suffered  much  from  bad 
spirits;  and  that  as  it  was  very  long  since  I  heard 
from  him,  I  was  not  a  little  uneasy. 

The  continuance  of  his  regard  for  his  friend 
Dr.  Burney,  appears  from  the  following  letters: 

To  the  Reverend  Dr.  Wheeler,  Oxford 

Dear  Sir,  Dr.  Burney,  who  brings  this  paper, 
is  engaged  in  a  History  of  Musick;  and  having 
been  told  by  Dr.  Markham  of  some  MSS.  relat¬ 
ing  to  his  subject,  which  are  in  the  library  of 
your  College,  is  desirous  to  examine  them.  He  is 
my  friend;  and  therefore  I  take  the  liberty  of  in¬ 
treating  your  favour  and  assistance  in  his  en¬ 
quiry:  and  can  assure  you,  with  great  confidence, 
that  if  you  knew  him  he  would  not  want  any  in- 
tervenient  solicitation  to  obtain  the  kindness  of 
one  who  loves  learning  and  virtue  as  you  love 
them. 

I  have  been  flattering  myself  all  the  summer 
with  the  hope  of  paying  my  annual  visit  to  my 
friends;  but  something  has  obstructed  me:  I  still 
hope  not  to  be  long  without  seeing  you.  I  should 
be  glad  of  a  little  literary  talk;  and  glad  to  shew 
you,  by  the  frequency  of  my  visits,  how  eagerly 
I  love  it,  when  you  talk  it.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  your 
most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

London,  November  2,  1778 

To  the  Reverend  Dr.  Edwards,  Oxford 

Sir,  The  bearer,  Dr.  Burney,  has  had  some 
account  of  a  Welsh  Manuscript  in  the  Bodleian 
library,  from  which  he  hopes  to  gain  some  ma¬ 
terials  for  his  History  of  Musick;  but  being  ig¬ 
norant  of  the  language,  is  at  a  loss  where  to  find 
assistance.  I  make  no  doubt  but  you,  Sir,  can 
help  him  through  his  difficulties,  and  therefore 
take  the  liberty  of  recommending  him  to  your 
favour,  as  I  am  sure  you  will  find  him  a  man 
worthy  of  every  civility  that  can  be  shewn,  and 
every  benefit  that  can  be  conferred. 

But  we  must  not  let  Welsh  drive  us  from 
Greek.  What  comes  of  Xenophon?  If  you  do  not 
like  the  trouble  of  publishing  the  book,  do  not 
let  your  commentaries  be  lost;  contrive  that 
they  may  be  published  somewhere.  I  am,  Sir, 
your  humble  servant, 

Sam  Johnson 

London,  November  2,  1778 


418 

These  letters  procured  Dr.  Burney  great  kind¬ 
ness  and  friendly  offices  from  both  of  these  gen¬ 
tlemen,  not  only  on  that  occasion,  but  in  future 
visits  to  the  university.  The  same  year  Dr.  John¬ 
son  not  only  wrote  to  Dr.  Joseph  Warton  in  fa¬ 
vour  of  Dr.  Burney’s  youngest  son,  who  was  to 
be  placed  in  the  college  of  Winchester,  but  ac¬ 
companied  him  when  he  went  thither. 

We  surely  cannot  but  admire  the  benevolent 
exertions  of  this  great  and  good  man,  especially 
when  we  consider  how  grievously  he  was  afflict¬ 
ed  with  bad  health,  and  how  uncomfortable  his 
home  was  made  by  the  perpetual  jarring  of  those 
whom  he  charitably  accommodated  under  his 
roof.  He  has  sometimes  suffered  me  to  talk  joc¬ 
ularly  of  his  group  of  females,  and  call  them  his 
Seraglio .  He  thus  mentions  them,  together  with 
honest  Levett,  in  one  of  his  letters  to  Mrs.  Thrale  P 
“Williams  hates  every  body;  Levett  hates  Des¬ 
moulins,  and  does  not  love  Williams;  Desmou¬ 
lins  hates  them  both;  Poll2  loves  none  of  them.” 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  It  is  indeed  a  long  time  since  I 
wrote,  and  I  think  you  have  some  reason  to 
complain;  however, you  must  not  let  small  things 
disturb  you,  when  you  have  such  a  fine  addi¬ 
tion  to  your  happiness  as  a  new  boy,  and  I  hope 
your  lady’s  health  restored  by  bringing  him.  It 
seems  very  probable  that  a  little  care  will  now 
restore  her,  if  any  remains  of  her  complaints  are 
left. 

You  seem,  if  I  understand  your  letter,  to  be 
gaining  ground  at  Auchinleck,  an  incident  that 
would  give  me  great  delight.  .  .  . 

When  any  fit  of  anxiety,  or  gloominess,  or 
perversion  of  mind,  lays  hold  upon  you,  make 
it  a  rule  not  to  publish  it  by  complaints,  but 
exert  your  whole  care  to  hide  it;  by  endeavour¬ 
ing  to  hide  it,  you  will  drive  it  away.  Be  always 
busy. 

Tiie  club  is  to  meet  with  the  Parliament;  we 
talk  of  electing  Banks,  the  traveller;  he  will  be  a 
reputable  member. 

Langton  has  been  encamped  with  his  com¬ 
pany  of  militia  on  Warley-common;  I  spent  five 
days  amongst  them;  he  signalized  himself  as  a 
diligent  officer,  and  has  very  high  respect  in  the 
regiment.  He  presided  when  I  was  there  at  a 
court-martial;  he  is  now  quartered  in  Hertford¬ 
shire;  his  lady  and  little  ones  are  in  Scotland. 
Paoli  came  to  the  camp  and  commended  the 
soldiers. 

Of  myself  I  have  no  great  matter  to  say,  my 
health  is  not  restored,  my  nights  are  restless  and 
tedious.  The  best  night  that  I  have  had  these 
twenty  years  was  at  Fort- Augustus.  I  hope  soon 

Wol.  ii,  p.  38. 

2Miss  Carmichael. 


[  1779 

to  send  you  a  few  lines  to  read.  I  am,  dear  Sir, 
your  most  affectionate, 

Sam.  Johnson 

November  21,  1778 

About  this  time  the  Rev.  Mr.  John  Hussey, 
who  had  been  some  time  in  trade,  and  was  then 
a  clergyman  of  the  Church  of  England,  being 
about  to  undertake  a  journey  to  Aleppo,  and 
other  parts  of  the  East,  which  he  accomplished, 
Dr.  Johnson,  (who  had  long  been  in  habits  of 
intimacy  with  him,)  honoured  him  with  the 
following  letter: 

To  Mr.  John  Hussey 

Dear  Sir,  I  have  sent  you  the  Grammar ,  and 
have  left  you  two  books  more,  by  which  I  hope 
to  be  remembered;  write  my  name  in  them:  we 
may  perhaps  see  each  other  no  more,  you  part 
with  my  good  wishes,  nor  do  I  despair  of  seeing 
you  return.  Let  no  opportunities  of  vice  corrupt 
you;  let  no  bad  example  seduce  you;  let  the 
blindness  of  Mahometans  confirm  you  in  Chris¬ 
tianity.  God  bless  you.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  af¬ 
fectionate  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

December  29,  1778 

Johnson  this  year  expressed  great  satisfaction 
at  the  publication  of  the  first  volume  of  Discourses 
to  the  Royal  Academy ,  by  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds, 
whom  he  always  considered  as  one  of  his  liter¬ 
ary  school.  Much  praise  indeed  is  due  to  those 
excellent  Discourses ,  which  are  so  universally  ad¬ 
mired,  and  for  which  the  authour  received  from 
the  Empress  of  Russia  a  gold  snuff-box,  adorned 
with  the  profile  in  has  relief,  set  in  diamonds; 
and  containing  what  is  infinitely  more  valuable, 
a  slip  of  paper,  on  which  are  written  with  her 
Imperial  Majesty’s  own  hand,  the  following 
words:  “ Pour  le  Chevalier  Reynolds  en  temoignage  du 
contentement  quefai  ressentie  a  la  lecture  de  ses  excel¬ 
lent  discours  sur  la  peinture .” 

In  1779,  Johnson  gave  the  world  a  luminous 
proof  that  the  vigour  of  his  mind  in  all  its  facul¬ 
ties,  whether  memory,  judgement,  or  imagina¬ 
tion,  was  not  in  the  least  abated;  for  this  year 
came  out  the  first  four  volumes  of  his  Prefaces , 
biographical  and  critical ,  to  the  most  eminent  of  the 
English  Poets,*  published  by  the  booksellers  of 
London.  The  remaining  volumes  came  out  in 
the  year  1 780.  The  Poets  were  selected  by  the 
several  booksellers  who  had  the  honorary  copy 
right,  which  is  still  preserved  among  them  by 
mutual  compact,  notwithstanding  the  decision 
of  the  House  of  Lords  against  the  perpetuity  of 
Literary  Property.  We  have  his  own  authority,3 
that  by  his  recommendation  the  poems  of  Black - 

zLife  of  Watts . 


BOSWELL 


1779  ]  LIFE  OF 

more,  Watts,  Pomfret,  and  Yalden,  were  added 
to  the  collection.  Of  this  work  I  shall  speak  more 
particularly  hereafter. 

On  the  22  nd  of  January,  I  wrote  to  him  on 
several  topicks,  and  mentioned  that  as  he  had 
been  so  good  as  to  permit  me  to  have  the  proof 
sheets  of  his  Lives  of  the  Poets ,  I  had  written  to 
his  servant,  'Francis,  to  take  care  of  them  for  me. 

Mr.  Boswell  to  Dr.  Johnson 

Edinburgh,  Feb .  2,  1779 

My  Dear  Sir,  Garrick’s  death  is  a  striking 
event;  not  that  we  should  be  surprised  with  the 
death  of  any  man,  who  has  lived  sixty-two  years 
but  because  there  was  a  vivacity  in  our  late  cele¬ 
brated  friend,  which  drove  away  the  thoughts 
of  death  from  any  association  with  him.  I  am  sure 
you  will  be  tenderly  affected  with  his  departure; 
and  I  would  wish  to  hear  from  you  upon  the 
subject.  I  was  obliged  to  him  in  my  days  of  ef¬ 
fervescence  in  London,  when  poor  Derrick  was 
my  governour;  and  since  that  time  I  received 
many  civilities  from  him.  Do  you  remember  how 
pleasing  it  was,  when  I  received  a  letter  from 
him  at  Inverary,  upon  our  first  return  to  civi¬ 
lized  living  after  our  Hebridean  journey?  I  shall 
always  remember  him  with  affection  as  well  as 
admiration. 

On  Saturday  last,  being  the  30th  of  January, 
I  drank  coffee  and  old  port,  and  had  solemn 
conversation  with  the  Reverend  Mr.  Falconer, 
a  nonjuring  bishop,  a  very  learned  and  worthy 
man.  He  gave  two  toasts,  which  you  will  be¬ 
lieve  I  drank  with  cordiality,  Dr.  Samuel  John¬ 
son,  and  Flora  Macdonald.  I  sat  about  four 
hours  with  him,  and  it  was  really  as  if  I  had 
been  living  in  the  last  century.  The  Episcopal 
Church  of  Scotland,  though  faithful  to  the  royal 
house  of  Stuart,  has  never  accepted  of  any  conge 
d'elire ,  since  the  Revolution;  it  is  the  only  true 
Episcopal  Church  in  Scotland,  as  it  has  its  own 
succession  of  bishops.  For  as  to  the  episcopal 
clergy  who  take  the  oaths  to  the  present  govern¬ 
ment,  they  indeed  follow  the  rites  of  the  Church 
of  England,  but,  as  Bishop  Falconer  observed, 
“they  are  not  Episcopals;  for  they  are  under  no 
bishop,  as  a  bishop  cannot  have  authority  be¬ 
yond  his  diocese.”  This  venerable  gentleman  did 
me  the  honour  to  dine  with  me  yesterday,  and 
he  laid  his  hands  upon  the  heads  of  my  little 
ones.  We  had  a  good  deal  of  curious  literary 
conversation,  particularly  about  Mr.  Thomas 
Ruddiman,  with  whom  he  lived  in  great  friend¬ 
ship. 

Any  fresh  instance  of  the  uncertainty  of  life 
makes  one  embrace  more  closely  a  valuable 
friend.  My  dear  and  much  respected  Sir,  may 
God  preserve  you  long  in  this  world  while  I  am 
in  it.  I  am  ever,  your  much  obliged,  and  affec¬ 
tionate  humble  servant, 

James  Boswell 


419 

On  the  23rd  of  February  I  wrote  to  him  again, 
complaining  of  his  silence,  as  I  had  heard  he 
was  ill,  and  had  written  to  Mr.  Thrale,  for  in¬ 
formation  concerning  him;  and  I  announced 
my  intention  of  soon  being  again  in  London. 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  Why  should  you  take  such  delight 
to  make  a  bustle,  to  write  to  Mr.  Thrale  that  I 
am  negligent,  and  to  Francis  to  do  what  is  so 
very  unnecessary.  Thrale,  you  may  be  sure, 
cared  not  about  it;  and  I  shall  spare  Francis  the 
trouble,  by  ordering  a  set  both  of  the  Lives  and 
Poets  to  dear  Mrs.  Boswell,1  in  acknowledge¬ 
ment  of  her  marmalade.  Persuade  her  to  accept 
them,  and  accept  them  kindly.  If  I  thought  she 
would  receive  them  scornfully,  I  would  send 
them  to  Miss  Boswell,  who,  I  hope,  has  yet  none 
of  her  mamma’s  ill-will  to  me. 

I  would  send  sets  of  Lives ,  four  volumes,  to 
some  other  friends,  to  Lord  Hailes  first.  His  sec¬ 
ond  volume  lies  by  my  bed-side;  a  book  surely 
of  great  labour,  and  to  every  just  thinker  of 
great  delight.  Write  me  word  to  whom  I  shall 
send  besides;  would  it  please  Lord  Auchinleck? 
Mrs.  Thrale  waits  in  the  coach.  I  am,  dear  Sir, 
&c., 

Sam.  Johnson 

March  13,  1779 

This  letter  crossed  me  on  the  road  to  London, 
where  I  arrived  on  Monday,  March  15,  and 
next  morning  at  a  late  hour,  found  Dr.  Johnson 
sitting  over  his  tea,  attended  by  Mrs.  Desmou¬ 
lins,  Mr.  Levett,  and  a  clergyman,  who  had 
come  to  submit  some  poetical  pieces  to  his  re¬ 
vision.  It  is  wonderful  what  a  number  and  va¬ 
riety  of  writers  some  of  them  even  unknown  to 
him,  prevailed  on  his  good-nature  to  look  over 
their  works,  and  suggest  corrections  and  im¬ 
provements.  My  arrival  interrupted  for  a  little 
while  the  important  business  of  this  true  repre¬ 
sentative  of  Bayes;  upon  its  being  resumed,  I 
found  that  the  subject  under  immediate  consid¬ 
eration  was  a  translation,  yet  in  manuscript,  of 
the  Carmen  Seculare  of  Horace,  which  had  this 
year  been  set  to  musick,  and  performed  as  a 
publick  entertainment  in  London,  for  the  joint 
benefit  of  Monsieur  Philidor  and  Signor  Baretti. 
When  Johnson  had  done  reading,  the  authour 
asked  him  bluntly,  “If  upon  the  whole  it  was  a 
good  translation?”  Johnson,  whose  regard  for 
truth  was  uncommonly  strict,  seemed  to  be  puz¬ 
zled  for  a  moment,  what  answer  to  make;  as  he 
certainly  could  not  honestly  commend  the  per¬ 
formance:  with  exquisite  address  he  evaded  the 
question  thus,  “Sir,  I  do  not  say  that  it  may  not 

xHe  sent  a  set  elegantly  bound  and  gilt,  which 
was  received  as  a  very  handsome  present. 


JOHNSON 


BOSWELL 


4Q0 

be  made  a  very  good  translation.”  Here  nothing 
whatever  in  favour  of  the  performance  was  af¬ 
firmed,  and  yet  the  writer  was  not  shocked.  A 
printed  Ode  to  the  Warlike  Genius  of  Britain,  came 
next  in  review;  the  bard  was  a  lank  bony  figure, 
with  short  black  hair;  he  was  writhing  himself 
in  agitation,  while  Johnson  read,  and  shewing 
his  teeth  in  a  grin  of  earnestness,  exclaimed  in 
broken  sentences,  and  in  a  keen  sharp  tone,  “Is 
that  poetry,  Sir? — Is  it  Pindar?”  Johnson.  “Why, 
Sir,  there  is  here  a  great  deal  of  what  is  called 
poetry.”  Then,  turning  to  me,  the  poet  cried, 
“My  muse  has  not  been  long  upon  the  town, 
and  (pointing  to  the  Ode)  it  trembles  under  the 
hand  of  the  great  critick.”  Johnson,  in  a  tone  of 
displeasure,  asked  him,  “Why  do  you  praise  An¬ 
son?”  I  did  not  trouble  him  by  asking  his  reason 
for  this  question.  He  proceeded,  “Here  is  an  er- 
rour,  Sir;  you  have  made  Genius  feminine.” 
“Palpable,  Sir;  (cried  the  enthusiast,)  I  know  it. 
But  (in  a  lower  tone,)  it  was  to  pay  a  compliment 
to  the  Duchess  of  Devonshire,  with  which  her 
Grace  was  pleased.  She  is  walking  across  Cox- 
heath,  in  the  military  uniform,  and  I  suppose 
her  to  be  the  Genius  of  Britain.”  Johnson.  “Sir, 
you  are  giving  a  reason  for  it;  but  that  will  not 
make  it  right.  You  may  have  a  reason  why  two 
and  two  should  make  five;  but  they  will  still 
make  but  four.” 

Although  I  was  several  times  with  him  in  the 
course  of  the  following  days  such  it  seems  were 
my  occupations,  or  such  my  negligence,  that  I 
have  preserved  no  memorial  of  his  conversation 
till  Friday,  March  26,  when  I  visited  him.  He 
said  he  expected  to  be  attacked  on  account  of 
his  Lives  of  the  Poets.  “However  (said  he,)  I  would 
rather  be  attacked  than  unnoticed.  For  the  worst 
thing  you  can  do  to  an  authour  is  to  be  silent  as 
to  his  works.  An  assault  upon  a  town  is  a  bad 
thing;  but  starving  it  is  still  worse;  an  assault 
may  be  unsuccessful;  you  may  have  more  men 
killed  than  you  kill;  but  if  you  starve  the  town, 
you  are  sure  of  victory.” 

Talking  of  a  friend  of  ours  associating  with 
persons  of  very  discordant  principles  and  char¬ 
acters;  I  said  he  was  a  very  universal  man,  quite 
a  man  of  the  world.  Johnson.  “Yes,  Sir;  but  one 
may  be  so  much  a  man  of  the  world  as  to  be 
nothing  in  the  world.  I  remember  a  passage  in 
Goldsmith’s  Vicar  of  Wakefield ,  which  he  was  af¬ 
terwards  fool  enough  to  expunge:  T  do  not  love 
a  man  who  is  zealous  for  nothing.5  55  Boswell. 
“That was  a  fine  passage.”  Johnson.  “Yes,  Sir: 
there  was  another  fine  passage  too,  which  he 
struck  out:  ‘When  I  was  a  young  man,  being 
anxious  to  distinguish  myself,  I  was  perpetually 


[  1779 

starting  new  propositions.  But  I  soon  gave  this 
over;  for,  I  found  that  generally  what  was  new 
was  false.5  ”  I  said  I  did  not  like  to  sit  with  peo¬ 
ple  of  whom  I  had  not  a  good  opinion.  Johnson. 
“But  you  must  not  indulge  your  delicacy  too 
much;  or  you  will  be  a  tete-a-tete  man  all  your 
life.55 

During  my  stay  in  London  this  spring,  I  find 
I  was  unaccountably  negligent  in  preserving 
Johnson’s  sayings,  more  so  than  at  any  time 
when  I  was  happy  enough  to  have  an  opportun¬ 
ity  of  hearing  his  wisdom  and  wit.  There  is  no 
help  for  it  now.  I  must  content  myself  with  pre¬ 
senting  such  scraps  as  I  have.  But  I  ain  never¬ 
theless  ashamed  and  vexed  to  think  how  much 
has  been  lost.  It  is  not  that  there  was  a  bad  crop 
this  year;  but  that  I  was  not  sufficiently  careful 
in  gathering  it  in.  I,  therefore,  in  some  instances 
can  only  exhibit  a  few  detached  fragments. 

Talking  of  the  wonderful  concealment  of  the 
authour  of  the  celebrated  letters  signed  Junius ; 
he  said,  “I  should  have  believed  Burke  to  be 
Junius,  because  I  know  no  man  but  Burke  who 
is  capable  of  writing  these  letters;  but  Burke 
spontaneously  denied  it  to  me.  The  case  would 
have  been  different  had  I  asked  him  if  he  was 
the  authour;  a  man  so  questioned,  as  to  an  anon¬ 
ymous  publication,  may  think  he  has  a  right  to 
deny  it.” 

He  observed  that  his  old  friend,  Mr.  Sheri¬ 
dan,  had  been  honoured  with  extraordinary  at¬ 
tention  in  his  own  country,  by  having  had  an  ex¬ 
ception  made  in  his  favour  in  an  Irish  Act  of 
Parliament  concerning  insolvent  debtors.  “Thus 
to  be  singled  out  (said  he,)  by  a  legislature,  as 
an  object  of  publick  consideration  and  kindness, 
is  a  proof  of  no  common  merit.” 

At  Streatham,  on  Monday,  March  29,  at 
breakfast  he  maintained  that  a  father  had  no 
right  to  control  the  inclinations  of  his  daughters 
in  marriage. 

On  Wednesday,  March  31,  when  I  visited 
him,  and  confessed  an  excess  of  which  I  had  very 
seldom  been  guilty;  that  I  had  spent  a  whole 
night  in  playing  at  cards,  and  that  I  could  not 
look  back  on  it  with  satisfaction;  instead  of  a 
harsh  animadversion,  he  mildly  said,  “Alas,  Sir, 
on  how  few  things  can  we  look  back  with  satis¬ 
faction.” 

On  Thursday,  April  1 ,  he  commended  one  of 
the  Dukes  of  Devonshire  for  “a  dogged  verac¬ 
ity.”1  He  said  too,  “London  is  nothing  to  some 
people;  but  to  a  man  whose  pleasure  is  intellec¬ 
tual,  London  is  the  place.  And  there  is  no  place 
where  oeconomy  can  be  so  well  practised  as  in 

^ee  ante ,  p.  358. 


1779]  LIFE  OF 

London.  More  can  be  had  here  for  the  money, 
even  by  ladies,  than  any  where  else.  You  cannot 
play  tricks  with  your  fortune  in  a  small  place; 
you  must  make  an  uniform  appearance.  Here  a 
lady  may  have  well-furnished  apartments,  and 
elegant  dress,  without  any  meat  in  her  kitchen.” 

I  was  amused  by  considering  with  how  much 
ease  and  coolness  he  could  write  or  talk  to  a 
friend,  exhorting  him  not  to  suppose  that  happi¬ 
ness  was  not  to  be  found  as  well  in  other  places 
as  in  London;  when  he  himself  was  at  all  times 
sensible  of  its  being,  comparatively  speaking,  a 
heaven  upon  earth.  The  truth  is,  that  by  those 
who  from  sagacity,  attention,  and  experience, 
have  learnt  the  full  advantage  of  London,  its 
preeminence  over  every  other  place,  not  only 
for  variety  of  enjoyment,  but  for  comfort,  will 
be  felt  with  a  philosophical  exultation.  The  free¬ 
dom  from  remark  and  petty  censure,  with  which 
life  may  be  passed  there,  is  a  circumstance  which 
a  man  who  knows  the  teazing  restraint  of  a  nar¬ 
row  circle  must  relish  highly.  Mr.  Burke,  whose 
orderly  and  amiable  domestic  habits  might  make 
the  eye  of  observation  less  irksome  to  him  than 
to  most  men,  said  once  very  pleasantly,  in  my 
hearing,  “Though  I  have  the  honour  to  repre¬ 
sent  Bristol,  I  should  not  like  to  live  there;  I 
should  be  obliged  to  be  so  much  upon  my  good  be¬ 
haviour”  In  London,  a  man  may  live  in  splen¬ 
did  society  at  one  time,  and  in  frugal  retirement 
at  another,  without  animadversion.  There,  and 
there  alone,  a  man’s  own  house  is  truly  his  castle , 
in  which  he  can  be  in  perfect  safety  from  intru¬ 
sion  whenever  he  pleases.  I  never  shall  forget  how 
well  this  was  expressed  to  me  one  day  by  Mr. 
Meynell:  “The  chief  advantage  of  London  (said 
he,)  is,  that  a  man  is  always  so  near  his  burrow” 

He  said  of  one  of  his  old  acquaintances,  “He 
is  very  fit  for  a  travelling  governour.  He  knows 
French  very  well.  He  is  a  man  of  good  princi¬ 
ples;  and  there  would  be  no  danger  that  a  young 
gentleman  should  catch  his  manner;  for  it  is  so 
very  bad,  that  it  must  be  avoided.  In  that  re¬ 
spect  he  would  be  like  the  drunken  Helot.” 

A  gentleman  has  informed  me,  that  Johnson 
said  of  the  same  person,  “Sir,  he  has  the  most 
inverted  understanding  of  any  man  whom  I  have 
ever  known.” 

On  Friday,  April  2,  being  Good-Friday,  I  vis¬ 
ited  him  in  the  morning  as  usual;  and  finding 
that  we  insensibly  fell  into  a  train  of  ridicule  up¬ 
on  the  foibles  of  one  of  our  friends,  a  very  worthy 
man,  I,  by  way  of  a  check,  quoted  some  good 
admonition  from  The  Government  of  the  Tongue , 
that  very  pious  book.  It  happened  also  remark¬ 
ably  enough,  that  the  subject  of  the  sermon 


JOHNSON  421 

preached  to  us  to-day  by  Dr.  Burrows,  the  rec¬ 
tor  of  St.  Clement  Danes,  was  the  certainty  that 
at  the  last  day  we  must  give  an  account  of  “the 
deeds  done  in  the  body”;  and,  amongst  various 
apts  of  culpability  he  mentioned  evil-speaking. 
As  we  were  moving  slowly  along  in  the  crowd 
from  church,  Johnson  jogged  my  elbow,  and 
said,  “Did  you  attend  to  the  sermon?”  “Yes, 
Sir,  (said  I,)  it  was  very  applicable  to  us.”  He, 
however,  stood  upon  the  defensive.  “Why,  Sir, 
the  sense  of  ridicule  is  given  us,  and  may  be 
lawfully  used.  The  authour  of  The  Government  of 
the  Tongue  would  have  us  treat  all  men  alike.” 

In  the  interval  between  morning  and  evening 
service,  he  endeavoured  to  employ  himself  ear¬ 
nestly  in  devotional  exercises;  and  as  he  has  men¬ 
tioned  in  his  Prayers  and  Meditations ,l  gave  me 
Les  Pensees  de  Pascal ,  that  I  might  not  interrupt 
him.  I  preserve  the  book  with  reverence.  His 
presenting  it  to  me  is  marked  upon  it  with  his 
own  hand,  and  I  have  found  in  it  a  truly  divine 
unction.  We  went  to  church  again  in  the  after¬ 
noon. 

On  Saturday,  April  3,  I  visited  him  at  night, 
and  found  him  sitting  in  Mrs.  Williams’s  room, 
with  her,  and  one  who  he  afterwards  told  me 
was  a  natural  son  of  the  second  Lord  Southwell. 
The  table  had  a  singular  appearance,  being  cov¬ 
ered  with  a  heterogeneous  assemblage  of  oysters 
and  porter  for  his  company,  and  tea  for  himself. 
I  mentioned  my  having  heard  an  eminent  phy¬ 
sician,  who  was  himself  a  Christian,  argue  in  fa¬ 
vour  of  universal  toleration,  and  maintain,  that 
no  man  could  be  hurt  by  another  man’s  differ¬ 
ing  from  him  in  opinion,  Johnson.  “Sir,  you  are 
to  a  certain  degree  hurt  by  knowing  that  even 
one  man  does  not  believe.” 

On  Easter-day,  after  solemn  service  at  St. 
Paul’s,  I  dined  with  him:  Mr.  Allen  the  printer 
was  also  his  guest.  He  was  uncommonly  silent; 
and  I  have  not  written  down  any  thing,  except 
a  single  curious  fact,  which,  having  the  sanction 
of  his  inflexible  veracity,  may  be  received  as  a 
striking  instance  of  human  insensibility  and  in¬ 
consideration.  As  he  was  passing  by  a  fishmong¬ 
er  who  was  skinning  an  eel  alive,  he  heard  him 
“curse  it,  because  it  would  not  lye  still.” 

On  Wednesday,  April  7,  I  dined  with  him  at 
Sir  Joshua  Reynolds’s.  I  have  not  marked  what 
company  was  there.  Johnson  harangued  upon 
the  qualities  of  different  liquors;  and  spoke  with 
great  contempt  of  claret,  as  so  weak,  that  “a 
man  would  be  drowned  by  it  before  it  made  him 
drunk.”  He  was  persuaded  to  drink  one  glass  of 
it,  that  he  might  judge,  not  from  recollection, 

*See  p.  173. 


BOSWELL 


422 

which  might  be  dim,  but  from  immediate  sensa¬ 
tion.  He  shook  his  head,  and  said,  “Poor  stuff! 
No,  Sir,  claret  is  the  liquor  for  boys;  port  for 
men;  but  he  who  aspires  to  be  a  hero  (smiling,) 
must  drink  brandy.  In  the  first  place,  the  fla¬ 
vour  of  brandy  is  most  grateful  to  the  palate; 
and  then  brandy  will  do  soonest  for  a  man  what 
drinking  can  do  for  him.  There  are,  indeed,  few 
who  are  able  to  drink  brandy.  That  is  a  power 
rather  to  be  wished  for  than  attained.  And  yet, 
(proceeded  he,)  as  in  all  pleasure  hope  is  a  con¬ 
siderable  part,  I  know  not  but  fruition  comes 
too  quick  by  brandy.  Florence  wine  I  think  the 
worst;  it  is  wine  only  to  the  eye;  it  is  wine  nei¬ 
ther  while  you  are  drinking  it,  nor  after  you 
have  drunk  it;  it  neither  pleases  the  taste,  nor 
exhilarates  the  spirits.”  I  reminded  him  how 
heartily  he  and  I  used  to  drink  wine  together, 
when  we  were  first  acquainted;  and  how  I  used 
to  have  a  head-ache  after  sitting  up  with  him. 
He  did  not  like  to  have  this  recalled,  or,  perhaps, 
thinking  that  I  boasted  improperly,  resolved  to 
have  a  witty  stroke  at  me:  “Nay,  Sir,  it  was  not 
the  wine  that  made  your  head  ache  but  the  sense 
that  I  put  into  it.”  Boswell.  “What,  Sir!  will 
sense  make  the  head  ache?”  Johnson.  “Yes,  Sir, 
(with  a  smile,)  when  it  is  not  used  to  it.” — No 
man  who  has  a  true  relish  of  pleasantry  could  be 
offended  at  this;  especially  if  Johnson  in  a  long 
intimacy  had  given  him  repeated  proofs  of  his 
regard  and  good  estimation.  I  used  to  say,  that 
as  he  had  given  me  a  thousand  pounds  in  praise, 
he  had  a  good  right  now  and  then  to  take  a 
guinea  from  me. 

On  Thursday,  April  8,  I  dined  with  him  at 
Mr.  Allan  Ramsay’s,  with  Lord  Graham  and 
some  other  company.  We  talked  of  Shakspeare’s 
witches.  Johnson.  “They  are  beings  of  his  own 
creation;  they  are  a  compound  of  malignity  and 
meanness,  without  any  abilities;  and  are  quite 
different  from  the  Italian  magician.  King  James 
says  in  his  Demonology,  ‘Magicians  command 
the  devils:  witches  are  their  servants.  The  Ital¬ 
ian  magicians  are  elegant  beings.’  ”  Ramsay. 
“Opera  witches,  not  Drury-lane  witches.”  John¬ 
son  observed,  that  abilities  might  be  employed 
in  a  narrow  sphere,  as  in  getting  money,  which 
he  said  he  believed  no  man  could  do,  without 
vigorous  parts,  though  concentrated  to  a  point. 
Ramsay.  “Yes,  like  a  strong  horse  in  a  mill;  he 
pulls  better.” 

Lord  Graham,  while  he  praised  the  beauty  of 
Lochlomond,  on  the  banks  of  which  is  his  family 
seat,  complained  of  the  climate,  and  said  he 
could  not  bear  it.  Johnson.  “Nay,  my  Lord, 
don’t  talk  so:  you  may  bear  it  well  enough.  Your 


[  1779 

ancestors  have  borne  it  more  years  than  I  can 
tell.”  This  was  a  handsome  compliment  to  the 
antiquity  of  the  House  of  Montrose.  His  Lord- 
ship  told  me  afterwards,  that  he  had  only  af¬ 
fected  to  complain  of  the  climate;  lest,  if  he  had 
spoken  as  favourably  of  his  country  as  he  really 
thought,  Dr.  Johnson  might  have  attacked  it. 
Johnson  was  very  courteous  to  Lady  Margaret 
Macdonald.  “Madam,  (said  he,)  when  I  was 
in  the  Isle  of  Sky,  I  heard  of  the  people  running 
to  take  the  stones  off  the  road,  lest  Lady  Mar¬ 
garet’s  horse  should  stumble.” 

Lord  Graham  commended  Dr.  Drummond 
at  Naples,  as  a  man  of  extraordinary  talents; 
and  added,  that  he  had  a  great  love  of  liberty. 
Johnson.  “He  is  young,  my  Lord;  (looking  to  his 
Lordship  with  an  arch  smile,)  all  boys  love  lib¬ 
erty,  till  experience  convinces  them  they  are  not 
so  fit  to  govern  themselves  as  they  imagined.  We 
are  all  agreed  as  to  our  own  liberty;  we  would 
have  as  much  of  it  as  we  can  get;  but  we  are  not 
agreed  as  to  the  liberty  of  others:  for  in  propor¬ 
tion  as  we  take,  others  must  lose.  I  believe  we 
hardly  wish  that  the  mob  should  have  liberty  to 
govern  us.  When  that  was  the  case  some  time 
ago,  no  man  was  at  liberty  not  to  have  candles 
in  his  windows.”  Ramsay.  “The  result  is,  that 
order  is  better  than  confusion.”  Johnson.  “The 
result  is,  that  order  cannot  be  had  but  by  sub¬ 
ordination.” 

On  Friday,  April  16,  I  had  been  present  at 
the  trial  of  the  unfortunate  Mr.  Hackman,  who, 
in  a  fit  of  frantick  jealous  love,  had  shot  Miss 
Ray,  the  favourite  of  a  nobleman.  Johnson,  in 
whose  company  I  dined  to-day  with  some  other 
friends,  was  much  interested  by  my  account  of 
what  passed,  and  particularly  with  his  prayer 
for  the  mercy  of  heaven.  He  said,  in  a  solemn 
fervid  tone,  “I  hope  he  shall  find  mercy.” 

This  day  a  violent  altercation  arose  between 
Johnson  and  Beau  clerk,  which  having  made 
much  noise  at  the  time,  I  think  it  proper,  in  or¬ 
der  to  prevent  any  future  misrepresentation,  to 
give  a  minute  account  of  it. 

In  talking  of  Hackman,  Johnson  argued,  as 
Judge  Blackstone  had  done,  that  his  being  fur¬ 
nished  with  two  pistols  was  a  proof  that  he  meant 
to  shoot  two  persons.  Mr.  Beauclerk  said,  “No; 
for  that  every  wise  man  who  intended  to  shoot 
himself,  took  two  pistols,  that  he  might  be  sure 

of  doing  it  at  once.  Lord - ’s  cook 

shot  himself  with  one  pistol,  and  lived  ten  days 

in  great  agony.  Mr. - ,  who  loved  buttered 

muffins,  but  durst  not  eat  them  because  they 
disagreed  with  his  stomach,  resolved  to  shoot 
himself;  and  then  he  eat  three  buttered  muffins 


1779  1  LIFE  OF 

for  breakfast,  before  shooting  himself,  knowing 
that  he  should  not  be  troubled  with  indigestion: 
he  had  two  charged  pistols;  one  was  found  lying 
charged  upon  the  table  by  him,  after  he  had 
shot  himself  with  the  other.”  “Well,  (said  John¬ 
son,  with  an  air  of  triumph,)  you  see  here  one 
pistol  was  sufficient.”  Beau  clerk  replied  smart¬ 
ly,  “Because  it  happened  to  kill  him.”  And  ei¬ 
ther  then  or  a  very  little  afterwards,  being  piqued 
at  Johnson’s  triumphant  remark,  added,  “This 
is  what  you  don’t  know,  and  I  do.”  There  was 
then  a  cessation  of  the  dispute;  and  some  min¬ 
utes  intervened,  during  which,  dinner  and  the 
glass  went  on  cheerfully;  when  Johnson  sudden¬ 
ly  and  abruptly  exclaimed,  “Mr.  Beauclerk, 
how  came  you  to  talk  so  petulantly  to  me,  as 
‘This  is  what  you  don’t  know,  but  what  I  know’? 
One  thing  I  know,  whichjpow  don’t  seem  to  know, 
that  you  are  very  uncivil.”  Beauclerk.  “Be¬ 
cause  you  began  by  being  uncivil,  (which  you  al¬ 
ways  are.)”  The  words  in  parenthesis  were,  I 
believe,  not  heard  by  Dr.  Johnson.  Here  again 
there  was  a  cessation  of  arms.  Johnson  told  me, 
that  the  reason  why  he  waited  at  first  some  time 
without  taking  any  notice  of  what  Mr.  Beau¬ 
clerk  said,  was  because  he  was  thinking  whether 
he  should  resent  it.  But  when  he  considered  that 
there  were  present  a  young  Lord  and  an  emi¬ 
nent  traveller,  two  men  of  the  world  with  whom 
he  had  never  dined  before,  he  was  apprehensive 
that  they  might  think  they  had  a  right  to  take 
such  liberties  with  him  as  Beauclerk  did,  and 
therefore  resolved  he  would  not  let  it  pass;  add¬ 
ing,  that  “he  would  not  appear  a  coward.”  A 
little  while  after  this,  the  conversation  turned 
on  the  violence  of  Hackman’s  temper.  Johnson 
then  said,  “It  was  his  business  to  command  his 
temper,  as  my  friend,  Mr.  Beauclerk,  should 
have  done  some  time  ago.  ”  Beauclerk.  c  c  I  should 
learn  of you,  Sir.”  Johnson.  “Sir,  you  have  given 
me  opportunities  enough  of  learning,  when  I 
have  been  in  your  company.  No  man  loves  to  be 
treated  with  contempt.”  Beauclerk.  (with  a 
polite  inclination  towards  Johnson,)  “Sir,  you 
have  known  me  twenty  years,  and  however  I 
may  have  treated  others,  you  may  be  sure  I 
could  never  treat  you  with  contempt.”  Johnson. 
“Sir,  you  have  said  more  than  was  necessary.” 
Thus  it  ended;  and  Beau  clerk’s  coach  not  hav¬ 
ing  come  for  him  till  very  late,  Dr.  Johnson  and 
another  gentleman  sat  with  him  a  long  time  af¬ 
ter  the  rest  of  the  company  were  gone;  and  he 
and  I  dined  at  Beauclerk’s  on  the  Saturday  se’n- 
night  following. 

After  this  tempest  had  subsided,  I  recollect 
the  following  particulars  of  his  conversation: 


JOHNSON  423 

“I  am  always  for  getting  a  boy  forward  in  his 
learning;  for  that  is  a  sure  good.  I  would  let  him 
at  first  read  any  English  book  which  happens  to 
engage  his  attention;  because  you  have  done  a 
great  deal  when  you  have  brought  him  to  have 
entertainment  from  a  book.  He’ll  get  better 
books  afterwards.” 

“Mallet,  I  believe,  never  wrote  a  single  line 
of  his  projected  life  of  the  Duke  of  Marlborough. 
He  groped  for  materials;  and  thought  of  it,  till 
he  had  exhausted  his  mind.  Thus  it  sometimes 
happens  that  men  entangle  themselves  in  their 
own  schemes.” 

“To  be  contradicted,  in  order  to  force  you  to 
talk,  is  mighty  unpleasing.  You  shine ,  indeed; 
but  it  is  by  being  ground” 

Of  a  gentleman  who  made  some  figure  among 
the  Literati  of  his  time,  (Mr.  Fitzherbert,)  he 
said,  “What  eminence  he  had  was  by  a  felicity 
of  manner;  he  had  no  more  learning  than  what 
he  could  not  help.” 

On  Saturday,  April  24,  I  dined  with  him  at 
Mr.  Beauclerk’s,  with  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  Mr. 
Jones,  (afterwards  Sir  William,)  Mr.  Langton, 
Mr.  Steevens,  Mr.  Paradise,  and  Dr.  Higgins. 
I  mentioned  that  Mr.  Wilkes  had  attacked  Gar¬ 
rick  to  me,  as  a  man  who  had  no  friend.  “I  be¬ 
lieve  he  is  right,  Sir.  01  <£tXot,  ov  <}>L\os — He  had 
friends,  but  no  friend.1  Garrick  was  so  diffused, 
he  had  no  man  to  whom  he  wished  to  unbosom 
himself.  He  found  people  always  ready  to  ap¬ 
plaud  him,  and  that  always  for  the  same  thing: 
so  he  saw  life  with  great  uniformity.”  I  took  up¬ 
on  me,  for  once,  to  fight  with  Goliath’s  weap¬ 
ons,  and  play  the  sophist. — “Garrick  did  not 
need  a  friend,  as  he  got  from  every  body  all  he 
wanted.  What  is  a  friend?  One  who  supports 
you  and  comforts  you,  while  others  do  not. 
Friendship,  you  know,  Sir,  is  the  cordial  drop, 
cto  make  the  nauseous  draught  of  life  go  down’: 
but  if  the  draught  be  not  nauseous,  if  it  be  all 
sweet,  there  is  no  occasion  for  that  drop.”  John¬ 
son.  “Many  men  would  not  be  content  to  live 
so.  I  hope  I  should  not.  They  would  wish  to 
have  an  intimate  friend,  with  whom  they  might 
compare  minds,  and  cherish  private  virtues.” 
One  of  the  company  mentioned  Lord  Chester¬ 
field,  as  a  man  who  had  no  friend.  Johnson. 
“There  were  more  materials  to  make  friendship 
in  Garrick,  had  he  not  been  so  diffused.”  Bos¬ 
well.  “Garrick  was  pure  gold,  but  beat  out  to 
thin  leaf.  Lord  Chesterfield  was  tinsel.”  John¬ 
son.  “Garrick  was  a  very  good  man,  the  cheer- 
fullest  man  of  his  age;  a  decent  liver  in  a  profes¬ 
sion  which  is  supposed  to  give  indulgence  to  li- 
1  See  ante ,  p.  56,  and  392. 


424 

centiousncss;  and  a  man  who  gave  away,  freely, 
money  acquired  by  himself.  He  began  the  world 
with  a  great  hunger  for  money;  the  son  of  a 
half-pay  officer,  bred  in  a  family,  whose  study 
was  to  make  four-pence  do  as  much  as  others 
made  four-pence  halfpenny  do.  But,  when  he 
had  got  money,  he  was  very  liberal.55  I  presumed 
to  animadvert  on  his  eulogy  on  Garrick,  in  his 
Lives  of  the  Poets.  “You  say,  Sir,  his  death  eclipsed 
the  gaiety  of  nations.55  Johnson.  “I  could 
not  have  said  more  nor  less.  It  is  the  truth; 
eclipsed ,  not  extinguished',  and  his  death  eclipse; 
it  was  like  a  storm.55  Boswell.  “But  why  na¬ 
tions?  Did  his  gaiety  extend  farther  than  his  own 
nation?55  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  some  exaggera¬ 
tion  must  be  allowed.  Besides,  nations  may  be 
said — if  we  allow  the  Scotch  to  be  a  nation,  and 
to  have  gaiety, — which  they  have  not.  You  are 
an  exception,  though.  Come,  gentlemen,  let  us 
candidly  admit  that  there  is  one  Scotchman 
who  is  cheerful.55  Beauclerk.  “But  he  is  a  very 
unnatural  Scotchman.55  I,  however,  continued 
to  think  the  compliment  to  Garrick  hyperbol- 
ically  untrue.  His  acting  had  ceased  some  time 
before  his  death;  at  any  rate  he  had  acted  in 
Ireland  but  a  short  time,  at  an  early  period  of 
his  life,  and  never  in  Scotland.  I  objected  also  to 
what  appears  an  anticlimax  of  praise,  when  con¬ 
trasted  with  the  preceding  panegyrick, — “and 
diminished  the  public  stock  of  harmless  pleas¬ 
ure!55 — “Is  not  harmless  pleasure  very  tame?55 
Johnson.  “Nay,  Sir,  harmless  pleasure  is  the 
highest  praise.  Pleasure  is  a  word  of  dubious 
import;  pleasure  is  in  general  dangerous,  and 
pernicious  to  virtue;  to  be  able  therefore  to  fur¬ 
nish  pleasure  that  is  harmless,  pleasure  pure 
and  unalloyed,  is  as  great  a  power  as  man  can 
possess.55  This  was,  perhaps,  as  ingenious  a  de¬ 
fence  as  could  be  made;  still,  however  I  was  not 
satisfied. 

A  celebrated  wit  being  mentioned,  he  said, 
“One  may  say  of  him  as  was  said  of  a  French 
wit,  II  rfa  de  P  esprit  que  contre  Dieu.  I  have  been 
several  times  in  company  with  him,  but  never 
perceived  any  strong  power  of  wit.  He  produces 
a  general  effect  by  various  means;  he  has  a 
cheerful  countenance  and  a  gay  voice.  Besides 
his  trade  is  wit.  It  would  be  as  wild  in  him  to 
come  into  company  without  merriment,  as  for 
a  highwayman  to  take  the  road  without  his 
pistols.55 

Talking  of  the  effects  of  drinking,  he  said, 
“Drinking  may  be  practised  with  great  pru¬ 
dence;  a  man  who  exposes  himself  when  he  is 
intoxicated,  has  not  the  art  of  getting  drunk; 
a  sober  man  who  happens  occasionally  to  get 


[  1 779 

drunk,  readily  enough  goes  into  a  new  company 
which  a  man  who  has  been  drinking  should  nev¬ 
er  do.  Such  a  man  will  undertake  any  thing;  he 
is  without  skill  in  inebriation.  I  used  to  slink 
home,  when  I  had  drunk  too  much.  A  man  ac¬ 
customed  to  self-examination  will  be  conscious 
when  he  is  drunk,  though  an  habitual  drunkard 
will  not  be  conscious  of  it.  I  knew  a  physician 
who  for  twenty  years  was  not  sober;  yet  in  a 
pamphlet,  which  he  wrote  upon  fevers,  he  ap¬ 
pealed  to  Garrick  and  me  for  his  vindication 
from  a  charge  of  drunkenness.  A  bookseller  (nam¬ 
ing  him,)  who  got  a  large  fortune  by  trade,  was 
so  habitually  and  equably  drunk,  that  his  most 
intimate  friends  never  perceived  that  he  was 
more  sober  at  one  time  than  another.55 

Talking  of  celebrated  and  successful  irregular 
practisers  in  physick;  he  said,  “Taylor  was  the 
most  ignorant  man  I  ever  knew;  but  sprightly. 
Ward  the  dullest.  Taylor  challenged  me  once  to 
talk  Latin  with  him,  (laughing).  I  quoted  some 
of  Horace,  which  he  took  to  be  a  part  of  my  own 
speech.  He  said  a  few  words  well  enough.55  Beau- 
clerk.  “I  remember,  Sir,  you  said  that  Taylor 
was  an  instance  how  far  impudence  could  carry 
ignorance.55  Mr.  Beauclerk  was  very  entertain¬ 
ing  this  day,  and  told  us  a  number  of  short  sto¬ 
ries  in  a  lively  elegant  manner,  and  with  that 
air  of  the  world  which  has  I  know  not  what  im¬ 
pressive  effect,  as  if  there  were  something  more 
than  is  expressed,  or  than  perhaps  we  could  per¬ 
fectly  understand.  As  Johnson  and  I  accom¬ 
panied  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  in  his  coach,  John¬ 
son  said,  “There  is  in  Beauclerk  a  predominance 
over  his  company,  that  one  does  not  like.  But  he 
is  a  man  who  has  lived  so  much  in  the  world, 
that  he  has  a  short  story  on  every  occasion;  he  is 
always  ready  to  talk,  and  is  never  exhausted.55 

Johnson  and  I  passed  the  evening  at  Miss 
Reynolds’s,  Sir  Joshua’s  sister.  I  mentioned  that 
an  eminent  friend  of  ours,  talking  of  the  com¬ 
mon  remark,  that  affection  descends,  said,  that 
“this  was  wisely  contrived  for  the  preservation 
of  mankind;  for  which  it  was  not  so  necessary 
that  there  should  be  affection  from  children  to 
parents,  as  from  parents  to  children;  nay,  there 
would  be  no  harm  in  that  view  though  children 
should  at  a  certain  age  eat  their  parents.55  John¬ 
son.  “But,  Sir,  if  this  were  known  generally  to 
be  the  case,  parents  would  not  have  affection 
for  children.55  Boswell.  “True,  Sir;  for  it  is  in 
expectation  of  a  return  that  parents  are  so  at¬ 
tentive  to  their  children;  and  I  know  a  very 
pretty  instance  of  a  little  girl  of  whom  her  father 
was  very  fond,  who  once  when  he  was  in  a  mel¬ 
ancholy  fit,  and  had  gone  to  bed,  persuaded 


BOSWELL 


1779]  LIFE  OF 

him  to  rise  in  good  humour  by  saying,  ‘My  dear 
papa,  please  to  get  up,  and  let  me  help  you  on 
with  your  clothes,  that  I  may  learn  to  do  it  when 
you  are  an  old  man.5  ” 

Soon  after  this  time  a  little  incident  occurred, 
which  I  will  not  suppress,  because  I  am  desirous 
that  my  work  should  be,  as  much  as  is  consist¬ 
ent  with  the  strictest  truth,  an  antidote  to  the 
false  and  injurious  notions  of  his  character,  which 
have  been  given  by  others,  and  therefore  I  in¬ 
fuse  every  drop  of  genuine  sweetness  into  my 
biographical  cup. 

To  Dr.  Johnson 

My  Dear  Sir,  I  am  in  great  pain  with  an  in¬ 
flamed  foot,  and  obliged  to  keep  my  bed,  so  am 
prevented  from  having  the  pleasure  to  dine  at 
Mr.  Ramsay’s  to-day,  which  is  very  hard;  and 
my  spirits  are  sadly  sunk.  Will  you  be  so  friendly 
as  to  come  and  sit  an  hour  with  me  in  the  even¬ 
ing.  I  am  ever  your  most  faithful,  and  affection¬ 
ate  humble  servant, 

James  Boswell 

South  Audley-street 

Monday,  April  26 

To  Mr.  Boswell 

Mr.  Johnson  laments  the  absence  of  Mr.  Bos¬ 
well,  and  will  come  to  him. — Harley-street. 

He  came  to  me  in  the  evening,  and  brought 
Sir  Joshua  Reynolds.  I  need  scarcely  say,  that 
their  conversation,  while  they  sate  by  my  bed¬ 
side,  was  the  most  pleasing  opiate  to  pain  that 
could  have  been  administered. 

Johnson  being  now  better  disposed  to  obtain 
information  concerning  Pope  than  he  was  last 
year,1  sent  by  me  to  my  Lord  Marchmont  a  pres¬ 
ent  of  those  volumes  of  his  Lives  of  the  Poets  which 
were  at  this  time  published,  with  a  request  to 
have  permission  to  wait  on  him;  and  his  Lord- 
ship,  who  had  called  on  him  twice,  obligingly 
appointed  Saturday,  the  first  of  May,  for  re¬ 
ceiving  us. 

On  that  morning  Johnson  came  to  me  from 
Streatham,  and  after  drinking  chocolate  at  Gen¬ 
eral  Paoli’s,  in  South-Audley-street,  we  proceed¬ 
ed  to  Lord  Marchmont’s  in  Curzon-street.  His 
Lordship  met  us  at  the  door  of  his  library,  and 
with  great  politeness  said  to  Johnson,  “I  am  not 
going  to  make  an  encomium  upon  myself ,  by 
telling  you  the  high  respect  I  have  for  you.  Sir.” 
Johnson  was  exceedingly  courteous;  and  the  in¬ 
terview,  which  lasted  about  two  hours,  during 
which  the  Earl  communicated  his  anecdotes  of 
Pope,  was  as  agreeable  as  I  could  have  wished. 
When  we  came  out,  I  said  to  Johnson,  that  con- 

1  See  ante ,  p.  410. 


JOHNSON  425 

sidering  his  Lordship’s  civility,  I  should  have 
been  vexed  if  he  had  again  failed  to  come.  “Sir, 
(said  he,)  I  would  rather  have  given  twenty 
pounds  than  not  have  come.”  I  accompanied 
him  to  Streatham,  where  we  dined,  and  re¬ 
turned  to  town  in  the  evening. 

On  Monday,  May  3,  I  dined  with  him  at  Mr. 
Dilly’s;  I  pressed  him  this  day  for  his  opinion  on 
the  passage  in  Parnell,  concerning  which  I  had 
in  vain  questioned  him  in  several  letters,  and  at 
length  obtained  it  in  due  form  of  law. 

“Case  for  Dr.  Johnson’s  Opinion 
3rd  of  May,  1779 

“Parnell,  in  his  Hermit ,  has  the  following 
passage: 

To  clear  this  doubt ,  to  know  the  world  by  sight , 

To  find  if  books  and  swains  report  it  right: 

(For yet  by  swains  alone  the  world  he  knew , 

Whose  feet  came  wandering  o'er  the  nightly  dew.) 

Is  there  not  a  contradiction  in  its  being  first  sup¬ 
posed  that  the  Hermit  knew  both  what  books  and 
swains  reported  of  the  world;  yet  afterwards  said, 
that  he  knew  it  by  swains  alone ? 

“7  think  it  an  inaccuracy. — He  mentions  two 
instructors  in  the  first  line ,  and  says  he  had  only 
one  in  the  next .”2 

This  evening  I  set  out  for  Scotland. 

To  Mrs.  Lucy  Porter,  in  Lichfield 

Dear  Madam,  Mr.  Green  has  informed  me 
that  you  are  much  better;  I  hope  I  need  not  tell 
you  that  I  am  glad  of  it.  I  cannot  boast  of  being 
much  better;  my  old  nocturnal  complaint  still 
pursues  me,  and  my  respiration  is  dfficult, 

2CSI  do  not  (says  Mr.  Malone,)  see  any  difficulty 
in  this  passage,  and  wonder  that  Dr.  Johnson  should 
have  acknowledged  it  to  be  inaccurate.  The  Hermit, 
it  should  be  observed,  had  no  actual  experience  of 
the  world  whatsoever:  all  his  knowledge  concern¬ 
ing  it  had  been  obtained  in  two  ways;  from  books , 
and  from  the  relations  of  those  country  swains,  who 
had  seen  a  little  of  it.  The  plain  meaning,  therefore, 
is,  ‘To  clear  his  doubts  concerning  Providence,  and 
to  obtain  some  knowledge  of  the  world  by  actual 
experience;  to  see  whether  the  accounts  furnished 
by  books,  or  by  the  oral  communications  of  swains, 
were  just  representations  of  it;  [I  say,  swains,]  for 
his  oral  or  viva  voce  information  had  been  obtained 
from  that  part  of  mankind  alone,  &c.5  The  word 
alone  here  does  not  relate  to  the  whole  of  the  pre¬ 
ceding  line,  as  has  been  supposed,  but,  by  a  com¬ 
mon  licence,  to  the  words, — of  all  mankind,  which 
are  understood,  and  of  which  it  is  restrictive.” 

Mr.  Malone,  it  must  be  owned,  has  shewn  much 
critical  ingenuity  in  the  explanation  of  this  pas¬ 
sage.  His  interpretation,  however,  seems  to  me 
much  too  recondite.  The  meaning  of  the  passage 
may  be  certain  enough;  but  surely  the  expression  is 
confused,  and  one  part  of  it  contradictory  to  the 
other. 


426  BOSWELL  [1779 


though  much  easier  than  when  I  left  you  the 
summer  before  last.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Thrale  are 
well;  Miss  has  been  a  little  indisposed;  but  she 
is  got  well  again.  They  have  since  the  loss  of 
their  boy  had  two  daughters;  but  they  seem 
likely  to  want  a  son. 

I  hope  you  had  some  books  which  I  sent  you. 
I  was  sorry  for  poor  Mrs.  Adey’s  death,  and  am 
afraid  you  will  be  sometimes  solitary;  but  en¬ 
deavour,  whether  alone  or  in  company,  to  keep 
yourself  cheerful.  My  friends  likewise  die  very 
fast;  but  such  is  the  state  of  man.  I  am,  dear 
love,  your  most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

May  4,  1779 

He  had,  before  I  left  London,  resumed  the 
conversation  concerning  the  appearance  of  a 
ghost  at  Newcastle  upon  Tyne,  which  Mr.  John 
Wesley  believed,  but  to  which  Johnson  did  not 
give  credit.  I  was,  however,  desirous  to  examine 
the  question  closely,  and  at  the  same  time 
wished  to  be  made  acquainted  with  Mr.  John 
Wesley;  for  though  I  differed  from  him  in  some 
points,  I  admired  his  various  talents,  and  loved 
his  pious  zeal.  At  my  request,  therefore,  Dr. 
Johnson  gave  me  a  letter  of  introduction  to 
him. 

To  the  Reverend  Mr.  John  Wesley 

Sir,  Mr.  Boswell,  a  gentleman  who  has  been 
long  known  to  me,  is  desirous  of  being  known  to 
you,  and  has  asked  this  recommendation,  which 
I  give  him  with  great  willingness,  because  I 
think  it  very  much  to  be  wished  that  worthy 
and  religious  men  should  be  acquainted  with 
each  other.  I  am,  Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

May  3,  1779 

Mr.  Wesley  being  in  the  course  of  his  minis¬ 
try  at  Edinburgh,  I  presented  this  letter  to  him, 
and  was  very  politely  received.  I  begged  to  have 
it  returned  to  me,  which  was  accordingly  done. 
His  state  of  the  evidence  as  to  the  ghost  did  not 
satisfy  me. 

I  did  not  write  to  Johnson,  as  usual,  upon  my 
return  to  my  family,  but  tried  how  he  would  be 
affected  by  my  silence.  Mr.  Dilly  sent  me  a  copy 
of  a  note  which  he  received  from  him  on  the 
13  th  of  July,  in  these  words: — 

To  Mr.  Dilly 

Sir,  Since  Mr.  Boswell’s  departure  I  have 
never  heard  from  him;  please  to  send  word  what 
you  know  of  him,  and  whether  you  have  sent 
my  books  to  his  lady.  I  am,  &c. 

Sam.  Johnson 

My  readers  will  not  doubt  that  his  solicitude 
about  me  was  very  flattering. 


To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  What  can  possibly  have  happened, 
that  keeps  us  two  such  strangers  to  each  other? 
I  expected  to  have  heard  from  you  when  you 
came  home;  I  expected  afterwards.  1  went  into 
the  country  and  returned;  and  yet  there  is  no 
letter  from  Mr.  Boswell.  No  ill  I  hope  has  hap¬ 
pened;  and  if  ill  should  happen,  why  should  it 
be  concealed  from  him  who  loves  you?  Is  it  a 
fit  of  humour,  that  has  disposed  you  to  try  who 
can  hold  out  longest  without  writing?  If  it  be, 
you  have  the  victory.  But  I  am  afraid  of  some¬ 
thing  bad;  set  me  free  from  my  suspicions. 

My  thoughts  are  at  present  employed  in  guess¬ 
ing  the  reason  of  your  silence:  you  must  not  ex¬ 
pect  that  I  should  tell  you  any  thing,  if  I  had 
any  thing  to  tell.  Write,  pray  write  to  me,  and 
let  me  know  what  is,  or  what  has  been  the 
cause  of  this  long  interruption.  I  am,  dear  Sir, 
your  most  affectionate  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

July  13,  1779 

To  Dr.  Samuel  Johnson 

Edinburgh,  July  17,  1779 

My  Dear  Sir,  What  may  be  justly  denomi¬ 
nated  a  supine  indolence  of  mind  has  been  my 
state  of  existence  since  I  last  returned  to  Scot¬ 
land,  In  a  livelier  state  I  had  often  suffered  se¬ 
verely  from  long  intervals  of  silence  on  your 
part;  and  I  had  even  been  chid  by  you  for  ex¬ 
pressing  my  uneasiness.  I  was  willing  to  take  ad¬ 
vantage  of  my  insensibility,  and  while  I  could 
bear  the  experiment,  to  try  whether  your  affec¬ 
tion  for  me  would,  after  an  unusual  silence  on 
my  part,  make  you  write  first.  This  afternoon  I 
have  had  very  high  satisfaction  by  receiving 
your  kind  letter  of  inquiry,  for  which  I  most 
gratefully  thank  you.  I  am  doubtful  if  it  was  right 
to  make  the  experiment;  though  I  have  gained 
by  it.  I  was  beginning  to  grow  tender,  and  to 
upbraid  myself,  especially  after  having  dreamt 
two  nights  ago  that  I  was  with  you.  I  and  my 
wife,  and  my  four  children,  are  all  well.  I  would 
not  delay  one  post  to  answer  your  letter;  but  as 
it  is  late,  I  have  not  time  to  do  more.  You  shall 
soon  hear  from  me,  upon  many  and  various 
particulars;  and  I  shall  never  again  put  you  to 
any  test.  I  am,  with  veneration,  my  dear  Sir, 
your  much  obliged,  and  faithful  humble  servant, 

James  Boswell 

On  the  22nd  of  July,  I  wrote  to  him  again; 
and  gave  him  an  account  of  my  last  interview 
with  my  worthy  friend,  Mr.  Edward  Dilly,  at 
his  brother’s  house  at  Southill,  in  Bedfordshire, 
where  he  died  soon  after  I  parted  from  him, 
leaving  me  a  very  kind  remembrance  of  his  re¬ 
gard. 

I  informed  him  that  Lord  Hailes,  who  had 
promised  to  furnish  him  with  some  anecdotes 


1779  ] 

for  his  Lives  of  the  Poets ,  had  sent  me  three  in¬ 
stances  of  Prior’s  borrowing  from  Gombauld,  in 
Recueil  des  Poetes ,  tome  3.  Epigram  To  John  I 
owed  “ great  obligation ,”  p.  25.  To  the  Duke  of 
Noailles ,  p.  32.  Sauntering  Jack  and  Idle  Joan , 
P-  25. 

My  letter  was  a  pretty  long  one,  and  con¬ 
tained  a  variety  of  particulars;  but  he,  it  should 
seem,  had  not  attended  to  it;  for  his  next  to  me 
was  as  follows: 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

My  Dear  Sir,  Are  you  playing  the  same 
trick  again,  and  trying  who  can  keep  silence 
longest?  Remember  that  all  tricks  are  either 
knavish  or  childish;  and  that  it  is  as  foolish  to 
make  experiments  upon  the  constancy  of  a  friend, 
as  upon  the  chastity  of  a  wife. 

What  can  be  the  cause  of  this  second  fit  of  si¬ 
lence,  I  cannot  conjecture;  but  after  one  trick,  I 
will  not  be  cheated  by  another,  nor  will  harass 
my  thoughts  with  conjectures  about  the  mo¬ 
tives  of  a  man  who,  probably,  acts  only  by  ca¬ 
price.  I  therefore  suppose  you  are  well,  and  that 
Mrs.  Boswell  is  well  too;  and  that  the  fine  sum¬ 
mer  has  restored  Lord  Auchinleck.  I  am  much 
better  than  you  left  me;  I  think  I  am  better 
than  when  I  was  in  Scotland. 

I  forgot  whether  I  informed  you  that  poor 
Thrale  has  been  in  great  danger.  Mrs.  Thrale 
likewise  has  miscarried,  and  been  much  indis¬ 
posed.  Every  body  else  is  well;  Langton  is  in 
camp.  I  intend  to  put  Lord  Hailes’s  descrip¬ 
tion  of  Bryden1  into  another  edition,  and  as  I 
know  his  accuracy,  wish  he  would  consider  the 
dates,  which  I  could  not  always  settle  to  my  own 
mind. 

Mr.  Thrale  goes  to  Brighthelmston,  about 
Michaelmas,  to  be  jolly  and  ride  a  hunting.  I 
shall  go  to  town,  or  perhaps  to  Oxford.  Exercise 
and  gaiety,  or  rather  carelessness,  will,  I  hope, 
dissipate  all  remains  of  his  malady;  and  I  like¬ 
wise  hope  by  the  change  of  place,  to  find  some 
opportunities  of  growing  yet  better  myself.  I 
am,  dear  Sir,  your  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

Streatham,  Sept.  9,  1779 

My  readers  will  not  be  displeased  at  being 
told  every  slight  circumstance  of  the  manner  in 
which  Dr.  Johnson  contrived  to  amuse  his  sol¬ 
itary  hours.  He  sometimes  employed  himself  in 
chymistry,  sometimes  in  watering  and  pruning 
a  vine,  sometimes  in  small  experiments,  at  which 
those  who  may  smile,  should  recollect  that  there 

1  Which  I  communicated  to  him  from  his  Lord- 
ship,  but  it  has  not  yet  been  published.  I  have  a 
copy  of  it.  [The  few  notices  concerning  Dryden, 
which  Lord  Hailes  had  collected,  the  authour  aft¬ 
erwards  gave  to  Mr.  Malone. — M.] 


427 

are  moments  which  admit  of  being  soothed  only 
by  trifles.2 

On  the  20th  of  September  I  defended  myself 
against  his  suspicion  of  me,  which  I  did  not  de¬ 
serve;  and  added,  “Pray  let  us  write  frequently. 
A  whim  strikes  me,  that  we  should  send  off  a 
sheet  once  a  week,  like  a  stage-coach,  whether 
it  be  full  or  not;  nay,  though  it  should  be  empty. 
The  very  sight  of  your  hand-writing  would  com¬ 
fort  me;  and  were  a  sheet  to  be  thus  sent  regu¬ 
larly,  we  should  much  oftener  convey  some¬ 
thing,  were  it  only  a  few  kind  words.” 

My  friend  Colonel  James  Stuart,  second  son 
of  the  Earl  of  Bute,  who  had  distinguished  him¬ 
self  as  a  good  officer  of  the  Bedfordshire  militia, 
had  taken  a  publick-spirited  resolution  to  serve 
his  country  in  its  difficulties,  by  raising  a  regular 
regiment,  and  taking  the  command  of  it  him¬ 
self.  This,  in  the  heir  of  the  immense  property 
of  Wortley,  was  highly  honourable.  Having  been 
in  Scotland  recruiting,  he  obligingly  asked  me 
to  accompany  him  to  Leeds,  then  the  head-quar¬ 
ters  of  his  corps;  from  thence  to  London  for  a 
short  time,  and  afterwards  to  other  places  to 
which  the  regiment  might  be  ordered.  Such  an 
offer,  at  a  time  of  the  year  when  I  had  full  lei¬ 
sure,  was  very  pleasing;  especially  as  I  was  to 
accompany  a  man  of  sterling  good  sense,  infor¬ 
mation,  discernment,  and  conviviality;  and  was 
to  have  a  second  crop  in  one  year  of  London 
and  Johnson.  Of  this  I  informed  my  illustrious 
friend,  in  characteristical  warm  terms,  in  a  let¬ 
ter  dated  the  30th  of  September,  from  Leeds. 

On  Monday,  October  4,  I  called  at  his  house 
before  he  was  up.  He  sent  for  me  to  his  bedside, 
and  expressed  his  satisfaction  at  this  incidental 
meeting,  with  as  much  vivacity  as  if  he  had 
been  in  the  gaiety  of  youth.  He  called  briskly, 
“Frank,  go  and  get  coffee,  and  let  us  breakfast 
in  splendour .” 

During  this  visit  to  London  I  had  several  in¬ 
terviews  with  him,  which  it  is  unnecessary  to 
distinguish  particularly.  I  consulted  him  as  to 

2In  one  of  his  manuscript  Diaries,  there  is  the 
following  entry,  which  marks  his  curious  minute 
attention:  “July  26,  1768.  I  shaved  my  nail  by  ac¬ 
cident  in  whetting  the  knife,  about  an  eighth  of  an 
inch  from  the  bottom,  and  about  a  fourth  from  the 
top.  This  I  measure  that  I  may  know  the  growth  of 
nails;  the  whole  is  about  five  eighths  of  an  inch.” 

Another  of  the  same  kind  appears,  “Aug.  7, 
1779,  Partem  brachii  dextri  carpo  proximam  et  cutem 
pestor is  circa  mamillam  dextram  rasi ,  ut  notum  fieret  quan¬ 
to  temporis  pili  renovarenturP 

And,  “Aug.  15,  1773.  I  cut  from  the  vine  41 
leaves,  which  weighed  five  oz.  and  a  half,  and  eight 
scruples: — I  lay  them  upon  my  book-case,  to  see 
what  weight  they  will  lose  by  drying.” 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


428 

the  appointment  of  guardians  to  my  children, 
in  case  of  my  death.  “Sir,  (said  he,)  do  not  ap¬ 
point  a  number  of  guardians.  When  there  are 
many,  they  trust  one  to  another,  and  the  busi¬ 
ness  is  neglected.  I  would  advise  you  to  choose 
only  one;  let  him  be  a  man  of  respectable  char¬ 
acter,  who,  for  his  own  credit,  will  do  what  is 
right;  let  him  be  a  rich  man,  so  that  he  may  be 
under  no  temptation  to  take  advantage;  and  let 
him  be  a  man  of  business,  who  is  used  to  con¬ 
duct  affairs  with  ability  and  expertness,  to  whom, 
therefore,  the  execution  of  the  trust  will  not  be 
burdensome.” 

On  Sunday,  October  10,  we  dined  together 
at  Mr.  Strahan’s.  The  conversation  having 
turned  on  the  prevailing  practice  of  going  to 
the  East-Indies  in  quest  of  wealth; — Johnson. 
“A  man  had  better  have  ten  thousand  pounds  at 
the  end  of  ten  years  passed  in  England,  than 
twenty  thousand  pounds  at  the  end  of  ten  years 
passed  in  India,  because  you  must  compute  what 
you  give  for  money;  and  a  man  who  has  lived 
ten  years  in  India,  has  given  up  ten  years  of  so¬ 
cial  comfort  and  all  those  advantages  which 
arise  from  living  in  England.  The  ingenious  Mr. 
Brown,  distinguished  by  the  name  of  Capability 
Brown ,  told  me,  that  he  was  once  at  the  seat  of 
Lord  Clive,  who  had  returned  from  India  with 
great  wealth;  and  that  he  shewed  him  at  the 
door  of  his  bed-chamber  a  large  chest,  which  he 
said  he  had  once  had  full  of  gold;  upon  which 
Brown  observed,  T  am  glad  you  can  bear  it  so 
near  your  bed-chamber.’  ” 

We  talked  of  the  state  of  the  poor  in  London. 
—Johnson.  “Saunders  Welch,  the  Justice,  who 
was  once  High-Constable  of  Holborn,  and  had 
the  best  opportunities  of  knowing  the  state  of 
the  poor,  told  me,  that  I  under-rated  the  num¬ 
ber,  when  I  computed  that  twenty  a  week,  that 

is,  above  a  thousand  a  year,  died  of  hunger;  not 
absolutely  of  immediate  hunger;  but  of  the  wast¬ 
ing  and  other  diseases  which  are  the  consequences 
of  hunger.  This  happens  only  in  so  large  a  place 
as  London,  where  people  are  not  known.  What 
we  are  told  about  the  great  sums  got  by  beg¬ 
ging  is  not  true:  the  trade  is  overstocked.  And 
you  may  depend  upon  it,  there  are  many  who 
cannot  get  work.  A  particular  kind  of  manufac¬ 
ture  fails:  those  who  have  been  used  to  work  at 

it,  can,  for  some  time,  work  at  nothing  else.  You 
meet  a  man  begging;  you  charge  him  with  idle¬ 
ness:  he  says,  ‘I  am  willing  to  labour.  Will  you 
give  me  work?’ — T  cannot.’ — ‘Why,  then  you 
have  no  right  to  charge  me  with  idleness.’  ” 

We  left  Mr.  Strahan’s  at  seven,  as  Johnson 
had  said  he  intended  to  go  to  evening  prayers. 


[  1779 

As  we  walked  along,  he  complained  of  a  little 
gout  in  his  toe,  and  said,  “I  shan’t  go  to  prayers 
to-night;  I  shall  go  to-morrow:  Whenever  I  miss 
church  on  a  Sunday,  I  resolve  to  go  another  day. 
But  I  do  not  always  do  it.”  This  was  a  fair  ex¬ 
hibition  of  that  vibration  between  pious  reso¬ 
lutions  and  indolence,  which  many  of  us  have 
too  often  experienced. 

I  went  home  with  him,  and  we  had  a  long 
quiet  conversation. 

I  read  him  a  letter  from  Dr.  Hugh  Blair  con¬ 
cerning  Pope,  (in  writing  whose  life  he  was  now 
employed,)  which  I  shall  insert  as  a  literary 
curiosity.1 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  In  the  year  1 763,  being  at  London, 
1  was  carried  by  Dr.  John  Blair,  Prebendary  of 
Westminster,  to  dine  at  old  Lord  Bathurst’s; 
where  we  found  the  late  Mr.  Mallet,  Sir  James 
Porter,  who  had  been  Ambassadour  at  Con¬ 
stantinople,  the  late  Dr.  Macaulay,  and  two  or 
three  more.  The  conversation  turning  on  Mr. 
Pope,  Lord  Bathurst  told  us,  that  The  Essay  on 
Man  was  originally  composed  by  Lord  Boling- 
broke  in  prose,  and  that  Mr.  Pope  did  no  more 
than  put  it  into  verse:  that  he  had  read  Lord 
Bolingbrokc’s  manuscript  in  his  own  hand-writ¬ 
ing;  and  remembered  well,  that  he  was  at  a  loss 
whether  most  to  admire  the  elegance  of  Lord 
Bolingbroke’s  prose,  or  the  beauty  of  Mr.  Pope’s 
verse.  When  Lord  Bathurst  told  this,  Mr.  Mal¬ 
let  bade  me  attend,  and  remember  this  remark¬ 
able  piece  of  information;  as,  by  the  course  of 
Nature,  I  might  survive  his  Lordship,  and  be  a 
witness  of  his  having  said  so.  The  conversation 
was  indeed  too  remarkable  to  be  forgotten.  A 
few  days  after,  meeting  with  you,  who  were 
then  also  in  London,  you  will  remember  that  I 
mentioned  to  you  what  had  passed  on  this  sub¬ 
ject,  as  I  was  much  struck  with  this  anecdote. 
But  what  ascertains  my  recollection  of  it  be- 

^he  Rev.  Dr.  Law,  Bishop  of  Carlisle,  in  the 
Preface  to  his  valuable  edition  of  Archbishop  King’s 
Essay  on  the  Origin  oj  Evil ,  mentions  that  the  prin¬ 
ciples  maintained  in  it  had  been  adopted  by  Pope 
in  his  Essay  on  Man;  and  adds,  “The  fact,  notwith¬ 
standing  such  denial  (Bishop  Warburton’s),  might 
have  been  strictly  verified  by  an  unexceptionable 
testimony,  viz.  that  of  the  late  Lord  Bathurst,  who 
saw  the  very  same  system  of  the  to  peXnov  (tak¬ 
en  from  the  Archbishop)  in  Lord  Bolingbroke’s 
own  hand,  lying  before  Mr.  Pope,  while  he  was 
composing  his  Essay.”  This  is  respectable  evidence; 
but  that  of  Dr.  Blair  is  more  direct  from  the  foun¬ 
tain-head,  as  well  as  more  full.  Let  me  add  to  it 
that  of  Dr.  Joseph  Warton;  “The  late  Lord  Bath¬ 
urst  repeatedly  assured  me  that  he  had  read  the 
whole  scheme  of  The  Essay  on  Man ,  in  the  hand¬ 
writing  of  Bolingbroke,  and  drawn  up  in  a  series  of 
propositions,  which  Pope  was  to  versify  and  illus¬ 
trate.”  Essays  on  the  Genius  and  Writings  oj  Pope ,  vol. 
ii,  p.  62. 


BOSWELL 


1779] 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


429 


yond  doubt,  is  that  being  accustomed  to  keep  a 
journal  of  what  passed  when  I  was  in  London, 
which  I  wrote  out  every  evening,  I  find  the  par¬ 
ticulars  of  the  above  information,  just  as  I  have 
now  given  them,  distinctly  marked;  and  am 
thence  enabled  to  fix  this  conversation  to  have 
passed  on  Friday,  the  22nd  of  April,  1763. 

I  remember  also  distinctly,  (though  I  have 
not  for  this  the  authority  of  my  journal,)  that 
the  conversation  going  on  concerning  Mr.  Pope, 
I  took  notice  of  a  report  which  had  been  some¬ 
times  propagated  that  he  did  not  understand 
Greek.  Lord  Bathurst  said  to  me,  that  he  knew 
that  to  be  false;  for  that  part  of  the  Iliad ,  was 
translated  by  Mr.  Pope  in  his  house  in  the  coun¬ 
try;  and  that  in  the  mornings  when  they  assem¬ 
bled  at  breakfast,  Mr.  Pope  used  frequently  to 
repeat,  with  great  rapture,  the  Greek  lines  which 
he  had  been  translating,  and  then  to  give  them 
his  version  of  them,  and  to  compare  them  to¬ 
gether. 

If  these  circumstances  can  be  of  any  use  to 
Dr.  Johnson,  you  have  my  full  liberty  to  give  them 
to  him.  I  beg  you  will,  at  the  same  time,  present 
to  him  my  most  respectful  compliments,  with 
best  wishes  for  his  success  and  fame  in  all  his 
literary  undertakings.  I  am,  with  great  respect, 
my  dearest  Sir,  your  most  affectionate,  and  ob¬ 
liged  humble  servant,  _ 

Hugh  Blair 

Broughton  Park,  Sept .  21,  1779 


Johnson.  “Depend  upon  it,  Sir,  this  is  too 
strongly  stated.  Pope  may  have  had  from  Bol- 
ingbroke  the  philosophick  stamina  of  his  Essay; 
and  admitting  this  to  be  true,  Lord  Bathurst  did 
not  intentionally  falsify.  But  the  thing  is  not  true 
in  the  latitude  that  Blair  seems  to  imagine;  we 
are  sure  that  the  poetical  imagery,  which  makes 
a  great  part  of  the  poem,  was  Pope’s  own.  It  is 
amazing,  Sir,  what  deviations  there  are  from 
precise  truth,  in  the  account  which  is  given  of 
almost  every  thing.  I  told  Mrs.  Thrale,  ‘You 
ha  /e  so  little  anxiety  about  truth,  that  you  nev¬ 
er  tax  your  memory  with  the  exact  thing.’  Now 
what  is  the  use  of  the  memory  to  truth,  if  one  is 
careless  of  exactness?  Lord  Hailes’s  Annals  of 
Scotland  are  very  exact;  but  they  contain  mere 
dry  particulars.  They  are  to  be  considered  as  a 
Dictionary.  You  know  such  things  are  there; 
and  may  be  looked  at  when  you  please.  Rob¬ 
ertson  paints;  but  the  misfortune  is,  you  are  sure 
he  does  not  know  the  people  whom  he  paints;  so 
you  cannot  suppose  a  likeness.  Characters  should 
never  be  given  by  an  historian,  unless  he  knew 
the  people  whom  he  describes,  or  copies  from 
those  who  knew  them.” 

Boswell.  “Why,  Sir,  do  people  play  this  trick 
which  1  observe  now,  when  I  look  at  your  grate, 
putting  the  shovel  against  it  to  make  the  fire 


burn?”  Johnson.  “They  play  the  trick,  but  it 
does  not  make  the  fire  burn.  There  is  a  better; 
(setting  the  poker  perpendicularly  up  at  right 
angles  with  the  grate.)  In  days  of  superstition 
they  thought,  as  it  made  a  cross  with  the  bars,  it 
would  drive  away  the  witch.” 

Boswell.  “By  associating  with  you,  Sir,  I  am 
always  getting  an  accession  of  wisdom.  But  per¬ 
haps  a  man,  after  knowing  his  own  character — 
the  limited  strength  of  his  own  mind,  should  not 
be  desirous  of  having  too  much  wisdom,  con¬ 
sidering,  quid  valeant  humeri ,  how  little  he  can 
carry.”  Johnson.  “Sir,  be  as  wise  as  you  can;  let 
a  man  be  aliis  Icetus ,  sapiens  sibi: 

Though  pleas'd  to  see  the  dolphins  play , 

I  mind  my  compass  and  my  way.1 
You  may  be  wise  in  your  study  in  the  morning, 
and  gay  in  company  at  a  tavern  in  the  evening. 
Every  man  is  to  take  care  of  his  own  wisdom 
and  his  own  virtue,  without  minding  too  much 
what  others  think.” 

He  said,  “Dodsley  first  mentioned  to  me  the 
scheme  of  an  English  Dictionary;  but  I  had  long 
thought  of  it.”  Boswell.  “You  did  not  know 
what  you  were  undertaking.”  Johnson.  “Yes, 
Sir,  I  knew  very  well  what  I  was  undertaking, 
— and  very  well  how  to  do  it, — and  have  done 
it  very  well.”  Boswell.  “An  excellent  climax! 
and  it  has  availed  you.  In  your  Preface  you  say, 
‘What  would  it  avail  me  in  this  gloom  of  soli¬ 
tude?’  You  have  been  agreeably  mistaken.” 

In  his  Life  of  Milton  he  observes,  “I  cannot 
but  remark  a  kind  of  respect,  perhaps  uncon¬ 
sciously,  paid  to  this  great  man  by  his  biogra¬ 
phers:  every  house  in  which  he  resided  is  his¬ 
torically  mentioned,  as  if  it  were  an  injury  to 
neglect  naming  any  place  that  he  honoured  by 
his  presence.”  I  had,  before  I  read  this  obser¬ 
vation,  been  desirous  of  shewing  that  respect  to 
Johnson,  by  various  inquiries.  Finding  him  this 
evening  in  a  very  good  humuor,  I  prevailed  on 
him  to  give  me  an  exact  list  of  his  places  of  res¬ 
idence,  since  he  entered  the  metropolis  as  an 
authour,  which  I  subjoin  in  a  note.2 

I  mentioned  to  him  a  dispute  between  a  friend 
of  mine  and  his  lady,  concerning  conjugal  in¬ 
fidelity,  which  my  friend  had  maintained  was 
by  no  means  so  bad  in  the  husband,  as  in  the 

1  The  Spleen ,  a  Poem. 

2  1 .  Exeter-street,  off  Gatherine-street,  Strand.  2. 
Greenwich.  3.  Woodstock-street,  near  Hanover- 
square.  4.  Castle-street,  Cavendish-square,  No.  6. 
5.  Strand.  6  Bos  well- Court.  7.  Strand,  again.  8. 
Bow-street.  9.  Holborn.  10.  Fetter-lane.  11.  Hol- 
born,  again.  12.  Gough-square.  13.  Staple  Inn.  14. 
Gray’s  Inn.  15.  Inner  Temple-lane,  No.  1.  16, 
Johnson ’s-court.  No.  7.  17.  Bolt-court,  No.  8. 


BOSWELL 


430 

wife.  Johnson.  “Your  friend  was  in  the  right, 
Sir.  Between  a  man  and  his  Maker  it  is  a  differ¬ 
ent  question:  but  between  a  man  and  his  wife,  a 
husband’s  infidelity  is  nothing.  They  are  con¬ 
nected  by  children,  by  fortune,  by  serious  con¬ 
siderations  of  community.  Wise  married  women 
don’t  trouble  themselves  about  the  infidelity  in 
their  husbands.”  Boswell.  “To  be  sure  there  is 
a  great  difference  between  the  offence  of  infi¬ 
delity  in  a  man  and  that  of  his  wife.”  Johnson. 
“The  difference  is  boundless.  The  man  imposes 
no  bastards  upon  his  wife.” 

Here  it  may  be  questioned  whether  Johnson 
was  entirely  in  the  right.  I  suppose  it  will  not  be 
controverted  that  the  difference  in  the  degree  of 
criminality  is  very  great,  on  account  of  conse¬ 
quences:  but  still  it  may  be  maintained,  that, 
independent  of  moral  obligation,  infidelity  is  by 
no  means  a  light  offence  in  a  husband;  because 
it  must  hurt  a  delicate  attachment,  in  which  a 
mutual  constancy  is  implied,  with  such  refined 
sentiments  as  Massinger  has  exhibited  in  his  play 
of  The  Picture. — Johnson  probably  at  another 
time  would  have  admitted  this  opinion.  And  let 
it  be  kept  in  remembrance,  that  he  was  very 
careful  not  to  give  any  encouragement  to  irreg¬ 
ular  conduct.  A  gentleman,  not  adverting  to  the 
distinction  made  by  him  upon  this  subject,  sup¬ 
posed  a  case  of  singular  perverseness  in  a  wife, 
and  heedlessly  said,  “That  then  he  thought  a 
husband  might  do  as  he  pleased  with  a  safe  con¬ 
science.”  Johnson.  “Nay,  Sir,  this  is  wild  indeed 
(smiling;)  you  must  consider  that  fornication  is 
a  crime  in  a  single  man;  and  you  cannot  have 
more  liberty  by  being  married.” 

He  this  evening  expressed  himself  strongly 
against  the  Roman  Catholics;  observing,  “In 
every  thing  in  which  they  differ  from  us  they  are 
wrong.”  He  was  even  against  the  invocation  of 
saints;  in  short,  he  was  in  the  humour  of  op¬ 
position. 

Having  regretted  to  him  that  I  had  learnt  lit¬ 
tle  Greek,  as  is  too  generally  the  case  in  Scot¬ 
land;  that  I  had  for  a  long  time  hardly  applied 
at  all  to  the  study  of  that  noble  language,  and 
that  I  was  desirous  of  being  told  by  him  what 
method  to  follow;  he  recommended  to  me  as 
easy  helps,  Sylvanus’s  First  Book  of  the  Iliad ; 
Dawson’s  Lexicon  to  the  Greek  New  Testament ;  and 
Hesiod ,  with  Pasoris  Lexicon  at  the  end  of  it. 

On  Tuesday,  October  12,  I  dined  with  him 
at  Mr.  Ramsay’s,  with  Lord  Newhaven,  and 
some  other  company,  none  of  whom  I  recollect, 
but  a  beautiful  Miss  Graham,1  a  relation  of  his 
Lordship’s,  who  asked  Dr.  Johnson  to  hob  or 

xNow  the  Lady  of  Sir  Henry  Dashwood,  Bart. 


[  1779 

nob  with  her.  He  was  flattered  by  such  pleasing 
attention,  and  politely  told  her,  he  never  drank 
wine;  but  if  she  would  drink  a  glass  of  water,  he 
was  much  at  her  service.  She  accepted.  “Oho, 
Sir!  (said  Lord  Newhaven,)  you  are  caught.” 
Johnson.  “Nay,  I  do  not  see  how  I  am  caught ; 
but  if  I  am  caught,  I  don’t  want  to  get  free 
again.  If  I  am  caught,  I  hope  to  be  kept.”  Then 
when  the  two  glasses  of  water  were  brought, 
smiling  placidly  to  the  young  lady,  he  said, 
“Madam,  let  us  reciprocate .” 

Lord  Newhaven  and  Johnson  carried  on  an 
argument  for  some  time,  concerning  the  Mid¬ 
dlesex  election.  Johnson  said,  “Parliament  may 
be  considered  as  bound  by  law  as  a  man  is  bound 
where  there  is  nobody  to  tie  the  knot.  As  it  is 
clear  that  the  House  of  Commons  may  expel, 
and  expel  again  and  again,  why  not  allow  of  the 
power  to  incapacitate  for  that  parliament,  rath¬ 
er  than  have  a  perpetual  contest  kept  up  be¬ 
tween  parliament  and  the  people.”  Lord  New¬ 
haven  tbok  the  opposite  side;  but  respectfully 
said,  “I  speak  with  great  deference  to  you,  Dr. 
Johnson;  I  speak  to  be  instructed.”  This  had  its 
full  effect  on  my  friend.  He  bowed  his  head  al¬ 
most  as  low  as  the  table,  to  a  complimenting 
nobleman;  and  called  out,  “My  Lord,  my  Lord, 
I  do  not  desire  all  this  ceremony;  let  us  tell  our 
minds  to  one  another  quietly.”  After  the  debate 
was  over,  he  said,  “I  have  got  lights  on  the  sub¬ 
ject  to-day,  which  I  had  not  before.”  This  was 
a  great  deal  from  him,  especially  as  he  had  writ¬ 
ten  a  pamphlet  upon  it. 

He  observed,  “The  House  of  Commons  was 
originally  not  a  privilege  of  the  people,  but  a 
check  for  the  Crown  on  the  House  of  Lords.  I 
remember  Henry  the  Eighth  wanted  them  to  do 
something;  they  hesitated  in  the  morning,  but 
did  it  in  the  afternoon.  He  told  them,  6 It  is  well 
you  did;  or  half  your  heads  should  have  been 
upon  Temple-bar.’  But  the  House  of  Commons 
is  now  no  longer  under  the  power  of  the  crown, 
and  therefore  must  be  bribed.”  He  added,  “I 
have  no  delight  in  talking  of  publick  affairs.” 

Of  his  fellow-collegian,  the  celebrated  Mr. 
George  Whitefield,  he  said,  “Whitefield  never 
drew  as  much  attention  as  a  mountebank  does; 
he  did  not  draw  attention  by  doing  better  than 
others,  but  by  doing  what  was  strange.  Were 
Astley  to  preach  a  sermon  standing  upon  his 
head  on  a  horse’s  back,  he  would  collect  a  mul¬ 
titude  to  hear  him;  but  no  wise  man  would  say 
he  had  made  a  better  sermon  for  that.  I  never 
treated  Whitefield’s  ministry  with  contempt;  I 
believe  he  did  good.  He  had  devoted  himself  to 
the  lower  classes  of  mankind,  and  among  them 


1779  ] 

he  was  of  use.  But  when  familiarity  and  noise 
claim  the  praise  due  to  knowledge,  art,  and  ele¬ 
gance,  we  must  beat  down  such  pretensions.” 

What  I  have  preserved  of  his  conversation 
during  the  remainder  of  my  stay  in  London  at 
this  time,  is  only  what  follows:  I  told  him  that 
when  I  objected  to  keeping  company  with  a  no¬ 
torious  infidel,  a  celebrated  friend  of  ours  said 
to  me,  “I  do  not  think  that  men  who  live  laxly 
in  the  world,  as  you  and  I  do,  can  with  propri¬ 
ety  assume  such  an  authority.  Dr.  Johnson  may, 
who  is  uniformly  exemplary  in  his  conduct.  But 
it  is  not  very  consistent  to  shun  an  infidel  to-day, 
and  get  drunk  to-morrow.”  Johnson.  “Nay,  Sir, 
this  is  sad  reasoning.  Because  a  man  cannot  be 
right  in  all  things,  is  he  to  be  right  in  nothing? 
Because  a  man  sometimes  gets  drunk,  is  he  there¬ 
fore  to  steal?  This  doctrine  would  very  soon 
bring  a  man  to  the  gallows.” 

After  all,  however,  it  is  a  difficult  question 
how  far  sincere  Christians  should  associate  with 
the  avowed  enemies  of  religion;  for  in  the  first 
place,  almost  every  man’s  mind  may  be  more  or 
Jess  “corrupted  by  evil  communications”;  sec¬ 
ondly,  the  world  may  very  naturally  suppose 
that  they  are  not  really  in  earnest  in  religion, 
who  can  easily  bear  its  opponents;  and  thirdly, 
if  the  profane  find  themselves  quite  well  re¬ 
ceived  by  the  pious,  one  of  the  checks  upon  an 
open  declaration  of  their  infidelity,  and  one  of 
the  probable  chances  of  obliging  them  seriously 
to  reflect,  which  their  being  shunned  would  do, 
is  removed. 

He,  I  know  not  why,  shewed  upon  all  occa¬ 
sions  an  aversion  to  go  to  Ireland,  where  I  pro¬ 
posed  to  him  that  we  should  make  a  tour.  John¬ 
son.  “It  is  the  last  place  where  I  should  wish  to 
travel.”  Boswell.  “Should  you  not  like  to  see 
Dublin,  Sir?”  Johnson.  “No,  Sir!  Dublin  is  only 
a  worse  capital.”  Boswell.  “Is  not  the  Giant’s- 
Causeway  worth  seeing?”  Johnson.  “Worth  see¬ 
ing?  yes;  but  not  worth  going  to  see.” 

Yet  he  had  a  kindness  for  the  Irish  nation, 
and  thus  generously  expressed  himself  to  a  gen¬ 
tleman  from  that  country,  on  the  subject  of  an 
union  which  artful  Politicians  have  often  had  in 
view — “Do  not  make  an  union  with  us,  Sir.  We 
should  unite  with  you,  only  to  rob  you.  We 
should  have  robbed  the  Scotch,  if  they  had  had 
any  thing  of  which  we  could  have  robbed  them.” 

Of  an  acquaintance  of  ours,  whose  manners 
and  every  thing  about  him,  though  expensive, 
were  coarse,  he  said,  “Sir,  you  see  in  him  vulgar 
prosperity.” 

A  foreign  minister  of  no  very  high  talents,  who 
had  been  in  his  company  for  a  considerable  time 


431 

quite  overlooked,  happened  luckily  to  mention 
that  he  had  read  some  of  his  Rambler  in  Italian, 
and  admired  it  much.  This  pleased  him  greatly; 
he  observed  that  the  title  had  been  translated, 
II  Genio  errante ,  though  I  have  been  told  it  was 
rendered  more  ludicrously,  II  Vagabondo\  and 
finding  that  this  minister  gave  such  a  proof  of 
his  taste,  he  was  all  attention  to  him,  and  on  the 
first  remark  which  he  made,  however  simple, 
exclaimed,  “The  Ambassadour  says  well — His 
Excellency  observes — ”  And  then  he  expanded 
and  enriched  the  little  that  had  been  said,  in  so 
strong  a  manner,  that  it  appeared  something  of 
consequence.  This  was  exceedingly  entertain¬ 
ing  to  the  company  who  were  present,  and  many 
a  time  afterwards  it  furnished  a  pleasant  topick 
of  merriment:  “ The  Ambassadour  says  well”  be¬ 
came  a  laughable  term  of  applause,  when  no 
mighty  matter  had  been  expressed. 

I  left  London  on  Monday,  October  18,  and 
accompanied  Colonel  Stuart  to  Chester,  where 
his  regiment  was  to  lye  for  some  time. 

Mr.  Boswell  to  Dr.  Johnson 

Chester,  October  22,  1779 

My  Dear  Sir,  It  was  not  till  one  o’clock  on 
Monday  morning,  that  Colonel  Stuart  and  I 
left  London;  for  we  chose  to  bid  a  cordial  adieu 
to  Lord  Mountstuart,  who  was  to  set  out  on  that 
day  on  his  embassy  to  Turin.  We  drove  on  ex¬ 
cellently,  and  reached  Lichfield  in  good  time 
enough  that  night.  The  Colonel  had  heard  so 
preferable  a  character  of  the  George,  that  he 
would  not  put  up  at  the  Three  Crowns,  so  that  I 
did  not  see  our  host  Wilkins.  We  found  at  the 
George  as  good  accommodation  as  we  could 
wish  to  have,  and  I  fully  enjoyed  the  comfort¬ 
able  thought  that  I  was  in  Lichfield  again.  Next 
morning  it  rained  very  hard;  and  as  I  had  much 
to  do  in  a  little  time,  I  ordered  a  post-chaise, 
and  between  eight  and  nine  sallied  forth  to 
make  a  round  of  visits.  I  first  went  to  Mr.  Green, 
hoping  to  have  had  him  to  accompany  me  to 
all  my  other  friends,  but  he  was  engaged  to  at¬ 
tend  the  Bishop  of  Sodor  and  Man,  who  was 
then  lying  at  Lichfield  very  ill  of  the  gout.  Hav¬ 
ing  taken  a  hasty  glance  at  the  additions  to 
Green’s  museum,  from  which  it  was  not  easy  to 
break  away,  I  next  went  to  the  Friery,  where  I 
at  first  occasioned  some  tumult  in  the  ladies, 
who  were  not  prepared  to  receive  company  so 
early:  but  my  name ,  which  has  by  wonderful  fe¬ 
licity  come  to  be  closely  associated  with  yours, 
soon  made  all  easy;  and  Mrs.  Cobb  and  Miss 
Adye  re-assumed  their  seats  at  the  breakfast 
table,  which  they  had  quitted  with  some  precip¬ 
itation.  They  received  me  with  the  kindness  of 
an  old  acquaintance;  and  after  we  had  joined  in 
a  cordial  chorus  to  your  praise,  Mrs.  Cobb  gave 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


432 

me  the  high  satisfaction  of  hearing  that  you  said, 
“Boswell  is  a  man  who  I  believe  never  left  a 
house  without  leaving  a  wish  for  his  return.” 
And  she  afterwards  added,  that  she  bid  you  tell 
me,  that  if  ever  I  came  to  Lichfield,  she  hoped 
I  would  take  a  bed  at  the  Friery.  From  thence  I 
drove  to  Peter  Garrick’s,  where  I  also  found  a 
very  flattering  welcome.  He  appeared  to  me  to 
enjoy  his  usual  chearfulness;  and  he  very  kindly 
asked  me  to  coine  when  1  could,  and  pass  a 
week  with  him.  From  Mr.  Garrick’s,  I  went  to 
the  Palace  to  wait  on  Mr.  Seward.  I  was  first 
entertained  by  his  lady  and  daughter,  he  him¬ 
self  being  in  bed  with  a  cold,  according  to  his 
valetudinary  custom.  But  he  desired  to  see  me; 
and  I  found  him  drest  in  his  black  gown,  with  a 
white  flannel  night-gown  above  it;  so  that  he 
looked  like  a  Dominican  friar.  He  was  good-hu¬ 
moured  and  polite;  and  under  his  roof  too  my 
reception  was  very  pleasing.  I  then  proceeded 
to  Stow-hill,  and  first  paid  my  respects  to  Mrs. 
Gastrell,  whose  conversation  I  was  not  willing 
to  quit.  But  my  sand-glass  was  now  beginning  to 
run  low,  as  I  could  not  trespass  too  long  on  the 
Colonel’s  kindness,  who  obligingly  waited  for 
me;  so  I  hastened  to  Mrs.  Aston’s,  whom  I 
found  much  better  than  I  feared  I  should ;  and 
there  I  met  a  brother-in-law  of  these  ladies, 
who  talked  much  of  you,  and  very  well  too,  as 
it  appeared  to  me.  It  then  only  remained  to  visit 
Mrs.  Lucy  Porter,  which  I  did,  I  really  believe, 
with  sincere  satisfaction  on  both  sides.  I  am  sure 
I  was  glad  to  see  her  again;  and,  as  I  take  her  to 
be  very  honest,  I  trust  she  was  glad  to  see  me 
again;  for  she  expressed  herself  so,  that  I  could 
not  doubt  of  her  being  in  earnest.  What  a  great 
key-stone  of  kindness,  my  dear  Sir,  were  you 
that  morning!  for  we  were  all  held  together  by 
our  common  attachment  to  you.  I  cannot  say 
that  I  ever  passed  two  hours  with  more  self- 
complacency  than  I  did  those  two  at  Lichfield. 
Let  me  not  entertain  any  suspicion  that  this  is 
idle  vanity.  Will  not  you  confirm  me  in  my  per¬ 
suasion,  that  he  who  finds  himself  so  regarded 
has  just  reason  to  be  happy? 

We  got  to  Chester  about  midnight  on  Tues¬ 
day;  and  here  again  I  am  in  a  state  of  much  en¬ 
joyment.  Colonel  Stuart  and  his  officers  treat 
me  with  all  the  civility  I  could  wish;  and  I  play 
my  part  admirably.  Lretus  aliis ,  sapiens  sibi,  the 
classical  sentence  which  you,  I  imagine,  in¬ 
vented  the  other  day,  is  exemplified  in  my  pres¬ 
ent  existence.  The  Bishop,  to  whom  I  had  the 
honour  to  be  known  several  years  ago,  shews  me 
much  attention;  and  I  am  edified  by  his  conver¬ 
sation.  I  must  not  omit  to  tell  you,  that  his 
Lordship  admires,  very  highly,  your  Prejaces  to 
the  Poets .  I  am  daily  obtaining  an  extension  of 
agreeable  acquaintance,  so  that  I  am  kept  in 
animated  variety;  and  the  study  of  the  place  it¬ 
self,  by  the  assistance  of  books,  and  of  the  Bishop, 
is  sufficient  occupation.  Chester  pleases  my  fan- 


[  1779 

cy  more  than  any  town  I  ever  saw.  But  I  will 
not  enter  upon  it  at  all  in  this  letter. 

How  long  I  shall  stay  here  I  cannot  yet  say.  I 
told  a  very  pleasing  young  lady,1  niece  to  one  of 
the  Prebendaries,  at  whose  house  I  saw  her,  “I 
have  come  to  Chester,  Madam,  I  cannot  tell 
how;  and  far  less  can  I  tell  how  I  am  to  get  away 
from  it.”  Do  not  think  me  too  juvenile.  I  beg  it  of 
you,  my  dear  Sir,  to  favour  me  with  a  letter 
while  I  am  here,  and  add  to  the  happiness  of  a 
happy  friend,  who  is  ever,  with  affectionate  ven¬ 
eration,  most  sincerely  yours, 

James  Boswell 

If  you  do  not  write  directly,  so  as  to  catch  me 
here,  I  shall  be  disappointed.  Two  lines  from 
you  will  keep  my  lamp  burning  bright. 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  Why  should  you  importune  me  so 
earnestly  to  write?  Of  what  importance  can  it 
be  to  hear  of  distant  friends,  to  a  man  who  finds 
himself  welcome  wherever  he  goes,  and  makes 
new  friends  faster  than  he  can  want  them?  If  to 
the  delight  of  such  universal  kindness  of  recep¬ 
tion,  any  thing  can  be  added  by  knowing  that 
you  retain  my  good-will,  you  may  indulge  your¬ 
self  in  the  full  enjoyment  of  that  small  addition. 

I  am  glad  that  you  made  the  round  of  Lich¬ 
field  with  so  much  success:  the  oftener  you  are 
seen,  the  more  you  will  be  liked.  It  was  pleasing 
to  me  to  read  that  Mrs.  Aston  was  so  well,  and 
that  Lucy  Porter  was  so  glad  to  see  you. 

In  the  place  where  you  now  are,  there  is  much 
to  be  observed;  and  you  will  easily  procure 
yourself  skilful  directors.  But  what  will  you  do 
to  keep  away  the  black  dog  that  worries  you  at 
home?  If  you  would,  in  compliance  with  your 
father’s  advice,  enquire  into  the  old  tenures  and 
old  charters  of  Scotland,  you  would  certainly 
open  to  yourself  many  striking  scenes  of  the 
manners  of  the  middle  ages.  The  feudal  system, 
in  a  country  half-barbarous,  is  naturally  pro¬ 
ductive  of  great  anomalies  in  civil  life.  The 
knowledge  of  past  times  is  naturally  growing  less 
in  all  cases  not  of  publick  record;  and  the  past 
time  of  Scotland  is  so  unlike  the  present,  that  it 
is  already  difficult  for  a  Scotchman  to  image  the 
oeconomy  of  his  grandfather.  Do  not  be  tardy 
nor  negligent;  but  gather  up  eagerly  what  can 
yet  be  found.2 

We  have,  I  think,  once  talked  of  another  pro¬ 
ject,  a  History  of  the  late  insurrection  in  Scotland , 
with  all  its  incidents.  Many  falsehoods  are  pass- 

2Miss  Letitia  Barnston. 

2I  have  a  valuable  collection  made  by  my  Fath¬ 
er,  which,  with  some  additions  and  illustrations  of 
my  own,  I  intend  to  publish.  I  have  some  heredi¬ 
tary  claim  to  be  an  Antiquary;  not  only  from  my 
Father,  but  as  being  descended,  by  the  mother’s 
side,  from  the  able  and  learned  Sir  John  Skene, 
whose  merit  bids  defiance  to  all  the  attempts  which 
have  been  made  to  lessen  his  fame. 


BOSWELL 


1779]  LIFE  OF 

ing  into  uncontradicted  history.  Voltaire,  who 
loved  a  striking  story,  has  told  what  he  could 
not  find  to  be  true. 

You  may  make  collections  for  either  of  these 
projects,  or  for  both,  as  opportunities  occur,  and 
digest  your  materials  at  leisure.  The  great  direc¬ 
tion  which  Burton  has  left  to  men  disordered 
like  you,  is  this,  Be  not  solitary;  be  not  idle:  which  I 
would  thus  modify; — If  you  are  idle,  be  not  soli¬ 
tary;  if  you  are  solitary,  be  not  idle. 

There  is  a  letter  for  you,  from  your  humble 
servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

London,  October  27,  1779 

To  Dr.  Samuel  Johnson 

Carlisle,  Nov.  7,  1779 

My  Dear  Sir,  That  I  should  importune  you 
to  write  to  me  at  Chester,  is  not  wonderful, 
when  you  consider  what  an  avidity  I  have  for 
delight;  and  that  the  amor  of  pleasure,  like  the 
amor  nummi ,  increases  in  proportion  with  the 
quantity  which  we  possess  of  it.  Your  letter,  so 
full  of  polite  kindness  and  masterly  counsel,  came 
like  a  large  treasure  upon  me,  while  already 
glittering  with  riches.  I  was  quite  enchanted  at 
Chester,  so  that  I  could  with  difficulty  quit  it. 
But  the  enchantment  was  the  reverse  of  that  of 
Circ6;  for  so  far  was  there  from  being  any  thing 
sensual  in  it,  that  I  was  all  mind.  I  do  not  mean 
all  reason  only;  for  my  fancy  was  kept  finely  in 
play.  And  why  not? — If  you  please  I  will  send  you 
a  copy,  or  an  abridgement  of  my  Chester  jour¬ 
nal,  which  is  truly  a  log-book  of  felicity. 

The  Bishop  treated  me  with  a  kindness  which 
was  very  flattering.  I  told  him,  that  you  re¬ 
gretted  you  had  seen  so  little  of  Chester.  His 
Lordship  bade  me  tell  you,  that  he  should  be 
glad  to  shew  you  more  of  it.  I  am  proud  to  find 
the  friendship  with  which  you  honour  me  is 
known  in  so  many  places. 

I  arrived  here  late  last  night.  Our  friend  the 
Dean  has  been  gone  from  hence  some  months; 
but  I  am  told  at  my  inn,  that  he  is  very  populous 
(popular).  However,  I  found  Mr.  Law,  the 
Archdeacon,  son  to  the  Bishop,  and  with  him  I 
have  breakfasted  and  dined  very  agreeably.  I 
got  acquainted  with  him  at  the  assizes  here, 
about  a  year  and  a  half  ago;  he  is  a  man  of  great 
variety  of  knowledge,  uncommon  genius,  and  I 
believe,  sincere  religion.  I  received  the  holy  sac¬ 
rament  in  the  Cathedral  in  the  morning,  this 
being  the  first  Sunday  in  the  month;  and  was  at 
prayers  there  in  the  evening.  It  is  divinely  cheer¬ 
ing  to  me  to  think  that  there  is  a  Cathedral  so 
near  Auchinleck;  and  I  now  leave  Old  England 
in  such  a  state  of  mind  as  I  am  thankful  to  God 
for  granting  me. 

The  black  dog  that  worries  me  at  home  I  can¬ 
not  but  dread;  yet  as  I  have  been  for  some  time 
past  in  a  military  train,  I  trust  I  shall  repulse 
him.  To  hear  from  you  will  animate  me  like  the 


JOHNSON  433 

sound  of  a  trumpet,  I  therefore  hope,  that  soon 
after  my  return  to  the  northern  field,  I  shall  re¬ 
ceive  a  few  lines  from  you. 

Colonel  Stuart  did  me  the  honour  to  escort 
me  in  his  carriage  to  shew  me  Liverpool,  and 
from  thence  back  again  to  Warrington,  where 
we  parted.1  In  justice  to  my  valuable  wife,  I 
must  inform  you  she  wrote  to  me,  that  as  I  was 
so  happy,  she  would  not  be  so  selfish  as  to  wish 
me  to  return  sooner  than  business  absolutely  re¬ 
quired  my  presence.  She  made  my  clerk  write 
to  me  a  post  or  two  after  to  the  same  purpose, 
by  commission  from  her;  and  this  day  a  kind 
letter  from  her  met  me  at  the  Post-Office  here, 
acquainting  me  that  she  and  the  little  ones  were 
well,  and  expressing  all  their  wishes  for  my  re¬ 
turn  home.  I  am,  more  and  more,  my  dear  Sir, 
your  affectionate  and  obliged  humble  servant, 

James  Boswell 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  Your  last  letter  was  not  only  kind 
but  fond.  But  I  wish  you  to  get  rid  of  all  intel¬ 
lectual  excesses,  and  neither  to  exalt  your  pleas¬ 
ures,  nor  aggravate  your  vexations,  beyond  their 
real  and  natural  state.  Why  should  you  not  be 
as  happy  at  Edinburgh  as  at  Chester?  In  culpa 
est  animus ,  qui  se  non  effugit  usquam.  Please  your¬ 
self  with  your  wife  and  children,  and  studies, 
and  practice. 

I  have  sent  a  petition2  from  Lucy  Porter,  with 
which  I  leave  it  to  your  discretion  whether  it  is 
proper  to  comply.  Return  me  her  letter,  which 
I  have  sent,  that  you  may  know  the  v/hole  case, 
and  not  be  seduced  to  any  thing  that  you  may 
afterwards  repent.  Miss  Doxy  perhaps  you  know 
to  be  Mr.  Garrick’s  niece. 

If  Dean  Percy  can  be  popular  at  Carlisle,  he 
may  be  very  happy.  He  has  in  his  disposal  two 
livings,  each  equal,  or  almost  equal  in  value  to 
the  deanery;  he  may  take  one  himself,  and  give 
the  other  to  his  son. 

How  near  is  the  Cathedral  to  Auchinleck, 
that  you  are  so  much  delighted  with  it?  It  is,  I 
suppose,  at  least  an  hundred  and  fifty  miles  off. 
However,  if  you  are  pleased,  it  is  so  far  well. 

Let  me  know  what  reception  you  have  from 
your  father,  and  the  state  of  his  health.  Please 
him  as  much  as  you  can,  and  add  no  pain  to  his 
last  years. 

Of  our  friends  here  I  can  recollect  nothing  to 
tell  you.  I  have  neither  seen  nor  heard  of  Lang- 
ton.  Beauclerk  is  just  returned  from  Brighthelm- 

JHis  regiment  was  afterwards  ordered  to  Jamai¬ 
ca,  where  he  accompanied  it,  and  almost  lost  his 
life  by  the  climate.  This  impartial  order  I  should 
think  a  sufficient  refutation  of  the  idle  rumour  that 
“there  was  still  something  behind  the  throne  great¬ 
er  than  the  throne  itself.” 

Requesting  me  to  inquire  concerning  the  fam¬ 
ily  of  a  gentleman  who  was  then  paying  his  ad¬ 
dresses  to  Miss  Doxy. 


434 

ston,  I  am  told,  much  better.  Mr.  Thrale  and 
his  family  are  still  there;  and  his  health  is  said 
to  be  visibly  improved;  he  has  not  bathed,  but 
hunted. 

At  Bolt-court  there  is  much  malignity,  but  of 
late  little  open  hostility.1  I  have  had  a  cold,  but 
it  is  gone. 

Make  my  compliments  to  Mrs.  Boswell,  &c.  I 
am,  Sir,  your  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

London,  Nov.  13,  1779 

On  November  22,  and  December  21,  I  wrote 
to  him  from  Edinburgh,  giving  a  very  favour¬ 
able  report  of  the  family  of  Miss  Doxy’s  lover; — 
that  after  a  good  deal  of  enquiry  I  had  discov¬ 
ered  the  sister  of  Mr.  Francis  Stewart,  one  of  his 
amanuenses  when  writing  his  Dictionary ; — that 
I  had,  as  desired  by  him,  paid  her  a  guinea  for 
an  old  pocket-book  of  her  brother’s  which  he 
had  retained;  and  that  the  good  woman,  who 
was  in  very  moderate  circumstances,  but  con¬ 
tented  and  placid,  wondered  at  his  scrupulous 
and  liberal  honesty,  and  received  the  guinea  as 
if  sent  her  by  Providence. — That  I  had  repeat¬ 
edly  begged  of  him  to  keep  his  promise  to  send 
me  his  letter  to  Lord  Chesterfield,  and  that  this 
memento ,  like  Delenda  est  Carthago ,  must  be  in  ev¬ 
ery  letter  that  I  should  write  to  him,  till  I  had 
obtained  my  object. 

1780:  ^tat.  71.] — In  1780,  the  world  was 
kept  in  impatience  for  the  completion  of  his 
Lives  of  the  Poets ,  upon  which  he  was  employed 
so  far  as  his  indolence  allowed  him  to  labour. 

I  wrote  to  him  on  January  1,  and  March  13, 
sending  him  my  notes  of  Lord  Marchmont’s  in¬ 
formation  concerning  Pope; — complaining  that 
1  had  not  heard  from  him  for  almost  four  months, 
though  he  was  two  letters  in  my  debt; — that  I 
had  suffered  again  from  melancholy; — hoping 
that  he  had  been  in  so  much  better  company, 
(the  Poets,)  that  he  had  not  time  to  think  of  his 
distant  friends;  for  if  that  were  the  case,  I  should 
have  some  recompence  for  my  uneasiness; — 
that  the  state  of  my  affairs  did  not  admit  of  my 
coming  to  London  this  year;  and  begging  he 
would  return  me  Goldsmith’s  two  poems,  with 
his  lines  marked. 

His  friend  Dr.  Lawrence  having  now  suffered 
the  greatest  affliction  to  which  a  man  is  liable, 
and  which  Johnson  himself  had  felt  in  the  most 
severe  manner;  Johnson  wrote  to  him  in  an  ad¬ 
mirable  strain  of  sympathy  and  pious  consola¬ 
tion. 

To  Dr.  Lawrence 

Dear  Sir,  At  a  time  when  all  your  friends 
ought  to  shew  their  kindness,  and  with  a  char¬ 
gee  ante,  p.  418. 


[  1780 

acter  which  ought  to  make  all  that  know  you 
your  friends,  you  may  wonder  that  you  have  yet 
heard  nothing  from  me. 

1  have  been  hindered  by  a  vexatious  and  in¬ 
cessant  cough,  for  which  within  these  ten  days  I 
have  been  bled  once,  fasted  four  or  five  times, 
taken  physick  five  times,  and  opiates,  I  think, 
six.  This  day  it  seems  to  remit. 

The  loss,  dear  Sir,  which  you  have  lately  suf¬ 
fered,  I  felt  many  years  ago,  and  know  therefore 
how  much  has  been  taken  from  you,  and  how 
little  help  can  be  had  from  consolation.  He  that 
outlives  a  wife  whom  he  has  long  loved,  sees 
himself  disjoined  from  the  only  mind  that  has 
the  same  hopes,  and  fears,  and  interest;  from 
the  only  companion  with  whom  he  has  shared 
much  good  or  evil;  and  with  whom  he  could  set 
his  mind  at  liberty,  to  retrace  the  past  or  antici¬ 
pate  the  future.  The  continuity  of  being  is  lacer¬ 
ated;  the  settled  course  of  sentiment  and  action 
is  stopped;  and  life  stands  suspended  and  mo¬ 
tionless,  till  it  is  driven  by  external  causes  into  a 
new  channel.  But  the  time  of  suspense  is  dreadful. 

Our  first  recourse  in  this  distressed  solitude, 
is,  perhaps  for  want  of  habitual  piety,  to  a 
gloomy  acquiescence  in  necessity.  Of  two  mor¬ 
tal  beings,  one  must  lose  the  other;  but  surely 
there  is  a  higher  and  better  comfort  to  be  drawn 
from  the  consideration  of  that  Providence  which 
watches  over  all,  and  a  belief  that  the  living  and 
the  dead  are  equally  in  the  hands  of  God,  who 
will  reunite  those  whom  he  has  separated;  or 
who  sees  that  it  is  best  not  to  reunite.  I  am,  dear 
Sir,  your  most  affectionate,  and  most  humble 
servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

January  20,  1 780 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  Well,  I  had  resolved  to  send  you 
the  Chesterfield  letter;  but  I  will  write  once 
again  without  it.  Never  impose  tasks  upon  mor¬ 
tals.  To  require  two  things  is  the  way  to  have 
them  both  undone. 

For  the  difficulties  which  you  mention  in  your 
affairs  I  am  sorry;  but  difficulty  is  now  very  gen¬ 
eral:  it  is  not  therefore  less  grievous,  for  there  is 
less  hope  of  help.  I  pretend  not  to  give  you  ad¬ 
vice,  not  knowing  the  state  of  your  affairs;  and 
general  counsels  about  prudence  and  frugality 
would  do  you  little  good.  You  are,  however,  in 
the  right  not  to  increase  your  own  perplexity  by 
a  journey  hither;  and  I  hope  that  by  staying  at 
home  you  will  please  your  father. 

Poor  dear  Beauclerk — nec ,  ut  soles ,  dabis  joca. 
His  wit  and  his  folly,  his  acuteness  and  mali¬ 
ciousness,  his  merriment  and  reasoning,  are  now 
over.  Such  another  will  not  often  be  found  among 
mankind.  He  directed  himself  to  be  buried  by 
the  side  of  his  mother,  an  instance  of  tenderness 
which  I  hardly  expected.  He  has  left  his  chil¬ 
dren  to  the  care  of  Lady  Di,  and  if  she  dies,  of 


BOSWELL 


435 


1780  ]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


Mr-  Langton,  and  of  Mr.  Leicester  his  relation, 
and  a  man  of  good  character.  His  library  has 
been  offered  to  sale  to  the  Russian  ambassador.1 

Dr.  Percy,  notwithstanding  all  the  noise  of 
the  news-papers,  has  had  no  literary  loss.2  Clothes 
and  moveables  were  burnt  to  the  value  of  about 
one  hundred  pounds;  but  his  papers,  and  I 
think  his  books,  were  all  preserved. 

Poor  Mr.  Thrale  has  been  in  extreme  danger 
from  an  apoplectical  disorder,  and  recovered, 
beyond  the  expectation  of  his  physicians;  he  is 
now  at  Bath,  that  his  mind  may  be  quiet,  and 
Mrs.  Thrale  and  Miss  are  with  him. 

Having  told  you  what  has  happened  to  your 
friends,  let  me  say  something  to  you  of  yourself. 
You  are  always  complaining  of  melancholy,  and 
I  conclude  from  those  complaints  that  you  are 
fond  of  it.  No  man  talks  of  that  which  he  is  de¬ 
sirous  to  conceal,  and  every  man  desires  to  con¬ 
ceal  that  of  which  he  is  ashamed.  Do  not  pre¬ 
tend  to  deny  it;  manifestum  habemus  jurem;  make  it 
an  invariable  and  obligatory  law  to  yourself, 
never  to  mention  your  own  mental  diseases;  if 
you  are  never  to  speak  of  them,  you  will  think 
on  them  but  little,  and  if  you  think  little  of 
them,  they  will  molest  you  rarely.  When  you 
talk  of  them,  it  is  plain  that  you  want  either 
praise  or  pity;  for  praise  there  is  no  room,  and 
pity  will  do  you  no  good;  therefore,  from  this 
hour  speak  no  more,  think  no  more,  about 
them. 

Your  transaction  with  Mrs.  Stewart  gave  me 
great  satisfaction;  I  am  much  obliged  to  you  for 
your  attention.  Do  not  lose  sight  of  her;  your 
countenance  may  be  of  great  credit,  and  of  con¬ 
sequence  of  great  advantage  to  her.  The  mem¬ 
ory  of  her  brother  is  yet  fresh  in  my  mind;  he 
was  an  ingenious  and  worthy  man. 

Please  to  make  my  compliments  to  your  lady, 
and  to  the  young  ladies.  I  should  like  to  see 
them,  pretty  loves.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  yours  affec¬ 
tionately, 

Sam.  Johnson 

April  8,  1 780 

Mrs.  Thrale  being  now  at  Bath  with  her  hus¬ 
band,  the  correspondence  between  Johnson  and 
her  was  carried  on  briskly.  I  shall  present  my 
readers  with  one  of  her  original  letters  to  him  at 
this  time,  which  will  amuse  them  probably  more 
than  those  well-written  but  studied  epistles  which 
she  has  inserted  in  her  collection,  because  it  ex¬ 
hibits  the  easy  vivacity  of  their  literary  inter¬ 
course.  It  is  also  of  value  as  a  key  to  Johnson’s 
answer,  which  she  has  printed  by  itself,  and  of 
which  I  shall  subjoin  extracts. 

1Mr.  Beauclerk’s  library  was  sold  by  publick 
auction  in  April  and  May  1781,  for  £501 1 .  [M.] 

2By  a  fire  in  Northumberland-house,  where  he 

had  an  apartment,  in  which  I  have  passed  many 

an  agreeable  hour. 


Mrs.  Thrale  to  Dr.  Johnson 

I  had  a  very  kind  letter  from  you  yesterday, 
dear  Sir,  with  a  most  circumstantial  date.  You 
took  trouble  with  my  circulating  letter,  Mr. 
Evans  writes  me  word,  and  I  thank  you  sincere¬ 
ly  for  so  doing:  one  might  do  mischief  else  not 
being  on  the  spot. 

Yesterday’s  evening  was  passed  at  Mrs.  Mon¬ 
tagu’s:  there  was  Mr.  Melmoth;  I  do  not  like 
him  though ,  nor  he  me;  it  was  expected  we 
should  have  pleased  each  other;  he  is,  however, 
just  Tory  enough  to  hate  the  Bishop  of  Peter¬ 
borough3  for  Whiggism,  and  Whig  enough  to 
abhor  you  for  Toryism. 

Mrs.  Montagu  flattered  him  finely:  so  he 
had  a  good  afternoon  on’t.  This  evening  we 
spend  at  a  concert.  Poor  Oueeny’s4  sore  eyes 
have  just  released  her;  she  had  a  long  confine¬ 
ment,  and  could  neither  read  nor  write,  so  my 
master5  treated  her  very  good-naturedly  with 
the  visits  of  a  young  woman  in  this  town,  a  tay- 
lor’s  daughter,  who  professes  musick,and  teaches 
so  as  to  give  six  lessons  a  day  to  ladies,  at  five 
and  threepence  a  lesson.  Miss  Burney  says  she  is  a 
great  performer;  and  I  respect  the  wench  for  get¬ 
ting  her  living  so  prettily;  she  is  very  modest  and 
pretty-mannered,  and  not  seventeen  years  old. 

You  live  in  a  fine  whirl  indeed;  if  I  did  not 
write  regularly  you  would  half  forget  me,  and 
that  would  be  very  wrong,  for  I  felt  my  regard 
for  you  in  my  face  last  night,  when  the  criticisms 
were  going  on. 

This  morning  it  was  all  connoisseurship;  we 
went  to  see  some  pictures  painted  by  a  gentle- 
man-artist,  Mr.  Taylor,  of  this  place;  my  mas¬ 
ter  makes  one,  every  where,  and  has  got  a  good 
dawling  companion  to  ride  with  him  now.  .  .  . 
He  looks  well  enough,  but  I  have  no  notion  of 
health  for  a  man  whose  mouth  cannot  be  sewed 
up.  Burney  and  I  and  Queeney  teize  him  every 
meal  he  eats,  and  Mrs.  Montagu  is  quite  serious 
with  him;  but  what  can  one  do?  He  will  eat,  I 
think,  and  if  he  does  eat  I  know  he  will  not  live; 
it  makes  me  very  unhappy,  but  I  must  bear  it. 
Let  me  always  have  your  friendship.  I  am,  most 
sincerely,  dear  Sir,  your  faithful  servant, 

H.  L.  T. 

Bath,  Friday ,  April  28 

Dr.  Johnson  to  Mrs.  Thrale 

Dearest  Madam,  Mr.  Thrale  never  will  live 
abstinently,  till  he  can  persuade  himself  to  live 
by  rule.  .  .  .6  Encourage,  as  you  can,  the  musical 
girl. 

Nothing  is  more  common  than  mutual  dis¬ 
like,  where  mutual  approbation  is  particularly 

3Dr.  John  Hinchliffe. 

4A  kind  of  nick-name  given  to  Mrs.  Thrale’s 
eldest  daughter,  whose  name  being  Esther ,  she 
might  be  assimilated  to  a  Queen . 

5Mr.  Thrale. 

6I  have  taken  the  liberty  to  leave  out  a  few  lines. 


436  BOSWELL  [1780 


expected.  There  is  often  on  both  sides  a  vigi¬ 
lance  not  over-benevolent;  and  as  attention  is 
strongly  excited,  so  that  nothing  drops  unheeded, 
any  difference  in  taste  or  opinion,  and  some  dif¬ 
ference  where  there  is  no  restraint  will  common¬ 
ly  appear,  immediately  generates  dislike. 

Never  let  criticisms  operate  upon  your  face  or 
your  mind;  it  is  very  rarely  that  an  authour  is 
hurt  by  his  criticks.  The  blaze  of  reputation 
cannot  be  blown  out,  but  it  often  dies  in  the 
socket;  a  very  few  names  may  be  considered  as 
perpetual  lamps  that  shine  unconsumed.  From 
the  authour  of  Fitzosborne' s  Letters  I  cannot  think 
myself  in  much  danger.  1  met  him  only  once 
about  thirty  years  ago,  and  in  some  small  dis¬ 
pute  reduced  him  to  whistle;  having  not  seen 
him  since,  that  is  the  last  impression.  Poor  Moore, 
the  fabulist,  was  one  of  the  company. 

Mrs.  Montagu’s  long  stay,  against  her  own  in¬ 
clination,  is  very  convenient.  You  would,  by 
your  own  confession,  want  a  companion;  and 
she  is  par  pluribus;  conversing  with  her  you  may 
find  variety  in  one . 

London,  May  1,  1780 

On  the  2nd  of  May  I  wrote  to  him,  and  re¬ 
quested  that  we  might  have  another  meeting 
somewhere  in  the  North  of  England,  in  the  au¬ 
tumn  of  this  year. 

From  Mr.  Langton  I  received  soon  after  this 
time  a  letter,  of  which  I  extract  a  passage,  rela¬ 
tive  both  to  Mr.  Beauclerk  and  Dr.  Johnson. 

“The  melancholy  information  you  have  re¬ 
ceived  concerning  Mr.  Beauclerk’s  death  is  true. 
Had  his  talents  been  directed  in  any  sufficient 
degree  as  they  ought,  I  have  always  been  strong¬ 
ly  of  opinion  that  they  were  calculated  to  make 
an  illustrious  figure;  and  that  opinion,  as  it  had 
been  in  part  formed  upon  Dr.  Johnson’s  judg¬ 
ment,  receives  more  and  more  confirmation  by 
hearing  what,  since  his  death,  Dr.  Johnson  has 
said  concerning  them;  a  few  evenings  ago,  he 
was  at  Mr.  Vesey’s,  where  Lord  Althorpe,  who 
was  one  of  a  numerous  company  there,  addressed 
Dr.  Johnson  on  the  subject  of  Mr.  Beauclerk’s 
death,  saying,  £Our  Club  has  had  a  great  loss 
since  we  met  last.’  He  replied,  CA  loss,  that  per¬ 
haps  the  whole  nation  could  not  repair!’  The 
Doctor  then  went  on  to  speak  of  his  endow¬ 
ments,  and  particularly  extolled  the  wonderful 
ease  with  which  he  uttered  what  was  highly  ex¬ 
cellent.  He  said,  that  ‘no  man  ever  was  so  free 
when  he  was  going  to  say  a  good  thing,  from  a 
look  that  expressed  that  it  was  coming;  or,  when 
he  had  said  it,  from  a  look  that  expressed  that  it 
had  come.3  At  Mr.  Thrale’s,  some  days  before 
when  we  were  talking  on  the  same  subject,  he 
said,  referring  to  the  same  idea  of  his  wonderful 
facility,  ‘That  Beauclerk’s  talents  were  those 


which  he  had  felt  himself  more  disposed  to  envy, 
than  those  of  any  whom  he  had  known.’ 

“On  the  evening  I  have  spoken  of  above,  at 
Mr.  Vesey’s,  you  would  have  been  much  grat¬ 
ified,  as  it  exhibited  an  instance  of  the  high  im¬ 
portance  in  which  Dr.  Johnson’s  character  is 
held,  I  think  even  beyond  any  I  ever  before  was 
witness  to.  The  company  consisted  chiefly  of  la¬ 
dies,  among  whom  were  the  Duchess  Dowager 
of  Portland,  the  Duchess  of  Beaufort,  whom  I 
suppose  from  her  rank  I  must  name  before  her 
mother  Mrs.  Boscawen,  and  her  elder  sister  Mrs. 
Lewson,  who  was  likewise  there;  Lady  Lucan, 
Lady  Clermont,  and  others  of  note  both  for  their 
station  and  understandings.  Among  the  gentle¬ 
men  were  Lord  Althorpe,  whom  I  have  before 
named,  Lord  Macartney,  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds, 
Lord  Lucan,  Mr.  Wraxal,  whose  book  you  have 
probably  seen,  The  Tour  to  the  Northern  Parts  of 
Europe ;  a  very  agreeable  ingenious  man;  Dr. 
Warren,  Mr.  Pepys,  the  Master  in  Chancery, 
whom  I  believe  you  know,  and  Dr.  Barnard,  the 
Provost  of  Eton.  As  soon  as  Dr.  Johnson  was 
come  in  and  had  taken  a  chair,  the  company  be¬ 
gan  to  collect  round  him,  till  they  became  not 
less  than  four,  if  not  five,  deep;  those  behind 
standing,  and  listening  over  the  heads  of  those 
that  were  sitting  near  him.  The  conversation  for 
some  time  was  chiefly  between  Dr.  Johnson  and 
the  Provost  of  Eton,  while  the  others  contribut¬ 
ed  occasionally  their  remarks.  Without  attempt¬ 
ing  to  detail  the  particulars  of  the  conversation, 
which  perhaps  if  I  did,  I  should  spin  my  account 
out  to  a  tedious  length,  I  thought,  my  dear  Sir, 
this  general  account  of  the  respect  with  which 
our  valued  friend  was  attended  to,  might  be 
acceptable.” 

To  the  Reverend  Dr.  Farmer 

May  25,  1 780 

Sir,  I  know  your  disposition  to  second  any 
literary  attempt,  and  therefore  venture  upon 
the  liberty  of  entreating  you  to  procure  from 
College  or  University  registers,  all  the  dates,  or 
other  informations  which  they  can  supply,  re¬ 
lating  to  Ambrose  Philips,  Broome,  and  Gray, 
who  were  all  of  Cambridge,  and  of  whose  lives  1 
am  to  give  such  accounts  as  I  can  gather.  Be 
pleased  to  forgive  this  trouble  from,  Sir,  your 
most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

While  Johnson  was  thus  engaged  in  preparing 
a  delightful  literary  entertainment  for  the  world, 
the  tranquillity  of  the  metropolis  of  Great-Brit- 
ain  was  unexpectedly  disturbed,  by  the  most 
horrid  series  of  outrage  that  ever  disgraced  a 
civilised  country.  A  relaxation  of  some  of  the  se- 


i7So  1 

vere  penal  provisions  against  our  fellow-sub¬ 
jects  of  the  Gatholick  communion  had  been 
granted  by  the  legislature,  with  an  opposition 
so  inconsiderable  that  the  genuine  mildness  of 
Christianity,  united  with  liberal  policy,  seemed 
to  have  become  general  in  this  island.  But  a 
dark  and  malignant  spirit  of  persecution  soon 
shewed  itself,  in  an  unworthy  petition  for  the  re¬ 
peal  of  the  wise  and  humane  statute.  That  pe¬ 
tition  was  brought  forward  by  a  mob,  with  the 
evident  purpose  of  intimidation,  and  was  justly 
rejected.  But  the  attempt  was  accompanied  and 
followed  by  such  daring  violence  as  is  unexam¬ 
pled  in  history.  Of  this  extraordinary  tumult, 
Dr.  Johnson  has  given  the  following  concise, 
lively,  and  just  account  in  his  Letters  to  Mrs. 
Thrale:1 

“On  Friday,2  the  good  Protestants  met  in 
Saint  George’s-Fields,  at  the  summons  of  Lord 
George  Gordon,  and  marching  to  Westminster, 
insulted  the  Lords  and  Commons,  who  all  bore 
it  with  great  tameness.  At  night  the  outrages  be¬ 
gan  by  the  demolition  of  the  mass-house  by 
Lincoln’s-Inn. 

“An  exact  journal  of  a  week’s  defiance  of  gov¬ 
ernment  I  cannot  give  you.  On  Monday,  Mr. 
Strahan,  who  had  been  insulted,  spoke  to  Lord 
Mansfield,  who  had  I  think  been  insulted  too, 
of  the  licentiousness  of  the  populace;  and  his 
Lordship  treated  it  as  a  very  slight  irregularity. 
On  Tuesday  night  they  pulled  down  Fielding’s 
house,  and  burnt  his  goods  in  the  street.  They 
had  gutted  on  Monday  Sir  George  Savile’s 
house,  but  the  building  was  saved.  On  Tuesday 
evening,  leaving  Fielding’s  ruins,  they  went  to 
Newgate  to  demand  their  companions  who  had 
been  seized  demolishing  the  chapel.  The  keeper 
could  not  release  them  but  by  the  Mayor’s  per¬ 
mission,  which  he  went  to  ask;  at  his  return  he 
found  all  the  prisoners  released,  and  Newgate 
in  a  blaze.  They  then  went  to  Bloomsbury,  and 
fastened  upon  Lord  Mansfield’s  house,  which 
they  pulled  down;  and  as  for  his  goods,  they  to¬ 
tally  burnt  them.  They  have  since  gone  to  Caen- 
wood,  but  a  guard  was  there  before  them.  They 
plundered  some  Papists,  I  think,  and  burnt  a 
mass-house  in  Moorfields  the  same  night. 

“On  Wednesday  I  walked  with  Dr.  Scott  to 
look  at  Newgate,  and  found  it  in  ruins,  with 
the  fire  yet  glowing.  As  I  went  by,  the  Protes¬ 
tants  were  plundering  the  Sessions-house  at  the 
Old-Bailey.  There  were  not,  I  believe,  a  hun- 

Wol.  ii,  p.  143,  et  seq .  I  have  selected  passages 
from  several  letters,  without  mentioning  dates. 

June  2. 


437 

dred;  but  they  did  their  work  at  leisure,  in  full 
security,  without  sentinels,  without  trepidation, 
as  men  lawfully  employed,  in  full  day.  Such  is 
the  cowardice  of  a  commercial  place.  On  Wed¬ 
nesday  they  broke  open  the  Fleet,  and  the 
King’s-Bench,  and  the  Marshalsea,  and  Wood- 
street  Compter,  and  Clerkenwell  Bridewell,  and 
released  all  the  prisoners. 

“At  night  they  set  fire  to  the  Fleet,  and  to  the 
King’s-Bench,  and  I  know  not  how  many  other 
places;  and  one  might  see  the  glare  of  confla¬ 
gration  fill  the  sky  from  many  parts.  The  sight 
was  dreadful.  Some  people  were  threatened: 
Mr.  Strahan  advised  me  to  take  care  of  myself. 
Such  a  time  of  terrour  you  have  been  happy  in 
not  seeing. 

“The  King  said  in  Council,  ‘That  the  magis¬ 
trates  had  not  done  their  duty,  but  that  he  would 
do  his  own’;  and  a  proclamation  was  published, 
directing  us  to  keep  our  servants  within  doors, 
as  the  peace  was  now  to  be  preserved  by  force. 
The  soldiers  were  sent  out  to  different  parts, 
and  the  town  is  now  [June  9]  at  quiet. 

“The  soldiers  are  stationed  so  as  to  be  every 
where  within  call:  there  is  no  longer  any  body 
of  rioters,  and  the  individuals  are  hunted  to  their 
holes,  and  led  to  prison;  Lord  George  was  last 
night  sent  to  the  Tower.  Mr.  John  Wilkes  was 
this  day  in  my  neighbourhood,  to  seize  the  pub¬ 
lisher  of  a  seditious  paper. 

“Several  chapels  have  been  destroyed,  and 
several  inoffensive  Papists  have  been  plundered; 
but  the  high  sport  was  to  burn  the  gaols. 
This  was  a  good  rabble  trick.  The  debtors  and 
the  criminals  were  all  set  at  liberty;  but  of  the 
criminals,  as  has  always  happened,  many  are 
already  retaken;  and  two  pirates  have  surren¬ 
dered  themselves,  and  it  is  expected  that  they 
will  be  pardoned. 

“Government  now  acts  again  with  its  prop¬ 
er  force;  and  we  are  all  under  the  protection  of 
the  King  and  the  law.  I  thought  that  it  would 
be  agreeable  to  you  and  my  master  to  have  my 
testimony  to  the  publick  security;  and  that  you 
would  sleep  more  quietly  when  I  told  you  that 
you  are  safe. 

“There  has,  indeed,  been  an  universal  panick 
from  which  the  King  was  the  first  that  recov¬ 
ered.  Without  the  concurrence  of  his  ministers, 
or  the  assistance  of  the  civil  magistrate,  he  put 
the  soldiers  in  motion,  and  saved  the  town  from 
calamities,  such  as  a  rabble’s  government  must 
naturally  produce. 

“The  publick  has  escaped  a  very  heavy  calam¬ 
ity.  The  rioters  attempted  the  Bank  on  Wednes¬ 
day  night,  but  in  no  great  number;  and  like  oth- 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


BOSWELL 


438 

er  thieves,  with  no  great  resolution.  Jack  Wilkes 
headed  the  party  that  drove  them  away.  It  is 
agreed,  that  if  they  had  seized  the  Bank  on  Tues¬ 
day,  at  the  height  of  the  panick,  when  no  resist¬ 
ance  had  been  prepared,  they  might  have  carried 
irrecoverably  away  whatever  they  had  found. 
Jack,  who  was  always  zealous  for  order  and  de¬ 
cency,  declares  that  if  he  be  trusted  with  power, 
he  will  not  leave  a  rioter  alive.  There  is,  how¬ 
ever,  now  no  longer  any  need  of  heroism  or 
bloodshed ;  no  blue  ribband1  is  any  longer  worn.” 

Such  was  the  end  of  this  miserable  sedition, 
from  which  London  was  delivered  by  the  mag¬ 
nanimity  of  the  Sovereign  himself.  Whatever 
some  may  maintain,  I  am  satisfied  that  there 
was  no  combination  or  plan,  either  domestic  or 
foreign;  but  that  the  mischief  spread  by  a  grad¬ 
ual  contagion  of  frenzy,  augmented  by  the  quan¬ 
tities  of  fermented  liquors,  of  which  the  deluded 
populace  possessed  themselves  in  the  course  of 
their  depredations. 

I  should  think  myself  very  much  to  blame, 
did  I  here  neglect  to  do  justice  to  my  esteemed 
friend  Mr.  Akerman,  the  keeper  of  Newgate, 
who  long  discharged  a  very  important  trust  with 
an  uniform  intrepid  firmness,  and  at  the  same 
time  a  tenderness  and  a  liberal  charity,  which 
entitle  him  to  be  recorded  with  distinguished 
honour. 

L'pon  this  occasion,  from  the  timidity  and 
negligence  of  magistracy  on  the  one  hand,  and 
the  almost  incredible  exertions  of  the  mob  on 
the  other,  the  first  prison  of  this  great  country 
was  laid  open,  and  the  prisoners  set  free;  but 
that  Mr.  Akerman,  whose  house  was  burnt, 
would  have  prevented  all  this,  had  proper  aid 
been  sent  to  him  in  due  time,  there  can  be  no 
doubt. 

Many  years  ago,  a  fire  broke  out  in  the  brick 
part  which  was  built  as  an  addition  to  the  old 
gaol  of  Newgate.  The  prisoners  were  in  con¬ 
sternation  and  tumult,  calling  out,  “We  shall  be 
burnt — we  shall  be  burnt !  Down  with  the  gate 
— down  with  the  gate!”  Mr.  Akerman  hastened 
to  them,  shewed  himself  at  the  gate,  and  hav¬ 
ing,  after  some  confused  vociferation  of  “Hear 
him — hear  him!”  obtained  a  silent  attention, 
he  then  calmly  told  them,  that  the  gate  must 
not  go  down;  that  they  were  under  his  care,  and 
that  they  should  not  be  permitted  to  escape:  but 
that  he  could  assure  them,  they  need  not  be 
afraid  of  being  burnt,  for  that  the  fire  was  not  in 
the  prison,  properly  so  called,  which  was  strongly 

^ord  George  Gordon  and  his  followers,  during 
these  outrages,  wore  blue  ribbands  in  their  hats. 
[M.] 


[  1780 

built  with  stone;  and  that  if  they  would  engage 
to  be  quiet,  he  himself  would  come  in  to  them, 
and  conduct  them  to  the  further  end  of  the 
building,  and  would  not  go  out  till  they  gave 
him  leave.  To  this  proposal  they  agreed;  upon 
which  Mr.  Akerman,  having  first  made  them 
fall  back  from  the  gate,  went  in,  and  with  a  de¬ 
termined  resolution,  ordered  the  outer  turnkey 
upon  no  account  to  open  the  gate,  even  though 
the  prisoners  (though  he  trusted  they  would  not) 
should  break  their  word,  and  by  force  bring 
himself  to  order  it.  “Never  mind  me,  (said  he,) 
should  that  happen.”  The  prisoners  peaceably 
followed  him,  while  he  conducted  them  through 
passages  of  which  he  had  the  keys,  to  the  ex¬ 
tremity  of  the  gaol  which  was  most  distant  from 
the  fire.  Having,  by  this  very  judicious  conduct, 
fully  satisfied  them  that  there  was  no  immediate 
risk,  if  any  at  all,  he  then  addressed  them  thus: 
“Gentlemen,  you  are  now  convinced  that  I 
told  you  true.  I  have  no  doubt  that  the  engines 
will  soon  extinguish  this  fire;  if  they  should  not, 
a  sufficient  guard  will  come,  and  you  shall  all  be 
taken  out  and  lodged  in  the  Compters.  I  assure 
you,  upon  my  word  and  honour,  that  I  have 
not  a  farthing  insured.  I  have  left  my  house, 
that  I  might  take  care  of  you.  I  will  keep  my 
promise,  and  stay  with  you  if  you  insist  upon  it; 
but  if  you  will  allow  me  to  go  out  and  look  after 
my  family  and  property,  I  shall  be  obliged  to 
you.”  Struck  with  his  behaviour,  they  called 
out,  “Master  Akerman,  you  have  done  bravely; 
it  was  very  kind  in  you:  by  all  means  go  and 
take  care  of  your  own  concerns.”  He  did  so  ac¬ 
cordingly,  while  they  remained,  and  were  all 
preserved. 

Johnson  has  been  heard  to  relate  the  sub¬ 
stance  of  this  story  with  high  praise,  in  which  he 
was  joined  by  Mr.  Burke.  My  illustrious  friend, 
speaking  of  Mr.  Akerman’ s  kindness  to  his  pris¬ 
oners,  pronounced  this  eulogy  upon  his  charac¬ 
ter: — “He  who  has  long  had  constantly  in  his 
view  the  worst  of  mankind,  and  is  yet  eminent 
for  the  humanity  of  his  disposition,  must  have 
had  it  originally  in  a  great  degree,  and  contin¬ 
ued  to  cultivate  it  very  carefully.” 

In  the  course  of  this  month  my  brother  Da¬ 
vid  waited  upon  Dr.  Johnson,  with  the  follow¬ 
ing  letter  of  introduction,  which  I  had  taken 
care  should  be  lying  ready  on  his  arrival  in 
London. 

To  Dr.  Samuel  Johnson 

Edinburgh,  April  29,  1780 

My  Dear  Sir,  This  will  be  delivered  to  you 
by  my  brother  David,  on  his  return  from  Spain. 
You  will  be  glad  to  see  the  man  who  vowed  to 


i7So  1 

“stand  by  the  old  castle  of  Auchinleck,  with 
heart,  purse,  and  sword33;  that  roraantick family 
solemnity  devised  by  me,  of  which  you  and  I 
talked  with  complacency  upon  the  spot.  I  trust 
that  twelve  years  of  absence  have  not  lessened  his 
feudal  attachment;  and  that  you  will  find  him 
worthy  of  being  introduced  to  your  acquaint¬ 
ance.  I  have  the  honour  to  be,  with  affectionate 
veneration,  my  dear  Sir,  your  most  faithful  hum¬ 
ble  servant, 

James  Boswell 

Johnson  received  him  very  politely,  and  has 
thus  mentioned  him  in  a  letter  to  Mrs.  Thrale:1 
“I  have  had  with  me  a  brother  of  Boswell’s,  a 
Spanish  merchant,2  whom  the  war  has  driven 
from  his  residence  at  Valentia;  he  is  gone  to 
see  his  friends,  and  will  find  Scotland  but  a  sorry 
place  after  twelve  years3  residence  in  a  happier 
climate.  He  is  a  very  agreeable  man,  and  speaks 
no  Scotch.33 

To  Dr.  Beattie,  at  Aberdeen 

Sir,  More  years  than  I  have  any  delight  to 
reckon,  have  past  since  you  and  I  saw  one  anoth¬ 
er;  of  this,  however,  there  is  no  reason  for  mak¬ 
ing  any  reprehensory  complaint — Sic  fata  ferunt. 
But  methinks  there  might  pass  some  small  in¬ 
terchange  of  regard  between  us.  If  you  say,  that 
I  ought  to  have  written,  I  now  write;  and  I 
write  to  tell  you,  that  I  have  much  kindness  for 
you  and  Mrs.  Beattie;  and  that  I  wish  your 
health  better,  and  your  life  long.  Try  change  of 
air,  and  come  a  few  degrees  Southwards :  a  soft¬ 
er  climate  may  do  you  both  good;  winter  is 
coming  on;  and  London  will  be  warmer,  and 
gayer,  and  busier,  and  more  fertile  of  amuse¬ 
ment  than  Aberdeen. 

My  health  is  better;  but  that  will  be  little  in 
the  balance,  when  I  tell  you  that  Mrs.  Montagu 
has  been  very  ill,  and  is  I  doubt  now  but  weak¬ 
ly.  Mr.  Thrale  has  been  very  dangerously  dis¬ 
ordered;  but  is  much  better,  and  I  hope  will  to¬ 
tally  recover.  He  has  withdrawn  himself  from 
business  the  whole  summer.  Sir  Joshua  and  his 
sister  are  well;  and  Mr.  Davies  has  got  great 
success  as  an  author,3  generated  by  the  corrup¬ 
tion  of  a  bookseller.  More  news  I  have  not  to 

1Vol.  ii,  p.  163.  Mrs.  Piozzi  has  omitted  the 
name,  she  best  knows  why. 

2Now  settled  in  London. 

sMeaning  his  entertaining  Memoirs  of  David  Gar¬ 
rick ,  Esq.,  of  which  Johnson  (as  Davies  informed 
me)  wrote  the  first  sentence;  thus  giving,  as  it  were, 

the  key-note  to  the  performance.  It  is,  indeed,  very 
characteristical  of  its  authour,  beginning  with  a 

maxim,  and  proceeding  to  illustrate. — “All  excel¬ 
lence  has  a  right  to  be  recorded.  I  shall,  therefore, 
think  it  superfluous  to  apologise  for  writing  the  life 
of  a  man,  who  by  an  uncommon  assemblage  of 
private  virtues,  adorned  the  highest  eminence  in  a 
publick  profession.33 


439 

tell  you,  and  therefore  you  must  be  contented 
with  hearing,  what  I  know  not  whether  you 
much  wish  to  hear,  that  I  am,  Sir,  your  most 
humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

Bolt-court,  Fleet-street 

August  21,  1780 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  I  find  you  have  taken  one  of  your 
fits  of  taciturnity,  and  have  resolved  not  to 
write  till  you  are  written  to;  it  is  but  a  peevish 
humour,  but  you  shall  have  your  way. 

I  have  sat  at  home  in  Bolt-court,  all  the  sum¬ 
mer,  thinking  to  write  the  Lives ,  and  a  great 
part  of  the  time  only  thinking.  Several  of  them, 
however,  are  done,  and  I  still  think  to  do  the 
rest. 

Mr.  Thrale  and  his  family  have,  since  his  ill¬ 
ness,  passed  their  time  first  at  Bath,  and  then  at 
Brighthelmston;  but  I  have  been  at  neither 
place.  I  would  have  gone  to  Lichfield,  if  I  could 
have  had  time,  and  I  might  have  had  time  if  I 
had  been  active;  but  I  have  missed  much,  and 
done  little. 

In  the  late  disturbances,  Mr.  Thrale’s  house 
and  stock  were  in  great  danger;  the  mob  was 
pacified  at  their  first  invasion,  with  about  fifty 
pounds  in  drink  and  meat;  and  at  their  second, 
were  driven  away  by  the  soldiers.  Mr.  Strahan 
got  a  garrison  into  his  house,  and  maintained 
them  a  fortnight;  he  was  so  frighted  that  he  re¬ 
moved  part  of  his  goods.  Mrs.  Williams  took 
shelter  in  the  country. 

I  know  not  whether  I  shall  get  a  ramble  this 
autumn;  it  is  now  about  the  time  when  we  were 
travelling.  I  have,  however,  better  health  than  I 
had  then,  and  hope  you  and  I  may  yet  shew 
ourselves  on  some  part  of  Europe,  Asia,  or  Afri¬ 
ca.4  In  the  mean  time  let  us  play  no  trick,  but 
keep  each  other’s  kindness  by  all  means  in  our 
power. 

The  bearer  of  this  is  Dr.  Dunbar,  of  Aber¬ 
deen,  who  has  written  and  published  a  very  in¬ 
genious  book,5  and  who  I  think  has  a  kindness 
for  me,  and  will,  when  he  knows  you,  have  a 
kindness  for  you. 

I  suppose  your  little  ladies  are  grown  tall; 
and  your  son  is  become  a  learned  young  man.  I 
love  them  all,  and  I  love  your  naughty  lady, 
whom  I  never  shall  persuade  to  love  me.  When 

4It  will,  no  doubt,  be  remarked  how  he  avoids 
the  rebellious  land  of  America.  This  puts  me  in  mind 
of  an  anecdote,  for  which  I  am  obliged  to  my 
worthy  social  friend,  Governour  Richard  Penn: 
“At  one  of  Miss  E.  Hervey’s  assemblies,  Dr.  John¬ 
son  was  following  her  up  and  down  the  room;  upon 
which  Lord  Abingdon  observed  to  her,  ‘Your  great 
friend  is  very  fond  of  you;  you  can  go  no  where 
without  him.3 — ‘Ay,  (said  she,)  he  would  follow 
me  to  any  part  of  the  world.’ — ‘Then  (said  the 
Earl,)  ask  him  to  go  with  you  to  America .’  ” 

5 Essays  on  the  History  of  Mankind . 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


440 


BOSWELL 


[  1780 


the  Lives  are  done,  I  shall  send  them  to  com¬ 
plete  her  collection,  but  must  send  them  in  pa¬ 
per,  as  for  want  of  a  pattern,  I  cannot  bind 
them  to  fit  the  rest.  I  am,  Sir,  yours  most  affec¬ 
tionately, 

Sam.  Johnson 

London,  Aug.  21,  1780 

This  year  he  wrote  to  a  young  clergyman  in 
the  country,  the  following  very  excellent  letter, 
which  contains  valuable  advice  to  Divines  in 
general: 

Dear  Sir,  Not  many  days  ago  Dr.  Lawrence 
shewed  me  a  letter,  in  which  you  make  mention 
of  me:  I  hope,  therefore,  you  will  not  be  dis¬ 
pleased  that  I  endeavour  to  preserve  your  good¬ 
will  by  some  observations  which  your  letter 
suggested  to  me. 

You  are  afraid  of  falling  into  some  impropri¬ 
eties  in  the  daily  service  by  reading  to  an  audi¬ 
ence  that  requires  no  exactness.  Your  fear,  I 
hope,  secures  you  from  danger.  They  who  con¬ 
tract  absurd  habits  are  such  as  have  no  fear.  It 
is  impossible  to  do  the  same  thing  very  often, 
without  some  peculiarity  of  manner:  but  that 
manner  may  be  good  or  bad,  and  a  little  care 
will  at  least  preserve  it  from  being  bad:  to  make 
it  good,  there  must,  I  think,  be  something  of 
natural  or  casual  felicity,  which  cannot  be  taught. 

Your  present  method  of  making  your  sermons 
seems  very  judicious.  Few  frequent  preachers 
can  be  supposed  to  have  sermons  more  their 
own  than  yours  will  be.  Take  care  to  register, 
somewhere  or  other,  the  authours  from  whom 
your  several  discourses  are  borrowed;  and  do 
not  imagine  that  you  shall  always  remember, 
even  what  perhaps  you  now  think  it  impossible 
to  forget. 

My  advice,  however,  is,  that  you  attempt,  from 
time  to  time,  an  original  sermon;  and  in  the  la¬ 
bour  of  composition,  do  not  burthen  your  mind 
with  too  much  at  once;  do  not  exact  from  your¬ 
self  at  one  effort  of  excogitation,  propriety  of 
thought  and  elegance  of  expression.  Invent  first, 
and  then  embellish.  The  production  of  some¬ 
thing,  where  nothing  was  before,  is  an  act  of 
greater  energy  than  the  expansion  or  decora¬ 
tion  of  the  thing  produced.  Set  down  diligently 
your  thoughts  as  they  rise,  in  the  first  words  that 
occur;  and,  when  you  have  matter,  you  will  eas¬ 
ily  give  it  form:  nor,  perhaps,  will  this  method 
be  always  necessary;  for  by  habit,  your  thoughts 
and  diction  will  flow  together. 

The  composition  of  sermons  is  not  very  diffi¬ 
cult:  the  divisions  not  only  help  the  memory  of 
the  hearer,  but  direct  the  judgement  of  the 
writer;  they  supply  sources  of  invention,  and 
keep  every  part  in  its  proper  place. 

What  I  like  least  in  your  letter  is  your  account 
of  the  manners  of  your  parish;  from  which  I 
gather,  that  it  has  been  long  neglected  by  the 


parson.  The  Dean  of  Carlisle,1  who  was  then  a 
little  rector  in  Northamptonshire,  told  me,  that 
it  might  be  discerned  whether  or  no  there  was  a 
clergyman  resident  in  a  parish  by  the  civil  or 
savage  manner  of  the  people.  Such  a  congrega¬ 
tion  as  yours  stands  in  need  of  much  reforma¬ 
tion;  and  I  would  not  have  you  think  it  impossi¬ 
ble  to  reform  them.  A  very  savage  parish  was 
civilised  by  a  decayed  gentlewoman,  who  came 
among  them  to  teach  a  petty  school.  My  learned 
friend  Dr.  Wheeler  of  Oxford,  when  he  was  a 
young  man,  had  the  care  of  a  neighbouring  par¬ 
ish  for  fifteen  pounds  a  year,  which  he  was  never 
paid;  but  he  counted  it  a  convenience  that  it 
compelled  him  to  make  a  sermon  weekly.  One 
woman  he  could  not  bring  to  the  communion; 
and,  when  he  reproved  or  exhorted  her,  she 
only  answered,  that  she  was  no  scholar.  He  was 
advised  to  set  some  good  woman  or  man  of  the 
parish,  a  little  wiser  than  herself,  to  talk  to  her 
in  a  language  level  to  her  mind.  Such  honest,  I 
may  call  them  holy  artifices,  must  be  practised 
by  every  clergyman;  for  all  means  must  be  tried 
by  which  souls  may  be  saved.  Talk  to  your  peo¬ 
ple,  however,  as  much  as  you  can;  and  you  will 
find,  that  the  more  frequently  you  converse  with 
them  upon  religious  subjects,  the  more  willingly 
they  will  attend,  and  the  more  submissively  they 
will  learn.  A  clergyman’s  diligence  always  makes 
him  venerable.  I  think  I  have  now  only  to  say, 
that  in  the  momentous  work  you  have  under¬ 
taken,  I  pray  God  to  bless  you.  I  am,  Sir,  your 
most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

Bolt-court,  Aug.  30,  1780 

My  next  letters  to  him  were  dated  August  24, 
September  6,  and  October  1,  and  from  them  I 
extract  the  following  passages: 

£tMy  brother  David  and  I  find  the  long  in¬ 
dulged  fancy  of  our  comfortable  meeting  again 
at  Auchinleck,  so  well  realised,  that  it  in  some 
degree  confirms  the  pleasing  hope  of  0/  pre- 
clarum  diem !  in  a  future  state.” 

“I  beg  that  you  may  never  again  harbour  a 
suspicion  of  my  indulging  a  peevish  humour,  or 
playing  tricks;  you  will  recollect  that  when  I  con¬ 
fessed  to  you,  that  I  had  once  been  intentionally 
silent  to  try  your  regard,  I  gave  you  my  word 
and  honour  that  I  would  not  do  so  again.” 

“I  rejoice  to  hear  of  your  good  state  of  health; 
I  pray  God  to  continue  it  long.  I  have  often 
said,  that  I  would  willingly  have  ten  years  added 
to  my  life,  to  have  ten  taken  from  yours;  I  mean, 
that  I  would  be  ten  years  older  to  have  you  ten 
years  younger.  But  let  me  be  thankful  for  the 
years  during  which  I  have  enjoyed  your  friend¬ 
ship,  and  please  myself  with  the  hopes  of  enjoy¬ 
ing  it  many  years  to  come  in  this  state  of  being, 

T>r.  Percy,  now  Bishop  of  Dromore. 


1780]  LIFE  OF 

trusting  always,  that  in  another  state,  we  shall 
meet  never  to  be  separated.  Of  this  we  can  form 
no  notion;  but  the  thought,  though  indistinct,  is 
delightful,  when  the  mind  is  calm  and  clear.” 

“The  riots  in  London  were  certainly  horrible; 
but  you  give  me  no  account  of  your  own  situa¬ 
tion,  during  the  barbarous  anarchy.  A  descrip¬ 
tion  of  it  by  Dr.  Johnson  would  be  a  great 
painting;1  you  might  write  another  London ,  a 
Poem." 

“I  am  charmed  with  your  condescending  af¬ 
fectionate  expression,  £let  us  keep  each  other’s 
kindness  by  all  the  means  in  our  power’;  my 
revered  Friend !  how  elevating  is  it  to  my  mind, 
that  I  am  found  worthy  to  be  a  companion  to 
Dr.  Samuel  Johnson!  All  that  you  have  said  in 
grateful  praise  of  Mr.  Walmsley,  I  have  long 
thought  of  you;  but  we  are  both  Tories,  which 
has  a  very  general  influence  upon  our  sentiments. 
I  hope  that  you  will  agree  to  meet  me  at  York, 
about  the  end  of  this  month;  or  if  you  will  come 
to  Carlisle,  that  would  be  better  still,  in  case  the 
Dean  be  there.  Please  to  consider,  that  to  keep 
each  other’s  kindness,  we  should  every  year  have 
that  free  and  intimate  communication  of  mind 
which  can  be  had  only  when  we  are  together. 
We  should  have  both  our  solemn  and  our  pleas¬ 
ant  talk.” 

“I  write  now  for  the  third  time,  to  tell  you 
that  my  desire  for  our  meeting  this  autumn,  is 
much  increased.  I  wrote  to  ’Squire  Godfrey 
Bosville,  my  Yorkshire  chief,  that  I  should,  per¬ 
haps,  pay  him  a  visit,  as  I  was  to  hold  a  confer¬ 
ence  with  Dr.  Johnson  at  York.  I  give  you  my 
word  and  honour  that  I  said  not  a  word  of  his 
inviting  you;  but  he  wrote  to  me  as  follows: 

“  ‘I  need  not  tell  you  I  shall  be  happy  to  see 
you  here  the  latter  end  of  this  month,  as  you 
propose;  and  I  shall  likewise  be  in  hopes  that 
you  will  persuade  Dr.  Johnson  to  finish  the 
conference  here.  I  will  add  to  the  favour  of  your 
own  company,  if  you  prevail  upon  such  an  as¬ 
sociate,  to  assist  your  observations.  I  have  often 
been  entertained  with  his  writings,  and  I  once 
belonged  to  a  club  of  which  he  was  a  member, 
and  I  never  spent  an  evening  there,  but  I  heard 
something  from  him  well  worth  remembering.’ 

“We  have  thus,  my  dear  Sir,  good  comfort¬ 
able  quarters  in  the  neighbourhood  of  York, 
where  you  may  be  assured  we  shall  be  heartily 
welcome.  I  pray  you  then  resolve  to  set  out;  and 
let  not  the  year  1780  be  a  blank  in  our  social 
calendar,  and  in  that  record  of  wisdom  and  wit, 
which  I  keep  with  so  much  diligence,  to  your  hon¬ 
our,  and  the  instruction  and  delight  of  others.” 
had  not  then  seen  his  letters  to  Mrs.  Thrale. 


JOHNSON  441 

Mr.  Thrale  had  now  another  contest  for  the 
representation  in  parliament  of  the  borough  of 
Southwark,  and  Johnson  kindly  lent  him  his  as¬ 
sistance,  by  writing  advertisements  and  letters 
for  him.  I  shall  insert  one  as  a  specimen:* 

To  THE  WORTHY  ELECTORS  OF  THE 

Borough  of  Southwark 

Gentlemen,  A  new  Parliament  being  now 
called,  I  again  solicit  the  honour  of  being  elected 
for  one  of  your  representatives;  and  solicit  it 
with  the  greater  confidence,  as  I  am  not  con¬ 
scious  of  having  neglected  my  duty,  or  of  having 
acted  otherwise  than  as  becomes  the  independ¬ 
ent  representative  of  independent  constituents; 
superiour  to  fear,  hope,  and  expectation,  who 
has  no  private  purposes  to  promote,  and  whose 
prosperity  is  involved  in  the  prosperity  of  his 
country.  As  my  recovery  from  a  very  severe  dis¬ 
temper  is  not  yet  perfect,  I  have  declined  to  at¬ 
tend  the  Hall,  and  hope  an  omission  so  neces¬ 
sary  will  not  be  harshly  censured. 

I  can  only  send  my  respectful  wishes,  that  all 
your  deliberations  may  tend  to  the  happiness  of 
the  kingdom,  and  the  peace  of  the  borough.  I 
am,  Gentlemen,  your  most  faithful  and  obedi¬ 
ent  servant, 

Henry  Thrale 

Southwark,  Sept.  5,  1780 

On  his  birth-day,  Johnson  has  this  note:  “I 
am  now  beginning  the  seventy-second  year  of 
my  life,  with  more  strength  of  body,  and  greater 
vigour  of  mind,  than  I  think  is  common  at  that 
age.”  But  still  he  complains  of  sleepless  nights 
and  idle  days,  and  forgetfulness,  or  neglect  of 
resolutions.  He  thus  pathetically  expresses  him¬ 
self, — “Surely  I  shall  not  spend  my  whole  life 
with  my  own  total  disapprobation.”2 

Mr.  Macbean,  whom  I  have  mentioned  more 
than  once,  as  one  of  Johnson’s  humble  friends,  a 
deserving  but  unfortunate  man,  being  now  op¬ 
pressed  by  age  and  poverty,  Johnson  solicited 
the  Lord  Chancellor  Thurlow,  to  have  him  ad¬ 
mitted  into  the  Charterhouse.  I  take  the  liberty 
to  insert  his  Lordship’s  answer,  as  I  am  eager  to 
embrace  every  occasion  of  augmenting  the  re¬ 
spectable  notion  which  should  ever  be  enter¬ 
tained  of  my  illustrious  friend: 

To  Dr.  Samuel  Johnson 

London,  October  24,  1780 

Sir,  I  have  this  moment  received  your  letter, 
dated  the  19th,  and  returned  from  Bath. 

In  the  beginning  of  the  summer  I  placed  one 
in  the  Chartreux,  without  the  sanction  of  a  rec¬ 
ommendation  so  distinct  and  so  authoritative  as 
yours  of  Macbean;  and  I  am  afraid,  that  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  establishment  of  the  House,  the 

2 Prayers  and  Meditations ,  p.  185. 


442 

opportunity  of  making  the  charity  so  good 
amends  will  not  soon  recur.  But  whenever  a  va¬ 
cancy  shall  happen,  if  you’ll  favour  me  with  no¬ 
tice  of  it,  I  will  try  to  recommend  him  to  the 
place,  even  though  it  should  not  be  my  turn  to 
nominate.  I  am,  Sir,  with  great  regard,  your 
most  faithful  and  obedient  servant, 

Thurlow 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  I  am  sorry  to  write  you  a  letter 
that  will  not  please  you,  and  yet  it  is  at  last  what 
I  resolve  to  do.  This  year  must  pass  without  an 
interview;  the  summer  has  been  foolishly  lost, 
like  many  other  of  my  summers  and  winters.  I 
hardly  saw  a  green  field,  but  staid  in  town  to 
work,  without  working  much. 

Mr.  Thrale’s  loss  of  health  has  lost  him  the 
election;  he  is  now  going  to  Brighthelmston,  and 
expects  me  to  go  with  him;  and  how  long  I  shall 
stay,  I  cannot  tell.  I  do  not  much  like  the  place, 
but  yet  I  shall  go,  and  stay  while  my  stay  is  de¬ 
sired.  We  must,  therefore,  content  ourselves  with 
knowing  what  we  know  as  well  as  man  can  know 
the  mind  of  man,  that  we  love  one  another,  and 
that  we  wish  each  other’s  happiness,  and  that 
the  lapse  of  a  year  cannot  lessen  our  mutual 
kindness. 

I  was  pleased  to  be  told  that  I  accused  Mrs. 
Boswell  unjustly,  in  supposing  that  she  bears  me 
ill-will.  I  love  you  so  much,  that  I  would  be 
glad  to  love  all  that  love  you,  and  that  you  love; 
and  I  have  love  very  ready  for  Mrs.  Boswell,  if 
she  thinks  it  worthy  of  acceptance.  I  hope  all 
the  young  ladies  and  gentlemen  are  well. 

I  take  a  great  liking  to  your  brother.  He  tells 
me  that  his  father  received  him  kindly,  but  not 
fondly;  however,  you  seem  to  have  lived  well 
enough  at  Auchinleck,  while  you  staid.  Make 
your  father  as  happy  as  you  can. 

You  lately  told  me  of  your  health:  I  can  tell 
you  in  return,  that  my  health  has  been  for  more 
than  a  year  past,  better  than  it  has  been  for 
many  years  before.  Perhaps  it  may  please  God 
to  give  us  some  time  together  before  we  are 
parted.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  yours  most  affectionately, 

October  17,  1780  Sam.  Johnson 

Being  disappointed  in  my  hopes  of  meeting 
Johnson  this  year,  so  that  I  could  hear  none  of 
his  admirable  sayings,  I  shall  compensate  for 
this  want  by  inserting  a  collection  of  them,  for 
which  I  am  indebted  to  my  worthy  friend  Mr. 
Langton,  whose  kind  communications  have  been 
separately  interwoven  in  many  parts  of  this  work. 
Very  few  articles  of  this  collection  were  com¬ 
mitted  to  writing  by  himself,  he  not  having  that 
habit;  which  he  regrets,  and  which  those  who 
know  the  numerous  opportunities  he  had  of 
gathering  the  rich  fruits  of  Johnsonian  wit  and 
wisdom,  must  ever  regret.  I  however  found,  in 


[  1780 

conversations  with  him,  that  a  good  store  of 
Johnsoniana  was  treasured  in  his  mind;  and  I 
compared  it  to  Herculaneum,  or  some  old  Ro¬ 
man  field,  which  when  dug,  fully  rewards  the 
labour  employed.  The  authenticity  of  every  ar¬ 
ticle  is  unquestionable.  For  the  expression,  I,  who 
wrote  them  down  in  his  presence,  am  partly  an¬ 
swerable. 

“Theocritus  is  not  deserving  of  very  high  re¬ 
spect  as  a  writer;  as  to  the  pastoral  part,  Virgil 
is  very  evidently  superiour.  He  wrote  when  there 
had  been  a  larger  influx  of  knowledge  into  the 
world  than  when  Theocritus  lived.  Theocritus 
does  not  abound  in  description,  though  living 
in  a  beautiful  country:  the  manners  painted  are 
coarse  and  gross.  Virgil  has  much  more  de¬ 
scription,  more  sentiment,  more  of  Nature,  and 
more  of  art.  Some  of  the  most  excellent  parts  of 
Theocritus  are,  where  Castor  and  Pollux,  going 
with  the  other  Argonauts,  land  on  the  Bebrycian 
coast,  and  there  fall  into  a  dispute  with  Amycus, 
the  King  of  that  country;  which  is  as  well  con¬ 
ducted  as  Euripides  could  have  done  it;  and  the 
battle  is  well  related.  Afterwards  they  carry  off 
a  woman,  whose  two  brothers  come  to  recover 
her,  and  expostulate  with  Castor  and  Pollux  on 
their  injustice;  but  they  pay  no  regard  to  the 
brothers,  and  a  battle  ensues,  where  Castor  and 
his  brother  are  triumphant.  Theocritus  seems 
not  to  have  seen  that  the  brothers  have  the  ad¬ 
vantage  in  their  argument  over  his  Argonaut 
heroes.  The  Sicilian  Gossips  is  a  piece  of  merit.’  ” 

“Callimachus  is  a  writer  of  little  excellence. 
The  chief  thing  to  be  learned  from  him  is  his  ac¬ 
count  of  Rites  and  Mythology;  which,  though 
desirable  to  be  known  for  the  sake  of  understand¬ 
ing  other  parts  of  ancient  authours,  is  the  least 
pleasing  or  valuable  part  of  their  writings.” 

“Mattaire’s  account  of  the  Stephani  is  a  heavy 
book.  He  seems  to  have  been  a  puzzle-headed 
man,  with  a  large  share  of  scholarship,  but  with 
little  geometry  or  logick  in  his  head,  without 
method,  and  possessed  of  little  genius.  He  wrote 
Latin  verses  from  time  to  time,  and  published  a 
set  in  his  old  age,  which  he  called  Senilia ;  in 
which  he  shews  so  little  learning  or  taste  in  writ¬ 
ing,  as  to  make  Carteret  a  dactyl.  In  matters  of 
genealogy  it  is  necessary  to  give  the  bare  names 
as  they  are;  but  in  poetry,  and  in  prose  of  any 
elegance  in  the  writing,  they  require  to  have  in¬ 
flection  given  to  them.  Plis  book  of  the  Dialects 
is  a  sad  heap  of  confusion;  the  only  way  to  write 
on  them  is  to  tabulate  them  with  Notes,  added 
at  the  bottom  of  the  page,  and  references.” 

“It  may  be  questioned,  whether  there  is  not 
some  mistake  as  to  the  methods  of  employing  the 


BOSWELL 


1780]  LIFE  OF 

poor,  seemingly  on  a  supposition  that  there  is  a 
certain  portion  of  work  left  undone  for  want  of 
persons  to  do  it;  but  if  that  is  otherwise,  and  all 
the  materials  we  have  are  actually  worked  up, 
or  all  the  manufactures  we  can  use  or  dispose  of 
are  already  executed,  then  what  is  given  to  the 
poor,  who  are  to  be  set  at  work,  must  be  taken 
from  some  who  now  have  it;  as  time  must  be 
taken  for  learning,  according  to  Sir  William 
Petty’s  observation,  a  certain  part  of  those  very 
materials  that,  as  it  is,  are  properly  worked  up, 
must  be  spoiled  by  the  unskilfulness  of  novices. 
We  may  apply  to  well-meaning,  but  misjudg¬ 
ing  persons  in  particulars  of  this  nature,  what 
Giannone  said  to  a  monk,  who  wanted  what 
he  called  to  convert  him: e  Tu  sei  santo,  ma  tu  non 
sei filosofo .’ — It  is  an  unhappy  circumstance  that 
one  might  give  away  five  hundred  pounds  in  a 
year  to  those  that  importune  in  the  streets,  and 
not  do  any  good.” 

“There  is  nothing  more  likely  to  betray  a 
man  into  absurdity  than  condescension ;  when  he 
seems  to  suppose  his  understanding  too  power¬ 
ful  for  his  company.” 

“Having  asked  Mr.  Langton  if  his  father  and 
mother  had  sat  for  their  pictures,  which  he 
thought  it  right  for  each  generation  of  a  family 
to  do,  and  being  told  they  had  opposed  it,  he 
said,  ‘Sir,  among  the  anfractuosities  of  the  hu¬ 
man  mind,  I  know  not  if  it  may  not  be  one,  that 
there  is  a  superstitious  reluctance  to  sit  for  a  pic¬ 
ture.’  ” 

“John  Gilbert  Cooper  related,  that  soon  af¬ 
ter  the  publication  of  his  Dictionary ,  Garrick 
being  asked  by  Johnson  what  people  said  of  it, 
told  him,  that  among  other  animadversions,  it 
was  objected  that  he  cited  authorities  which  were 
beneath  the  dignity  of  such  a  work,  and  men¬ 
tioned  Richardson.  ‘Nay,  (said  Johnson,)  I  have 
done  worse  than  that:  I  have  cited  thee ,  David.’” 

“Talking  of  expence,  he  observed,  with  what 
munificence  a  great  merchant  will  spend  his 
money,  both  from  his  having  it  at  command,  and 
from  his  enlarged  views  by  calculation  of  a  good 
effect  upon  the  whole.  ‘Whereas  (said  he,)  you 
will  hardly  ever  find  a  country  gentleman  who 
is  not  a  good  deal  disconcerted  at  an  unexpect¬ 
ed  occasion  for  his  being  obliged  to  lay  out  ten 
pounds.’  ” 

“When  in  good  humour  he  would  talk  of  his 
own  writings  with  a  wonderful  frankness  and 
candour,  and  would  even  criticise  them  with 
the  closest  severity.  One  day,  having  read  over 
one  of  his  Ramblers ,  Mr.  Langton  asked  him, 
how  he  liked  that  paper;  he  shook  his  head,  and 
answered,  ‘too  wordy.’  At  another  time,  when 


JOHNSON  443 

one  was  reading  his  tragedy  of  Irene  to  a  com¬ 
pany  at  a  house  in  the  country,  he  left  the  room; 
and  somebody  having  asked  him  the  reason  of 
this,  he  replied,  ‘Sir,  I  thought  it  had  been  bet¬ 
ter.’  ” 

“Talking  of  a  point  of  delicate  scrupulosity  of 
moral  conduct,  he  said  to  Mr.  Langton,  ‘Men 
of  harder  minds  than  ours  will  do  many  things 
from  v/hich  you  and  I  would  shrink;  yet,  Sir, 
they  will  perhaps  do  more  good  in  life  than  we. 
But  let  us  try  to  help  one  another.  If  there  be  a 
wrong  twist  it  may  be  set  right.  It  is  not  prob¬ 
able  that  two  people  can  be  wrong  the  same 
way.’  ” 

“Of  the  Preface  to  Capel’s  Shakspeare ,  he  said, 
‘If  the  man  would  have  come  to  me,  I  would 
have  endeavoured  to  endow  his  purposes  with 
words;  for  as  it  is,  he  doth  gabble  monstrously.’  ” 

“He  related,  that  he  had  once  in  a  dream  a 
contest  of  wit  with  some  other  person,  and  that 
he  was  very  much  mortified  by  imagining  that 
his  opponent  had  the  better  of  him.  ‘Now,  (said 
he,)  one  may  mark  here  the  effect  of  sleep  in 
weakening  the  power  a>f  reflection;  for  had  not 
my  judgement  failed  me,  I  should  have  seen, 
that  the  wit  of  this  supposed  antagonist,  by 
whose  superiority  I  felt  myself  depressed,  was  as 
much  furnished  by  me,  as  that  which  I  thought 
I  had  been  uttering  in  my  own  character.’  ” 

“One  evening  in  company,  an  ingenious  and 
learned  gentleman  read  to  him  a  letter  of  com¬ 
pliment  which  he  had  received  from  one  of  the 
Professors  of  a  foreign  University.  Johnson,  in 
an  irritable  fit,  thinking  there  was  too  much  os¬ 
tentation,  said,  ‘I  never  receive  any  of  these 
tributes  of  applause  from  abroad.  One  instance 
I  recollect  of  a  foreign  publication,  in  which 
mention  is  made  of  Villustre  Lockman.}  551 

“Of  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  he  said,  ‘Sir,  I 
know  no  man  who  has  passed  through  life  with 
more  observation  than  Reynolds.”’ 

“He  repeated  to  Mr.  Langton,  with  great  en¬ 
ergy,  in  the  Greek,  our  Saviour’s  gracious  ex¬ 
pression  concerning  the  forgiveness  of  Mary 
Magdalen,  ‘H  ttlcttls  aov  crkaconk  ere'  7 ropevov  eh 
eLprjvv^  ‘Thy  faith  hath  saved  thee;  go  in 
peace.’2  He  said,  ‘the  manner  of  this  discussion 
is  exceedingly  affecting.’  ” 

“He  thus  defined  the  difference  between  phys¬ 
ical  and  moral  truth;  ‘Physical  truth,  is,  when 
you  tell  a  thing  as  it  actually  is.  Moral  truth,  is, 
when  you  tell  a  thing  sincerely  and  precisely  as 

Secretary  to  the  British  Herring  Fishery,  re¬ 
markable  for  an  extraordinary  number  of  occa¬ 
sional  verses,  not  of  eminent  merit. 

2Luke,  7.  50. 


BOSWELL 


444 

it  appears  to  you.  I  say  such  a  one  walked  across 
the  street;  if  he  really  did  so,  I  told  a  physical 
truth.  If  I  thought  so,  though  I  should  have  been 
mistaken,  I  told  a  moral  truth.’  ” 

“Huggins,  the  translator  of  Ariosto,  and  Mr. 
Thomas  Warton,  in  the  early  part  of  his  literary 
life,  had  a  dispute  concerning  that  poet,  of  whom 
Mr.  Warton  in  his  Observations  on  Spenser's  Fairy 
Queen ,  gave  some  account,  which  Huggins  at¬ 
tempted  to  answer  with  violence,  and  said,  ‘I 
will  militate  no  longer  against  his  nescience .’  Hug¬ 
gins  was  master  of  the  subject,  but  wanted  ex¬ 
pression.  Mr.  Warton’s  knowledge  of  it  was 
then  imperfect,  but  his  manner  lively  and  ele¬ 
gant.  Johnson  said,  ‘It  appears  to  me,  that  Hug¬ 
gins  has  ball  without  powder,  and  Warton  pow¬ 
der  without  ball.’  ” 

“Talking  of  the  Farce  of  High  Life  below 
Stairs ,  he  said,  ‘Here  is  a  Farce,  which  is  really 
very  diverting  when  you  see  it  acted;  and  yet 
one  may  read  it,  and  not  know  that  one  has 
been  reading  any  thing  at  all.’  ” 

“He  used  at  one  time  to  go  occasionally  to 
the  green  room  of  Drury-lane  Theatre,  where 
he  was  much  regarded  by  the  players,  and  was 
very  easy  and  facetious  with  them.  He  had  a 
very  high  opinion  of  Mrs.  Clive’s  comick  pow¬ 
ers,  and  conversed  more  with  her  than  with  any 
of  them.  He  said,  ‘Clive,  Sir,  is  a  good  thing  to 
sit  by;  she  always  understands  what  you  say.’ 
And  she  said  of  him,  ‘I  love  to  sit  by  Dr.  John¬ 
son;  he  always  entertains  me.’  One  night,  when 
The  Recruiting  Officer  was  acted,  he  said  to  Mr. 
Holland,  who  had  been  expressing  an  appre¬ 
hension  that  Dr.  Johnson  would  disdain  the 
works  of  Farquhar;  ‘No,  Sir,  I  think  Farquhar 
a  man  whose  writings  have  considerable  merit.’” 

“His  friend  Garrick  was  so  busy  in  conduct¬ 
ing  the  drama,  that  they  could  not  have  so  much 
intercourse  as  Mr.  Garrick  used  to  profess  an 
anxious  wish  that  there  should  be.1  There  might, 
indeed,  be  something  in  the  contemptuous  se¬ 
verity  as  to  the  merit  of  acting,  which  his  old 
preceptor  nourished  in  himself,  that  would  mor¬ 
tify  Garrick  after  the  great  applause  which  he 
received  from  the  audience.  For  though  John¬ 
son  said  of  him,  ‘Sir,  a  man  who  has  a  nation  to 
admire  him  every  night,  may  well  be  expected 
to  be  somewhat  elated’:  yet  he  would  treat  the¬ 
atrical  matters  with  a  ludicrous  slight.  He  men¬ 
tioned  one  evening,  ‘I  met  David  coming  off  the 
stage,  drest  in  a  woman’s  riding-hood,  when  he 
acted  in  The  Wonder;  I  came  full  upon  him,  and 
I  believe  he  was  not  pleased.’  ” 

!In  a  letter  written  by  Johnson  to  a  friend  in 
1742-3,  he  says: — “I  never  see  Garrick.”  [M.] 


[  1780 

“Once  he  asked  Tom  Davies,  whom  he  saw 
drest  in  a  fine  suit  of  clothes,  ‘And  what  art  thou 
to-night?’  Tom  answered,  ‘The  Thane  of  Ross’; 
(which  it  will  be  recollected  is  a  very  inconsid¬ 
erable  character.)  ‘O  brave!’  said  Johnson.” 

“Of  Mr.  Longley,  at  Rochester,  a  gentleman 
of  very  considerable  learning,  whom  Dr.  John¬ 
son  met  there,  he  said,  ‘My  heart  warms  towards 
him.  I  was  surprised  to  find  in  him  such  a  nice 
acquaintance  with  the  metre  in  the  learned  lan¬ 
guages;  though  I  was  somewhat  mortified  that 
I  had  it  not  so  much  to  myself,  as  I  should  have 
thought.’  ” 

“Talking  of  the  minuteness  with  which  peo¬ 
ple  will  record  the  sayings  of  eminent  persons,  a 
story  was  told,  that  when  Pope  was  on  a  visit  to 
Spence  at  Oxford,  as  they  looked  from  the  win¬ 
dow  they  saw  a  Gentleman  Commoner,  who 
was  just  come  in  from  riding,  amusing  himself 
with  whipping  at  a  post.  Pope  took  occasion  to 
say,  ‘That  young  gentleman  seems  to  have  little 
to  do.’  Mr.  Beauclerk  observed,  ‘Then,  to  be 
sure,  Spence  turned  round  and  wrote  that  down’ ; 
and  went  on  to  say  to  Dr.  Johnson,  ‘Pope,  Sir, 
would  have  said  the  same  of  you  if  he  had  seen 
you  distilling.’  Johnson.  ‘Sir,  if  Pope  had  told 
me  of  my  distilling,  I  would  have  told  him  of 
his  grotto.’  ” 

“He  would  allow  no  settled  indulgence  of  idle¬ 
ness  upon  principle,  and  always  repelled  every 
attempt  to  urge  excuses  for  it.  A  friend  one  day 
suggested,  that  it  was  not  wholesome  to  study 
soon  after  dinner.  Johnson.  ‘Ah,  Sir,  don’t  give 
way  to  such  a  fancy.  At  one  time  of  my  life  I  had 
taken  it  into  my  head  that  it  was  not  wholesome 
to  study  between  breakfast  and  dinner.’  ” 

“Mr.  Beauclerk  one  day  repeated  to  Dr.  John¬ 
son  Pope’s  lines, 

Let  modest  Foster ,  if  he  will ,  excel 
Ten  metropolitans  in  preaching  well: 

Then  asked  the  Doctor,  ‘Why  did  Pope  say  this?’ 
J ohnson .  ‘  Sir ,  he  hoped  it  would  vex  somebody. ’  ’  ’ 

“Dr.  Goldsmith,  upon  occasion  of  Mrs.  Len¬ 
nox’s  bringing  out  a  play,  said  to  Dr.  Johnson 
at  the  club,  that  a  person  had  advised  him  to 
go  and  hiss  it,  because  she  had  attacked  Shaks- 
peare  in  her  book  called  Shakspeare  Illustrated . 
Johnson.  ‘And  did  not  you  tell  him  he  was  a 
rascal?’  Goldsmith.  ‘No,  Sir,  I  did  not.  Perhaps 
he  might  not  mean  what  he  said.’  Johnson. 
‘Nay,  Sir,  if  he  lied,  it  is  a  different  thing.’  Col- 
man  slily  said,  (but  it  is  believed  Dr.  Johnson 
did  not  hear  him,)  ‘Then  the  proper  expression 
should  have  been, — Sir,  if  you  don’t  lie,  you’re 
a  rascal.’  ” 


1780] 

“His  affection  for  Topham  Beauclerk  was  so 
great,  that  when  Beauclerk  was  labouring  under 
that  severe  illness  which  at  last  occasioned  his 
death  Johnson  said,  (with  a  voice  faultering 
with  emotion,)  ‘Sir,  I  would  walk  to  the  extent 
of  the  diameter  of  the  earth  to  save  Beauclerk/ 55 

“One  night  at  the  club  he  produced  a  trans¬ 
lation  of  an  Epitaph  which  Lord  Elibank  had 
written  in  English,  for  his  Lady,  and  requested 
of  Johnson  to  turn  into  Latin  for  him.  Having 
read  Domina  de  North  et  Gray ,  he  said  to  Dyer, 
‘You  see,  Sir,  what  barbarisms  we  are  compelled 
to  make  use  of,  when  modern  titles  are  to  be 
specifically  mentioned  in  Latin  inscriptions/ 
When  he  had  read  it  once  aloud,  and  there  had 
been  a  general  approbation  expressed  by  the 
company,  he  addressed  himself  to  Mr.  Dyer  in 
particular,  and  said,  ‘Sir,  I  beg  to  have  your 
judgement,  for  I  know  your  nicety/  Dyer  then 
very  properly  desired  to  read  it  over  again ;  which 
having  done,  he  pointed  out  an  incongruity  in 
one  of  the  sentences.  Johnson  immediately  as¬ 
sented  to  the  observation,  and  said,  ‘Sir,  this  is 
owing  to  an  alteration  of  a  part  of  the  sentence, 
from  the  form  in  which  I  had  first  written  it; 
and  I  believe,  Sir,  you  may  have  remarked,  that 
the  making  a  partial  change,  without  a  due  re¬ 
gard  to  the  general  structure  of  the  sentence,  is 
a  very  frequent  cause  of  errour  in  composition/ 55 

“Johnson  was  well  acquainted  with  Mr.  Dos- 
sie,  authour  of  a  treatise  on  Agriculture;  and 
said  of  him,  ‘Sir,  of  the  objects  which  the  Soci¬ 
ety  of  Arts  have  chiefly  in  view,  the  chymical 
effects  of  bodies  operating  upon  other  bodies, 
he  knows  more  than  almost  any  man/  Johnson, 
in  order  to  give  Mr.  Dossie  his  vote  to  be  a 
member  of  this  Society,  paid  up  an  arrear  which 
had  run  on  for  two  years.  On  this  occasion  he 
mentioned  a  circumstance  as  characteristick  of 
the  Scotch.  ‘One  of  that  nation,  (said  he,) who 
had  been  a  candidate,  against  whom  I  had  vot¬ 
ed,  came  up  to  me  with  a  civil  salutation.  Now, 
Sir,  this  is  their  way.  An  Englishman  would  have 
stomached  it,  and  been  sulky,  and  never  have 
taken  further  notice  of  you;  but  a  Scotchman, 
Sir,  though  you  vote  nineteen  times  against  him, 
will  accost  you  with  equal  complaisance  after 
each  time,  and  the  twentieth  time,  Sir,  he  will 
get  your  vote/  ” 

“Talking  on  the  subject  of  toleration,  one  day 
when  some  friends  were  with  him  in  his  study, 
he  made  his  usual  remark,  that  the  State  has  a 
right  to  regulate  the  religion  of  the  people,  who 
are  the  children  of  the  State.  A  clergyman  hav¬ 
ing  readily  acquiesced  in  this,  Johnson,  who 
loved  discussion,  observed,  ‘But,  Sir,  you  must 


445 

go  round  to  other  States  than  your  own.  You  do 
not  know  what  a  Bramin  has  to  say  for  himself.1 
In  short,  Sir,  I  have  got  no  further  than  this: 
Every  man  has  a  right  to  utter  what  he  thinks 
truth,  and  every  other  man  has  a  right  to  knock 
him  down  for  it.  Martyrdom  is  the  test/  55 

“A  man,  he  observed,  should  begin  to  write 
soon;  for,  if  he  waits  till  his  judgement  is  matured, 
his  inability,  through  want  of  practice  to  express 
his  conceptions,  will  make  the  disproportion  so 
great  between  what  he  sees,  and  what  he  can 
attain,  that  he  will  probably  be  discouraged  from 
writing  at  all.  As  a  proof  of  the  justness  of  this 
remark,  we  may  instance  what  is  related  of  the 
great  Lord  Granville;  that  after  he  had  written 
his  letter,  giving  an  account  of  the  battle  of  Det- 
tingen,  he  said,  ‘Here  is  a  letter,  expressed  in 
terms  not  good  enough  for  a  tallow-chandler  to 
have  used/  ” 

“Talking  of  a  Court-martial  that  was  sitting 
upon  a  very  momentous  publick  occasion,  he 
expressed  much  doubt  of  an  enlightened  deci¬ 
sion;  and  said,  that  perhaps  there  was  not  a 
member  of  it,  who  in  the  whole  course  of  his 
life,  had  ever  spent  an  hour  by  himself  in  bal¬ 
ancing  probabilities/5 

“Goldsmith  one  day  brought  to  the  club  a 
printed  Ode,  which  he,  with  others,  had  been 
hearing  read  by  its  authour  in  a  publick  room 
at  the  rate  of  five  shillings  each  for  admission. 
One  of  the  company  having  read  it  aloud,  Dr. 
Johnson  said,  ‘Bolder  words  and  more  timorous 
meaning,  I  think  never  were  brought  together.5  55 

“Talking  of  Gray’s  Odes ,  he  said,  ‘They  are 
forced  plants  raised  in  a  hot-bed;  and  they  are 
poor  plants;  they  are  but  cucumbers  after  all.5 
A  gentleman  present,  who  had  been  running 
down  Ode-writing  in  general,  as  a  bad  species 
of  poetry,  unluckily  said,  ‘Had  they  been  liter¬ 
ally  cucumbers,  they  had  been  better  things 
than  Odes.5 — ‘Yes,  Sir,  (said  Johnson,)  for  a 
hog. ’  ” 

“His  distinction  of  the  different  degrees  of  at¬ 
tainment  of  learning  was  thus  marked  upon  two 
occasions.  Of  Queen  Elizabeth  he  said,  ‘She  had 
learning  enough  to  have  given  dignity  to  a  bish¬ 
op5;  and  of  Mr.  Thomas  Davies  he  said,  ‘Sir, 
Davies  has  learning  enough  to  give  credit  to  a 
clergyman.555 

“He  used  to  quote,  with  great  warmth,  the 
saying  of  Aristotle  recorded  by  Diogenes  Laer- 

fldere  Lord  Macartney  remarks,  “A  Bramin  or 
any  cast  of  the  Hindoos  will  neither  admit  you  to 
be  of  their  religion,  nor  be  converted  to  yours; — a 
thing  which  struck  the  Portuguese  with  the  great¬ 
est  astonishment,  when  they  discovered  the  East 
Indies.55 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


446  BOSWELL  [1780 


tius;  that  there  was  the  same  difference  between 
one  learned  and  unlearned,  as  between  the  liv¬ 
ing  and  the  dead.” 

“It  is  very  remarkable,  that  he  retained  in  his 
memory  very  slight  and  trivial,  as  well  as  im¬ 
portant  things.  As  an  instance  of  this,  it  seems 
that  an  inferiour  domestick  of  the  Duke  of  Leeds 
had  attempted  to  celebrate  his  Grace’s  marriage 
in  such  homely  rhimes  as  he  could  make;  and 
this  curious  composition  having  been  sung  to 
Dr.  Johnson  he  got  it  by  heart,  and  used  to  re¬ 
peat  it  in  a  very  pleasant  manner.  Two  of  the 
stanzas  were  these: 

When  the  Duke  of  Leeds  shall  married  be 
To  a  fine  young  lady  of  high  quality , 

How  happy  will  that  gentlewoman  be 
In  his  Grace  of  Leeds’s  good  company . 

She  shall  have  all  that’s  fine  and fair , 

And  the  best  of  silk  and  satin  shall  wear; 

And  ride  in  a  coach  to  take  the  air. 

And  have  a  house  in  St.  fames’  s-square.1 

To  hear  a  man,  of  the  weight  and  dignity  of 
Johnson,  repeating  such  humble  attempts  at  po¬ 
etry,  had  a  very  amusing  effect.  He,  however, 
seriously  observed  of  the  last  stanza  repeated  by 
him,  that  it  nearly  comprized  all  the  advan¬ 
tages  that  wealth  can  give.” 

“An  eminent  foreigner,  when  he  was  shewn 
the  British  Museum,  was  very  troublesome  with 
many  absurd  inquiries.  ‘Now  there,  Sir,  (said 
he,)  is  the  difference  between  an  Englishman 
and  a  Frenchman.  A  Frenchman  must  be  al¬ 
ways  talking,  whether  he  knows  any  thing  of 
the  matter  or  not;  an  Englishman  is  content  to 
say  nothing,  when  he  has  nothing  to  say.’  ” 

“His  unjust  contempt  for  foreigners  was,  in¬ 
deed,  extreme.  One  evening,  at  old  Slaughter’s 

^he  correspondent  of  The  Gentleman’ s  Magazine 
[1792,  p.  214]  who  subscribes  himself  Sciolus  fur¬ 
nishes  the  following  supplement: — 

“A  lady  of  my  acquaintance  remembers  to  have 
heard  her  uncle  sing  those  homely  stanzas  more 
than  forty-five  years  ago.  He  repeated  the  second 
thus: 

She  shall  breed  young  lords  and  ladies  fair , 

And  ride  abroad  in  a  coach  and  three  pair , 

And  the  best,  &c. 

And  have  a  house,  &c. 

And  remembered  a  third  which  seems  to  have  been 
the  introductory  one,  and  is  believed  to  have  been 
the  only  remaining  one: 

When  the  Duke  of  Leeds  shall  have  made  his  choice 
Of  a  charming  young  lady  that’s  beautiful  and  wise , 
She’ll  be  the  happiest  young  gentlewoman  under  the  skies , 
As  long  as  the  sun  and  moon  shall  rise , 

And  how  happy  shall,  &c.” 

It  is  with  pleasure  I  add  that  this  stanza  could 
never  be  more  truly  applied  than  at  this  present 
time. 


coffee-house,  when  a  number  of  them  were  talk¬ 
ing  loud  about  little  matters,  he  said,  ‘Does  not 
this  confirm  old  Meynell’s  observation — For  any 
thing  I  sec,  foreigners  are  fools'  ” 

“He  said,  that  once,  when  he  had  a  violent 
tooth-ache,  a  Frenchman  accosted  him  thus: — 
‘Ah,  Monsieur  vous  etudiez  trop .’  ” 

“Having  spent  an  evening  at  Mr.  Langton’s 
with  the  Reverend  Dr.  Parr,  he  was  much  pleased 
with  the  conversation  of  that  learned  gentleman; 
and  after  he  was  gone,  said  to  Mr.  Langton,  ‘Sir, 
I  am  obliged  to  you  for  having  asked  me  this 
evening.  Parr  is  a  fair  man.  I  do  not  know  when 
I  have  had  an  occasion  of  such  free  controversy. 
It  is  remarkable  how  much  of  a  man’s  life  may 
pass  without  meeting  with  any  instance  of  this 
kind  of  open  discussion.’  ” 

“We  may  fairly  institute  a  criticism  between 
Shakspeare  and  Corneille,  as  they  both  had, 
though  in  a  different  degree,  the  lights  of  a  latter 
age.  It  is  not  so  just  between  the  Greek  dramat- 
ick  writers  and  Shakspeare.  It  may  be  replied 
to  what  is  said  by  one  of  the  remarkers  on  Shak¬ 
speare,  that  though  Darius’s  shade  had  presci¬ 
ence,  it  does  not  necessarily  follow  that  he  had 
all  past  particulars  revealed  to  him.” 

“Spanish  plays,  being  wildly  and  improbably 
farcical,  would  please  children  here,  as  children 
are  entertained  with  stories  full  of  prodigies;  their 
experience  not  being  sufficient  to  cause  them  to 
be  so  readily  startled  at  deviations  from  the  nat¬ 
ural  course  of  life.  The  machinery  of  the  Pagans 
is  uninteresting  to  us:  when  a  Goddess  appears 
in  Homer  or  Virgil,  we  grow  weary;  still  more 
so  in  the  Grecian  tragedies,  as  in  that  kind  of 
composition  a  nearer  approach  to  Nature  is  in¬ 
tended.  Yet  there  are  good  reasons  for  reading 
romances;  as — the  fertility  of  invention,  the  beau¬ 
ty  of  style  and  expression,  the  curiosity  of  seeing 
with  what  kind  of  performances  the  age  and 
country  in  which  they  were  written  was  delight¬ 
ed:  for  it  is  to  be  apprehended,  that  at  the  time 
when  very  wild  improbable  tales  were  well  re¬ 
ceived,  the  people  were  in  a  barbarous  state, 
and  so  on  the  footing  of  children,  as  has  been 
explained.” 

“It  is  evident  enough  that  no  one  who  writes 
now  can  use  the  Pagan  deities  and  mythology; 
the  only  machinery,  therefore,  seems  that  of 
ministering  spirits,  the  ghosts  of  the  departed, 
witches,  and  fairies,  though  these  latter,  as  the 
vulgar  superstition  concerning  them  (which, 
while  in  its  force,  infected  at  least  the  imagination 
of  those  that  had  more  advantage  in  education, 
though  their  reason  set  them  free  from  it,)  is  ev¬ 
ery  day  wearing  out,  seem  likely  to  be  of  little 


1780]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  447 


further  assistance  in  the  machinery  of  poetry.  As 
I  recollect,  Hammond  introduces  a  hag  or  witch 
into  one  of  his  love  elegies,  where  the  effect  is 
unmeaning  and  disgusting.” 

“The  man  who  uses  his  talent  of  ridicule  in 
creating  or  grossly  exaggerating  the  instances  he 
gives,  who  imputes  absurdities  that  did  not  hap¬ 
pen,  or  when  a  man  was  a  little  ridiculous  de¬ 
scribes  him  as  having  been  very  much  so,  abuses 
his  talents  greatly.  The  great  use  of  delineating 
absurdities  is,  that  we  may  know  how  far  human 
folly  can  go;  the  account,  therefore,  ought  of  ab¬ 
solute  necessity  to  be  faithful.  A  certain  charac¬ 
ter  (naming  the  person)  as  to  the  general  cast  of 
it,  is  well  described  by  Garrick,  but  a  great  deal 
of  the  phraseology  he  uses  in  it,  is  quite  his  own, 
particularly  in  the  proverbial  comparisons,  “ob¬ 
stinate  as  a  pig,51  &c.,  but  I  don’t  know  whether 

it  might  not  be  true  of  Lord - ,  that  from  a 

too  great  eagerness  of  praise  and  popularity, 
and  a  politeness  carried  to  a  ridiculous  excess, 
he  was  likely,  after  asserting  a  thing  in  general, 
to  give  it  up  again  in  parts.  For  instance,  if  he 
had  said  Reynolds  was  the  first  of  painters,  he 
was  capable  enough  of  giving  up,  as  objections 
might  happen  to  be  severally  made,  first  his  out¬ 
line, — then  the  grace  in  form, — then  the  colour¬ 
ing, — and  lastly,  to  have  owned  that  he  was 
such  a  mannerist,  that  the  disposition  of  his  pic¬ 
tures  was  all  alike.” 

“For  hospitality,  as  formerly  practised,  there 
is  no  longer  the  same  reason;  heretofore  the  poor¬ 
er  people  were  more  numerous,  and  from  want 
of  commerce,  their  means  of  getting  a  livelihood 
more  difficult;  therefore  the  supporting  them 
was  an  act  of  great  benevolence;  now  that  the 
poor  can  find  maintenance  for  themselves,  and 
their  labour  is  wanted,  a  general  undiscerning 
hospitality  tends  to  ill,  by  withdrawing  them 
from  their  work  to  idleness  and  drunkenness. 
Then,  formerly  rents  were  received  in  kind,  so 
that  there  was  a  great  abundance  of  provisions 
in  possession  of  the  owners  of  the  lands,  which, 
since  the  plenty  of  money  afforded  by  commerce, 
is  no  longer  the  case.” 

“Hospitality  to  strangers  and  foreigners  in  our 
country  is  now  almost  at  an  end,  since,  from  the 
increase  of  them  that  come  to  us,  there  have 
been  a  sufficient  number  of  people  that  have 
found  an  interest  in  providing  inns  and  proper 
accommodations,  which  is  in  general  a  more  ex¬ 
pedient  method  for  the  entertainment  of  trav¬ 
ellers.  Where  the  travellers  and  strangers  are 
few,  more  of  that  hospitality  subsists,  as  it  has 
not  been  worth  while  to  provide  places  of  ac¬ 
commodation.  In  Ireland  there  is  still  hospital¬ 


ity  to  strangers,  in  some  degree;  in  Hungary 
and  Poland  probably  more.” 

“Colman,  in  a  note  on  his  translation  of  Ter¬ 
ence  z  talking  of  Shakspeare’s  learning,  asks,  cWhat 
says  Farmer  to  this?  What  says  Johnson?’  Upon 
this  he  observed,  ‘Sir,  let  Farmer  answer  for 
himself:  I  never  engaged  in  this  controversy.  I 
always  said,  Shakspeare  had  Latin  enough  to 
grammaticise  his  English.’  ” 

“A  clergyman,  whom  he  characterised  as  one 
who  loved  to  say  little  oddities,  was  affecting  one 
day,  at  a  Bishop’s  table,  a  sort  of  slyness  and 
freedom  not  in  character,  and  repeated,  as  if 
part  of  The  Old  Man's  Wish ,  a  song  by  Dr. 
Walter  Pope,  a  verse  bordering  on  licentious¬ 
ness.  Johnson  rebuked  him  in  the  finest  manner, 
by  first  shewing  him  that  he  did  not  know  the 
passage  he  was  aiming  at,  and  thus  humbling 
him:  ‘Sir,  that  is  not  the  song:  it  is  thus.’  And  he 
gave  it  right.  Then  looking  stedfastly  on  him, 
‘Sir,  there  is  a  part  of  that  song  which  I  should 
wish  to  exemplify  in  my  own  life: 

May  I  govern  my  passions  with  absolute  sway/3  ” 

“Being  asked  if  Barnes  knew  a  good  deal  of 
Greek,  he  answered,  ‘I  doubt,  Sir,  he  was  unoc - 
ulus  inter  ccecos .’  ” 

“He  used  frequently  to  observe,  that  men 
might  be  very  eminent  in  a  profession,  without 
our  perceiving  any  particular  power  of  mind  in 
them  in  conversation.  ‘It  seems  strange  (said 
he,)  that  a  man  should  see  so  far  to  the  right, 
who  sees  so  short  a  way  to  the  left.  Burke  is  the 
only  man  whose  common  conversation  corre¬ 
sponds  with  the  general  fame  which  he  has  in  the 
world.  Take  up  whatever  topick  you  please,  he 
is  ready  to  meet  you.’  ” 

“A  gentleman,  by  no  means  deficient  in  lit¬ 
erature,  having  discovered  less  acquaintance 
with  one  of  the  Classicks  than  Johnson  expect¬ 
ed,  when  the  gentleman  left  the  room,  he  ob¬ 
served,  ‘You  see,  now,  how  little  any  body  reads.’ 
Mr.  Langton  happening  to  mention  his  having 
read  a  good  deal  in  Clenardus’s  Greek  Grammar , 
‘Why,  Sir,  (said  he,)  who  is  there  is  this  town 
who  knows  any  thing  of  Clenardus  but  you  and 
I?’  And  upon  Mr.  Langton’s  mentioning  that 
he  had  taken  the  pains  to  learn  by  heart  the 
Epistle  of  St.  Basil,  which  is  given  in  that  Gram¬ 
mar  as  a  praxis,  ‘Sir,  (said  he,)  I  never  made 
such  an  effort  to  attain  Greek.’  ” 

“Of  Dodsley’s  Publick  Virtue ,  a  Poem ,  he  said, 
‘It  was  fine  blank  (meaning  to  express  his  usual 
contempt  for  blank  verse) ;  however,  this  miser¬ 
able  poem  did  not  sell,  and  my  poor  friend 
Doddy  said,  Publick  Virtue  was  not  a  subject  to 
interest  the  age.’  ” 


448 

“Mr.  Langton,  when  a  very  young  man,  read 
Dodsley’s  Cleone ,  a  Tragedy ,  to  him,  not  aware 
of  his  extreme  impatience  to  be  read  to.  As  it 
went  on  he  turned  his  face  to  the  back  of  his 
chair,  and  put  himself  into  various  attitudes, 
which  marked  his  uneasiness.  At  the  end  of  an 
act,  however,  he  said,  ‘Come  let’s  have  some 
more,  let’s  go  into  the  slaughter-house  again, 
Lanky.  But  I  am  afraid  there  is  more  blood  than 
brains.’  Yet  he  afterwards  said,  ‘When  I  heard 
you  read  it,  I  thought  higher  of  its  power  of  lan¬ 
guage:  when  I  read  it  myself,  I  was  more  sensi¬ 
ble  of  its  pathetick  effect’;  and  then  he  paid  it  a 
compliment  which  many  will  think  very  extrav¬ 
agant.  ‘Sir,  (said  he,)  if  Otway  had  written  this 
play,  no  other  of  his  pieces  would  have  been  re¬ 
membered.’  Dodsley  himself,  upon  this  being 
repeated  to  him,  said,  ‘ 1 1  was  too  much’ :  it  must 
be  remembered,  that  Johnson  always  appeared 
not  to  be  sufficiently  sensible  of  the  merit  of 
Otway.” 

“Snatches  of  reading  (said  he,)  will  not  make 
a  Bentley  or  a  Clarke.  They  are,  however,  in  a 
certain  degree  advantageous.  I  would  put  a 
child  into  a  library  (where  no  unfit  books  are) 
and  let  him  read  at  his  choice.  A  child  should 
not  be  discouraged  from  reading  any  thing  that 
he  takes  a  liking  to,  from  a  notion  that  it  is  above 
his  reach.  If  that  be  the  case,  the  child  will  soon 
find  it  out  and  desist;  if  not,  he  of  course  gains 
the  instruction;  which  is  so  much  the  more  like¬ 
ly  to  come,  from  the  inclination  with  which  he 
takes  up  the  study.” 

“Though  he  used  to  censure  carelessness  with 
great  vehemence,  he  owned,  that  he  once,  to 
avoid  the  trouble  of  locking  up  five  guineas,  hid 
them,  he  forgot  where,  so  that  he  could  not  find 
them.” 

“A  gentleman  who  introduced  his  brother  to 
Dr.  Johnson  was  earnest  to  recommend  him  to 
the  Doctor’s  notice,  which  he  did  by  saying, 
‘When  we  have  sat  together  some  time,  you’ll 
find  my  brother  grow  very  entertaining.5 — ‘Sir, 
(said  Johnson,)  I  can  wait.5  55 

“When  the  rumour  was  strong  that  we  should 
have  a  war,  because  the  French  would  assist  the 
Americans,  he  rebuked  a  friend  with  some  as¬ 
perity  for  supposing  it,  saying,  ‘No,  Sir,  national 
faith  is  not  yet  sunk  so  low.5” 

“In  the  latter  part  of  his  life,  in  order  to  satisfy 
himself  whether  his  mental  faculties  were  im¬ 
paired,  he  resolved  that  he  would  try  to  learn  a 
new  language,  and  fixed  upon  the  Low  Dutch, 
for  that  purpose,  and  this  he  continued  till  he 
had  read  about  one  half  of  Thomas  a  Kempis;  and 
finding  that  there  appeared  no  abatement  of  his 


1 1780 

power  of  acquisition,  he  then  desisted,  as  think¬ 
ing  the  experiment  had  been  duly  tried.  Mr. 
Burke  justly  observed,  that  this  was  not  the  most 
vigorous  trial,  Low  Dutch  being  a  language  so 
near  to  our  own;  had  it  been  one  of  the  lan¬ 
guages  entirely  different,  he  might  have  been 
very  soon  satisfied.55 

“Mr.  Langton  and  he  having  gone  to  see  a 
Freemason’s  funeral  procession,  when  they  were 
at  Rochester,  and  some  solemn  musick  being 
played  on  French  horns,  he  said,  ‘This  is  the 
first  time  that  I  have  ever  been  affected  by  musi¬ 
cal  sounds’;  adding,  ‘that  the  impression  made 
upon  him  was  of  a  melancholy  kind.’  Mr.  Lang¬ 
ton  saying,  that  this  effect  was  a  fine  one, — 
Johnson.  ‘Yes,  if  it  softens  the  mind,  so  as  to 
prepare  it  for  the  reception  of  salutary  feelings, 
it  may  be  good:  but  inasmuch  as  it  is  melan¬ 
choly  per  se,  it  is  bad.’” 

“Goldsmith  had  long  a  visionary  project,  that 
some  time  or  other  when  his  circumstances  should 
be  easier,  he  would  go  to  Aleppo,  in  order  to  ac¬ 
quire  a  knowledge  as  far  as  might  be  of  any  arts 
peculiar  to  the  East,  and  introduce  them  into 
Britain.  When  this  was  talked  of  in  Dr.  Johnson’s 
company,  he  said,  ‘Of  all  men  Goldsmith  is  the 
most  unfit  to  go  out  upon  such  an  inquiry;  for  he 
is  utterly  ignorant  of  such  arts  as  we  already  pos¬ 
sess,  and  consequently  could  not  know  what 
would  be  accessions  to  our  present  stock  of  me¬ 
chanical  knowledge.  Sir,  he  would  bring  home 
a  grinding  barrow,  which  you  see  in  every  street 
in  London,  and  think  that  he  had  furnished  a 
wonderful  improvement.5  55 

“Greek,  Sir,  (said  he,)  is  like  lace;  every  man 
gets  as  much  of  it  as  he  can.511 

“When  Lord  Charles  Hay,  after  his  return 
from  America,  was  preparing  his  defence  to  be 
offered  to  the  Court-Martial  which  he  had  de¬ 
manded,  having  heard  Mr.  Langton  as  high  in 
expressions  of  admiration  of  Johnson,  as  he  usu¬ 
ally  was,  he  requested  that  Dr.  Johnson  might 
be  introduced  to  him;  and  Mr.  Langton  having 
mentioned  it  to  Johnson,  he  very  kindly  and 
readily  agreed ;  and  beingpresented  by  Mr.  Lang¬ 
ton  to  his  Lordship,  while  under  arrest,  he  saw 
him  several  times;  upon  one  of  which  occasions 
Lord  Charles  read  to  him  what  he  had  prepared, 
which  Johnson  signified  his  approbation  of,  say¬ 
ing,  ‘It  is  a  very  good  soldierly  defence.’  John¬ 
son  said,  that  he  had  advised  his  Lordship,  that 
as  it  was  in  vain  to  contend  with  those  who  were 
in  possession  of  power,  if  they  would  offer  him 

Tt  should  be  remembered,  that  this  was  said 
twenty-five  or  thirty  years  ago,  [written  in  1799,] 
when  lace  was  very  generally  worn.  [M.] 


BOSWELL 


1780  ]  LIFE  OF 

the  rank  of  Lieutenant-General,  and  a  govern¬ 
ment,  it  would  be  better  judged  to  desist  from 
urging  his  complaints.  It  is  well  known  that  his 
Lordship  died  before  the  sentence  was  made 
known.” 

“Johnson  one  day  gave  high  praise  to  Dr. 
Bentley’s  verses1  in  Dodsley’s  Collection ,  which 
he  recited  with  his  usual  energy.  Dr.  Adam  Smith, 
who  was  present,  observed  in  his  decisive  pro¬ 
fessorial  manner, c  V  ery  well — V  ery  well . 5 J  ohnson 
however  added,  ‘Yes,  they  are  very  well,  Sir;  but 
you  may  observe  in  what  manner  they  are  well. 
They  are  the  forcible  verses  of  a  man  of  a  strong 
mind,  but  not  accustomed  to  write  verse;  for 
there  is  some  uncouthness  in  the  expression.5”2 

xDr.  Johnson,  in  his  Life  of  Cowley ,  says,  that 
these  are  “the  only  English  verses  which  Bentley  is 
known  to  have  written.”  I  shall  here  insert  them, 
and  hope  my  readers  will  apply  them. 

Who  strives  to  mount  Parnassus '  hill. 

And  thence  poetick  laurels  bring , 

Must  first  acquire  due  force  and  skill , 

Must  fly  with  swarfs  or  eagle's  wing. 

Who  Nature's  treasures  would  explore, 

Her  mysteries  and  arcana  know; 

Must  high  as  lofty  Newton  soar, 

Must  stoop  as  delving  Woodward  low. 

Who  studies  ancient  laws  and  rites , 

Tongues,  arts,  and  arms,  and  history; 

Must  drudge,  like  Selden,  days  and  nights, 

And  in  the  endless  labour  die. 

Who  travels  in  religious  jars, 

{Truth  mixt  with  errour,  shades  with  rays;) 

Like  Whiston ,  wanting  pyx  or  stars. 

In  ocean  wide  or  sinks  or  strays. 

But  grant  our  hero's  hope ,  long  toil 
And  comprehensive  genius  crown , 

All  sciences,  all  arts  his  spoil , 

Yet  what  reward,  or  what  renown ? 

Envy,  innate  in  vulgar  souls. 

Envy  steps  in  and  stops  his  rise , 

Envy  with  poison'd  tarnish  fouls 
His  lustre,  and  his  worth  decries. 

He  lives  inglorious  or  in  want, 

To  college  and  old  books  confin'd; 

Instead  of  learn' d,  he's  call'd  pedant. 

Dunces  advanc'd,  he's  left  behind: 

Yet  left  content  a  genuine  Stoick  he. 

Great  without  patron ,  rich  without  South  Sea. 

2The  difference  between  Johnson  and  Smith  is 
apparent  even  in  this  slight  instance.  Smith  was  a 
man  of  extraordinary  application,  and  had  his 
mind  crowded  with  all  manner  of  subjects;  but  the 
force,  acuteness,  and  vivacity  of  Johnson  were  not 
to  be  found  there.  He  had  book-making  so  much  in 
his  thoughts,  and  was  so  chary  of  what  might  be 
turned  to  account  in  that  way,  that  he  once  said  to 
Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  that  he  made  it  a  rule,  when 
in  company,  never  to  talk  of  what  he  understood. 
Beauclerk  had  for  a  short  time  a  pretty  high  opin¬ 
ion  of  Smith’s  conversation.  Garrick,  after  listen¬ 
ing  to  him  for  a  while,  as  to  one  of  whom  his  ex¬ 
pectations  had  been  raised,  turned  slyly  to  a  friend, 
and  whispered  him,  “What  say  you  to  this? — eh? 
flabby,  I  think.” 


JOHNSON  449 

“Drinking  tea  one  day  at  Garrick’s  with  Mr. 
Langton,  he  was  questioned  if  he  was  not  some¬ 
what  of  a  heretick  as  to  Shakspeare;  said  Gar¬ 
rick,  T  doubt  he  is  a  little  of  an  infidel.’ — ‘Sir, 
(said  Johnson,)  I  will  stand  by  the  lines  I  have 
written  on  Shakspeare  in  my  Prologue  at  the 
opening  of  your  Theatre.’  Mr.  Langton  suggest¬ 
ed,  that  in  the  line 

And  panting  Time  toil'd  after  him  in  vain, 

Johnson  might  have  had  in  his  eye  the  passage 
in  The  Tempest,  where  Prospero  says  of  Miranda, 

- She  will  outstrip  all  praise. 

And  make  it  halt  behind  her. 

Johnson  said  nothing.  Garrick  then  ventured  to 
observe,  ‘I  do  not  think  that  the  happiest  line  in 
the  praise  of  Shakspeare.’  Johnson  exclaimed 
(smiling,)  ‘Prosaical  rogues!  next  time  I  write, 
I’ll  make  both  time  and  space  pant.’  ”3 

“It  is  well  known  that  there  was  formerly  a 
rude  custom  for  those  who  were  sailing  upon  the 
Thames,  to  accost  each  other  as  they  passed,  in 
the  most  abusive  language  they  could  invent, 
generally,  however,  with  as  much  satirical  hu¬ 
mour  as  they  were  capable  of  producing.  Addi¬ 
son  gives  a  specimen  of  this  ribaldry,  in  Number 
383  of  The  Spectator ,  when  Sir  Roger  de  Goverly 
and  he  are  going  to  Spring-garden.  Johnson  was 
once  eminently  successful  in  this  species  of  con¬ 
test;  a  fellow  having  attacked  him  with  some 
coarse  raillery,  Johnson  answered  him  thus,  ‘Sir, 
your  wife,  under  pretence  of  keeping  a  bawdy-house, 
is  a  receiver  of  stolen  goods.’  One  evening  when 
he  and  Mr.  Burke  and  Mr.  Langton  were  in 
company  together,  and  the  admirable  scolding 
of  Timon  of  Athens  was  mentioned,  this  instance 
of  Johnson’s  was  quoted,  and  thought  to  have 
at  least  equal  excellence.” 

3I  am  sorry  to  see  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Royal 
Society  of  Edinburgh,  vol.  ii,  An  Essay  on  the  Character 
of  Hamlet,  written,  I  should  suppose,  by  a  very 
young  man,  though  called  “Reverend”;  who  speaks 
with  presumptuous  petulance  of  the  first  literary 
character  of  his  age.  Amidst  a  cloudy  confusion  of 
words,  (which  hath  of  late  too  often  passed  in  Scot¬ 
land  for  Metaphysicks ,)  he  thus  ventures  to  criticise 
one  of  the  noblest  lines  in  our  language: — “Dr. 
Johnson  has  remarked,  that  ‘time  toil’d  after  him 
in  vain.’  But  I  should  apprehend,  that  this  is  en¬ 
tirely  to  mistake  the  character.  Time  toils  after  every 
great  man,  as  well  as  after  Shakspeare.  The  work¬ 
ings  of  an  ordinary  mind  keep  pace,  indeed,  with 
time;  they  move  no  faster;  they  have  their  beginning , 
their  middle,  and  their  end;  but  superiour  natures  can 
reduce  these  into  a  point.  They  do  not,  indeed,  sup¬ 
press  them;  but  they  suspend,  or  they  lock  them  up  in 
the  breast."  The  learned  Society,  under  whose  sanc¬ 
tion  such  gabble  is  ushered  into  the  world,  would 
do  well  to  offer  a  premium  to  any  one  who  will  dis¬ 
cover  its  meaning. 


BOSWELL 


450 

“As  Johnson  always  allowed  the  extraordi¬ 
nary  talents  of  Mr.  Burke,  so  Mr.  Burke  was  ful¬ 
ly  sensible  of  the  wonderful  powers  of  Johnson. 
Mr.  Langton  recollects  having  passed  an  eve¬ 
ning  with  both  of  them,  when  Mr.  Burke  repeat¬ 
edly  entered  upon  topicks  which  it  was  evident 
he  would  have  illustrated  with  extensive  knowl¬ 
edge  and  richness  of  expression;  but  Johnson  al¬ 
ways  seized  upon  the  conversation,  in  which, 
however,  he  acquitted  himself  in  a  most  master¬ 
ly  manner.  As  Mr.  Burke  and  Mr.  Langton  were 
walking  home,  Mr.  Burke  observed  that  John¬ 
son  had  been  very  great  that  night;  Mr.  Lang¬ 
ton  joined  in  this,  but  added,  he  could  have 
wished  to  hear  more  from  another  person;  (plain¬ 
ly  intimating  that  he  meant  Mr.  Burke.)  cO,  no 
(said  Mr.  Burke,)  it  is  enough  for  me  to  have 
rung  the  bell  to  him.’ ” 

“Beauclerk  having  observed  to  him  of  one  of 
their  friends,  that  he  was  aukward  at  counting 
money,  ‘Why,  Sir,  (said  Johnson,)  I  am  likewise 
aukward  at  counting  money.  But  then,  Sir,  the 
reason  is  plain;  I  have  had  very  little  money  to 
count.’” 

“He  had  an  abhorrence  of  affectation.  Talk¬ 
ing  of  old  Mr.  Langton,  of  whom  he  said,  ‘Sir, 
you  will  seldom  see  such  a  gentleman,  such  are 
his  stores  of  literature,  such  his  knowledge  in  di¬ 
vinity,  and  such  his  exemplary  life’;  he  added, 
‘and  Sir,  he  has  no  grimace,  no  gesticulation,  no 
bursts  of  admiration  on  trivial  occasions;  he  never 
embraces  you  with  an  overacted  cordiality.’” 

“Being  in  company  with  a  gentleman  who 
thought  fit  to  maintain  Dr.  Berkeley’s  ingenious 
philosophy,  that  nothing  exists  but  as  perceived 
by  some  mind;  when  the  gentleman  was  going 
away,  Johnson  said  to  him,  ‘Pray,  Sir,  don’t 
leave  us;  for  we  may  perhaps  forget  to  think  of 
you,  and  then  you  will  cease  to  exist.’” 

“Goldsmith,  upon  being  visited  by  Johnson 
one  day  in  the  Temple,  said  to  him  with  a  little 
jealousy  of  the  appearance  of  his  accommoda¬ 
tion,  ‘I  shall  soon  be  in  better  chambers  than 
these.’  Johnson  at  the  same  time  checked  him 
and  paid  him  a  handsome  compliment,  imply¬ 
ing  that  a  man  of  his  talents  should  be  above  at¬ 
tention  to  such  distinctions, — ‘Nay,  Sir,  never 
mind  that.  Nil  te  quaesiveris  extra 

“At  the  time  when  his  pension  was  granted  to 
him,  he  said,  with  a  noble  literary  ambition, 
‘Had  this  happened  twenty  years  ago,  I  should 
have  gone  to  Constantinople  to  learn  Arabick, 
as  Pococke  did.’” 

“As  an  instance  of  the  niceness  of  his  taste, 
though  he  praised  West’s  translation  of  Pindar, 
he  pointed  out  the  following  passage  as  faulty, 


[ 

by  expressing  a  circumstance  so  minute  as  to  de¬ 
tract  from  the  general  dignity  which  should  pre- 

a'  Down  then  from  thy  glittering  nail. 

Take,  O  Muse ,  thy  Dorian  lyre” 

“When  Mr.  Vesey  was  proposed  as  a  member 
of  The  Literary  Club,  Mr.  Burke  began  by  say¬ 
ing  that  he  was  a  man  of  gentle  manners.  ‘Sir, 
(said  Johnson,)  you  need  say  no  more.  When  you 
have  said  a  man  of  gentle  manners;  you  have 
said  enough.’” 

“The  late  Mr.  Fitzherbert  told  Mr.  Langton 
that  Johnson  said  to  him,  ‘Sir,  a  man  has  no 
more  right  to  say  an  uncivil  thing,  than  to  act 
one;  no  more  right  to  say  a  rude  thing  to  another 
than  to  knock  him  down.”’ 

“My  dear  friend  Dr.  Bathurst,  (said  he  with 
a  warmth  of  approbation,)  declared  he  was  glad 
that  his  father,  who  was  a  West-Indian  planter, 
had  left  his  affairs  in  total  ruin,  because  having 
no  estate,  he  was  not  under  the  temptation  of 
having  slaves.” 

“Richardson  had  little  conversation,  except 
about  his  own  works,  of  which  Sir  Joshua  Rey¬ 
nolds  said  he  was  always  willing  to  talk,  and 
glad  to  have  them  introduced.  Johnson  when  he 
carried  Mr.  Langton  to  see  him,  professed  that 
he  could  bring  him  out  into  conversation,  and 
used  this  allusive  expression, ‘Sir,  I  can  make  him 
rear .’  But  he  failed;  for  in  that  interview  Rich¬ 
ardson  said  little  else  than  that  there  lay  in  the 
room  a  translation  of  his  Clarissa  into  German.”1 

“Once  when  somebody  produced  a  newspa¬ 
per  in  which  there  was  a  letter  of  stupid  abuse 
of  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  of  which  Johnson  him¬ 
self  came  in  for  a  share, — ‘Pray,’  said  he,  ‘let  us 
have  it  read  aloud  from  beginning  to  end’ ;  which 
being  done,  he  with  a  ludicrous  earnestness,  and 

1A  literary  lady  has  favoured  me  with  a  char- 
acteristick  anecdote  of  Richardson.  One  day  at  his 
country-house  at  Northend,  where  a  large  com¬ 
pany  was  assembled  at  dinner,  a  gentleman  who 
was  just  returned  from  Paris,  willing  to  please  Mr. 
Richardson,  mentioned  to  him  a  very  flattering 
circumstance, — that  he  had  seen  his  Clarissa  lying 
on  the  King’s  brother’s  table.  Richardson  observ¬ 
ing  that  part  of  the  company  were  engaged  in  talk¬ 
ing  to  each  other,  affected  then  not  to  attend  to  it. 
But  by  and  by,  when  there  was  a  general  silence, 
and  he  thought  that  the  flattery  might  be  fully 
heard,  he  addressed  himself  to  the  gentleman,  “I 
think,  Sir,  you  were  saying  something  about, — ” 
pausing  in  a  high  flutter  of  expectation.  The  gen¬ 
tleman,  provoked  at  his  inordinate  vanity,  resolved 
not  to  indulge  it,  and  with  an  exquisitely  sly  air  of 
indifference  answered,  “A  mere  trifle,  Sir,  not 
worth  repeating.”  The  mortification  of  Richard¬ 
son  was  visible,  and  he  did  not  speak  ten  words 
more  the  whole  day.  Dr.  Johnson  was  present,  and 
appeared  to  enjoy  it  much. 


1780] 

not  directing  his  look  to  any  particular  person, 
called  out,  ‘Are  we  alive  after  all  this  satire  P 55 

“He  had  a  strong  prejudice  against  the  politi¬ 
cal  character  of  Seeker,  one  instance  of  which 
appeared  at  Oxford,  where  he  expressed  great 
dissatisfaction  at  his  varying  the  old  established 
toast,  cChurch  and  King.5  £The  Archbishop  of 
Canterbury,5  said  he  (with  an  affected  smooth 
smiling  grimace,)  ‘drinks,  “Constitution  in 
Church  and  State.55  5  Being  asked  what  differ¬ 
ence  there  was  between  the  two  toasts,  he  said, 
‘Why,  Sir,  you  may  be  sure  he  meant  something.5 
Yet  when  the  life  of  that  prelate,  prefixed  to  his 
sermons  by  Dr.  Porteus  and  Dr.  Stinton  his  chap¬ 
lains,  first  came  out,  he  read  it  with  the  utmost 
avidity,  and  said,  ‘It  is  a  life  well  written,  and 
that  well  deserves  to  be  recorded.555 

“Of  a  certain  noble  Lord,  he  said,  ‘Respect 
him,  you  could  not;  for  he  had  no  mind  of  his 
own.  Love  him  you  could  not;  for  that  which 
you  could  do  with  him,  every  one  else  could.5  55 

“Of  Dr.  Goldsmith  he  said,  ‘No  man  was 
more  foolish  when  he  had  not  a  pen  in  his  hand, 
or  more  wise  when  he  had.555 

“He  told  in  his  lively  manner  the  following 
literary  anecdote:  ‘Green  and  Guthrie,  an  Irish¬ 
man  and  a  Scotchman,  undertook  a  translation 
of  Duhalde’s  History  of  China.  Green  said  of  Guth¬ 
rie,  that  he  knew  no  English,  and  Guthrie  of 
Green,  that  he  knew  no  French;  and  these  two 
undertook  to  translate  Duhalde’s  History  of  Chi¬ 
na.  In  this  translation  there  was  found  ‘the  twen¬ 
ty-sixth  day  of  the  new  moon.5  Now  as  the  whole 
age  of  the  moon  is  but  twenty-eight  days,  the 
moon  instead  of  being  new,  was  nearly  as  old  as 
it  could  be.  Their  blunder  arose  from  their  mis¬ 
taking  the  word  neuvieme  ninth,  for  nouvelle  or 
neuve ,  new.555 

“Talking  of  Dr.  Blagden’s  copiousness  and 
precision  of  communication,  Dr.  Johnson  said, 
‘Blagden,  Sir,  is  a  delightful  fellow.555 

“On  occasion  of  Dr.  Johnson’s  publishing  his 
pamphlet  of  The  False  Alarm ,  there  came  out  a 
very  angry  answer  (by  many  supposed  to  be  by 
Mr.  Wilkes).  Dr.  Johnson  determined  on  not 
answering  it;  but,  in  conversation  with  Mr.  Lang- 
ton,  mentioned  a  particular  or  two,  which  if  he 
had  replied  to  it,  he  might  perhaps  have  inserted. 
In  the  answerer’s  pamphlet,  it  had  been  said 
with  solemnity,  ‘Do  you  consider,  Sir,  that  a 
House  of  Commons  is  to  the  people  as  a  Crea¬ 
ture  is  to  its  Creator?5  To  this  question,  said  Dr. 
Johnson,  I  could  have  replied,  that — in  the  first 
place — the  idea  of  a  Creator  must  be  such  as 
that  He  has  a  power  to  unmake  or  annihilate 
His  creature.55 


451 

“Then  it  cannot  be  conceived  that  a  creature 
can  make  laws  for  its  Creator.5’1 

“Depend  upon  it,  said  he,  that  if  a  man  talks 
of  his  misfortunes,  there  is  something  in  them 
that  is  not  disagreeable  to  him;  for  where  there 
is  nothing  but  pure  misery,  there  never  is  any 
recourse  to  the  mention  of  it.” 

“A  man  must  be  a  poor  beast  that  should  read 
no  more  in  quantity  than  he  could  utter  aloud.55 

“Imlac  in  Rasselas ,  I  spelt  with  a  c  at  the  end, 
because  it  is  less  like  English,  which  should  al¬ 
ways  have  the  Saxon  k  added  to  the  c.”2 

“Many  a  man  is  mad  in  certain  instances, 
and  goes  through  life  without  having  it  per¬ 
ceived:  for  example,  a  madness  has  seized  a  per¬ 
son  of  supposing  himself  obliged  literally  to  pray 
continually — had  the  madness  turned  the  oppo¬ 
site  way  and  the  person  thought  it  a  crime  ever 
to  pray,  it  might  not  improbably  have  contin¬ 
ued  unobserved.” 

“He  apprehended  that  the  delineation  of  char¬ 
acters  in  the  end  of  the  first  Book  of  the  Retreat  of 
the  Ten  Thousand  was  the  first  instance  of  the  kind 
that  was  known.” 

“Supposing  (said  he,)  a  wife  to  be  of  a  studious 
or  argumentative  turn,  it  would  be  very  trouble¬ 
some:  for  instance, — if  a  woman  should  continu¬ 
ally  dwell  upon  the  subject  of  the  Arian  heresy.55 

“No  man  speaks  concerning  another,  even 
suppose  it  be  in  his  praise,  if  he  thinks  he  does 
not  hear  him,  exactly  as  he  would,  if  he  thought 
he  was  within  hearing.55 

“  ‘The  applause  of  a  single  human  being  is  of 
great  consequence.5  This  he  said  to  me  with 
great  earnestness  of  manner,  very  near  the  time 
of  his  decease,  on  occasion  of  having  desired  me 
to  read  a  letter  addressed  to  him  from  some  per¬ 
son  in  the  North  of  England;  which  when  I  had 
done,  and  he  asked  me  what  the  contents  were, 
as  I  thought  being  particular  upon  it  might  fa¬ 
tigue  him,  it  being  of  great  length,  i  only  told 
him  in  general  that  it  was  highly  in  his  praise; — 
and  then  he  expressed  himself  as  above.” 

“He  mentioned  with  an  air  of  satisfaction  what 
Baretti  had  told  him;  that,  meeting,  in  the  course 

*His  profound  admiration  of  the  Great  First 
Cause  was  such  as  to  set  him  above  that  “Philoso¬ 
phy  and  vain  deceit”  [Colossians,  2.  8]  with  which 
men  of  narrower  conceptions  have  been  infected.  I 
have  heard  him  strongly  maintain  that  “what  is 
right  is  not  so  from  any  natural  fitness,  but  because 
God  wills  it  to  be  right”;  and  it  is  certainly  so,  be¬ 
cause  He  has  predisposed  the  relations  of  things  so 
as  that  which  He  wills  must  be  right. 

2I  hope  the  authority  of  the  great  Master  of  our 
language  will  stop  that  curtailing  innovation,  by 
which  we  see  critic ,  public ,  &c.,  frequently  written 
instead  of  critick ,  publick ,  &c. 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


452 

of  his  studying  English,  with  an  excellent  paper 
in  the  Spectator ,  one  of  four  that  were  written  by 
the  respectable  Dissenting  Minister,  Mr.  Grove 
of  Taunton,  and  observing  the  genius  and  ener¬ 
gy  of  mind  that  it  exhibits,  it  greatly  quickened 
his  curiosity  to  visit  our  country;  as  he  thought 
if  such  were  the  lighter  periodical  essays  of  our 
authours,  their  productions  on  more  weighty  oc¬ 
casions  must  be  wonderful  indeed !” 

“He  observed  once,  at  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds’s, 
that  a  beggar  in  the  street  will  more  readily  ask 
alms  from  a  man,  though  there  should  be  no 
marks  of  wealth  in  his  appearance,  than  from 
even  a  well-dressed  woman;1  which  he  accounted 
for  from  the  greater  degree  of  carefulness  as  to 
money  that  is  to  be  found  in  women;  saying  far¬ 
ther  upon  it,  that  the  opportunities  in  general 
that  they  possess  of  improving  their  condition 
are  much  fewer  than  men  have;  and  adding,  as 
he  looked  round  the  company,  which  consisted 
of  men  only, — there  is  not  one  of  us  who  does 
not  think  he  might  be  richer  if  he  would  use  his 
endeavour.” 

“He  thus  characterised  an  ingenious  writer  of 
his  acquaintance:  £Sir,  he  is  an  enthusiast  by 
rule.’” 

“  ‘He  may  hold  up  that  shield  against  all  his  ene¬ 
mies' ; — was  an  observation  on  Homer,  in  refer¬ 
ence  to  his  description  of  the  shield  of  Achilles, 
made  by  Mrs.  Fitzherbert,  wife  to  his  friend  Mr. 
Fitzherbert  of  Derbyshire,  and  respected  by  Dr. 
Johnson  as  a  very  fine  one.  He  had  in  general  a 
very  high  opinion  of  that  lady’s  understanding.” 

“An  observation  of  Bathurst’s  may  be  men¬ 
tioned,  which  Johnson  repeated,  appearing  to 
acknowledge  it  to  be  well  founded,  namely,  it 
was  somewhat  remarkable  how  seldom,  on  oc¬ 
casion  of  coming  into  the  company  of  any  new 
person,  one  felt  any  wish  or  inclination  to  see 
him  again.” 

This  year  the  Reverend  Dr.  Franklin  having 
published  a  translation  of  Lucian ,  inscribed  to 
him  the  Demonax  thus: — 

To  Dr.  Samuel  Johnson,  the  Demonax  of 
the  present  age,  this  piece  is  inscribed  by  a  sin¬ 
cere  admirer  of  his  respectable  talents, 

The  Translator 

Though  upon  a  particular  comparison  of  De¬ 
monax  and  Johnson,  there  does  not  seem  to  be  a 
great  deal  of  similarity  between  them,  this  Dedi¬ 
cation  is  a  just  compliment  from  the  general 
character  given  by  Lucian  of  the  ancient  Sage, 
4 apurrov  03V  oloa  eyo)  </>tXo<r60co^  yevofievov ,  the  best 
philosopher  whom  I  have  ever  seen  or  known.’ 

Sterne  is  of  a  direct  contrary  opinion.  See  his 
Sentimental  Journey ,  Article,  “The  Mystery.” 


[  1781 

1781 :  ait  at.  72] — In  i  781  Johnson  at  last  com¬ 
pleted  his  Lives  of  the  Poets ,  of  which  he  gives  this 
this  account:  “Some  time  in  March  I  finished 
the  Lives  of  the  Poets ,  which  I  wrote  in  my  usual 
way,  dilatorily  and  hastily,  unwilling  to  work, 
and  working  with  vigour  and  haste.”2  In  a  mem¬ 
orandum  previous  to  this,  he  says  of  them :  ^Writ¬ 
ten,  I  hope,  in  such  a  manner  as  may  tend  to 
the  promotion  of  piety.”3 

This  is  the  work  which  of  all  Dr.  Johnson’s 
writings  will  perhaps  be  read  most  generally, 
and  with  most  pleasure.  Philology  and  biography 
were  his  favourite  pursuits,  and  those  who  lived 
most  in  intimacy  with  him,  heard  him  upon  all 
occasions,  when  there  was  a  proper  opportuni¬ 
ty,  take  delight  in  expatiating  upon  the  various 
merits  of  the  English  Poets:  upon  the  niceties  of 
their  characters,  and  the  events  of  their  progress 
through  the  world  which  they  contributed  to  il¬ 
luminate.  His  mind  was  so  full  of  that  kind  of 
information,  and  it  was  so  well  arranged  in  his 
memory,  that  in  performing  what  he  had  under¬ 
taken  in  this  way,  he  had  little  more  to  do  than 
to  put  his  thoughts  upon  paper,  exhibiting  first 
each  Poet’s  life,  and  then  subjoining  a  critical 
examination  of  his  genius  and  works.  But  when 
he  began  to  write,  the  subject  swelled  in  such  a 
manner,  that  instead  of  prefaces  to  each  poet,  of 
no  more  than  a  few  pages,  as  he  had  originally 
intended,4  he  produced  an  ample,  rich,  and  most 
entertaining  view  of  them  in  every  respect.  In 
this  he  resembled  Quintilian,  who  tells  us,  that 
in  the  composition  of  his  Institutions  of  Oratory , 
Latins  se  tamen  aperiente  materia ,  plus  quam  impone - 
batur  oneris  sponte  suscepi.  The  booksellers,  justly 
sensible  of  the  great  additional  value  of  the  copy¬ 
right,  presented  him  with  another  hundred 
pounds,  over  and  above  two  hundred,  for  which 
his  agreement  was  to  furnish  such  prefaces  as  he 
thought  fit. 

This  was,  however,  but  a  small  recompence 
for  such  a  collection  of  biography,  and  such  princi¬ 
ples  and  illustrations  of  criticism,  as,  if  digested 
and  arranged  in  one  system,  by  some  modern 

2 Prayers  and  Meditations ,  p.  190. 

Hbid .,  p.  174. 

4His  design  is  thus  announced  in  his  Advertise¬ 
ment:  “The  Booksellers  having  determined  to  pub¬ 
lish  a  body  of  English  Poetry,  I  was  persuaded  to 
promise  them  a  Preface  to  the  works  of  each  au- 
thour;  an  undertaking,  as  it  was  then  presented  to 
my  mind,  not  very  tedious  or  difficult. 

“My  purpose  was  only  to  have  allotted  to  every 
poet  an  Advertisement,  like  that  [in  original  those ] 
which  we  find  in  the  French  Miscellanies,  contain¬ 
ing  a  few  dates,  and  a  general  character;  but  I 
have  been  led  beyond  my  intention,  I  hope  by  the 
honest  desire  of  giving  useful  pleasure.” 


BOSWELL 


1781]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  453 


Aristotle  or  Longinus,  might  form  a  code  upon 
that  subject,  such  as  no  other  nation  can  shew. 
As  he  was  so  good  as  to  make  me  a  present  of  the 
greatest  part  of  the  original  and  indeed  only 
manuscript  of  this  admirable  work,  I  have  an 
opportunity  of  observing  with  wonder,  the  cor¬ 
rectness  with  which  he  rapidly  struck  off  such 
glowing  composition.  He  may  be  assimilated  to 
the  Lady  in  Waller,  who  could  impress  with 
“Love  at  first  sight55: 

Some  other  nymphs  with  colours  faints 
And  pencil  slow  may  Cupid  paint , 

And  a  weak  heart  in  time  destroy; 

She  has  a  stamp ,  and  prints  the  boy . 

That  he  however,  had  a  good  deal  of  trouble, 
and  some  anxiety  in  carrying  on  the  work,  we  see 
from  a  series  of  letters  to  Mr.  Nichols  the  printer,1 

FThus: — “In  the  Life  of  Waller ,  Mr.  Nichols  will 
find  a  reference  to  the  Parliamentary  History  from 
which  a  long  quotation  is  to  be  inserted.  If  Mr. 
Nichols  cannot  easily  find  the  book,  Mr.  Johnson 
will  send  it  from  Streatham.” 

“Clarendon  is  here  returned.” 

“By  some  accident,  I  laid  your  note  upon  Duke 
up  so  safely,  that  I  cannot  find  it.  Your  informa¬ 
tions  have  been  of  great  use  to  me.  I  must  beg  it 
again ;  with  another  list  of  our  authours,  for  I  have 
laid  that  with  the  other.  I  have  sent  Stepney’s  Epi¬ 
taph.  Let  me  have  the  revises  as  soon  as  can  be. 
Dec.  1778.” 

“I  have  sent  Philips,  with  his  Epitaphs,  to  be  in¬ 
serted.  The  fragment  of  a  preface  is  hardly  worth 
the  impression,  but  that  we  may  seem  to  do  some¬ 
thing.  It  may  be  added  to  the  Life  of  Philips .  The 
Latin  page  is  to  be  added  to  the  Life  of  Smith.  I 
shall  be  at  home  to  revise  the  two  sheets  of  Milton. 
March  1,  1779.55 

“Please  to  get  me  the  last  edition  of  Hughes’s 
Letters ;  and  try  to  get  Dennis  upon  Blackmore ,  and 
upon  Cato ,  and  any  thing  of  the  same  writer  against 
Pope.  Our  materials  are  defective.” 

“As  Waller  professed  to  have  imitated  Fairfax, 
do  you  think  a  few  pages  of  Fairfax  would  enrich 
our  edition?  Few  readers  have  seen  it,  and  it  may 
please  them.  But  it  is  not  necessary.” 

“  6  An  account  of  the  Lives  and  works  of  some  of 
the  most  eminent  English  Poets.  By,’  &c. — ‘The 
English  Poets,  biographically  and  critically  con¬ 
sidered,  by  Sam.  Johnson.’ — Let  Mr.  Nichols  take 
his  choice,  or  make  another  to  his  mind.  May, 
1781.” 

“You  somehow  forgot  the  advertisement  for  the 
new  edition.  It  was  not  inclosed.  Of  Gay’s  Letters  I 
see  not  that  any  use  can  be  made,  for  they  give  no 
information  of  any  thing.  That  he  was  a  member 
of  the  Philosophical  Society  is  something;  but  sure¬ 
ly  he  could  be  but  a  corresponding  member.  How¬ 
ever,  not  having  his  life  here,  I  know  not  how  to 
put  it  in,  and  it  is  of  little  importance.” 

See  several  more  in  The  Gentleman's  Magazine , 
1785.  The  Editor  of  that  Miscellany,  in  which 
Johnson  wrote  for  several  years,  seems  justly  to 
think  that  every  fragment  of  so  great  a  man  is 
worthy  of  being  preserved. 


whose  variety  of  literary  inquiry  and  obliging 
disposition,  rendered  him  useful  to  Johnson.  Mr. 
Steevens  appears,  from  the  papers  in  my  posses¬ 
sion,  to  have  supplied  him  with  some  anecdotes 
and  quotations;  and  I  observe  the  fair  hand  of 
Mrs.  Thrale  as  one  of  his  copyists  of  select  pas¬ 
sages.  But  he  was  principally  indebted  to  my 
steady  friend  Mr.  Isaac  Reed,  of  Staple-inn, 
whose  extensive  and  accurate  knowledge  of  Eng¬ 
lish  literary  history  I  do  not  express  with  exag¬ 
geration,  when  I  say  it  is  wonderful;  indeed  his 
labours  have  proved  it  to  the  world;  and  all  who 
have  the  pleasure  of  his  acquaintance  can  bear 
testimony  to  the  frankness  of  his  communica¬ 
tions  in  private  society. 

It  is  not  my  intention  to  dwell  upon  each  of 
Johnson’s  Lives  of  the  Poets ,  or  attempt  an  analy¬ 
sis  of  their  merits,  which,  were  I  able  to  do  it, 
would  take  up  too  much  room  in  this  work;  yet 
I  shall  make  a  few  observations  upon  some  of 
them,  and  insert  a  few  various  readings. 

The  Life  of  Cowley  he  himself  considered  as 
the  best  of  the  whole,  on  account  of  the  disserta¬ 
tion  which  it  contains  on  the  Metaphysical  Poets. 
Dryden,  whose  critical  abilities  were  equal  to 
his  poetical,  had  mentioned  them  in  his  excellent 
Dedication  of  his  Juvenal,  but  had  barely  men¬ 
tioned  them.  Johnson  has  exhibited  them  at  large, 
with  such  happy  illustration  from  their  writings, 
and  in  so  luminous  a  manner,  that  indeed  he 
may  be  allowed  the  full  merit  of  novelty,  and  to 
have  discovered  to  us,  as  it  were,  a  new  planet 
in  the  poetical  hemisphere. 

It  is  remarked  by  Johnson,  in  considering  the 
works  of  a  poet,2  that  “amendments  are  seldom 
made  without  some  token  of  a  rent55;  but  I  do 
not  find  that  this  is  applicable  to  prose.3  We  shall 
see  that  though  his  amendments  in  this  work 
are  for  the  better,  there  is  nothing  of  the  pannus 
assutus;  the  texture  is  uniform:  and  indeed,  what 
had  been  there  at  first,  is  very  seldom  unfit  to 
have  remained. 

Various  Readings 4  in  the  Life  of  Cowley 

“All  [future  votaries  of]  that  may  hereafter  pant 
for  solitude. 

“To  conceive  and  execute  the  [agitation  or 
perception]  pains  and  the  pleasures  of  other  minds. 

“The  wide  effulgence  of  [the  blazing]  a  sum¬ 
mer  noon.55 

2Life  of  Sheffield. 

3See,  however,  p.  445  of  this  volume,  where  the 
same  remark  is  made  and  Johnson  is  there  speak¬ 
ing  of  prose.  [M.] 

4The  original  reading  is  enclosed  in  crotchets, 
and  the  present  one  is  printed  in  Italicks. 


454 

In  the  Life  of  Waller,  Johnson  gives  a  dis¬ 
tinct  and  animated  narrative  of  publick  affairs 
in  that  variegated  period,  with  strong  yet  nice 
touches  of  character;  and  having  a  fair  oppor¬ 
tunity  to  display  his  political  principles,  does  it 
with  an  unqualified  manly  confidence,  and  sat¬ 
isfies  his  readers  how  nobly  he  might  have  exe¬ 
cuted  a  Tory  History  of  his  country. 

So  easy  is  his  style  in  these  Lives,  that  I  do  not 
recollect  more  than  three  uncommon  or  learned 
words;  one,  when  giving  an  account  of  the  ap¬ 
proach  of  Waller’s  mortal  disease,  he  says  “he 
found  his  legs  grow  tumid”;  by  using  the  expres¬ 
sion  his  legs  swelled ,  he  would  have  avoided  this; 
and  there  would  have  been  no  impropriety  in  its 
being  followed  by  the  interesting  question  to  his 
physician,  “What  that  swelling  meant?”  Anoth¬ 
er,  when  he  mentions  that  Pope  had  emitted  pro¬ 
posals;  when  published  or  issued  would  have  been 
more  readily  understood;  and  a  third,  when  he 
calls  Orrery  and  Dr.  Delany,  writers  both  un¬ 
doubtedly  veracious ;  w’hen  true ,  honest ,  or  faithful, 
might  have  been  used.  Yet,  it  must  be  owned, 
that  none  of  these  are  hard  or  too  big  words;  that 
custom  would  make  them  seem  as  easy  as  any 
others;  and  that  a  language  is  richer  and  capa¬ 
ble  of  more  beauty  of  expression,  by  having  a 
greater  variety  of  synonimes. 

His  dissertation  upon  the  unfitness  of  poetry 
for  the  aweful  subjects  of  our  holy  religion, 
though  I  do  not  entirely  agree  with  him,  has  all 
the  merit  of  originality,  with  uncommon  force 
and  reasoning. 

Various  Readings  in  the 
Life  of  Waller 

“Consented  to  [the  insertion  of  their  names] 
their  own  nomination. 

“[After]  paying  a  fine  of  ten  thousand  pounds. 

“Congratulating  Charles  the  Second  on  his 
[coronation]  recovered  right. 

“He  that  has  flattery  ready  for  all  whom  the 
vicissitudes  of  the  world  happen  to  exalt,  must 
be  [confessed  to  degrade  his  powers]  scorned  as  a 
prostituted  mind. 

“The  characters  by  which  Waller  intended  to 
distinguish  his  writings  are  [elegance]  sprightli¬ 
ness  and  dignity. 

“Blossoms  to  be  valued  only  as  they  [fetch] 
foretell  fruits. 

“Images  such  as  the  superficies  of  nature  [eas¬ 
ily]  readily  supplies. 

“'[His]  Some  applications  [are  sometimes]  may 
be  thought  too  remote  and  unconsequential. 

“His  images  are  [sometimes  confused]  not  al¬ 
ways  distinct.” 


[  1781 

Against  his  Life  of  Milton,  the  hounds  of 
Whiggism  have  opened  in  full  cry.  But  of  Mil¬ 
ton’s  great  excellence  as  a  poet,  where  shall  we 
find  such  a  blazon  as  by  the  hand  of  Johnson?  I 
shall  select  only  the  following  passage  concern¬ 
ing  Paradise  Lost: 

“Fancy  can  hardly  forbear  to  conjecture  with 
what  temper  Milton  surveyed  the  silent  progress 
of  his  work,  and  marked  his  reputation  stealing 
its  way  in  a  kind  of  subterraneous  current,  through 
fear  and  silence.  I  cannot  but  conceive  him  calm 
and  confident,  little  disappointed,  not  at  all  de¬ 
jected,  relying  on  his  own  merit  with  steady  con¬ 
sciousness,  and  waiting  without  impatience  the 
vicissitudes  of  opinion,  and  the  impartiality  of  a 
future  generation.” 

Indeed  even  Dr.  Towers,  who  may  be  con¬ 
sidered  as  one  of  the  warmest  zealots  of  The  Rev¬ 
olution  Society  itself,  allows,  that  “Johnson  has 
spoken  in  the  highest  terms  of  the  abilities  of  that 
great  poet,  and  has  bestowed  on  his  principal 
poetical  compositions  the  most  honourable  en¬ 
comiums.”1 

That  a  man,  who  venerated  the  Church  and 
Monarchy  as  Johnson  did,  should  speak  with  a 
just  abhorrence  of  Milton  as  a  politician,  or  rather 
as  a  daring  foe  to  good  polity,  was  surely  to  be 
expected;  and  to  those  who  censure  him,  I  would 
recommend  his  commentary  on  Milton’s  cele¬ 
brated  complaint  of  his  situation,  when  by  the 
lenity  of  Charles  the  Second,  “a  lenity  of  which 
(as  Johnson  well  observes)  the  world  has  had 
perhaps  no  other  example,  he,  who  had  written 
in  justification  of  the  murder  of  his  Sovereign, 
was  safe  under  an  Act  of  Oblivion.” 

^ee  An  Essay  on  the  Life ,  Character ,  and  writings  of 
Dr.  Samuel  Johnson ,  London,  1787;  which  is  very 
well  written,  making  a  proper  allowance  for  the 
democratical  bigotry  of  its  authour;  whom  I  can¬ 
not  however  but  admire  for  his  liberality  in  speak¬ 
ing  thus  of  my  illustrious  friend: 

“He  possessed  extraordinary  powers  of  under¬ 
standing,  which  were  much  cultivated  by  study, 
and  still  more  by  meditation  and  reflection.  His 
memory  was  remarkably  retentive,  his  imagina¬ 
tion  uncommonly  vigorous,  and  his  judgement  keen 
and  penetrating.  He  had  a  strong  sense  of  the 
importance  of  religion;  his  piety  was  sincere,  and 
sometimes  ardent;  and  his  zeal  for  the  interests  of 
virtue  was  often  manifested  in  his  conversation  and 
in  his  writings.  The  same  energy  which  was  dis¬ 
played  in  his  literary  productions  was  exhibited 
also  in  his  conversation,  which  was  various,  strik¬ 
ing,  and  instructive;  and  perhaps  no  man  ever 
equalled  him  for  nervous  and  pointed  repartees.” 

“His  Dictionary ,  his  moral  Essays ,  and  his  pro¬ 
ductions  in  polite  literature,  will  convey  useful  in¬ 
struction,  and  elegant  entertainment,  as  long  as 
the  language  in  which  they  are  written  shall  be 
understood.” 


BOSWELL 


1781  ] 

“No  sooner  is  he  safe  than  he  finds  himself  in 
danger,  fallen  on  evil  days  and  evil  tongues ,  [and] 
with  darkness  and  with  danger  compassed  round .  This 
darkness,  had  his  eyes  been  better  employed, 
had  undoubtedly  deserved  compassion;  but  to 
add  the  mention  of  danger,  was  ungrateful  and 
unjust.  He  was  fallen,  indeed,  on  evil  days;  the 
time  was  come  in  which  regicides  could  no  long¬ 
er  boast  their  wickedness.  But  of  evil  tongues  for 
Milton  to  complain,  required  impudence  at  least 
equal  to  his  other  powers;  Milton,  whose  warm¬ 
est  advocates  must  allow,  that  he  never  spared 
any  asperity  of  reproach,  or  brutality  of  inso¬ 
lence.’5 

I  have,  indeed,  often  wondered  how  Milton, 
“an  acrimonious  and  surly  Republican,” — “a 
man  who  in  his  domestick  relations  was  so  severe 
and  arbitrary,”  and  whose  head  was  filled  with 
the  hardest  and  most  dismal  tenets  of  Calvinism, 
should  have  been  such  a  poet;  should  not  only 
have  written  with  sublimity,  but  with  beauty, 
and  even  gaiety;  should  have  exquisitely  painted 
the  sweetest  sensations  of  which  our  nature  is 
capable;  imaged  the  delicate  raptures  of  connu¬ 
bial  love;  nay,  seemed  to  be  animated  with  all 
the  spirit  of  revelry.  It  is  a  proof  that  in  the 
human  mind  the  departments  of  judgement  and 
imagination,  perception  and  temper,  may  some¬ 
times  be  divided  by  strong  partitions;  and  that 
the  light  and  shade  in  the  same  character  may 
be  kept  so  distinct  as  never  to  be  blended.1 

In  the  Life  of  Milton,  Johnson  took  occasion 
to  maintain  his  own  and  the  general  opinion  of 
the  excellence  of  rhyme  over  blank  verse,  in 
English  poetry;  and  quotes  this  apposite  illus¬ 
tration  of -it  by  “an  ingenious  critick,”  that  it 
seems  to  be  verse  only  to  the  eye.2  The  gentleman 
whom  he  thus  characterises,  is  (as  he  told  Mr. 
Seward)  Mr.  Lock,  of  Norbury  Park,  in  Surrey, 
whose  knowledge  and  taste  in  the  fine  arts  is 
universally  celebrated;  with  whose  elegance  of 
manners  the  writer  of  the  present  work  has  felt 
himself  much  impressed,  and  to  whose  virtues  a 
common  friend,  who  has  known  him  long,  and  is 
not  much  addicted  to  flattery,  gives  the  highest 
testimony. 

1Mr.  Malone  thinks  it  is  rather  a  proof  that  he 
felt  nothing  of  those  cheerful  sensations  which  he 
has  described:  that  on  these  topicks  it  is  the  poet, 
and  not  the  man,  that  writes. 

2One  of  the  most  natural  instances  of  the  effect 
of  blank  verse  occurred  to  the  late  Earl  of  Hope- 
ton.  His  Lordship  observed  one  of  his  shepherds 
poring  in  the  fields  upon  Milton’s  Paradise  Lost ; 
and  having  asked  him  what  book  it  was,  the  man 
answered,  “An’t  please  your  Lordship,  this  is  a 
very  odd  sort  of  an  authour:  he  would  fain  rhyme, 
but  cannot  get  at  it.” 


455 

Various  Readings  in  the  Life  of  Milton 
“I  cannot  find  any  meaning  but  this  which 
[his  most  bigotted  advocates]  even  kindness  and 
reverence  can  give. 

“[Perhaps  no]  scarcely  any  man  ever  wrote  so 
much,  and  praised  so  few. 

“A  certain  [rescue]  preservative  from  oblivion. 
“Let  me  not  be  censured  for  this  digression, 
as  [contracted]  pedantick  or  paradoxical. 

“Socrates  rather  was  of  opinion,  that  what  we 
had  to  learn  was  how  to  [obtain  and  communi¬ 
cate  happiness]  do  good  and  avoid  evil. 

“Its  elegance  [who  can  exhibit?]  is  less  attain¬ 
able.” 

I  could,  with  pleasure,  expatiate  upon  the 
masterly  execution  of  the  Life  of  Dryden,  which 
we  have  seen3  was  one  of  Johnson’s  literary  pro¬ 
jects  at  an  early  period,  and  which  it  is  remark¬ 
able,  that  after  desisting  from  it,  from  a  sup¬ 
posed  scantiness  of  materials,  he  should,  at  an 
advanced  age,  have  exhibited  so  amply. 

His  defence  of  that  great  poet  against  the  il¬ 
liberal  attacks  upon  him,  as  if  his  embracing  the 
Roman  Catholick  communion  had  been  a  time¬ 
serving  measure,  is  a  piece  of  reasoning  at  once 
able  and  candid.  Indeed,  Dryden  himself,  in  his 
Hind  and  Panther ,  has  given  such  a  picture  of  his 
mind,  that  they  who  know  the  anxiety  for  re¬ 
pose  as  to  the  aweful  subject  of  our  state  beyond 
the  grave,  though  they  may  think  his  opinion 
ill-founded,  must  think  charitably  of  his  senti¬ 
ment: 

But ,  gracious  God,  how  well  dost  thou  provide 
For  erring  judgements  an  unerring  guide! 

Thy  throne  is  darkness  in  the  abyss  of  light, 

A  blaze  of  glory  that forbids  the  sight. 

O /  teach  me  to  believe  thee  thus  conceal'd , 

And  search  no  farther  than  thyself  reveal'd; 

But  Her  alone  for  my  director  take , 

Whom  thou  has  promis'd  never  to  forsake. 

My  thoughtless  youth  was  wing'd  with  vain  desires; 
My  manhood  long  misled  by  wand' ring  fires, 

Follow'd false  lights;  and  when  their  glimpse  was  gone. 
My  pride  struck  out  new  sparkles  of  her  own. 

Such  was  I,  such  by  Nature  still  I  am; 

Be  thine  the  glory,  and  be  mine  the  shame. 

Good  life  be  now  my  task:  my  doubts  are  done ; 

What  more  could  shock  my  faith  than  Three  in  One? 

In  drawing  Dryden’s  character,  Johnson  has 
given,  though  I  suppose  unintentionally,  some 
touches  of  his  own.  Thus: — “The  power  that 
predominated  in  his  intellectual  operations  was 
rather  strong  reason  than  quick  sensibility.  Upon 
all  occasions  that  were  presented,  he  studied 
rather  than  felt;  and  produced  sentiments  not 
such  as  Nature  enforces,  but  meditation  supplies. 
3See  p.  319. 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


BOSWELL 


456 

With  the  simple  and  elemental  passions  as  they 
spring  separate  in  the  mind,  he  seems  not  much 
acquainted.  He  is,  therefore,  with  all  his  variety 
of  excellence,  not  often  pathetick;  and  had  so 
little  sensibility  of  the  power  of  effusions  purely 
natural,  that  he  did  not  esteem  them  in  others.” 
It  may  indeed  be  observed,  that  in  all  the  num¬ 
erous  writings  of  Johnson,  whether  in  prose  or 
verse,  and  even  in  his  Tragedy,  of  which  the 
subject  is  the  distress  of  an  unfortunate  Princess, 
there  is  not  a  single  passage  that  ever  drew  a  tear. 

Various  Readings  in  the  Life  of  Dryden 

“The  reason  of  this  general  perusal,  Addison 
has  attempted  to  [find  in]  derive  from  the  delight 
which  the  mind  feels  in  the  investigation  of  se¬ 
crets. 

“His  best  actions  are  but  [convenient]  inability 
of  wickedness. 

“When  once  he  had  engaged  himself  in  dispu¬ 
tation,  [matter]  thoughts  flowed  in  on  either  side. 

“The  abyss  of  an  un-ideal  [emptiness]  vacancy. 

“These,  like  [many  other  harlots,]  the  harlots  of 
other  men ,  had  his  love  though  not  his  approba¬ 
tion. 

“He  [sometimes  displays]  descends  to  display  his 
knowledge  with  pedantick  ostentation. 

“French  words  which  [were  then  used  in]  had 
then  crept  into  conversation.” 

The  Life  of  Pope  was  written  by  Johnson  con 
amore ,  both  from  the  early  possession  which  that 
writer  had  taken  of  his  mind,  and  from  the  pleas¬ 
ure  which  he  must  have  felt,  in  for  ever  silencing 
all  attempts  to  lessen  his  poetical  fame  by  dem¬ 
onstrating  his  excellence,  and  pronouncing  the 
following  triumphant  eulogium: — “After  all  this, 
it  is  surely  superfluous  to  answer  the  question 
that  has  once  been  asked,  Whether  Pope  was  a 
poet?  otherwise  than  by  asking  in  return,  If  Pope 
be  not  a  poet,  where  is  poetry  to  be  found?  To 
circumscribe  poetry  by  a  definition,  will  only 
shew  the  narrowness  of  the  definer ;  though  a  def¬ 
inition  which  shall  exclude  Pope  will  not  easily 
be  made.  Let  us  look  round  upon  the  present 
time,  and  back  upon  the  past;  let  us  enquire  to 
whom  the  voice  of  mankind  has  decreed  the 
wreath  of  poetry;  let  their  productions  be  ex¬ 
amined,  and  their  claims  stated,  and  the  pre¬ 
tensions  of  Pope  will  be  no  more  disputed.” 

I  remember  once  to  have  heard  Johnson  say, 
“Sir,  a  thousand  years  may  elapse  before  there 
shall  appear  another  man  with  a  power  of  versi¬ 
fication  equal  to  that  of  Pope.”  That  power  must 
undoubtedly  be  allowed  its  due  share  in  enhanc¬ 
ing  the  value  of  his  captivating  composition. 


[  1781 

Johnson,  who  had  done  liberal  justice  to  War- 
burton  in  his  edition  of  Shakspeare ,  which  was 
published  during  the  life  of  that  powerful  writer, 
with  still  greater  liberality  took  an  opportunity 
in  the  Life  of  Pope ,  of  paying  the  tribute  due  to 
him  when  he  was  no  longer  in  “high  place,”  but 
numbered  with  the  dead.1 

JOf  Johnson’s  conduct  towards  Warburton,  a 
very  honourable  notice  is  taken  by  the  editor  of 
Tracts  by  Warburton  and  a  War  bur  Ionian,  not  admitted 
into  the  Collection  of  their  'iespective  Works.  After  an 
able  and  “fond,  though  not  undistinguishing,” 
consideration  of  Warburton’s  character,  he  says, 
“In  two  immortal  works,  Johnson  has  stood  forth 
in  the  foremost  rank  of  his  admirers.  By  the  testi¬ 
mony  of  such  a  man,  impertinence  must  be  abashed, 
and  malignity  itself  must  be  softened.  Of  literary 
merit,  Johnson,  as  wc  all  know,  was  a  sagacious 
but  a  most  severe  judge.  Such  was  his  discernment, 
that  he  pierced  into  the  most  secret  springs  of  hu¬ 
man  actions;  and  such  was  his  integrity,  that  he 
always  weighed  the  moral  characters  of  his  fellow- 
creatures  in  the  ‘balance  of  the  sanctuary.’  He  was 
too  courageous  to  propitiate  a  rival,  and  too  proud 
to  truckle  to  a  superiour.  Warburton  he  knew,  as  I 
know  him,  and  as  every  man  of  sense  and  virtue 
would  wish  to  be  known, — I  mean,  both  from  his 
own  writings,  and  from  the  writings  of  those  who 
dissented  from  his  principles,  or  who  envied  his 
reputation.  But,  as  to  favours,  he  had  never  re¬ 
ceived  or  asked  any  from  the  Bishop  of  Gloucester; 
and,  if  my  memory  fails  me  not,  he  had  seen  him 
only  once,  when  they  met  almost  without  design, 
conversed  without  much  effort,  and  parted  with¬ 
out  any  lasting  impressions  of  hatred  or  affection. 
Yet,  with  all  the  ardour  of  sympathetic  genius, 
Johnson  has  done  that  spontaneously  and  ably, 
which,  by  some  writers,  had  been  before  attempt¬ 
ed  injudiciously,  and  which,  by  others,  from  whom 
more  successful  attempts  might  have  been  expect¬ 
ed,  has  not  hitherto  been  done  at  all.  He  spoke  well 
of  Warburton,  without  insulting  those  whom  War¬ 
burton  despised.  He  suppressed  not  the  imperfec¬ 
tions  of  this  extraordinary  man,  while  he  endeav¬ 
oured  to  do  justice  to  his  numerous  and  transcen¬ 
dental  excellencies.  He  defended  him  when  living, 
amidst  the  clamours  of  his  enemies;  and  praised 
him  when  dead,  amidst  the  silence  of  his  friends .” 

Having  availed  myself  of  this  editor’s  eulogy  on 
my  departed  friend,  for  which  I  warmly  thank 
him,  let  me  not  suffer  the  lustre  of  his  reputation, 
honestly  acquired  by  profound  learning  and  vig¬ 
orous  eloquence  to  be  tarnished  by  a  charge  of  il- 
liberality.  He  has  been  accused  of  invidiously  drag¬ 
ging  again  into  light  certain  writings  of  a  person 
respectable  by  his  talents,  his  learning,  his  station 
and  his  age,  which  were  published  a  great  many 
years  ago,  and  have  since,  it  is  said,  been  silently 
given  up  by  their  authour.  But  when  it  is  consid¬ 
ered  that  these  writings  were  not  sins  of  youth,  but 
deliberate  works  of  one  well-advanced  in  life,  over¬ 
flowing  at  once  with  flattery  to  a  great  man  of 
great  interest  in  the  Church,  and  with  unjust  and 
acrimonious  abuse  of  two  men  of  eminent  merit; 
and  that,  though  it  would  have  been  unreasonable 
to  expect  an  humiliating  recantation,  no  apology 
whatever  has  been  made  in  the  cool  of  the  evening, 
for  the  oppressive  fervour  of  the  heat  of  the  day; 


1 781  ]  LIFE  OF 

It  seems  strange,  that  two  such  men  as  John¬ 
son  and  War  bur  ton,  who  lived  in  the  same  age 
and  country,  should  not  only  not  have  been  in 
any  degree  of  intimacy,  but  been  almost  person¬ 
ally  unacquainted.  But  such  instances,  though  we 
must  wonder  at  them,  are  not  rare.  If  I  am 
rightly  informed,  after  a  careful  enquiry,  they 
never  met  but  once,  which  was  at  the  house  of 
Mrs.  French,  in  London,  well  known  for  her  ele¬ 
gant  assemblies,  and  bringing  eminent  charac¬ 
ters  together.  The  interview  proved  to  be  mutu¬ 
ally  agreeable. 

I  am  well  informed,  that  Warburton  said  of 
Johnson,  “I  admire  him,  but  I  cannot  bear  his 
style”:  and  that  Johnson  being  told  of  this,  said, 
“That  is  exactly  my  case  as  to  him.”  The  man¬ 
ner  in  which  he  expressed  his  admiration  of  the 
fertility  of  Warburton’s  genius  and  of  the  variety 
of  his  materials  was,  “The  table  is  always  full, 
Sir.  He  brings  things  from  the  north,  and  the 
south,  and  from  every  quarter.  In  his  Divine  Le¬ 
gation ,  you  are  always  entertained.  He  carries 
you  round  and  round,  without  carrying  you  for¬ 
ward  to  the  point;  but  then  you  have  no  wish 
to  be  carried  forward.”  He  said  to  the  Reverend 
Mr.  Strahan,  “Warburton  is  perhaps  the  last 
man  who  has  written  with  a  mind  full  of  reading 
and  reflection.” 

It  is  remarkable,  that  in  the  Life  of  Broome, 
Johnson  takes  notice  of  Dr.  Warburton  using  a 
mode  of  expression  which  he  himself  used,  and 
that  not  seldom,  to  the  great  offence  of  those 
who  did  not  know  him.  Having  occasion  to  men¬ 
tion  a  note,  stating  the  different  parts  which  were 
executed  by  the  associated  translators  of  The 
Odyssey ,  he  says,  “Dr.  Warburton  told  me,  in  his 
warm  language,  that  he  thought  the  relation 
given  in  the  note  a  lie.  The  language  is  warm  in¬ 
deed;  and,  I  must  own,  cannot  be  justified  in 
consistency  with  a  decent  regard  to  the  estab¬ 
lished  forms  of  speech.”  Johnson  had  accustomed 
himself  to  use  the  word  lie ,  to  express  a  mistake 
or  an  errour  in  relation;  in  short,  when  the  thing 
was  not  so  as  told ,  though  the  relator  did  not  mean 
to  deceive.  When  he  thought  there  was  inten¬ 
tional  falsehood  in  the  relator,  his  expression 
was,  “He  lies ,  and  he  knows  he  lies.” 

Speaking  of  Pope’s  not  having  been  known  to 
excel  in  conversation,  Johnson  observes,  that 
“traditional  memory  retains  no  sallies  of  raii- 

no  slight  relenting  indication  has  appeared  in  any 
note,  or  any  corner  of  later  publications;  is  it  not 
fair  to  understand  him  as  superciliously  persever¬ 
ing?  When  he  allows  the  shafts  to  remain  in  the 
wounds,  and  will  not  stretch  forth  a  lenient  hand, 
is  it  wrong,  is  it  not  generous  to  become  an  indig¬ 
nant  avenger? 


JOHNSON  457 

lery,  or  sentences  of  observation;  nothing  either 
pointed  or  solid,  wise  or  merry;  and  that  one 
apophthegm  only  is  recorded.”  In  this  respect, 
Pope  differed  widely  from  Johnson,  whose  con¬ 
versation  was,  perhaps,  more  admirable  than 
even  his  writings,  however  excellent.  Mr.  Wilkes 
has,  however,  favoured  me  with  one  repartee  of 
Pope,  of  which  Johnson  was  not  informed.  John¬ 
son,  after  justly  censuring  him  for  having  “nursed 
in  his  mind  a  foolish  dis-esteem  of  Kings,”  tells 
us,  “yet  a  little  regard  shewn  him  by  the  Prince 
of  Wales  melted  his  obduracy;  and  he  had  not 
much  to  say  when  he  was  asked  by  his  Royal 
Highness,  how  he  could  love  a  Prince ,  while  he  dis¬ 
liked  Kings?”  The  answer  which  Pope  made,  was, 
“The  young  lion  is  harmless,  and  even  playful; 
but  when  his  claws  are  full  grown  he  becomes 
cruel,  dreadful,  and  mischievous.” 

But  although  we  have  no  collection  of  Pope’s 
sayings,  it  is  not  therefore  to  be  concluded,  that 
he  was  not  agreeable  in  social  intercourse;  for 
Johnson  has  been  heard  to  say,  that  “the  happi¬ 
est  conversation  is  that  of  which  nothing  is  dis¬ 
tinctly  remembered  but  a  general  effect  of  pleas¬ 
ing  impression.”  The  late  Lord  Somerville,1  who 
saw  much  both  of  great  and  brilliant  life,  told 
me,  that  he  had  dined  in  company  with  Pope, 
and  that  after  dinner  the  little  man ,  as  he  called 
him,  drank  his  bottle  of  Burgundy,  and  was  ex¬ 
ceedingly  gay  and  entertaining. 

I  cannot  withhold  from  my  great  friend  a  cen¬ 
sure  of  at  least  culpable  inattention,  to  a  noble¬ 
man,  who,  it  has  been  shewn,  behaved  to  him 
with  uncommon  politeness.  He  says,  “Except 
Lord  Bathurst,  none  of  Pope’s  noble  friends  were 
such  as  that  a  good  man  would  wish  to  have  his 
intimacy  with  them  known  to  posterity.”  This 
will  not  apply  to  Lord  Mansfield,  who  was  not 
ennobled  in  Pope’s  lifetime;  but  Johnson  should 
have  recollected,  that  Lord  Marchmont  was  one 
of  those  noble  friends.  He  includes  his  Lordship 
along  with  Lord  Bolingbroke,  in  a  charge  of 
neglect  of  the  papers  which  Pope  left  by  his  will; 

xLet  me  here  express  my  grateful  remembrance 
of  Lord  Somerville’s  kindness  to  me,  at  a  very  early 
period.  He  was  the  first  person  of  high  rank  that 
took  particular  notice  of  me  in  the  way  most  flat¬ 
tering  to  a  young  man,  fondly  ambitious  of  being 
distinguished  for  his  literary  talents;  and  by  the 
honour  of  his  encouragement  made  me  think  well 
of  myself,  and  aspire  to  deserve  it  better.  He  had  a 
happy  art  of  communicating  his  varied  knowledge 
of  the  world,  in  short  remarks  and  anecdotes,  with 
a  quiet  pleasant  gravity,  that  was  exceedingly  en¬ 
gaging.  Never  shall  I  forget  the  hours  which  I  en¬ 
joyed  with  him  at  his  apartments  in  the  Royal  Pal¬ 
ace  of  Holy- Rood  House,  and  at  his  seat  near  Edin¬ 
burgh,  which  he  himself  had  formed  with  an  ele¬ 
gant  taste. 


45B  BOSWELL  [1781 


when,  in  truth,  as  I  myself  pointed  out  to  him, 
before  he  wrote  that  poet’s  life,  the  papers  were 
“committed  to  the  sole  care  and  judgement  of  Lord 
Bolingbroke,  unless  he  (Lord  Bolingbroke)  shall 
not  survive  me”;  so  that  Lord  Marchmont  had 
no  concern  whatever  with  them.  After  the  first 
edition  of  the  Lives ,  Mr.  Malone,  whose  love  of  jus¬ 
tice  is  equal  to  his  accuracy,  made,  in  my  hear¬ 
ing,  the  same  remark  to  Johnson;  yet  he  omit¬ 
ted  to  correct  the  erroneous  statement.1  These 
particulars  I  mention,  in  the  belief  that  there 
was  only  forgetfulness  in  my  friend;  but  I  owe 
this  much  to  the  Earl  of  Marchmont’s  reputa¬ 
tion,  who,  were  there  no  other  memorials,  will 
be  immortalised  by  that  lino  of  Pope,  in  the 
verses  on  his  Grotto: 

And  the  bright  flame  was  shot  through  Marchmont' s  soul . 

Various  Readings  in  the  Life  of  Pope 

“[Somewhat  free]  sufficiently  bold  in  his  criti¬ 
cism. 

“All  the  gay  [niceties]  varieties  of  diction. 

“Strikes  the  imagination  with  far  [movt\ great- 
er  force. 

“It  is  [probably]  certainly  the  noblest  version 
of  poetry  which  the  world  has  ever  seen. 

“Every  sheet  enabled  him  to  write  the  next 
with  [less  trouble]  more  facility. 

“No  man  sympathizes  with  [vanity  depressed] 
the  sorrows  of  vanity. 

“It  had  been  [criminal]  less  easily  excused. 

“When  he  [threatened  to  lay  down]  talked  of 
laying  down  his  pen. 

“Society  [is  so  named  emphatically  in  oppos¬ 
ition  to]  politically  regulated ,  is  a  state  contra-dis¬ 
tinguished  from  a  state  of  nature. 

“A  fictitious  fife  of  an  [absurd]  infatuated 
scholar. 

“A  foolish  [contempt,  disregard,]  disesteem  of 
Kings. 

“His  hopes  and  fears,  his  joys  and  sorrows 
[were  like  those  of  other  mortals]  acted  strongly 
upon  his  mind. 

“Eager  to  pursue  knowledge  and  attentive  to 
[accumulate]  retain  it. 

“A  mind  [excursive]  active ,  ambitious,  and 
adventurous. 

“In  its  [noblest]  widest  researches  still  longing 
to  go  forward. 

“He  wrote  in  such  a  manner  as  might  expose 
him  to  few  [neglects]  hazards. 

1This  neglect  did  not  arise  from  any  ill-will  to¬ 
wards  Lord  Marchmont,  but  from  inattention;  just 
as  he  neglected  to  correct  his  statement  concerning 
the  family  of  Thomson  the  poet,  after  it  had  been 
shewn  to  be  erroneous  (ante,  415).  [M.] 


“The  [reasonableness]  Jzu/zVtf  of  my  determin¬ 
ation. 

“A  [favourite]  delicious  employment  of  the 
poets. 

“More  terrifick  and  more  powerful  [beings] 
phantoms  perform  on  the  stormy  ocean. 

“The  inventor  of  [those]  this  petty  [beings] 
nation. 

“The  [mind]  heart  naturally  loves  truth.” 

In  the  Life  of  Addison  we  find  an  unpleasing 
account  of  his  having  lent  Steele  a  hundred 
pounds,  and  “reclaimed  his  loan  by  an  execu¬ 
tion.”  In  the  new  edition  of  the  Biographia  Brit - 
annica ,  the  authenticity  of  this  anecdote  is  de¬ 
nied.  But  Mr.  Malone  has  obliged  me  with  the 
following  note  concerning  it: 

Many  persons  having  doubts  concerning  this 
fact,  I  applied  to  Dr.  Johnson  to  learn  on  what 
authority  he  asserted  it.  He  told  me,  he  had  it 
from  Savage,  who  lived  in  intimacy  with  Steele, 
and  who  mentioned,  that  Steele  told  him  the 
story  with  tears  in  his  eyes. — Ben  Victor,  Dr. 
Johnson  said,  likewise  informed  him  of  this  re¬ 
markable  transaction,  from  the  relation  of  Mr. 
Wilkes  the  comedian,  who  was  also  an  intimate 
of  Steele’s. — Some  in  defence  of  Addison  have 
said,  that  “the  act  was  done  with  the  good  na- 
tured  view  of  rousing  Steele,  and  correcting 
that  profusion  which  always  made  him  necessi¬ 
tous.” — “If  that  were  the  case,  (said  Johnson,) 
and  that  he  only  wanted  to  alarm  Steele,  he 
would  afterwards  have  returned  the  money  to  his 
friend,  which  it  is  not  pretended  he  did.” — “This 
too,  (he  added,)  might  be  retorted  by  an  advo¬ 
cate  for  Steele,  who  might  alledge,  that  he  did 
not  repay  the  loan  intentionally ,  merely  to  see 
whether  Addison  would  be  mean  and  ungener¬ 
ous  enough  to  make  use  of  legal  process  to  re¬ 
cover  it.  But  of  such  speculations  there  is  no 
end:  we  cannot  dive  into  the  hearts  of  men;  but 
their  actions  are  open  to  observation. 

I  then  mentioned  to  him  that  some  people 
thought  that  Mr.  Addison’s  character  was  so 
pure,  that  the  fact,  though  true ,  ought  to  have 
been  suppressed.  He  saw  no  reason  for  this.  “If 
nothing  but  the  bright  side  of  characters  should 
be  shewn,  we  should  sit  down  in  despondency, 
and  think  it  utterly  impossible  to  imitate  them 
in  any  thing.  The  sacred  writers,  (he  observed,) 
related  the  vicious  as  well  as  the  virtuous  ac¬ 
tions  of  men;  which  had  this  moral  effect,  that 
it  kept  mankind  from  despair ,  into  which  other¬ 
wise  they  would  naturally  fall,  were  they  not 
supported  by  the  recollection  that  others  had 
offended  like  themselves,  and  by  penitence  and 
amendment  of  life  had  been  restored  to  the  fa¬ 
vour  of  Heaven.” 

E.  M. 

March  15,  1782 


1781  ] 

The  last  paragraph  of  this  note  is  of  great  im¬ 
portance;  and  I  request  that  my  readers  may 
consider  it  with  particular  attention.  It  will  be 
afterwards  referred  to  in  this  work. 

Various  Readings  in  the  Life  of  Addison 

“[But  he  was  our  first  great  example]  He  was , 
however ,  one  of  our  earliest  examples  of  correctness. 

“And  [overlook]  despise  their  masters. 

“His  instructions  were  such  as  the  [state]  char - 
acter  of  his  [own  time]  readers  made  [necessary] 
proper . 

“His  purpose  was  to  [diffuse]  infuse  literary 
curiosity  by  gentle  and  unsuspected  conveyance 
[among]  into  the  gay,  the  idle,  and  the  wealthy. 

“Framed  rather  for  those  that  [wish]  are  learn¬ 
ing  to  write. 

“Domestick  [manners]  scenes .” 

In  his  Life  of  Parnell,  I  wonder  that  Johnson 
omitted  to  insert  an  Epitaph  which  he  had  long 
before  composed  for  that  amiable  man,  without 
ever  writing  it  down,  but  which  he  was  so  good 
as,  at  my  request,  to  dictate  to  me,  by  which 
means  it  has  been  preserved. 

Hie  requiescit  Thomas  Parnell,  S.  T.  P. 

Qui  sacerdos pariter  etpoetay 
Utrasque  partes  ita  implevit , 

Ut  neqite  sacerdoti  suavitas poeUBy 
Nec  poeUB  sacerdotis  sanctitas ,  deesset . 

Various  Readings  in  the  Life  of  Parnell 

“About  three  years  [after]  afterwards. 

“[Did  not  much  want]  was  in  no  great  need  of 
improvement. 

“But  his  prosperity  did  not  last  long  [was  cloud¬ 
ed  by  that  which  took  away  all  his  powers  of  en¬ 
joying  either  profit  or  pleasure,  the  death  of  his 
wife,  whom  he  is  said  to  have  lamented  with 
such  sorrow,  as  hastened  his  end.1]  His  end, 
whatever  was  the  cause,  was  now  approaching. 

“In  the  Hermit,  the  [composition]  narrative , 
as  it  is  less  airy,  is  less  pleasing.” 

In  the  Life  of  Blackmore,  we  find  that  writ¬ 
er’s  reputation  generously  cleared  by  Johnson 
from  the  cloud  of  prejudice  which  the  malignity 
of  contemporary  wits  had  raised  around  it.  In 
this  spirited  exertion  of  justice,  he  has  been  im¬ 
itated  by  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  in  his  praise  of 
the  architecture  of  Vanburgh. 

We  trace  Johnson’s  own  character  in  his  ob¬ 
servations  on  Blackmore’s  “magnanimity  as  an 

T  should  have  thought  that  Johnson,  who  had 
felt  the  severe  affliction  from  which  Parnell  never 
recovered,  would  have  preserved  this  passage. 


459 

authour.”  “The  incessant  attacks  of  his  enemies, 
whether  serious  or  merry,  are  never  discovered 
to  have  disturbed  his  quiet,  or  to  have  lessened 
his  confidence  in  himself.”  Johnson,  I  recollect, 
once  told  me,  laughing  heartily,  that  he  under¬ 
stood  it  had  been  said  of  him,  “He  appears  not  to 
feel;  but  when  he  is  alone ,  depend  upon  it,  he 
suffers  sadly .”  I  am  as  certain  as  I  can  be  of  any 
man’s  real  sentiments,  that  he  enjoyed  the  per¬ 
petual  shower  of  little  hostile  arrows  as  evidences 
of  his  fame. 

Various  Readings  in  the  Life  of  Blackmore 

“To  [set]  engage  poetry  [on  the  side]  in  the 
cause  of  virtue. 

“He  likewise  [established]  enforced  the  truth  of 
Revelation. 

“  [Kindness]  benevolence  was  ashamed  to  favour. 

“His  practice,  which  was  once  [very  exten¬ 
sive]  invidiously  great. 

“There  is  scarcely  any  distemper  of  dreadful 
name  [of]  which  he  has  not  [shewn]  taught  his 
reader  how  [it  is  to  be  opposed]  to  oppose. 

“Of  this  [contemptuous]  indecent  arrogance. 

“[He  wrote]  but  produced  likewise  a  work  of  a 
different  kind. 

“At  least  [written]  compiled  with  integrity. 

“Faults  which  many  tongues  [were  desirous] 
would  have  made  haste  to  publish. 

“But  though  he  [had  not]  could  not  boast  of 
much  critical  knowledge. 

“He  [used]  waited  for  no  felicities  of  fancy. 

“Or  had  ever  elevated  his  [mind]  views  to 
that  ideal  perfection  which  every  [mind]  genius 
born  to  excel  is  condemned  always  to  pursue 
and  never  overtake. 

“The  |  first  great]  fundamental  principle  of  wis¬ 
dom  and  of  virtue.” 

Various  Readings  in  the  Life  of  Philips 

“His  dreaded  [rival]  antagonist  Pope. 

“They  [have  not  often  much]  are  not  loaded 
with  thought. 

“In  his  translations  from  Pindar,  he  [will  not 
be  denied  to  have  reached]  found  the  art  of  reach¬ 
ing  all  the  obscurity  of  the  Theban  bard.” 

Various  Readings  in  the  Life  of  Congreve 

“Congreve’s  conversation  must  surely  have 
been  at  least  equally  pleasing  with  his  writings. 

“It  apparently  [requires]  pre-supposes  a  famil¬ 
iar  knowledge  of  many  characters. 

“Reciprocation  of  [similes]  conceits. 

“The  dialogue  is  quick  and  [various]  sparkling. 

“Love  for  Love;  a  comedy  [more  drawn  from 
life]  of  nearer  alliance  to  life . 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


BOSWELL 


460 

“The  general  character  of  his  miscellanies  is, 
that  they  shew  little  wit  and  [no]  little  virtue. 

“[Perhaps]  certainly  he  had  not  the  fire  re¬ 
quisite  for  the  higher  species  of  lyrick  poetry.” 

Various  Readings  in  the  Life  o/Tickell 

“[Longed]  long  wished  to  peruse  it. 

“At  the  [accession]  arrival  of  King  George. 

“Fiction  [unnaturally]  unskilfully  compound¬ 
ed  of  Grecian  deities  and  Gothick  fairies.” 

Various  Readings  in  the  Life  of  Akenside 

“For  [another]  a  different  purpose. 

“[A  furious]  an  unnecessary  and  outrageous 
zeal. 

“[Something  which]  what  he  called  and 
thought  liberty. 

“A  [favourer  of  innovation]  lover  of  contradic¬ 
tion. 

“Warburton’s  [censure]  objections. 

“His  rage  [for  liberty]  of  patriotism. 

“Mr.  Dyson  with  [a  zeal]  an  ardour  of  friend¬ 
ship.” 

In  the  Life  of  Lyttelton,  Johnson  seems  to 
have  been  not  favourably  disposed  towards  that 
nobleman.  Mrs.  Thrale  suggests  that  he  was  of¬ 
fended  by  Molly  Aston's  preference  of  his  Lord- 
ship  to  him.1  I  can  by  no  means  join  in  the  cen¬ 
sure  bestowed  by  Johnson  on  his  Lordship, 
whom  he  calls  “poor  Lyttelton,”  for  returning 
thanks  to  the  Critical  Reviewers  for  having  “kind¬ 
ly  commended”  his  Dialogues  of  the  Dead.  Such 
“acknowledgements  (says  my  friend,)  never  can 

JLet  not  my  readers  smile  to  think  of  Johnson’s 
being  a  candidate  for  female  favour;  Mr.  Peter 
Garrick  assured  me,  that  he  was  told  by  a  lady, 
that  in  her  opinion  Johnson  was  “a  very  seducing 
man.”  Disadvantages  of  person  and  manner  may  be 
forgotten,  where  intellectual  pleasure  is  communi¬ 
cated  to  a  susceptible  mind:  and  that  Johnson  was 
capable  of  feeling  the  most  delicate  and  disinter¬ 
ested  attachment,  appears  from  the  following  let¬ 
ter,  which  is  published  by  Mrs.  Thrale  [Piozzi  Let¬ 
ters,  ii.  391],  with  some  others  to  the  same  person, 
of  which  the  excellence  is  not  so  apparent: 

“To  Miss  Boothby 

“January,  1755 

“Dearest  Madam,  Though  I  am  afraid  your  ill¬ 
ness  leaves  you  little  leisure  for  the  reception  of 
airy  civilities,  yet  I  cannot  forbear  to  pay  you  my 
congratulations  on  the  new  year;  and  to  declare 
my  wishes  that  your  years  to  come  may  be  many 
and  happy.  In  this  wish,  indeed,  I  include  myself, 
who  have  none  but  you  on  whom  my  heart  re¬ 
poses;  yet  surely  I  wish  your  good,  even  though 
your  situation  were  such  as  should  permit  you  to 
communicate  no  gratifications  to,  dearest,  dearest 
Madam,  your,  &c. 

“Sam  Johnson” 


[  1781 

be  proper,  since  they  must  be  paid  either  for 
flattery  or  for  justice.”  In  my  opinion,  the  most 
upright  man,  who  has  been  tried  on  a  false  ac¬ 
cusation,  may,  when  he  is  acquitted,  make  a 
bow  to  his  jury.  And  when  those  who  are  so 
much  the  arbiters  of  literary  merit,  as  in  a  con¬ 
siderable  degree  to  influence  the  publick  opin¬ 
ion,  review  an  authour’s  work,  placido  lumine , 
when  I  am  afraid  mankind  in  general  are  better 
pleased  with  severity,  he  may  surely  express  a 
grateful  sense  of  their  civility. 

Various  Readings  in  the  Life  of  Lyttelton 

“He  solaced  [himself]  his  grief  by  writing  a 
long  poem  to  her  memory. 

“The  production  rather  [of  a  mind  that  means 
well  than  thinks  vigorously]  as  it  seems  of  leisure 
than  of  study ,  rather  effusions  than  compositions. 

“His  last  literary  [work]  production. 

“[Found  the  way]  undertook  to  persuade.” 

As  the  introduction  to  his  critical  examina¬ 
tion  of  the  genius  and  writings  of  Young,  he 
did  Mr.  Herbert  Croft,  then  a  Barrister  of  Lin- 
coln’s-inn,  now  a  clergyman,  the  honour  to 
adopt  a  Life  of  Young  written  by  that  gentleman, 
who  was  the  friend  of  Dr.  Young’s  son,  and 
wished  to  vindicate  him  from  some  very  erron¬ 
eous  remarks  to  his  prejudice.  Mr.  Croft’s  per¬ 
formance  was  subjected  to  the  revision  of  Dr. 
Johnson,  as  appears  from  the  following  note  to 
Mr.  John  Nichols;2 

“This  Life  of  Dr.  Young  was  written  by  a  friend 
of  his  son.  What  is  crossed  with  black  is  expunged 
by  the  authour,  what  is  crossed  with  red  is  ex¬ 
punged  by  me.  If  you  find  any  thing  more  that 
can  be  well  omitted,  I  shall  not  be  sorry  to  see  it 
yet  shorter.” 

It  has  always  appeared  to  me  to  have  a  con¬ 
siderable  share  of  merit,  and  to  display  a  pretty 
successful  imitation  of  Johnson’s  style.  When  1 
mentioned  this  to  a  very  eminent  literary  char¬ 
acter,3  he  opposed  me  vehemently,  exclaiming, 
“No,  no,  it  is  not  a  good  imitation  of  Johnson;  it 
has  all  his  pomp  without  his  force;  it  has  all  the 
nodosities  of  the  oak  without  its  strength.”  This 
was  an  image  so  happy,  that  one  might  have 
thought  he  would  have  been  satisfied  with  it: 
but  he  was  not.  And  setting  his  mind  again  to 
work,  he  added,  with  exquisite  felicity,  “It  has 
all  the  contortions  of  the  Sybil,  without  the  in¬ 
spiration.” 

Mr.  Croft  very  properly  guards  us  against 
supposing  that  Young  was  a  gloomy  man;  and 

2The  Gentleman’s  Magazine ,  vol.  lv,  p.  10. 

3The  late  Mr.  Burke.  [M.] 


1781]  LIFE  OF 

mentions,  that  “his  parish  was  indebted  to  the 
good-humour  of  the  authour  of  the  Night  Thoughts 
for  an  Assembly  and  a  Bowling-Green.”  A  let¬ 
ter  from  a  noble  foreigner  is  quoted,  in  which  he 
is  said  to  have  been  “very  pleasant  in  conversa¬ 
tion.” 

Mr.  Langton,  who  frequently  visited  him, 
informs  me,  that  there  was  an  air  of  benevolence 
in  his  manner,  but  that  he  could  obtain  from 
him  less  information  than  he  had  hoped  to  re¬ 
ceive  from  one  who  had  lived  so  much  in  inter¬ 
course  with  the  brightest  men  of  what  has  been 
called  the  Augustan  age  of  England;  and  that 
he  shewed  a  degree  of  eager  curiosity  concern¬ 
ing  the  common  occurrences  that  were  then 
passing,  which  appeared  somewhat  remarkable 
in  a  man  of  such  intellectual  stores,  of  such  an 
advanced  age,  and  who  had  retired  from  life 
with  declared  disappointment  in  his  expecta¬ 
tions. 

An  instance  at  once  of  his  pensive  turn  of 
mind,  and  his  cheerfulness  of  temper,  appeared 
in  a  little  story  which  he  himself  told  to  Mr. 
Langton,  when  they  were  walking  in  his  gar¬ 
den:  “Here  (said  he,)  I  had  put  a  handsome 
sun-dial,  with  this  inscription,  Eheu  fugaces! 
which  (speaking  with  a  smile)  was  sadly  veri¬ 
fied,  for  by  the  next  morning  my  dial  had  been 
carried  off.”1 

“It  gives  me  much  pleasure  to  observe,  that 
however  Johnson  may  have  casually  talked,  yet 
when  he  sits,  as  can  ardent  judge  zealous  to  his 
trust,  giving  sentence3  upon  the  excellent  works 
of  Young,  he  allows  them  the  high  praise  to 
which  they  are  justly  entitled.  ‘The  Universal 
Passion  (says  he,)  is  indeed  a  very  great  per¬ 
formance, — his  distichs  have  the  weight  of  solid 
sentiment,  and  his  points  the  sharpness  of  resist¬ 
less  truth.3  ” 

But  I  was  most  anxious  concerning  Johnson’s 
decision  upon  Night  Thoughts ,  which  I  esteem  as 
a  mass  of  the  grandest  and  richest  poetry  that 
human  genius  has  ever  produced;  and  was  de¬ 
lighted  to  find  this  character  of  that  work:  “In 
his  Night  Thoughts ,  he  has  exhibited  a  very  wide 
display  of  original  poetry,  variegated  with  deep 
reflections  and  striking  allusions;  a  wilderness 
of  thought,  in  which  the  fertility  of  fancy  scat- 

xThe  late  Mr.  James  Ralph  told  Lord  Macart¬ 
ney,  that  he  passed  an  evening  with  Dr.  Young  at 
Lord  Melcombe’s  (then  Mr.  Dodington)  at  Ham¬ 
mersmith.  The  Doctor  happening  to  go  out  into 
the  garden,  Mr.  Dodington  observed  to  him,  on 
his  return,  that  it  was  a  dreadful  night,  as  in  truth 
it  was,  there  being  a  violent  storm  of  rain  and  wind. 
“No,  Sir,  (replied  the  Doctor,)  it  is  a  very  fine  night. 
The  Lord  is  abroad.” 


JOHNSON  461 

ters  flowers  of  every  hue  and  of  every  odour. 
This  is  one  of  the  few  poems  in  which  blank 
verse  could  not  be  changed  for  rhyme  but  with 
disadvantage.”  And  afterwards,  “Particular 
lines  are  not  to  be  regarded;  the  power  is  in  the 
whole;  and  in  the  whole  there  is  a  magnificence 
like  that  ascribed  to  Chinese  plantation,  the 
magnificence  of  vast  extent  and  endless  diver¬ 
sity.” 

But  there  is  in  this  Poem  not  only  all  that 
Johnson  so  well  brings  in  view,  but  a  power  of 
the  Pathetick  beyond  almost  any  example  that  I 
have  seen.  He  who  does  not  feel  his  nerves  shak¬ 
en,  and  his  heart  pierced  by  many  passages  in 
this  extraordinary  work,  particularly  by  that 
most  affecting  one,  which  describes  the  gradual 
torment  suffered  by  the  contemplation  of  an 
object  of  affectionate  attachment,  visibly  and 
certainly  decaying  into  dissolution,  must  be  of  a 
hard  and  obstinate  frame. 

To  all  the  other  excellencies  of  Night  Thoughts 
let  me  add  the  great  and  peculiar  one,  that  they 
contain  not  only  the  noblest  sentiments  of  vir¬ 
tue,  and  contemplations  on  immortality,  but 
the  Christian  Sacrifice ,  the  Divine  Propitiation ,  with 
all  its  interesting  circumstances,  and  consola¬ 
tions  to  “a  wounded  spirit,”  solemnly  and  poet¬ 
ically  displayed  in  such  imagery  and  language, 
as  cannot  fail  to  exalt,  animate,  and  soothe  the 
truly  pious.  No  book  whatever  can  be  recom¬ 
mended  to  young  persons,  with  better  hopes  of 
seasoning  their  minds  with  vital  religion ,  than 
Young’s  Night  Thoughts. 

In  the  Life  of  Swift,  it  appears  to  me  that 
Johnson  had  a  certain  degree  of  prejudice  against 
that  extraordinary  man,  of  which  I  have  else¬ 
where  had  occasion  to  speak.  Mr.  Thomas  Sher¬ 
idan  imputed  it  to  a  supposed  apprehension  in 
Johnson,  that  Swift  had  not  been  sufficiently 
active  in  obtaining  for  him  an  Irish  degree  when 
it  was  solicited,2  but  of  this  there  was  not  suffi¬ 
cient  evidence;  and  let  me  not  presume  to 
charge  Johnson  with  injustice,  because  he  did 
not  think  so  highly  of  the  writings  of  this  au¬ 
thour,  as  I  have  done  from  my  youth  upwards. 
Yet  that  he  had  an  unfavourable  bias  is  evident, 
were  it  only  from  that  passage  in  which  he 
speaks  of  Swift’s  practice  of  saving,  as,  “first 
ridiculous  and  at  last  detestable”;  and  yet  after 
some  examination  of  circumstances,  finds  him¬ 
self  obliged  to  own,  that  “it  will  perhaps  appear 
that  he  only  liked  one  mode  of  expence  better 
than  another,  and  saved  merely  that  he  might 
have  something  to  give.” 

2See  p.  34. 


462  BOSWELL  [1781 


One  observation  which  Johnson  makes  in 
Swift’s  life  should  be  often  inculcated: 

“It  may  be  justly  supposed,  that  there  was  in 
his  conversation  what  appears  so  frequently  in 
his  letters,  an  affectation  of  familiarity  with  the 
great,  an  ambition  of  momentary  equality, 
sought  and  enjoyed  by  the  neglect  of  those  cere¬ 
monies  which  custom  has  established  as  the  bar¬ 
riers  betw  een  one  order  of  society  and  another. 
This  transgression  of  regularity  was  by  himself 
and  his  admirers  termed  greatness  of  soul;  but 
a  great  mind  disdains  to  hold  any  thing  by  cour¬ 
tesy,  and  therefore  never  usurps  what  a  lawful 
claimant  may  take  away.  He  that  encroaches  on 
another’s  dignity  puts  himself  in  his  power;  he 
is  either  repelled  with  helpless  indignity,  or  en¬ 
dured  by  clemency  and  condescension.” 

Various  Readings  in  the  Life  of  Swift 

“Charity  may  be  persuaded  to  think  that  it 
might  be  written  by  a  man  of  a  peculiar  [opin¬ 
ions]  character ,  without  ill  intention. 

“He  did  not  [disown]  deny  it. 

“[To]  by  whose  kindness  it  is  not  unlikely  that 
he  was  [indebted  for]  advanced  to  his  benefices. 

“[With]  for  this  purpose  he  had  recourse  to 
Mr.  Harley. 

“Sharpe,  whom  he  [represents]  describes  as 
‘the  harmless  tool  of  others’  hate.’ 

“Harley  was  slow  because  he  was  [irresolute] 
doubtful. 

“When  [readers  were  not  many]  we  were  not 
yet  a  nation  of  readers . 

“[Every  man  who]  he  that  could  say  he  knew 
him. 

“Every  man  of  known  influence  has  so  many 
[more]  petitions  [than]  which  he  [can]  cannot 
grant,  that  he  must  necessarily  offend  more 
than  he  [can  gratify]  gratifies. 

“Ecclesiastical  [preferments]  benefices. 

“Swift  [procured]  contrived  an  interview. 

“[As  a  writer]  In  his  works  he  has  given  very 
different  specimens. 

“On  all  common  occasions  he  habitually  [as¬ 
sumes]  affects  a  style  of  [superiority]  arrogance. 

“By  the  [omission]  neglect  of  those  ceremonies. 

“That  their  merits  filled  the  world  [and]  or 
that  there  was  no  [room  for]  hope  of  more.” 

I  have  not  confined  myself  to  the  order  of  the 
Lives ,  in  making  my  few  remarks.  Indeed  a  dif¬ 
ferent  order  is  observed  in  the  original  publica¬ 
tion,  and  in  the  collection  of  Johnson’s  Works. 
And  should  it  be  objected,  that  many  of  my 
various  readings  are  inconsiderable,  those  who 
make  the  objection  will  be  pleased  to  consider, 


that  such  small  particulars  are  intended  for 
those  who  are  nicely  critical  in  composition,  to 
whom  they  will  be  an  acceptable  selection. 

Spence's  Anecdotes ,  which  are  frequently  quoted 
and  referred  to  in  Johnson’s  Lives  of  the  Poets ,  are 
in  a  manuscript  collection,  made  by  the  Rev¬ 
erend  Mr.  Joseph  Spence,  containing  a  number 
of  particulars  concerning  eminent  men.  To  each 
anecdote  is  marked  the  name  of  the  person  on 
whose  authority  it  is  mentioned.  This  valuable 
collection  is  the  property  of  the  Duke  of  New¬ 
castle,  who  upon  the  application  of  Sir  Lucas 
Pepys,  was  pleased  to  permit  it  to  be  put  into 
the  hands  of  Dr.  Johnson,  who  I  am  sorry  to 
think  made  but  an  aukward  return.  “Great  as¬ 
sistance  (says  he,)  has  been  given  me  by  Mr. 
Spence’s  Collection,  of  which  I  consider  the 
communication  as  a  favour  worthy  of  publick 
acknowledgement”;  but  he  has  not  owned  to 
whom  he  was  obliged;  so  that  the  acknowledge¬ 
ment  is  unappropriated  to  his  Grace. 

While  the  world  in  general  was  filled  with 
admiration  of  Johnson’s  Lives  of  the  Poets ,  there 
were  narrow  circles  in  which  prejudice  and  re¬ 
sentment  were  fostered,  and  from  which  attacks 
of  different  sorts  issued  against  him.1  By  some 
violent  Whigs  he  was  arraigned  of  injustice  to 
Milton;  by  some  Cambridge  men  of  depreciat¬ 
ing  Gray;  and  his  expressing  with  a  dignified 
freedom  what  he  really  thought  of  George,  Lord 
Lyttelton,  gave  offence  to  some  of  the  friends  of 
that  nobleman,  and  particularly  produced  a 
declaration  of  war  against  him  from  Mrs.  Mon¬ 
tagu,  the  ingenious  Essayist  on  Shakspeare,  be¬ 
tween  whom  and  his  Lordship  a  commerce  of 
reciprocal  compliments  had  long  been  carried 
on.  In  this  war  the  smaller  powers  in  alliance 
with  him  were  of  course  led  to  engage,  at  least 
on  the  defensive,  and  thus  I  for  one  was  excluded 
from  the  enjoyment  of  “A  Feast  of  Reason,” 
such  as  Mr.  Cumberland  has  described,  with  a 
keen,  yet  just  and  delicate  pen,  in  his  Observer . 
These  minute  inconveniencies  gave  not  the  least 
disturbance  to  Johnson.  He  nobly  said,  when  I 
talked  to  him  of  the  feeble,  though  shrill  outcry 
which  had  been  raised,  ‘’Sir,  I  considered  my¬ 
self  as  entrusted  with  a  certain  portion  of  truth.  I 
have  given  my  opinion  sincerely;  let  them  shew 
where  they  think  me  wrong.” 

Trom  this  disreputable  class,  I  except  an  ingen¬ 
ious  though  not  satisfactory  defence  of  Hammond, 
which  I  did  not  see  till  lately,  by  the  favour  of  its 
authour,  my  amiable  friend,  the  Reverend  Mr. 
Bevill,  who  published  it  without  his  name.  It  is  a 
juvenile  performance,  but  elegantly  written,  with 
classical  enthusiasm  of  sentiment,  and  yet  with  a  be¬ 
coming  modesty,  and  great  respect  for  Dr.  Johnson. 


1781]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  463 


While  my  friend  is  thus  contemplated  in  the 
splendour  derived  from  his  last  and  perhaps 
most  admirable  work,  I  introduce  him  with  pe¬ 
culiar  propriety  as  the  correspondent  of  W arren 
Hastings  !  a  man  whose  regard  reflects  dignity 
even  upon  Johnson;  a  man,  the  extent  of  whose 
abilities  was  equal  to  that  of  his  power;  and 
who,  by  those  who  are  fortunate  enough  to 
know  him  in  private  life,  is  admired  for  his  liter¬ 
ature  and  taste,  and  beloved  for  the  candour, 
moderation,  and  mildness  of  his  character.  Were 
I  capable  of  paying  a  suitable  tribute  of  admira¬ 
tion  to  him,  I  should  certainly  not  withhold  it  at 
a  moment1  when  it  is  not  possible  that  I  should 
be  suspected  of  being  an  interested  flatterer. 
But  how  weak  would  be  my  voice  after  that  of 
the  millions  whom  he  governed.  His  condes¬ 
cending  and  obliging  compliance  with  my  soli¬ 
citation,  I  with  humble  gratitude  acknowledge; 
and  while  by  publishing  his  letter  to  me,  ac¬ 
companying  the  valuable  communication,  I  do 
eminent  honour  to  my  great  friend,  I  shall  en¬ 
tirely  disregard  any  invidious  suggestions,  that 
as  I  in  some  degree  participate  in  the  honour,  I 
have,  at  the  same  time,  the  gratification  of  my 
own  vanity  in  view. 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Park  Lane,  Dec .  2,  1 790 

Sir,  I  have  been  fortunately  spared  the  trou¬ 
blesome  suspense  of  a  long  search,  to  which,  in 
performance  of  my  promise,  I  had  devoted  this 
morning,  by  lighting  upon  the  objects  of  it 
among  the  first  papers  that  I  laid  my  hands  on: 
my  veneration  for  your  great  and  good  friend, 
Dr.  Johnson,  and  the  pride,  or  I  hope  some¬ 
thing  of  a  better  sentiment,  which  I  indulged  in 
possessing  such  memorials  of  his  good  will  to¬ 
wards  me,  having  induced  me  to  bind  them  in  a 
parcel  containing  other  select  papers,  and  la¬ 
belled  with  the  titles  appertaining  to  them.  They 
consist  but  of  three  letters,  which  I  believe  were 
all  that  I  ever  received  from  Dr.  Johnson.  Of 
these,  one,  which  was  written  in  quadruplicate, 
under  the  different  dates  of  its  respective  dis¬ 
patches,  has  already  been  made  publick,  but  not 
from  any  communication  of  mine.  This,  how¬ 
ever,  I  have  joined  to  the  rest;  and  have  now  the 
pleasure  of  sending  them  to  you  for  the  use  to 
which  you  informed  me  it  was  your  desire  to 
destine  them. 

My  promise  was  pledged  with  the  condition, 
that  if  the  letters  were  found  to  contain  any 
thing  which  should  render  them  improper  for 
the  publick  eye,  you  would  dispense  with  the 
performance  of  it.  You  will  have  the  goodness,  I 
am  sure,  to  pardon  my  recalling  this  stipulation 
to  your  recollection,  as  I  should  be  loth  to  ap- 

ffanuary,  1791. 


pear  negligent  of  that  obligation  which  is  al¬ 
ways  implied  in  an  epistolary  confidence.  In  the 
reservation  of  that  right  I  have  read  them  over 
with  the  most  scrupulous  attention,  but  have 
not  seen  in  them  the  slightest  cause  on  that 
ground  to  withhold  them  from  you.  But,  though 
not  on  that,  yet  on  another  ground  I  own  I  feel 
a  little,  yet  but  a  little,  reluctance  to  part  with 
them:  I  mean  on  that  of  my  own  credit,  which  I 
fear  will  suffer  by  the  information  conveyed  by 
them,  that  I  was  early  in  the  possession  of  such 
valuable  instructions  for  the  beneficial  employ¬ 
ment  of  the  influence  of  my  late  station,  and  (as 
it  may  seem,)  have  so  little  availed  myself  of 
them.  Whether  1  could,  if  it  were  necessary,  de¬ 
fend  myself  against  such  an  imputation,  it  little 
concerns  the  world  to  know.  I  look  only  to  the 
effect  which  these  relicks  may  produce,  consid¬ 
ered  as  evidences  of  the  virtues  of  their  authour: 
and  believing  that  they  will  be  found  to  display 
an  uncommon  warmth  of  private  friendship, 
and  a  mind  ever  attentive  to  the  improvement 
and  extension  of  useful  knowledge,  and  solici¬ 
tous  for  the  interests  of  mankind,  I  can  cheer¬ 
fully  submit  to  the  little  sacrifice  of  my  own 
fame,  to  contribute  to  the  illustration  of  so  great 
and  venerable  a  character.  They  cannot  be  bet¬ 
ter  applied,  for  that  end,  than  by  being  en¬ 
trusted  to  your  hands.  Allow  me,  with  this  offer¬ 
ing,  to  infer  from  it  a  proof  of  the  very  great  es¬ 
teem  with  which  I  have  the  honour  to  profess 
myself,  Sir,  your  most  obedient  and  most  hum¬ 
ble  servant, 

Warren  Hastings 

P.S.  At  some  future  time,  and  when  you  have 
no  further  occasion  for  these  papers,  I  shall  be 
obliged  to  you  if  you  would  return  them. 

The  last  of  the  three  letters  thus  graciously 
put  into  my  hands,  and  which  has  already  ap¬ 
peared  in  publick,  belongs  to  this  year;  but  I 
shall  previously  insert  the  first  two  in  the  order 
of  their  dates.  They  altogether  form  a  grand 
group  in  my  biographical  picture. 

To  the  Honourable  Warren  Hastings,  Esq. 

Sir,  Though  I  have  had  but  little  personal 
knowledge  of  you,  I  have  had  enough  to  make 
me  wish  for  more;  and  though  it  be  now  a  long 
time  since  I  was  honoured  by  your  visit,  I  had 
too  much  pleasure  from  it  to  forget  it.  By  those 
whom  we  delight  to  remember,  we  are  unwill¬ 
ing  to  be  forgotten;  and  therefore  I  cannot  omit 
this  opportunity  of  reviving  myself  in  your  mem¬ 
ory  by  a  letter  which  you  will  receive  from  the 
hands  of  my  friend  Mr.  Chambers;2  a  man, 
whose  purity  of  manners  and  vigour  of  mind 
are  sufficient  to  make  every  thing  welcome  that 
he  brings. 

2Afterwards  Sir  Robert  Chambers,  one  of  his 
Majesty’s  Judges  in  India. 


x 


464 

That  this  is  my  only  reason  for  writing,  will 
be  too  apparent  by  the  uselessness  of  my  letter 
to  any  other  purpose.  I  have  no  questions  to  ask; 
not  that  I  want  curiosity  after  either  the  ancient 
or  present  state  of  regions  in  which  have  been 
seen  all  the  power  and  splendour  of  wide-ex¬ 
tended  empire;  and  which,  as  by  some  grant  of 
natural  superiority,  supply  the  rest  of  the  world 
with  almost  all  that  pride  desires  and  luxury  en¬ 
joys.  But  my  knowledge  of  them  is  too  scanty  to 
furnish  me  with  proper  topicks  of  inquiry;  I  can 
only  wish  for  information;  and  hope,  that  a 
mind  comprehensive  like  yours  will  find  leisure, 
amidst  the  cares  of  your  important  station,  to 
inquire  into  many  subjects  of  which  the  Euro¬ 
pean  world  either  thinks  not  at  all,  or  thinks 
with  deficient  intelligence  and  uncertain  con¬ 
jecture.  I  shall  hope,  that  he  who  once  intended 
to  increase  the  learning  of  his  country  by  the  in¬ 
troduction  of  the  Persian  language,  will  examine 
nicely  the  traditions  and  histories  of  the  East; 
that  he  will  survey  the  wonders  of  its  ancient 
edifices,  and  trace  the  vestiges  of  its  ruined  cit¬ 
ies;  and  that,  at  his  return,  we  shall  know  the 
arts  and  opinions  of  a  race  of  men,  from  whom 
very  little  has  been  hitherto  derived. 

You,  Sir,  have  no  need  of  being  told  by  me, 
how  much  may  be  added  by  your  attention  and 
patronage  to  experimental  knowledge  and  na¬ 
tural  history.There  are  arts  of  manufacture  prac¬ 
tised  in  the  countries  in  which  you  preside, 
which  are  yet  very  imperfectly  known  here,  either 
to  artificers  or  philosophers.  Of  the  natural  pro¬ 
ductions,  animate  and  inanimate,  we  yet  have 
so  little  intelligence,  that  our  books  are  filled,  I 
fear,  with  conjectures  about  things  which  an 
Indian  peasant  knows  by  his  senses. 

Many  of  those  things  my  first  wish  is  to  see; 
my  second  to  know,  by  such  accounts  as  a  man 
like  you  will  be  able  to  give. 

As  I  have  not  skill  to  ask  proper  questions,  I 
have  likewise  no  such  access  to  great  men  as  can 
enable  me  to  send  you  any  political  informa¬ 
tion.  Of  the  agitations  of  an  unsettled  govern¬ 
ment,  and  the  struggles  of  a  feeble  ministry,  care 
is  doubtless  taken  to  give  you  more  exact  ac¬ 
counts  than  I  can  obtain.  If  you  are  inclined  to  in¬ 
terest  yourself  much  in  publick  transactions,  it  is 
no  misfortune  to  you  to  be  so  distant  from  them. 

That  literature  is  not  totally  forsaking  us,  and 
that  your  favourite  language  is  not  neglected, 
will  appear  from  the  book,1  which  I  should  have 
pleased  myself  more  with  sending,  if  I  could 
have  presented  it  bound:  but  time  was  wanting. 
I  beg,  however,  Sir,  that  you  will  accept  it  from 
a  man  very  desirous  of  your  regard;  and  that  if 
you  think  me  able  to  gratify  you  by  any  thing 
more  important  you  will  employ  me. 

I  am  now  going  to  take  leave,  perhaps  a  very 
long  leave,  of  my  dear  Mr.  Chambers.  That  he 
is  going  to  live  where  you  govern,  may  justly  al- 

Jones’s  Persian  Grammar . 


[  1781 

leviate  the  regret  of  parting;  and  the  hope  of 
seeing  both  him  and  you  again,  which  I  am  not 
willing  to  mingle  with  doubt,  must  at  present 
comfort  as  it  can,  Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

March  30,  1774 

To  the  Same 

Sir,  Being  informed  that  by  the  departure  of 
a  ship,  there  is  now  an  opportunity  of  writing  to 
Bengal,  I  am  unwilling  to  slip  out  of  your  mem¬ 
ory  by  my  own  negligence,  and  therefore  take  the 
liberty  of  reminding  you  of  my  existence,  by  send¬ 
ing  you  a  book  which  is  not  yet  made  publick. 

I  have  lately  visited  a  region  less  remote,  and 
less  illustrious  than  India,  which  afforded  some 
occasions  for  speculation;  what  has  occurred  to 
me,  I  have  put  into  the  volume,2  of  which  I  beg 
your  acceptance. 

Men  in  your  station  seldom  have  presents  to¬ 
tally  disinterested;  my  book  is  received,  let  me 
now  make  my  request. 

There  is,  Sir,  somewhere  within  your  govern¬ 
ment,  a  young  adventurer,  one  Chauncey  Law¬ 
rence,  whose  father  is  one  of  my  oldest  friends. 
Be  pleased  to  shew  the  young  man  what  coun¬ 
tenance  is  fit,  whether  he  wants  to  be  restrained 
by  your  authority,  or  encouraged  by  your  fa¬ 
vour.  His  father  is  now  President  of  the  College 
of  Physicians,  a  man  venerable  for  his  knowl¬ 
edge,  and  more  venerable  for  his  virtue. 

1  wish  you  a  prosperous  government,  a  safe 
return,  and  a  long  enjoyment  of  plenty  and 
tranquillity.  I  am,  Sir,  your  most  obedient  and 
most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

London,  Dec.  20,  1774 

To  the  Same 

Jan.  9,  1781 

Sir,  Amidst  the  importance  and  multiplicity 
of  affairs  in  which  your  great  office  engages  you, 
I  take  the  liberty  of  recalling  your  attention  for 
a  moment  to  literature,  and  will  not  prolong 
the  interruption  by  an  apology  which  your 
character  makes  needless. 

Mr.  Hoole,  a  gentleman  long  known,  and 
long  esteemed  in  the  India-House,  after  having 
translated  Tasso,  has  undertaken  Ariosto.  How 
well  he  is  qualified  for  his  undertaking  he  has 
already  shewn.  He  is  desirous,  Sir,  of  your  fa¬ 
vour  in  promoting  his  proposals,  and  flatters  me 
by  supposing  that  my  testimony  may  advance 
his  interest. 

It  is  a  new  thing  for  a  clerk  of  the  India- 
House  to  translate  poets; — it  is  new  for  a  Gover- 
nour  of  Bengal  to  patronize  learning.  That  he 
may  find  his  ingenuity  rewarded,  and  that  learn¬ 
ing  may  flourish  under  your  protection,  is  the 
wish  of,  Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

2  Journey  to  the  Western  Islands  of  Scotland. 


BOSWELL 


1781]  LIFE  OF 

I  wrote  to  him  in  February,  complaining  of 
having  been  troubled  by  a  recurrence  of  the 
perplexing  question  of  Liberty  and  Necessity; — 
and  mentioning  that  I  hoped  soon  to  meet  him 
again  in  London. 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  I  hoped  you  had  got  rid  of  all  this 
hypocrisy  of  misery.  What  have  you  to  do  with 
Liberty  and  Necessity?  Or  what  more  than  to 
hold  your  tongue  about  it?  Do  not  doubt  but  I 
shall  be  most  heartily  glad  to  see  you  here 
again,  for  I  love  every  part  about  you  but  your 
affectation  of  distress. 

I  have  at  last  finished  my  Lives ,  and  have  laid 
up  for  you  a  load  of  copy,  all  out  of  order,  so 
that  it  will  amuse  you  a  long  time  to  set  it  right. 
Gome  to  me,  my  dear  Bozzy,  and  let  us  be  as 
happy  as  we  can.  We  will  go  again  to  the  Mitre, 
and  talk  old  times  over.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  yours 
affectionately, 

Sam.  Johnson 

March  14,  1781 

On  Monday,  March  1  g,  I  arrived  in  London, 
and  on  Tuesday,  the  20th,  met  him  in  Fleet- 
street,  walking,  or  rather  indeed  moving  along; 
for  his  peculiar  march  is  thus  described  in  a  very 
just  and  picturesque  manner,  in  a  short  Life1  of 
him  published  very  soon  after  his  death: — 
“When  he  walked  the  streets,  what  with  the 
constant  roll  of  his  head,  and  the  concomitant 
motion  of  his  body,  he  appeared  to  make  his 
way  by  that  motion,  independent  of  his  feet.” 
That  he  was  often  much  stared  at  while  he  ad¬ 
vanced  in  this  manner,  may  easily  be  believed; 
but  it  was  not  safe  to  make  sport  of  one  so  robust 
as  he  was.  Mr.  Langton  saw  him  one  day,  in  a 
fit  of  absence,  by  a  sudden  start,  drive  the  load 
off  a  porter’s  back,  and  walk  forward  briskly, 
without  being  conscious  of  what  he  had  done. 
The  porter  was  very  angry,  but  stood  still,  and 
eyed  the  huge  figure  with  much  earnestness,  till 
he  was  satisfied  that  his  wisest  course  was  to  be 
quiet,  and  take  up  his  burthen  again. 

Our  accidental  meeting  in  the  street  after  a 
long  separation  was  a  pleasing  surprize  to  us 
both.  He  stepped  aside  with  me  into  Falcon- 
court,  and  made  kind  inquiries  about  my  family, 
and  as  we  were  in  a  hurry  going  different  ways, 
I  promised  to  call  on  him  next  day;  he  said  he 
was  engaged  to  go  out  in  the  morning.  “Early, 

Published  by  Kearsley,  with  this  well-chosen 
motto: 

From  his  cradle 

He  was  a  Scholar,  and  a  ripe  and  good  one: 

And  to  add  greater  honours  to  his  age 

Than  man  could  give  him ,  he  died  fearing  Heaven . 

Shakspeare. 


JOHNSON  465 

Sir?”  said  I.  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  a  London 
morning  does  not  go  with  the  sun.” 

I  waited  on  him  next  evening,  and  he  gave  me 
a  great  portion  of  his  original  manuscript  of  his 
Lives  of  the  Poets ,  which  he  had  preserved  for  me. 

I  found  on  visiting  his  friend,  Mr.  Thrale, 
that  he  was  now  very  ill,  and  had  removed,  I 
suppose  by  the  solicitation  of  Mrs.  Thrale,  to  a 
house  in  Grosvenor-square.  I  was  sorry  to  see 
him  sadly  changed  in  his  appearance. 

He  told  me  I  might  now  have  the  pleasure  to 
see  Dr.  Johnson  drink  wine  again,  for  he  had 
lately  returned  to  it.  When  I  mentioned  this  to 
Johnson,  he  said,  “I  drink  it  now  sometimes, 
but  not  socially.”  The  first  evening  that  I  was 
with  him  at  Thrale’s,  I  observed  he  poured  a 
large  quantity  of  it  into  a  glass,  and  swallowed 
it  greedily.  Every  thing  about  his  character  and 
manners  was  forcible  and  violent;  there  never 
was  any  moderation;  many  a  day  did  he  fast, 
many  a  year  did  he  refrain  from  wine;  but  when 
he  did  eat,  it  was  voraciously;  when  he  did 
drink  wine,  it  was  copiously.  He  could  practise 
abstinence,  but  not  temperance. 

Mrs.  Thrale  and  I  had  a  dispute,  whether 
Shakspeare  or  Milton  had  drawn  the  most  ad¬ 
mirable  picture  of  a  man.2 1  was  for  Shakspeare; 
Mrs.  Thrale  for  Milton;  and  after  a  fair  hear¬ 
ing,  Johnson  decided  for  my  opinion. 

I  told  him  of  one  of  Mr.  Burke’s  playful  sallies 
upon  Dean  Marlay:  “I  don’t  like  the  Deanery 
of  Ferns ,  it  sounds  so  like  a  barren  title.” — “Dr. 
Heath  should  have  it,”  said  I.  Johnson  laughed, 
and  condescending  to  trifle  in  the  same  mode  of 
conceit,  suggested  Dr.  Moss. 

He  said,  “Mrs.  Montagu  has  dropt  me.  Now, 
Sir,  there  are  people  whom  one  should  like  very 
well  to  drop,  but  would  not  wish  to  be  dropped 
by.”  He  certainly  was  vain  of  the  society  of 
ladies,  and  could  make  himself  very  agreeable 
to  them,  when  he  chose  it;  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds 
agreed  with  me  that  he  could.  Mr.  Gibbon,  with 
his  usual  sneer,  controverted  it,  perhaps  in  re- 

*2Shakspeare  makes  Hamlet  thus  describe  his 
father: 

See  what  a  grace  was  seated  on  this  brow: 
Hyperion's  curls ,  the  front  of  Jove  himself , 

An  eye  like  Mars ,  to  threaten  and  command; 

A  station  like  the  herald ,  Mercury , 

New-lighted  on  a  heaven-kissing  hill; 

A  combination ,  and  a  form,  indeed , 

Where  every  god  did  seem  to  set  his  seal , 

To  give  the  world  assurance  of  a  man. 

Milton  thus  pourtrays  our  first  parent,  Adam: 

His  fair  large  front  and  eye  sublime  declar'd 
Absolute  rule;  and  hyacinihin  locks 
Round  from  his  parted  forelock  many  hung 
Clustering,  but  not  beneath  his  shoulders  broad. 


BOSWELL 


466 

sentment  of  Johnson’s  having  talked  with  some 
disgust  of  his  ugliness,  which  one  would  think  a 
philosopher  would  not  mind.  Dean  Marlay  wit¬ 
tily  observed,  “A  lady  may  be  vain,  when  she 
can  turn  a  wolf-dog  into  a  lap-dog.” 

The  election  for  Ayrshire,  my  own  county, 
was  this  spring  tried  upon  a  petition,  before  a 
Committee  of  the  House  of  Commons.  I  was 
one  of  the  Counsel  for  the  sitting  member,  and 
took  the  liberty  of  previously  stating  different 
points  to  Johnson,  who  never  failed  to  see  them 
clearly,  and  to  supply  me  with  some  good  hints. 
He  dictated  to  me  the  following  note  upon  the 
registration  of  deeds: 

“All  laws  are  made  for  the  convenience  of  the 
community:  what  is  legally  done,  should  be 
legally  recorded,  that  the  state  of  things  may  be 
known,  and  that  wherever  evidence  is  requisite, 
evidence  may  be  had.  For  this  reason,  the  ob¬ 
ligation  to  frame  and  establish  a  legal  register 
is  enforced  by  a  legal  penalty,  which  penalty  is 
the  want  of  that  perfection  and  plentitude  of 
right  which  a  register  would  give.  Thence  it  fol¬ 
lows,  that  this  is  not  an  objection  merely  legal: 
for  the  reason  on  which  the  law  stands  being 
equitable,  makes  it  an  equitable  objection.” 

“This  (said  he,)  you  must  enlarge  on,  when 
speaking  to  the  Committee.  You  must  not  argue 
there  as  if  you  were  arguing  in  the  schools;  close 
reasoning  will  not  fix  their  attention;  you  must 
say  the  same  thing  over  and  over  again,  in  dif¬ 
ferent  words.  If  you  say  it  but  once,  they  miss  it 
in  a  moment  of  inattention.  It  is  unjust,  Sir,  to 
censure  lawyers  for  multiplying  words  when 
they  argue;  it  is  often  necessary  for  them  to  mul¬ 
tiply  words.” 

His  notion  of  the  duty  of  a  member  of  Parlia¬ 
ment,  sitting  upon  an  election-committee,  was 
very  high;  and  when  he  was  told  of  a  gentleman 
upon  one  of  those  committees,  who  read  the 
news-papers  part  of  the  time,  and  slept  the  rest, 
while  the  merits  of  a  vote  were  examined  by  the 
counsel;  and  as  an  excuse,  when  challenged  by 
the  chairman  for  such  behaviour,  bluntly  an¬ 
swered,  “I  had  made  up  my  mind  upon  that 
case”; — Johnson,  with  an  indignant  contempt, 
said,  “If  he  was  such  a  rogue  as  to  make  up  his 
mind  upon  a  case  without  hearing  it,  he  should 
not  have  been  such  a  fool  as  to  tell  it.”  “I  think 
(said  Mr.  Dudley  Long,  now  North,)  the  Doc¬ 
tor  has  pretty  plainly  made  him  out  to  be  both 
rogue  and  fool.” 

Johnson’s  profound  reverence  for  the  Hier¬ 
archy  made  him  expect  from  bishops  the  high¬ 
est  degree  of  decorum;  he  was  offended  even  at 
their  going  to  taverns;  “A  bishop  (said  he,)  has 


[1781 

nothing  to  do  at  a  tippling-house.  It  is  not  in¬ 
deed  immoral  in  him  to  go  to  a  tavern;  neither 
would  it  be  immoral  in  him  to  whip  a  top  in 
Grosvenor-square.  But,  if  he  did,  I  hope  the 
boys  would  fall  upon  him,  and  apply  the  whip 
to  him.  There  are  gradations  in  conduct;  there 
is  morality, — decency, — propriety.  None  of  these 
should  be  violated  by  a  bishop.  A  bishop  should 
not  go  to  a  house  where  he  may  meet  a  young 
fellow  leading  out  a  wench.”  Boswell.  “But 
Sir,  every  tavern  does  not  admit  women.”  John¬ 
son.  “Depend  upon  it,  Sir,  any  tavern  will  ad¬ 
mit  a  well-drest  man  and  a  well-drest  woman; 
they  will  not  perhaps  admit  a  woman  whom 
they  see  every  night  walking  by  their  door,  in 
the  street.  But  a  well-drest  man  may  lead  in  a 
well-drest  woman  to  any  tavern  in  London. 
Taverns  sell  meat  and  drink,  and  will  sell  them 
to  any  body  who  can  eat  and  can  drink.  You 
may  as  well  say  that  a  mercer  will  not  sell  silks 
to  a  woman  of  the  town.” 

He  also  disapproved  of  bishops  going  to  routs, 
at  least  of  their  staying  at  them  longer  than 
their  presence  commanded  respect.  He  men¬ 
tioned  a  particular  bishop.  “Poh!  (said  Mrs. 

Thrale,)  the  Bishop  of - is  never  minded 

at  a  rout.”  Boswell.  “When  a  bishop  places 
himself  in  a  situation  where  he  has  no  distinct 
character,  and  is  of  no  consequence,  he  de¬ 
grades  the  dignity  of  his  order.”  Johnson.  “Mr. 
Boswell,  Madam,  has  said  it  as  correctly  as  it 
could  be.” 

Nor  was  it  only  in  the  dignitaries  of  the  Church 
that  Johnson  required  a  particular  decorum  and 
delicacy  of  behaviour;  he  justly  considered  that 
the  clergy7,  as  persons  set  apart  for  the  sacred 
office  of  serving  at  the  altar,  and  impressing  the 
minds  of  men  with  the  aweful  concerns  of  a  fu¬ 
ture  state,  should  be  somewhat  more  serious 
than  the  generality  of  mankind,  and  have  a 
suitable  composure  of  manners.  A  due  sense  of 
the  dignity  of  their  profession,  independent  of 
higher  motives,  will  ever  prevent  them  from 
losing  their  distinction  in  an  indiscriminate  so¬ 
ciality;  and  did  such  as  affect  this,  know  how 
much  it  lessens  them  in  the  eyes  of  those  whom 
they  think  to  please  by  it,  they  would  feel  them¬ 
selves  much  mortified. 

Johnson  and  his  friend,  Beauclerk,  were  once 
together  in  company  with  several  clergymen, 
who  thought  that  they  should  appear  to  advan¬ 
tage,  by  assuming  the  lax  jollity  of  men  of  the 
world;  which,  as  it  may  be  observed  in  similar 
cases,  they  carried  to  noisy  excess.  Johnson,  who 
they  expected  would  be  entertained ,  sat  grave  and 
silent  for  some  time;  at  last,  turning  to  Beau- 


1781  J  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  467 


clerk,  he  said,  by  no  means  in  a  whisper,  “This 
merriment  of  parsons  is  mighty  offensive.55 

Even  the  dress  of  a  clergyman  should  be  in 
character,  and  nothing  can  be  more  despicable 
than  conceited  attempts  at  avoiding  the  appear¬ 
ance  of  the  clerical  order;  attempts,  which  are  as 
ineffectual  as  they  are  pitiful.  Dr.  Porteus,  now 
Bishop  of  London,  in  his  excellent  charge  when 
presiding  over  the  diocese  of  Chester,  justly  ani¬ 
madverts  upon  this  subject;  and  observes  of  a 
reverend  fop,  that  he  “can  be  but  half  a  beau” 

Addison,  in  The  Spectator ,  has  given  us  a  fine 
portrait  of  a  clergyman,  who  is  supposed  to  be  a 
member  of  his  Club ;  and  Johnson  has  exhibited 
a  model,  in  the  character  of  Mr.  Mudge,1  which 
has  escaped  the  collectors  of  his  works,  but 
which  he  owned  to  me,  and  which  indeed  he 
shewed  to  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  at  the  time  when 
it  was  written.  It  bears  the  genuine  marks  of 
Johnson’s  best  manner,  and  is  as  follows: 

“The  Reverend  Mr.  ^acariah  Mudge ,  Preben¬ 
dary  of  Exeter,  and  Vicar  of  St.  Andrew’s  in 
Plymouth;  a  man  equally  eminent  for  his  vir¬ 
tues  and  abilities,  and  at  once  beloved  as  a 
companion  and  reverenced  as  a  pastor.  He  had 
that  general  curiosity  to  which  no  kind  of  knowl¬ 
edge  is  indifferent  or  superfluous;  and  that  gen¬ 
eral  benevolence  by  which  no  order  of  men  is 
hated  or  despised. 

“His  principles  both  of  thought  and  action 
were  great  and  comprehensive.  By  a  solicitous 
examination  of  objections,  and  judicious  com¬ 
parison  of  opposite  arguments,  he  attained  what 
enquiry  never  gives  but  to  industry  and  per¬ 
spicuity,  a  firm  and  unshaken  settlement  of  con¬ 
viction.  But  his  firmness  was  without  asperity; 
for,  knowing  with  how  much  difficulty  truth 
was  sometimes  found,  he  did  not  wonder  that 
many  missed  it. 

“The  general  course  of  his  life  was  determined 
by  his  profession;  he  studied  the  sacred  volumes 
in  the  original  languages;  with  what  diligence 
and  success,  his  Notes  upon  the  Psalms  give  suffi¬ 
cient  evidence.  He  once  endeavoured  to  add  the 
knowledge  of  Arabick  to  that  of  Hebrew;  but 
finding  his  thoughts  too  much  diverted  from 
other  studies,  after  some  time  desisted  from  his 
purpose. 

“His  discharge  of  parochial  duties  was  exem¬ 
plary.  How  his  Sermons  were  composed,  may  be 
learned  from  the  excellent  volume  which  he  has 
given  to  the  publick;  but  how  they  were  de¬ 
livered,  can  be  known  only  to  those  that  heard 
them;  for  as  he  appeared  in  the  pulpit,  words 
will  not  easily  describe  him.  His  delivery,  though 

^ee  pp.  105-6. 


unconstrained  was  not  negligent,  and  though 
forcible  was  not  turbulent;  disdaining  anxious 
nicety  of  emphasis,  and  laboured  artifice  of  ac¬ 
tion,  it  captivated  the  hearer  by  its  natural  dig¬ 
nity,  it  roused  the  sluggish,  and  fixed  the  vola¬ 
tile,  and  detained  the  mind  upon  the  subject, 
without  directing  it  to  the  speaker. 

“The  grandeur  and  solemnity  of  the  preacher 
did  not  intrude  upon  his  general  behaviour;  at 
the  table  of  his  friends  he  was  a  companion  com¬ 
municative  and  attentive,  of  unaffected  manners, 
of  manly  cheerfulness,  willing  to  please,  and  easy 
to  be  pleased.  His  acquaintance  was  universally 
solicited,  and  his  presence  obstructed  no  enjoy¬ 
ment  which  religion  did  not  forbid.  Though  stu¬ 
dious  he  was  popular;  though  argumentative  he 
was  modest;  though  inflexible  he  was  candid; 
and  though  metaphysical  yet  orthodox.5’2 

On  Friday,  March  30,  I  dined  with  him  at 
Sir  Joshua  Reynolds’s,  with  the  Earl  of  Charle- 
mont,  Sir  Annesley  Stewart,  Mr.  Eliot  of  Port- 
Eliot,  Mr.  Burke,  Dean  Marlay,  Mr.  Langton;  a 
most  agreeable  day,  of  which  I  regret  that  every 
circumstance  is  not  preserved;  but  it  is  unreason¬ 
able  to  require  such  a  multiplication  of  felicity. 

Mr.  Eliot,  with  whom  Dr.  Walter  Harte  had 
travelled,  talked  to  us  of  his  History  of  Gustavus 
Adolphus ,  which  he  said  was  a  very  good  book  in 
the  German  translation.  Johnson.  “Harte  was 
excessively  vain.  He  put  copies  of  his  book  in 
manuscript  into  the  hands  of  Lord  Chesterfield 
and  Lord  Granville,  that  they  might  revise  it. 
Now  how  absurd  was  it  to  suppose  that  two  such 
noblemen  would  revise  so  big  a  manuscript. 
Poor  man !  he  left  London  the  day  of  the  pub¬ 
lication  of  his  book,  that  he  might  be  out  of  the 
way  of  the  great  praise  he  was  to  receive;  and 
he  was  ashamed  to  return,  when  he  found  how 
ill  his  book  had  succeeded.  It  was  unlucky  in 
coming  out  on  the  same  day  with  Robertson’s 
History  of  Scotland.  His  husbandry,  however,  is 
good.”  Boswell.  “So  he  was  fitter  for  that  than 
for  heroick  history:  he  did  well,  when  he  turned 
his  sword  into  a  plough-share.” 

Mr.  Eliot  mentioned  a  curious  liquor  peculiar 
to  his  country,  which  the  Cornish  fishermen 
drink.  They  call  it  Mahogany ;  and  it  is  made  of 
two  parts  gin,  and  one  part  treacle,  well  beaten 
together.  I  begged  to  have  some  of  it  made, 
which  was  done  with  proper  skill  by  Mr.  Eliot. 
I  thought  it  very  good  liquor;  and  said  it  was  a 
counterpart  of  what  is  called  Athol  Porridge  in 

2 London  Chronicle ,  May  2,  1769.  This  respectable 
man  is  there  mentioned  to  have  died  on  the  3rd  of 
April,  that  year,  at  Cofflect,  the  seat  of  Thomas 
Veale,  Esq.,  in  his  way  to  London. 


BOSWELL 


468 

the  Highlands  of  Scotland,  which  is  a  mixture 
of  whisky  and  honey.  Johnson  said,  “that  must 
be  a  better  liquor  than  the  Cornish,  for  both  its 
component  parts  are  better.”  He  also  observed, 
“ Mahogany  must  be  a  modern  name;  for  it  is  not 
long  since  the  wood  called  mahogany  was  known 
in  this  country.”  I  mentioned  his  scale  of  li¬ 
quors; — claret  for  boys, — port  for  men, — brandy 
for  heroes.  “Then  (said  Mr.  Burke,)  let  me  have 
claret:  I  love  to  be  a  boy;  to  have  the  careless 
gaiety  of  boyish  days.”  Johnson.  “I  should  drink 
claret  too,  if  it  would  give  me  that;  but  it  does 
not:  it  neither  makes  boys  men,  nor  men  boys. 
You’ll  be  drowned  by  it,  before  it  has  any  effect 
upon  you.” 

I  ventured  to  mention  a  ludicrous  paragraph 
in  the  news-papers,  that  Dr.  Johnson  was  learn¬ 
ing  to  dance  of  Vestris.  Lord  Charlemont,  wish¬ 
ing  to  excite  him  to  talk,  proposed  in  a  whisper, 
that  he  should  be  asked,  whether  it  was  true. 
“Shall  I  ask  him?”  said  his  Lordship.  We  were, 
by  a  great  majority,  clear  for  the  experiment. 
Upon  which  his  Lordship  very  gravely,  and 
with  a  courteous  air  said,  “Pray,  Sir,  is  it  true 
that  you  are  taking  lessons  of  Vestris?”  This  was 
risking  a  good  deal,  and  required  the  boldness 
of  a  General  of  Irish  Volunteers  to  make  the 
attempt.  Johnson  was  at  first  startled,  and  in 
some  heat  answered,  “How  can  your  Lordship 
ask  so  simple  a  question?”  But  immediately  re¬ 
covering  himself,  whether  from  unwillingness  to 
be  deceived,  or  to  appear  deceived,  or  whether 
from  real  good  humour,  he  kept  up  the  joke: 
“Nay,  but  if  any  body  were  to  answer  the  para¬ 
graph,  and  contradict  it,  I’d  have  a  reply,  and 
would  say,  that  he  who  contradicted  it  was  no 
friend  either  to  Vestris  or  me.  For  why  should 
not  Dr.  Johnson  add  to  his  other  powers  a  little 
corporeal  agility?  Socrates  learnt  to  dance  at  an 
advanced  age,  and  Cato  learnt  Greek  at  an  ad¬ 
vanced  age.  Then  it  might  proceed  to  say,  that 
this  Johnson,  not  content  with  dancing  on  the 
ground,  might  dance  on  the  rope;  and  they 
might  introduce  the  elephant  dancing  on  the 
rope.  A  nobleman1  wrote  a  play,  called  Love  in  a 
hollow  Tree.  He  found  out  that  it  was  a  bad  one, 
and  therefore  washed  to  buy  up  all  the  copies, 
and  burn  them.  The  Duchess  of  Marlborough 
had  kept  one;  and  when  he  was  against  her  at 
an  election,  she  had  a  new  edition  of  it  printed, 
and  prefixed  to  it,  as  a  frontispiece,  an  elephant 
dancing  on  a  rope;  to  shew,  that  his  Lordship’s 
writing  comedy  was  as  aukward  as  an  elephant 
dancing  on  a  rope.” 

On  Sunday,  April  1,  I  dined  with  him  at  Mr. 

William,  the  first  Viscount  Grimston. 


[  1781 

Thrale’s,  with  Sir  Philip  Jennings  Clerk  and 
Mr.  Perkins,2  who  had  the  superintendence  of 
Mr.  Thrale’s  brewery,  with  a  salary  of  five  hun¬ 
dred  pounds  a  year.  Sir  Philip  had  the  appear¬ 
ance  of  a  gentleman  of  ancient  family,  well  ad¬ 
vanced  in  life.  He  wore  his  own  white  hair  in  a 
bag  of  goodly  size,  a  black  velvet  coat,  with  an 
embroidered  waistcoat,  and  very  rich  laced  ruf¬ 
fles;  which  Mrs.  Thrale  said  were  old  fashioned, 
but  which,  for  that  reason,  I  thought  the  more 
respectable,  more  like  a  Tory;  yet  Sir  Philip  was 
then  in  Opposition  in  Parliament.  “Ah,  Sir, 
(said  Johnson,)  ancient  ruffles  and  modern  prin¬ 
ciples  do  not  agree.”  Sir  Philip  defended  the 
Opposition  to  the  American  war  ably  and  with 
temper,  and  I  joined  him.  He  said,  the  majority 
of  the  nation  was  against  the  ministry.  Johnson. 
“I,  Sir,  am  against  the  ministry;  but  it  is  for 
having  too  little  of  that,  of  which  Opposition 
thinks  they  have  too  much.  Were  I  minister,  if 
any  man  wagged  his  finger  against  me,  he  should 
be  turned  out;  for  that  which  it  is  in  the  power 
of  Government  to  give  at  pleasure  to  one  or  to 
another,  should  be  given  to  the  supporters  of 
Government.  If  you  will  not  oppose  at  the  ex¬ 
pence  of  losing  your  place,  your  opposition  will 
not  be  honest,  you  will  feel  no  serious  grievance; 
and  the  present  opposition  is  only  a  contest  to 
get  what  others  have.  Sir  Robert  Walpole  acted 
as  I  would  do.  As  to  the  American  war,  the 
sense  of  the  nation  is  with  the  ministry.  The  ma¬ 
jority  of  those  who  can  understand  is  with  it;  the 
majority  of  those  who  can  only  hear ,  is  against 
it;  and  as  those  who  can  only  hear  are  more 
numerous  than  those  who  can  understand,  and 
Opposition  is  always  loudest,  a  majority  of  the 
rabble  will  be  for  Opposition.” 

This  boisterous  vivacity  entertained  us;  but 
the  truth  in  my  opinion  was,  that  those  who 
could  understand  the  best  were  against  the 
American  war,  as  almost  every  man  now  is, 
when  the  question  has  been  coolly  considered. 

Mrs.  Thrale  gave  high  praise  to  Mr.  Dudley 
Long,  (now  North).  Johnson.  “Nay,  my  dear 
lady,  don’t  talk  so.  Mr.  Long’s  character  is  very 
short.  It  is  nothing.  He  fills  a  chair.  He  is  a  man 
of  genteel  appearance,  and  that  is  all.3  I  know 

2See  p.  234. 

3Here  Johnson  condescended  to  play  upon  the 
words  Long  and  short.  But  little  did  he  know  that, 
owing  to  Mr.  Long’s  reserve  in  his  presence,  he 
was  talking  thus  of  a  gentleman  distinguished 
amongst  his  acquaintance  for  acuteness  of  wit;  one 
to  whom  I  think  the  French  expression,  “//  petille 
d'espritT  is  particularly  suited.  He  has  gratified  me 
by  mentioning  that  he  heard  Dr.  Johnson  say,  “Sir, 
if  I  were  to  lose  Boswell,  it  would  be  a  limb  ampu¬ 
tated.” 


1781]  LIFE  OF 

nobody  who  blasts  by  praise  as  you  do:  for  when¬ 
ever  there  is  exaggerated  praise,  every  body  is 
set  against  a  character.  They  are  provoked  to 
attack  it.  Now  there  is  Pepys;1  you  praised  that 
man  with  such  disproportion,  that  I  was  incited 
to  lessen  him,  perhaps  more  than  he  deserves. 
His  blood  is  upon  your  head.  By  the  same  prin¬ 
ciple,  your  malice  defeats  itself;  for  your  cen¬ 
sure  is  too  violent.  And  yet,  (looking  to  her  with 
a  leering  smile,)  she  is  the  first  woman  in  the 
world,  could  she  but  restrain  that  wicked  tongue 
of  hers; — she  would  be  the  only  woman,  could 
she  but  command  that  little  whirligig.” 

Upon  the  subject  of  exaggerated  praise  I  took 
the  liberty  to  say,  that  I  thought  there  might  be 
very  high  praise  given  to  a  known  character 
which  deserved  it,  and  therefore  it  would  not  be 
exaggerated.  Thus,  one  might  say  of  Mr.  Ed¬ 
mund  Burke,  He  is  a  very  wonderful  man.  John¬ 
son.  “No,  Sir,  you  would  not  be  safe  if  another 
man  had  a  mind  perversely  to  contradict.  He 
might  answer,  ‘Where  is  all  the  wonder?  Burke 
is,  to  be  sure,  a  man  of  uncommon  abilities, 
with  a  great  quantity  of  matter  in  his  mind,  and 
a  great  fluency  of  language  in  his  mouth.  But 
we  are  not  to  be  stunned  and  astonished  by  him.5 
So  you  see,  Sir,  even  Burke  would  suffer,  not 
from  any  fault  of  his  own,  but  from  your  folly.’5 

Mrs.  Thrale  mentioned  a  gentleman  who  had 
acquired  a  fortune  of  four  thousand  a  year  in 
trade,  but  was  absolutely  miserable,  because  he 
could  not  talk  in  company;  so  miserable,  that 
he  was  impelled  to  lament  his  situation  in  the 
street  to  ******?  whom  he  hates,  and  who  he 
knows  despises  him. 4  c  I  am  a  most  unhappy  man, 
(said  he).  I  am  invited  to  conversations.  I  go  to 
conversations;  but,  alas!  I  have  no  conversa¬ 
tion.”  Johnson.  “Man  commonly  cannot  be  suc¬ 
cessful  in  different  ways.  This  gentleman  has 
spent,  in  getting  four  thousand  pounds  a  year, 
the  time  in  which  he  might  have  learnt  to  talk; 
and  now  he  cannot  talk.”  Mr.  Perkins  made  a 
shrewd  and  droll  remark:  “If  he  had  got  his  four 
thousand  a  year  as  a  mountebank,  he  might 
have  learnt  to  talk  at  the  same  time  that  he  was 
getting  his  fortune.” 

Some  other  gentlemen  came  in.  The  conver¬ 
sation  concerning  the  person  whose  character 

1  William  Weller  Pepys,  Esq.,  one  of  the  Masters 
in  the  High  Court  of  Chancery,  and  well  known  in 
polite  circles.  My  acquaintance  with  him  is  not 
sufficient  to  enable  me  to  speak  of  him  from  my 
own  judgement.  But  I  know  that  both  at  Eton  and 
Oxford  he  was  the  intimate  friend  of  the  late  Sir 
James  Macdonald,  the  Marcellusoi Scotland,  whose 
extraordinary  talents,  learning,  and  virtues,  will 
ever  be  remembered  with  admiration  and  regret. 


JOHNSON  469 

Dr.  Johnson  had  treated  so  slightingly,  as  he 
did  not  know  his  merit,  was  resumed.  Mrs. 
Thrale  said,  “You  think  so  of  him,  Sir,  because 
he  is  quiet,  and  does  not  exert  himself  with  force. 
You’ll  be  saying  the  same  thing  of  Mr.  ***** 
there,  who  sits  as  quiet — .”  This  was  not  well- 
bred;  and  Johnson  did  not  let  it  pass  without 
correction.  “Nay,  Madam,  what  right  have  vou 
to  talk  thus?  Both  Mr.  *****  and  I  have  reason 
to  take  it  ill.  Tou  may  talk  so  of  Mr.  *****;  but 
why  do  you  make  me  do  it?  Have  I  said  any¬ 
thing  against  Mr.  *****?  You  have  set  him, 
that  I  might  shoot  him:  but  I  have  not  shot  him.” 

One  of  the  gentlemen  said,  he  had  seen  three 
folio  volumes  of  Dr.  Johnson’s  sayings  collected 
by  me.  “I  must  put  you  right,  Sir,  (said  I,)  for  I 
am  very  exact  in  authenticity.  You  could  not 
see  folio  volumes,  for  I  have  none:  you  might 
have  seen  some  in  quarto  and  octavo.  This  is  in¬ 
attention  which  one  should  guard  against.” 
Johnson.  “Sir,  it  is  a  want  of  concern  about  ver¬ 
acity.  He  does  not  know  that  he  saw  any  vol¬ 
umes.  If  he  had  seen  them,  he  could  have  remem¬ 
bered  their  size.” 

Mr.  Thrale  appeared  very  lethargick  to-day. 
I  saw  him  again  on  Monday  evening,  at  which 
time  he  was  not  thought  to  be  in  immediate  dan¬ 
ger;  but  early  in  the  morning  of  Wednesday, 
the  4th,  he  expired.  Johnson  was  in  the  house, 
and  thus  mentions  the  event:  “I  felt  almost  the 
last  flutter  of  his  pulse,  and  looked  for  the  last 
time  upon  the  face,  that  for  fifteen  years  had  never 
been  turned  upon  me  but  with  respect  and  be¬ 
nignity.”2  Upon  that  day  there  was  a  Call  of  The 
Literary  Club;  but  Johnson  apologised  for  his 
absence  by  the  following  note: 

“Mr.  Johnson  knows  that  Sir  Joshua  Rey¬ 
nolds  and  the  other  gentlemen  will  excuse  his 
incompliance  with  the  call,  when  they  are  told 
that  Mr.  Thrale  died  this  morning. — Wednes¬ 
day.” 

Mr.  Thrale’s  death  was  a  very  essential  loss  to 
Johnson,  who,  although  he  did  not  foresee  all 
that  afterwards  happened,  was  sufficiently  con¬ 
vinced  that  the  comforts  which  Mr.  Thrale’s 
family  afforded  him,  would  now  in  a  great  meas¬ 
ure  cease.  He,  however,  continued  to  shew  a 
kind  attention  to  his  widow  and  children  as  long 
as  it  was  acceptable;  and  he  took  upon  him, 
with  a  very  earnest  concern,  the  office  of  one  of 
his  executors,  the  importance  of  which  seemed 
greater  than  usual  to  him,  from  his  circumstances 
having  been  always  such,  that  he  had  scarcely 
any  share  in  the  real  business  of  life.  His  friends 
of  the  club  were  in  hopes  that  Mr.  Thrale 

^Prayers  and  Meditations ,  p.  191. 


BOSWELL 


470 

might  have  made  a  liberal  provision  for  him  for 
his  life,  which,  as  Mr.  Thrale  left  no  son,  and  a 
very  large  fortune,  it  would  have  been  highly  to 
his  honour  to  have  done;  and,  considering  Dr. 
Johnson’s  age,  could  not  have  been  of  long  dur¬ 
ation;  but  he  bequeathed  him  only  two  hundred 
pounds,  which  was  the  legacy  given  to  each  of 
his  executors.  I  could  not  but  be  somewhat  di¬ 
verted  by  hearing  Johnson  talk  in  a  pompous 
manner  of  his  new  office,  and  particularly  of  the 
concerns  of  the  brewery,  which  it  was  at  last  re¬ 
solved  should  be  sold.  Lord  Lucan  tells  a  very 
good  story,  which,  if  not  precisely  exact,  is  cer¬ 
tainly  characteristical:  that  when  the  sale  of 
Thrale’s  brewery  was  going  forward,  Johnson 
appeared  bustling  about,  with  an  ink-horn  and 
pen  in  his  button-hole,  like  an  excise-man;  and 
on  being  asked  what  he  really  considered  to  be 
the  value  of  the  property  which  was  to  be  dis¬ 
posed  of,  answered,  “We  are  not  here  to  sell  a 
parcel  of  boilers  and  vats,  but  the  potentiality  of 
growing  rich,  beyond  the  dreams  of  avarice.” 

On  Friday,  April  6,  he  carried  me  to  dine  at 
a  club,  which,  at  his  desire,  had  been  lately 
formed  at  the  Queen’s  Arms,  in  St.  Paul’s 
Church-yard.  He  told  Mr.  Hoole,  that  he  wished 
to  have  a  City  Club ,  and  asked  him  to  collect 
one;  but,  said  he,  “Don’t  let  them  be  patriots .” 
The  company  were  to-day  very  sensible,  well- 
behaved  men.  I  have  preserved  only  two  particu¬ 
lars  of  his  conversation.  He  said  he  was  glad 
Lord  George  Gordon  had  escaped,  rather  than 
that  a  precedent  should  be  established  for  hang¬ 
ing  a  man  for  constructive  treason ;  which,  in  con¬ 
sistency  with  his  true,  manly,  constitutional  Tory¬ 
ism,  he  considered  would  be  a  dangerous  en¬ 
gine  of  arbitrary  power.  And  upon  its  being 
mentioned  that  an  opulent  and  very  indolent 
Scotch  nobleman,  who  totally  resigned  the  man¬ 
agement  of  his  affairs  to  a  man  of  knowledge 
and  abilities,  had  claimed  some  merit  by  saying, 
“The  next  best  thing  to  managing  a  man’s  own 
affairs  well  is  being  sensible  of  incapacity,  and 
not  attempting  it,  but  having  full  confidence  in 
one  who  can  do  it”:  Johnson.  “Nay,  Sir,  this  is 
paltry.  There  is  a  middle  course.  Let  a  man  give 
application;  and  depend  upon  it  he  will  soon 
get  above  a  despicable  state  of  helplessness,  and 
attain  the  power  of  acting  for  himself.” 

On  Saturday,  April  7,  I  dined  with  him  at 
Mr.  Hoole’s  with  Governour  Bouchier  and  Cap¬ 
tain  Orme,  both  of  whom  had  been  long  in  the 
East-Indies;  and  being  men  of  good  sense  and 
observation,  were  very  entertaining.  Johnson 
defended  the  oriental  regulation  of  different  casts 
of  men,  which  was  objected  to  as  totally  destruc¬ 


[  1781 

tive  of  the  hopes  of  rising  in  society  by  personal 
merit.  He  shewed  that  there  was  a  principle  in  it 
sufficiently  plausible  by  analogy.  “We  see  (said 
he,)  in  metals  that  there  are  different  species; 
and  so  likewise  in  animals,  though  one  species 
may  not  differ  very  widely  from  another,  as  in 
the  species  of  dogs, — the  cur,  the  spaniel,  the 
mastiff.  The  Brainins  are  the  mastiffs  of  man¬ 
kind.” 

On  Thursday,  April  12,  I  dined  with  him  at 
a  Bishop’s,  where  were  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds, 
Mr.  Berrcnger,  and  some  more  company.  He 
had  dined  the  day  before  at  another  Bishop’s. 
I  have  unfortunately  recorded  none  of  his  con¬ 
versation  at  the  Bishop’s  where  we  dined  togeth¬ 
er:  but  I  have  preserved  his  ingenious  defence 
of  his  dining  twice  abroad  in  Passion-week;  a 
laxity,  in  which  I  am  convinced  he  would  not 
have  indulged  himself  at  the  time  when  he  wrote 
his  solemn  paper  in  The  Rambler ,  upon  that  awe¬ 
ful  season.  It  appeared  to  me,  that  by  being 
much  more  in  company,  and  enjoying  more  lux¬ 
urious  living,  he  had  contracted  a  keener  relish 
of  pleasure,  and  was  consequently  less  rigorous 
in  his  religious  rites.  This  he  would  not  acknowl¬ 
edge;  but  he  reasoned  with  admirable  sophis¬ 
try,  as  follows:  “Why,#Sir,  a  Bishop’s  calling 
company  together  in  this  week  is,  to  use  the  vul¬ 
gar  phrase,  not  the  thing .  But  you  must  consider 
laxity  is  a  bad  thing;  but  preciseness  is  also  a 
bad  thing;  and  your  general  character  may  be 
more  hurt  by  preciseness  than  by  dining  writh  a 
Bishop  in  Passion-week.  There  might  be  a  han¬ 
dle  for  reflection.  It  might  be  said,  ‘He  refused 
to  dine  with  a  Bishop  in  Passion-week,  but  was 
three  Sundays  absent  from  Church.’  ”  Boswell. 
“Very  true,  Sir.  But  suppose  a  man  to  be  uni¬ 
formly  of  good  conduct,  would  it  not  be  better 
that  he  should  refuse  to  dine  with  a  Bishop  in 
this  week,  and  so  not  encourage  a  bad  practice 
by  his  example?”  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  you  are 
to  consider  whether  you  might  not  do  more 
harm  by  lessening  the  influence  of  a  Bishop’s 
character  by  your  disapprobation  in  refusing 
him,  than  by  going  to  him.” 

To  Mrs.  Lucy  Porter,  in  Lichfield 

Dear  Madam,  Life  is  full  of  troubles.  I  have 
just  lost  my  dear  friend  Thrale.  I  hope  he  is 
happy;  but  I  have  had  a  great  loss.  I  am  other¬ 
wise  pretty  well.  I  require  some  care  of  myself, 
but  that  care  is  not  ineffectual;  and  when  I  am 
out  of  order,  I  think  it  often  my  own  fault. 

The  spring  is  now  making  quick  advances. 
As  it  is  the  season  in  which  the  whole  world  is 
enlivened  and  invigorated,  I  hope  that  both 
you  and  I  shall  partake  of  its  benefits.  My  desire 


1 7Sl  3 

is  to  see  Lichfield;  but  being  left  executor  to  my 
friend,  I  know  not  whether  I  can  be  spared;  but 
I  will  try,  for  it  is  now  long  since  we  saw  one 
another,  and  how  little  we  can  promise  our¬ 
selves  many  more  interviews,  we  are  taught  by 
hourly  examples  of  mortality.  Let  us  try  to  live 
so  as  that  mortality  may  not  be  an  evil.  Write  to 
me  soon,  my  dearest;  your  letters  will  give  me 
great  pleasure. 

I  am  sorry  that  Mr.  Porter  has  not  had  his 
box;  but  by  sending  it  to  Mr.  Mathias,  who 
very  readily  undertook  its  conveyance,  I  did 
the  best  I  could,  and  perhaps  before  now  he  has 
it. 

Be  so  kind  as  to  make  my  compliments  to  my 
friends;  I  have  a  great  value  for  their  kindness, 
and  hope  to  enjoy  it  before  summer  is  past.  Do 
write  to  me.  I  am,  dearest  love,  your  most  hum¬ 
ble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

London,  April  12,  1781 

On  Friday,  April  13,  being  Good-Friday,  I 
went  to  St.  Clement’s  church  with  him  as  usual. 
There  I  saw  again  his  old  fellow-collegian,  Ed¬ 
wards,  to  whom  I  said,  “I  think,  Sir,  Dr.  John¬ 
son  and  you  meet  only  at  Church.” — “Sir,  (said 
he,)  it  is  the  best  place  we  can  meet  in,  except 
Heaven,  and  I  hope  we  shall  meet  there  too.” 
Dr.  Johnson  told  me,  that  there  was  very  little 
communication  between  Edwards  and  him,  af¬ 
ter  their  unexpected  renewal  of  acquaintance. 
“But,  (said  he,  smiling),  he  met  me  once,  and 
said,  T  am  told  you  have  written  a  very  pretty 
book  called  The  Rambler .’  I  was  unwilling  that 
he  should  leave  the  world  in  total  darkness,  and 
sent  him  a  set.” 

Mr.  Berrenger1  visited  him  to-day,  and  was 
very  pleasing.  We  talked  of  an  evening  society 
for  conversation  at  a  house  in  town,  of  which  we 
were  all  members,  but  of  which  Johnson  said, 
“It  will  never  do,  Sir.  There  is  nothing  served 
about  there,  neither  tea,  nor  coffee,  nor  lemon¬ 
ade,  nor  any  thing  whatever;  and  depend  upon 
it,  Sir,  a  man  does  not  love  to  go  to  a  place  from 
whence  he  comes  out  exactly  as  he  went  in.”  I 
endeavoured,  for  argument’s  sake,  to  maintain 
that  men  of  learning  and  talents  might  have  very 
good  intellectual  society,  without  the  aid  of  any 
little  gratifications  of  the  senses.  Berrenger  joined 
with  Johnson,  and  said,  that  without  these  any 
meeting  would  be  dull  and  insipid.  He  would 
therefore  have  all  the  slight  refreshments;  nay, 
it  would  not  be  amiss  to  have  some  cold  meat, 
and  a  bottle  of  wine  upon  a  side-board.  “Sir, 

Richard  Berrenger,  Esq.,  many  years  Gentle¬ 
man  of  the  Horse,  and  first  equerry  to  his  present 
Majesty.  [M.] 


471 

(said  Johnson  to  me,  with  an  air  of  triumph,) 
Mr.  Berrenger  knows  the  world.  Every  body 
loves  to  have  good  things  furnished  to  them 
without  any  trouble.  I  told  Mrs.  Thrale  once, 
that  as  she  did  not  choose  to  have  card  tables, 
she  should  have  a  profusion  of  the  best  sweet¬ 
meats,  and  she  would  be  sure  to  have  company 
enough  come  to  her.”  I  agreed  with  my  illus¬ 
trious  friend  upon  this  subject;  for  it  has  pleased 
God  to  make  man  a  composite  animal,  and 
where  there  is  nothing  to  refresh  the  body,  the 
mind  will  languish. 

On  Sunday,  April  1 5,  being  Easter-day,  after 
solemn  worship  in  St.  Paul’s  church,  I  found 
him  alone;  Dr.  Scott  of  the  Commons  came  in. 
He  talked  of  its  having  been  said  that  Addison 
wrote  some  of  his  best  papers  in  The  Spectator 
when  warm  with  wine.  Dr.  Johnson  did  not  seem 
willing  to  admit  this.  Dr.  Scott,  as  a  confirma¬ 
tion  of  it,  related,  that  Blackstone,  a  sober  man, 
composed  his  Commentaries  with  a  bottle  of  port 
before  him;  and  found  his  mind  invigorated  and 
supported  in  the  fatigue  of  his  great  work,  by  a 
temperate  use  of  it. 

I  told  him,  that  in  a  company  where  I  had 
lately  been,  a  desire  was  expressed  to  know  his 
authority  for  the  shocking  story  of  Addison’s 
sending  an  execution  into  Steele’s  house.2  “Sir, 
(said  he,)  it  is  generally  known,  it  is  known  to 
all  who  are  acquainted  with  the  literary  history 
of  that  period.  It  is  as  well  known,  as  that  he 
wrote  Cato.”  Mr.  Thomas  Sheridan  once  de¬ 
fended  Addison  to  me,  by  alledging  that  he  did 
it  in  order  to  cover  Steele’s  goods  from  other 
creditors,  who  were  going  to  seize  them. 

We  talked  of  the  difference  between  the  mode 
of  education  at  Oxford,  and  that  in  those  Col¬ 
leges  where  instruction  is  chiefly  conveyed  by 
lectures.  Johnson.  “Lectures  were  once  useful; 
but  now,  when  all  can  read,  and  books  are  so 
numerous,  lectures  are  unnecessary.  If  your  at¬ 
tention  fails,  and  you  miss  a  part  of  a  lecture,  it 
is  lost;  you  cannot  go  back  as  you  do  upon  a 
book.”  Dr.  Scott  agreed  with  him.  “But  yet 
(said  I),  Dr.  Scott,  you  yourself  gave  lectures 
at  Oxford.”  He  smiled.  “You  laughed  (then  said 
I,)  at  those  who  came  to  you.” 

Dr.  Scott  left  us,  and  soon  afterwards  we  went 
to  dinner.  Our  company  consisted  of  Mrs.  Wil¬ 
liams,  Mrs.  Desmoulins,  Mr.  Levett,  Mr.  Allen, 
the  printer,  and  Mrs.  Hall,  sister  of  the  Reverend 
Mr.  John  Wesley,  and  resembling  him,  as  I 
thought,  both  in  figure  and  manner.  Johnson 
produced  now,  for  the  first  time,  some  hand¬ 
some  silver  salvers,  which  he  told  me  he  had 

2See  this  explained,  ante ,  p.  458. 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


BOSWELL 


472 

bought  fourteen  years  ago;  so  it  was  a  great  day. 
I  was  not  a  little  amused  by  observing  Allen  per¬ 
petually  struggling  to  talk  in  the  manner  of 
Johnson,  like  the  little  frog  in  the  fable  blowing 
himself  up  to  resemble  the  stately  ox. 

I  mentioned  a  kind  of  religious  Robinhood 
Society,  which  met  every  Sunday  evening,  at 
Coachmakers’-hall,  for  free  debate;  and  that 
the  subject  for  this  night  was,  the  text  which  re¬ 
lates,  with  other  miracles,  which  happened  at 
our  Saviour’s  death,  “And  the  graves  were 
opened,  and  many  bodies  of  the  saints  which 
slept  arose,  and  came  out  of  the  graves  after  his 
resurrection,  and  went  into  the  holy  city,  and 
appeared  unto  many.”  Mrs.  Hall  said  it  was  a 
very  curious  subject,  and  she  should  like  to  hear 
itdiscussed.  Johnson,  (somewhat  warmly,)  “One 
would  not  go  to  such  a  place  to  hear  it, — one 
would  not  be  seen  in  such  a  place — to  give 
countenance  to  such  a  meeting.”  I,  however, 
resolved  that  I  would  go.  “But,  Sir,  (said  she  to 
Johnson,)  I  should  like  to  hear  you  discuss  it.” 
He  seemed  reluctant  to  engage  in  it.  She  talked 
of  the  resurrection  of  the  human  race  in  general, 
and  maintained  that  we  shall  be  raised  with  the 
same  bodies.  Johnson.  “Nay,  Madam,  we  see 
that  it  is  not  to  be  the  same  body;  for  the  Scrip¬ 
ture  uses  the  illustration  of  grain  sown,  and 
we  know  that  the  grain  which  grows  is  not  the 
same  with  what  is  sown.  You  cannot  suppose 
that  we  shall  rise  with  a  diseased  body;  it  is 
enough  if  there  be  such  a  sameness  as  to  distin¬ 
guish  identity  of  person.”  She  seemed  desirous 
of  knowing  more,  but  he  left  the  question  in  ob¬ 
scurity. 

Of  apparitions,1  he  observed,  “A  total  disbe¬ 
lief  of  them  is  adverse  to  the  opinion  of  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  the  soul  between  death  and  the  last  day; 
the  question  simply  is,  whether  departed  spirits 
ever  have  the  power  of  making  themselves  per¬ 
ceptible  to  us;  a  man  who  thinks  he  has  seen  an 
apparition,  can  only  be  convinced  himself;  his 
authority  will  not  convince  another,  and  his 
conviction,  if  rational,  must  be  founded  on  be¬ 
ing  told  something  which  cannot  be  known  but 
by  supernatural  means.” 

He  mentioned  a  thing  as  not  unfrequent,  of 
which  I  had  never  heard  before, — being  called , 

*As  this  subject  frequently  recurs  in  these  vol¬ 
umes,  the  reader  may  be  led  erroneously  to  sup¬ 
pose  that  Dr.  Johnson  was  so  fond  of  such  discus¬ 
sions,  as  frequently  to  introduce  them.  But  the 
truth  is,  that  the  authour  himself  delighted  in  talk¬ 
ing  concerning  ghosts,  and  what  he  has  frequently 
denominated  the  mysterious ;  and  therefore  took  ev¬ 
ery  opportunity  of  leading  Johnson  to  converse  on 
such  subjects.  [M.] 


[1781 

that  is,  hearing  one’s  name  pronounced  by  the 
voice  of  a  known  person  at  a  great  distance,  far 
beyond  the  possibility  of  being  reached  by  any 
sound  uttered  by  human  organs.  “An  acquaint¬ 
ance,  on  whose  veracity  I  can  depend,  told  me, 
that  walking  home  one  evening  to  Kilmarnock, 
he  heard  himself  called  from  a  wood,  by  the 
voice  of  a  brother  who  had  gone  to  America; 
and  the  next  packet  brought  accounts  of  that 
brother’s  death.”  Macbean  asserted  that  this  in¬ 
explicable  calling  was  a  thing  very  well  known. 
Dr.  Johnson  said,  that  one  day  at  Oxford,  as  he 
was  turning  the  key  of  his  chamber,  he  heard 
his  mother  distinctly  call  Sam.  She  was  then  at 
Lichfield;  but  nothing  ensued.  This  phenom¬ 
enon  is,  I  think,  as  wonderful  as  any  other  mys¬ 
terious  fact,  which  many  people  are  very  slow  to 
believe,  or  rather,  indeed,  reject  with  an  obsti¬ 
nate  contempt. 

Some  time  after  this,  upon  his  making  a  re¬ 
mark  which  escaped  my  attention,  Mrs.  Wil¬ 
liams  and  Mrs.  Hall  were  both  together  striving 
to  answer  him.  He  grew  angry,  and  called  out 
loudly,  “Nay,  when  you  both  speak  at  once,  it 
is  intolerable.”  But  checking  himself,  and  soft¬ 
ening,  he  said,  “This  one  may  say,  though  you 
are  ladies.”  Then  he  brightened  into  gay  hu¬ 
mour,  and  addressed  them  in  the  words  of  one 
of  the  songs  in  Ihe  Beggar's  Opera : 

But  two  at  a  time  there's  no  mortal  can  bear . 

“What,  Sir,  (said  I,)  are  you  going  to  turn  Cap¬ 
tain  Macheath?”  There  was  something  as  pleas¬ 
antly  ludicrous  in  this  scene  as  can  be  imagined. 
The  contrast  between  Macheath,  Polly,  and 
Lucy — and  Dr.  Samuel  Johnson,  blind,  peevish 
Mrs.  Williams,  and  lean,  lank,  preaching  Mrs. 
Hall,  was  exquisite. 

I  stole  away  to  Coachmakers’-hall,  and  heard 
the  difficult  text  of  which  we  had  talked,  dis¬ 
cussed  with  great  decency,  and  some  intelli¬ 
gence,  by  several  speakers.  There  was  a  differ¬ 
ence  of  opinion  as  to  the  appearance  of  ghosts  in 
modern  times,  though  the  arguments  for  it,  sup¬ 
ported  by  Mr.  Addison’s  authority,  preponder¬ 
ated.  The  immediate  subject  of  debate  was  em¬ 
barrassed  by  the  bodies  of  the  saints  having  been 
said  to  rise,  and  by  the  question  what  became 
of  them  afterwards;  did  they  return  again  to 
their  graves?  or  were  they  translated  to  heaven? 
Only  one  evangelist  mentions  the  fact,2  and  the 
commentators  whom  I  have  looked  at,  do  not 
make  the  passage  clear.  There  is,  however,  no 
occasion  for  our  understanding  it  further,  than 
to  know  that  it  was  one  of  the  extraordinary 

2Matthew,  27.  52,  53. 


1781  ] 

manifestations  of  divine  power,  which  accom¬ 
panied  the  most  important  event  that  ever  hap¬ 
pened. 

On  Friday,  April  20,  I  spent  with  him  one  of 
the  happiest  days  that  I  remember  to  have  en¬ 
joyed  in  the  whole  course  of  my  life.  Mrs.  Gar¬ 
rick,  whose  grief  for  the  loss  of  her  husband  was, 
I  believe,  as  sincere  as  wounded  affection  and 
admiration  could  produce,  had  this  day,  for  the 
first  time  since  his  death,  a  select  party  of  his 
friends  to  dine  with  her.  The  company  was  Miss 
Hannah  More,  who  lived  with  her,  and  whom 
she  called  her  Chaplain;  Mrs.  Boscawen,1  Mrs. 
Elizabeth  Carter,  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  Dr. 
Burney,  Dr.  Johnson,  and  myself.  We  found  our¬ 
selves  very  elegantly  entertained  at  her  house  in 
the  Adelphi,  where  I  have  passed  many  a  pleas¬ 
ing  hour  with  him  “who  gladdened  life.”  She 
looked  well,  talked  of  her  husband  with  com¬ 
placency,  and  while  she  cast  her  eyes  on  his  por¬ 
trait,  which  hung  over  the  chimney-piece,  said, 
that  “death  was  now  the  most  agreeable  object 
to  her.”  The  very  semblance  of  David  Garrick 
was  cheering.  Mr.  Beauclerk,  with  happy  pro¬ 
priety,  inscribed  under  that  fine  portrait  of  him, 
which  by  Lady  Diana’s  kindness  is  now  the 
property  of  my  friend  Mr.  Langton,  the  follow¬ 
ing  passage  from  his  beloved  Shakspeare: 

A  merrier  man, 

Within  the  limit  of  becoming  mirth , 

I  never  spent  an  hour's  talk  withal. 

His  eye  begets  occasion  for  his  wit; 

For  every  object  that  the  one  doth  catch. 

The  other  turns  to  a  mirth-moving  jest; 

Which  his  fair  tongue  ( Conceit's  expositor ) 
Delivers  in  such  apt  and  gracious  words. 

That  aged  ears  play  truant  at  his  tales. 

And  younger  hearings  are  quite  ravished: 

So  sweet  and  voluble  is  his  discourse. 

We  were  all  in  fine  spirits;  and  I  whispered  to 
Mrs.  Boscawen,  “I  believe  this  is  as  much  as  can 
be  made  of  life.”  In  addition  to  a  splendid  en¬ 
tertainment,  we  were  regaled  with  Lichfield  ale, 
which  had  a  peculiar  appropriated  value.  Sir 
Joshua,  and  Dr.  Burney,  and  I,  drank  cordially 
of  it  to  Dr.  Johnson’s  health;  and  though  he 
would  not  join  us,  he  as  cordially  answered, 
“Gentlemen,  I  wish  you  all  as  well  as  you  do 
me.” 

The  general  effect  of  this  day  dwells  upon  my 
mind  in  fond  remembrance;  but  I  do  not  find 
much  conversation  recorded.  What  I  have  pre¬ 
served  shall  be  faithfully  given. 

One  of  the  company  mentioned  Mr.  Thomas 
Hollis,  the  strenuous  Whig,  who  used  to  send 

1See  ante,  p.  406. 


473 

over  Europe  presents  of  democratical  books, 
with  their  boards  stamped  with  daggers  and  caps 
of  liberty.  Mrs.  Garter  said,  “He  was  a  bad  man. 
He  used  to  talk  uncharitably.”  Johnson.  “Poh! 
poh !  Madam;  who  is  the  worse  for  being  talked 
of  uncharitably?  Besides,  he  was  a  dull  poor 
creature  as  ever  lived:  and  I  believe  he  would 
not  have  done  harm  to  a  man  whom  he  knew  to 
be  of  very  opposite  principles  to  his  own.  I  re¬ 
member  once  at  the  Society  of  Arts,  when  an 
advertisement  was  to  be  drawn  up,  he  pointed 
me  out  as  the  man  who  could  do  it  best.  This, 
you  will  observe,  was  kindness  to  me.  I  however 
slipt  away,  and  escaped  it.” 

Mrs.  Garter  having  said  of  the  same  person, 
“I  doubt  he  was  an  Atheist.”  Johnson.  “I  don’t 
know  that.  He  might  perhaps  have  become  one, 
if  he  had  had  time  to  ripen,  (smiling.)  He  might 
have  exuberated  into  an  Atheist.” 

Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  praised  Mudge's  Sermons.2 
Johnson.  “Mudge’s  Sermons  are  good,  but  not 
practical.  He  grasps  more  sense  than  he  can  hold ; 
he  takes  more  corn  than  he  can  make  into  meal; 
he  opens  a  wide  prospect,  but  it  is  so  distant, 
it  is  indistinct.  I  love  Blair's  Sermons.  Though 
the  dog  is  a  Scotchman,  and  a  Presbyterian, 
and  every  thing  he  should  not  be,  I  was  the 
first  to  praise  them.  Such  was  my  candour,” 
(smiling.)  Mrs.  Boscawen.  “Such  his  great 
merit  to  get  the  better  of  all  your  prejudices.” 
Johnson.  “Why,  Madam,  let  us  compound  the 
matter;  let  us  ascribe  it  to  my  candour,  and  his 
merit.” 

In  the  evening  we  had  a  large  company  in 
the  drawing-room,  several  ladies,  the  Bishop  of 
Killaloe,  Dr.  Percy,  Mr.  Chamberlayne,  of  the 
Treasury,  &c.  &c.  Somebody  said  the  life  of  a 
mere  literary  man  could  not  be  very  entertain¬ 
ing.  Johnson.  “But  it  certainly  may.  This  is  a 
remark  which  has  been  made,  and  repeated, 
without  justice;  why  should  the  life  of  a  literary 
man  be  less  entertaining  than  the  life  of  any 
other  man?  Are  there  not  as  interesting  varieties 
in  such  a  life?  As  a  literary  life  it  may  be  very  en¬ 
tertaining.”  Boswell.  “But  it  must  be  better 
surely,  when  it  is  diversified  with  a  little  active 
variety — such  as  his  having  gone  to  Jamaica;  or 
— his  having  gone  to  the  Hebrides.”  Johnson 
was  not  displeased  at  this. 

Talking  of  a  very  respectable  authour,  he  told 
us  a  curious  circumstance  in  his  life,  which  was, 
that  he  had  married  a  printer’s  devil.  Reynolds. 
“A  printer’s  devil,  Sir!  Why,  I  thought  a  print¬ 
er’s  devil  was  a  creature  with  a  black  face  and 
in  rags.”  Johnson.  “Yes,  Sir.  But  I  suppose,  he 

2See  ante,  p.  467. 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


BOSWELL 


474 

had  her  face  washed,  and  put  clean  clothes  on 
her.  (Then  looking  very  serious,  and  very  ear¬ 
nest.)  And  she  did  not  disgrace  him;  the  woman 
had  a  bottom  of  good  sense.”  The  word  bottom 
thus  introduced,  was  so  ludicrous  when  contrast¬ 
ed  with  his  gravity,  that  most  of  us  could  not 
forbear  tittering  and  laughing;  though  I  recol¬ 
lect  that  the  Bishop  of  Killaloe  kept  his  coun¬ 
tenance  with  perfect  steadiness,  while  Miss  Han¬ 
nah  More  slyly  hid  her  face  behind  a  lady’s  back 
who  sat  on  the  same  settee  with  her.  His  pride 
could  not  bear  that  any  expression  of  his  should 
excite  ridicule,  when  he  did  not  intend  it;  he 
therefore  resolved  to  assume  and  exercise  des- 
potick  power,  glanced  sternly  around,  and  called 
out  in  a  strong  tone,  “Where’s  the  merriment?” 
Then  collecting  himself,  and  looking  aweful, 
to  make  us  feel  how  he  could  impose  restraint, 
and  as  it  were  searching  his  mind  for  a  still  more 
ludicrous  word,  he  slowly  pronounced,  “I  say  the 
woman  was  fundamentally  sensible”;  as  if  he  had 
said,  hear  this  now,  and  laugh  if  you  dare.  We 
all  sat  composed  as  at  a  funeral. 

He  and  I  walked  away  together;  we  stopped 
a  little  while  by  the  rails  of  the  Adelphi,  looking 
on  the  Thames,  and  I  said  to  him  with  some 
emotion  that  I  was  now  thinking  of  two  friends 
we  had  lost,  who  once  lived  in  the  buildings  be¬ 
hind  us,  Beauclerk  and  Garrick.  “Ay,  Sir,  (said 
he,  tenderly,)  and  two  such  friends  as  cannot  be 
supplied.” 

For  some  time  after  this  day  I  did  not  see  him 
very  often,  and  of  the  conversation  which  I  did 
enjoy,  I  am  sorry  to  find  I  have  preserved  but 
little.  I  was  at  this  time  engaged  in  a  variety  of 
other  matters,  which  required  exertion  and  as¬ 
siduity,  and  necessarily  occupied  almost  all  my 
time. 

One  day  having  spoken  very  freely  of  those 
who  were  then  in  power,  he  said  to  me,  “Be¬ 
tween  ourselves,  Sir,  I  do  not  like  to  give  op¬ 
position  the  satisfaction  of  knowing  how  much 
I  disapprove  of  the  ministry.”  And  when  I  men¬ 
tioned  that  Mr.  Burke  had  boasted  how  quiet 
the  nation  was  in  George  the  Second’s  reign, 
when  Whigs  were  in  power,  compared  with  the 
present  reign,  when  Tories  governed; — “Why, 
Sir,  (said  he,)  you  are  to  consider  that  Tories 
having  more  reverence  for  government,  will  not 
oppose  with  the  same  violence  as  Whigs,  who 
being  unrestrained  by  that  principle,  will  op¬ 
pose  by  any  means.” 

This  month  he  lost  not  only  Mr.  Thrale,  but 
another  friend,  Mr.  William  Strahan,  Junior, 
printer,  the  eldest  son  of  his  old  and  constant 
friend,  Printer  to  his  Majesty. 


[  1781 

To  Mrs.  Strahan 

Dear  Madam,  The  grief  which  I  feel  for  the 
loss  of  a  very  kind  friend  is  sufficient  to  make  me 
know  how  much  you  suffer  by  the  death  of  an 
amiable  son;  a  man,  of  whom  I  think  it  may 
truly  be  said,  that  no  one  knew  him  who  does 
not  lament  him.  I  look  upon  myself  as  having  a 
friend,  another  friend,  taken  from  me. 

Comfort,  dear  Madam,  I  would  give  you  if  I 
could,  but  I  know  how  little  the  forms  of  conso¬ 
lation  can  avail.  Let  me,  however,  counsel  you 
not  to  waste  your  health  in  unprofitable  sorrow, 
but  go  to  Bath,  and  endeavour  to  prolong  your 
own  life;  but  when  we  have  all  done  all  that  we 
can,  one  friend  must  in  time  lose  the  other.  I 
am,  dear  Madam,  your  most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

April  23,  1781 

On  Tuesday,  May  8,  I  had  the  pleasure  of 
again  dining  with  him  and  Mr.  Wilkes,  at  Mr. 
Dilly’s.  No  negotiation  was  now  required  to  bring 
them  together;  for  Johnson  was  so  well  satisfied 
with  the  former  interview,  that  he  was  very  glad 
to  meet  Wilkes  again,  who  was  this  day  seated 
between  Dr.  Beattie  and  Dr.  Johnson;  (between 
Truth  and  Reason ,  as  General  Paoli  said,  when  I 
told  him  of  it.)  Wilkes.  “I  have  been  thinking, 
Dr.  Johnson,  that  there  should  be  a  bill  brought 
into  parliament  that  the  controverted  elections 
for  Scotland  should  be  tried  in  that  country,  at 
their  own  Abbey  of  Holy-Rood  House,  and  not 
here;  for  the  consequence  of  trying  them  here  is, 
that  we  have  an  inundation  of  Scotchmen,  who 
come  up  and  never  go  back  again.  Now  here  is 
Boswell,  who  is  come  up  upon  the  election  for 
his  own  county,  which  will  not  last  a  fortnight.” 
Johnson.  “Nay,  Sir,  I  see  no  reason  why  they 
should  be  tried  at  all;  for,  you  know,  one  Scotch¬ 
man  is  as  good  as  another.”  Wilkes.  “Pray, 
Boswell,  how  much  may  be  got  in  a  year  by  an 
Advocate  at  the  Scotch  bar?”  Boswell.  “I  be¬ 
lieve  two  thousand  pounds.”  Wilkes.  “How 
can  it  be  possible  to  spend  that  money  in  Scot¬ 
land?”  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  the  money  may  be 
spent  in  England:  but  there  is  a  harder  question. 
If  one  man  in  Scotland  gets  possession  of  two 
thousand  pounds,  what  remains  for  all  the  rest 
of  the  nation?”  Wilkes.  “You  know,  in  the  last 
war,  the  immense  booty  which  Thurot  carried 
off  by  the  complete  plunder  of  seven  Scotch  isles; 
he  re-embarked  with  three  and  six-pence .”  Here 
again  Johnson  and  Wilkes  joined  in  extravagant 
sportive  raillery  upon  the  supposed  poverty  of 
Scotland,  which  Dr.  Beattie  and  I  did  not  think 
it  worth  our  while  to  dispute. 

The  subject  of  quotation  being  introduced, 
Mr.  Wilkes  censured  it  as  pedantry.  Johnson. 


1781]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  475 


“No,  Sir,  it  is  a  good  thing;  there  is  a  commun¬ 
ity  of  mind  in  it.  Classical  quotation  is  the  parole 
of  literary  men  all  over  the  world.”  Wilkes. 
“Upon  the  continent  they  all  quote  the  vulgate 
Bible.  Shakspeare  is  chiefly  quoted  here;  and  we 
quote  also  Pope,  Prior,  Butler,  Waller,  and 
sometimes  Cowley.” 

We  talked  of  Letter-writing.  Johnson.  “It  is 
now  become  so  much  the  fashion  to  publish  let¬ 
ters,  that  in  order  to  avoid  it,  I  put  as  litde  in¬ 
to  mine  as  I  can.”  Boswell.  “Do  what  you  will, 
Sir,  you  cannot  avoid  it.  Should  you  even  write 
as  ill  as  you  can,  your  letters  would  be  published 
as  curiosities: 

Behold  a  miracle !  instead  of  wit , 

See  two  dull  lines  with  Stanhope's  pencil  writ," 

He  gave  us  an  entertaining  account  of  Bet 
Flint ,  a  woman  of  the  town,  who,  with  some  ec- 
centrick  talents  and  much  effrontery,  forced  her¬ 
self  upon  his  acquaintance.  “Bet  (said  he,)  wrote 
her  own  Life  in  verse,1  which  she  brought  to  me, 
wishing  that  I  would  furnish  her  with  a  Preface 
to  it,  (laughing.)  I  used  to  say  of  her  that  she 
was  generally  slut  and  drunkard;  occasionally, 
whore  and  thief.  She  had,  however,  genteel 
lodgings,  a  spinnet  on  which  she  played,  and  a 
boy  that  walked  before  her  chair.  Poor  Bet  was 
taken  up  on  a  charge  of  stealing  a  counterpane, 

and  tried  at  the  Old  Bailey.  Chief  Justice - , 

who  loved  a  wench,  summed  up  favourably,  and 
she  was  acquitted.  After  which  Bet  said,  with  a 
gay  and  satisfied  air,  “Now  that  the  counter¬ 
pane  is  my  own ,  I  shall  make  a  petticoat  of  it.” 

Talking  of  oratory,  Mr.  Wilkes  described  it 
as  accompanied  with  all  the  charms  of  poetical 
expression.  Johnson.  “No,  Sir;  oratory  is  the 
power  of  beating  down  your  adversary’s  argu¬ 
ments,  and  putting  better  in  their  place.” 
Wilkes.  “But  this  does  not  move  the  passions.” 
Johnson.  “He  must  be  a  weak  man,  who  is  to 
be  so  moved.”  Wilkes,  (naming  a  celebrated 
orator,)  “Amidst  all  the  brilliancy  of - ’s  im¬ 

agination,  and  the  exuberance  of  his  wit,  there 
is  a  strange  want  of  taste.  It  was  observed  of 
Apelles’s  Venus,  that  her  flesh  seemed  as  if  she 
had  been  nourished  by  roses:  his  oratory  would 
sometimes  make  one  suspect  that  he  eats  pota¬ 
toes  and  drinks  whisky.” 

^Johnson,  whose  memory  was  wonderfully  re¬ 
tentive  [see  ante ,  p.  6],  remembered  the  first  four 
lines  of  this  curious  production,  which  have  been 
communicated  to  me  by  a  young  lady  of  his  ac¬ 
quaintance: 

When  first  I  drew  my  vital  breath; 

A  little  minikin  I  came  upon  earth; 

And  then  I  came  from  a  dark  abode , 

Into  this  gay  and  gaudy  world. 


Mr.  Wilkes  observed,  how  tenacious  we  are 
of  forms  in  this  country,  and  gave  as  an  instance, 
the  vote  of  the  House  of  Commons  for  remitting 
money  to  pay  the  army  in  America  in  Portugal 
pieces ,  when,  in  reality,  the  remittance  is  made 
not  in  Portugal  money,  but  in  our  own  specie. 
Johnson.  “Is  there  not  a  law,  Sir,  against  ex¬ 
porting  the  current  coin  of  the  realm?”  Wilkes. 
“Yes,  Sir:  but  might  not  the  House  of  Commons, 
in  case  of  real  evident  necessity,  order  our  own 
current  coin  to  be  sent  into  our  own  colonies?” 
Here  Johnson,  with  that  quickness  of  recollec¬ 
tion  which  distinguished  him  so  eminently,  gave 
the  Middlesex  Patriot  an  admirable  retort  upon 
his  own  ground.  “Sure,  Sir,  you  don’t  think  a 
resolution  of  the  House  of  Commons  equal  to  the 
law  of  the  land?”  Wilkes,  (at  once  perceiving  the 
application,)  “God  forbid,  Sir.”  To  hear  what 
had  been  treated  with  such  violence  in  The  False 
Alarm ,  now  turned  into  pleasant  repartee,  was 
extremely  agreeable.  Johnson  went  on; — “Locke 
observes  well,  that  a  prohibition  to  export  the 
current  coin  is  impolitick;  for  when  the  balance 
of  trade  happens  to  be  against  a  state,  the  cur¬ 
rent  coin  must  be  exported.” 

Mr.  Beauclerk’s  great  library  was  this  season 
sold  in  London  by  auction.  Mr.  Wilkes  said,  he 
wondered  to  find  in  it  such  a  numerous  collec¬ 
tion  of  sermons;  seeming  to  think  it  strange  that 
a  gentleman  of  Mr.  Beauclerk’s  character  in  the 
gay  world  should  have  chosen  to  have  many 
compositions  of  that  kind.  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir, 
you  are  to  consider,  that  sermons  make  a  con¬ 
siderable  branch  of  English  literature;  so  that  a 
library  must  be  very  imperfect  if  it  has  not  a 
numerous  collection  of  sermons:2  and  in  all  col- 

2Mr.  Wilkes  probably  did  not  know  that  there 
is  in  an  English  sermon  the  most  comprehensive 
and  lively  account  of  that  entertaining  faculty  for 
which  he  himself  is  so  much  admired.  It  is  in  Dr. 
Barrow’s  first  volume,  and  fourteenth  sermon, 
“ Against  foolish  Talking  and  Jesting.”  My  old  ac¬ 
quaintance,  the  late  Corbyn  Morris,  in  his  ingen¬ 
ious  Essay  on  Wit ,  Humour ,  and  Ridicule ,  calls  it  t£a 
profuse  description  of  Wit”:  but  I  do  not  see  how  it 
could  be  curtailed,  without  leaving  out  some  good 
circumstance  of  discrimination.  A 0  it  is  not  gener¬ 
ally  known,  and  may  perhaps  dispose  some  to  read 
sermons,  from  which  they  may  receive  real  advan¬ 
tage,  while  looking  only  for  entertainment,  I  shall 
here  subjoin  it: 

“But  first  (says  the  learned  preacher)  it  may  be 
demanded,  what  the  thing  we  speak  of  is?  Or  what 
this  facetiousness  (or  wit  as  he  calls  it  before)  doth 
import?  To  which  questions  I  might  reply,  as  De¬ 
mocritus  did  to  him  that  asked  the  definition  of  a 
man,  cTis  that  which  we  all  see  and  know.’  Any 
one  better  apprehends  what  it  is  by  acquaintance, 
than  I  can  inform  him  by  description.  It  is,  indeed, 
a  thing  so  versatile  and  multiform,  appearing  in  so 


476 

lections,  Sir,  the  desire  of  augmenting  it  grows 
stronger  in  proportion  to  the  advance  in  acqui¬ 
sition;  as  motion  is  accelerated  by  the  continu¬ 
ance  of  the  impetus.  Besides,  Sir,  (looking  at  Mr. 
Wilkes  with  a  placid  but  significant  smile,)  a 
man  may  collect  sermons  with  intention  of  mak¬ 
ing  himself  better  by  them.  I  hope  Mr.  Beau- 

many  shapes,  so  many  postures,  so  many  garbs,  so 
variously  apprehended  by  several  eyes  and  judge¬ 
ments,  that  it  seemeth  no  less  hard  to  settle  a  clear 
and  certain  notion  thereof,  than  to  make  a  portrait 
of  Proteus,  or  to  define  the  figure  of  the  fleeting  air. 
Sometimes  it  lieth  in  pat  allusion  to  a  known  story, 
or  in  seasonable  application  of  a  trivial  saying,  or 
in  forging  an  apposite  tale;  sometimes  it  playeth 
in  words  and  phrases,  taking  advantage  from  the 
ambiguity  of  their  sense,  or  the  affinity  of  their 
sound:  sometimes  it  is  wrapped  in  a  dress  of  hu¬ 
morous  expression:  sometimes  it  lurketh  under  an 
odd  similitude:  sometimes  it  is  lodged  in  a  sly  ques¬ 
tion,  in  a  smart  answer,  in  a  quirkish  reason,  in  a 
shrewd  intimation,  in  cunningly  diverting  or  clev¬ 
erly  retorting  an  objection:  sometimes  it  is  couched 
in  a  bold  scheme  of  speech,  in  a  tart  irony,  in  a 
lusty  hyperbole,  in  a  startling  metaphor,  in  a  plaus¬ 
ible  reconciling  of  contradictions,  or  in  acute  non¬ 
sense:  sometimes  a  scenical  representation  of  per¬ 
sons  or  things,  a  counterfeit  speech,  a  mimical  look 
or  gesture,  passeth  for  it:  sometimes  an  affected 
simplicity,  sometimes  a  presumptuous  bluntness 
giveth  it  being:  sometimes  it  riseth  only  from  a 
lucky  hitting  upon  what  is  strange:  sometimes  from 
a  crafty  wresting  obvious  matter  to  the  purpose. 
Often  it  consisteth  in  one  knows  not  what,  and 
springeth  up  one  can  hardly  tell  how.  Its  ways  are 
unaccountable,  and  inexplicable;  being  answer- 
able  to  the  numberless  rovings  of  fancy,  and  wind¬ 
ings  of  language.  It  is,  in  short,  a  manner  of  speak¬ 
ing  out  of  the  simple  and  plain  way,  (such  as  rea¬ 
son  teacheth  and  proveth  things  by,)  which  by  a 
pretty  surprising  uncouthness  in  conceit  or  expres¬ 
sion,  doth  affect  and  amuse  the  fancy,  stirring  in  it 
some  wonder,  and  breeding  some  delight  thereto. 
It  raiseth  admiration,  as  signifying  a  nimble  sagac¬ 
ity  of  apprehension,  a  special  felicity  of  invention, 
a  vivacity  of  spirit,  and  reach  of  wit  more  than  vul¬ 
gar;  it  seeming  to  argue  a  rare  quickness  of  parts, 
that  one  can  fetch  in  remote  conceits  applicable;  a 
notable  skill,  that  he  can  dextrously  accommodate 
them  to  the  purpose  before  him;  together  with  a 
lively  briskness  of  humour,  not  apt  to  damp  those 
sportful  flashes  of  imagination.  (Whence  in  Aris¬ 
totle  such  persons  are  termed  kmbk&oi,  dextrous 
men,  and  evarpofoL,  men  of  facile  or  versatile 
manners,  who  can  easily  turn  themselves  to  all 
things,  or  turn  all  things  to  themselves.)  It  also 
procureth  delight,  by  gratifying  curiosity  with  its 
rareness,  as  semblance  of  difficulty:  (as  monsters, 
not  for  their  beauty,  but  their  rarity;  as  juggling 
tricks,  not  for  their  use,  but  their  abstruseness,  are 
beheld  with  pleasure:)  by  diverting  the  mind  from 
its  road  of  serious  thoughts;  by  instilling  gaiety  and 
airiness  of  spirit;  by  provoking  to  such  dispositions 
of  spirit  in  way  of  emulation  or  complaisance; 
and  by  seasoning  matters,  otherwise  distasteful  or 
insipid,  with  an  unusual  and  thence  grateful 
tang.55 


1 1781 

clerk  intended,  that  some  time  or  other  that 
should  be  the  case  with  him.55 

Mr.  Wilkes  said  to  me,  loud  enough  for  Dr. 
Johnson  to  hear,  “Dr.  Johnson  should  make  me 
a  present  of  his  Lives  of  the  Poets ,  as  I  am  a  poor 
patriot,  who  cannot  afford  to  buy  them.55  John¬ 
son  seemed  to  take  no  notice  of  this  hint;  but  in 
a  little  while,  he  called  to  Mr.  Dilly,  “Pray,  Sir, 
be  so  good  as  to  send  a  set  of  my  Lives  to  Mr. 
Wilkes,  with  my  compliments.55  This  was  ac¬ 
cordingly  done;  and  Mr.  Wilkes  paid  Dr.  John¬ 
son  a  visit,  was  courteously  received,  and  sat 
with  him  a  long  time. 

The  company  gradually  dropped  away.  Mr. 
Dilly  himself  was  called  down  stairs  upon  busi¬ 
ness;  I  left  the  room  for  some  time;  when  I  re¬ 
turned,  I  was  struck  with  observing  Dr.  Samuel 
Johnson  and  John  Wilkes,  Esq.,  literally  tete-a 
tete;  for  they  were  reclined  upon  their  chairs, 
with  their  heads  leaning  almost  close  to  each 
other,  and  talking  earnestly,  in  a  kind  of  confi¬ 
dential  whisper,  of  the  personal  quarrel  between 
George  the  Second  and  the  King  of  Prussia. 
Such  a  scene  of  perfectly  easy  sociality  between 
two  such  opponents  in  the  war  of  political  con¬ 
troversy,  as  that  which  I  now  beheld,  would 
have  been  an  excellent  subject  for  a  picture.  It 
presented  to  my  mind  the  happy  days  which 
are  foretold  in  Scripture,  when  the  lion  shall  lie 
down  with  the  kid.1 

After  this  day  there  was  another  pretty  long 
interval,  during  which  Dr.  Johnson  and  I  did 
not  meet.  When  I  mentioned  it  to  him  with  re¬ 
gret,  he  was  pleased  to  say,  “Then,  Sir,  let  us 
live  double.55 

About  this  time  it  was  much  the  fashion  for 
several  ladies  to  have  evening  assemblies,  where 
the  fair  sex  might  participate  in  conversation 
with  literary  and  ingenious  men,  animated  by  a 
desire  to  please.  These  societies  were  denom¬ 
inated  Blue-stocking  Clubs ,  the  origin  of  which 
title  being  little  known,  it  may  be  worth  while 
to  relate  it.  One  of  the  most  eminent  members 
of  those  societies,  when  they  first  commenced, 
was  Mr.  Stillingfleet,2  whose  dress  was  remark¬ 
ably  grave,  and  in  particular  it  was  observed, 
that  he  wore  blue  stockings.  Such  was  the  excel¬ 
lence  of  his  conversation,  that  his  absence  was 

1When  I  mentioned  this  to  the  Bishop  of  Killa- 
loe,  “With  the  goat ,55  said  his  Lordship.  Such,  how¬ 
ever,  is  the  engaging  politeness  and  pleasantry  of 
Mr.  Wilkes,  and  such  the  social  good  humour  of 
the  Bishop,  that  when  they  dined  together  at  Mr. 
Dilly’s,  where  I  also  was,  they  were  mutually 
agreeable. 

2Mr.  Benjamin  Stillingfleet,  authour  of  tracts 
relating  to  natural  history,  &c. 


BOSWELL 


1781  ]  LIFE  OF 

felt  as  so  great  a  loss,  that  it  used  to  be  said,  “We 
can  do  nothing  without  the  blue  stockings ”;  and 
thus  by  degrees  the  title  was  established.  Miss 
Hannah  More  has  admirably  described  a  Blue¬ 
stocking  Club ,  in  her  Bas  Bleu ,  a  poem  in  which 
many  of  the  persons  who  were  most  conspicuous 
there  are  mentioned. 

Johnson  was  prevailed  with  to  come  some¬ 
times  into  these  circles,  and  did  not  think  him¬ 
self  too  grave  even  for  the  lively  Miss  Monckton 
(now  Countess  of  Corke),  who  used  to  have  the 
finest  bit  of  blue  at  the  house  of  her  mother,  Lady 
Galway.  Her  vivacity  enchanted  the  Sage,  and 
they  used  to  talk  together  with  all  imaginable 
ease.  A  singular  instance  happened  one  evening, 
when  she  insisted  that  some  of  Sterne’s  writings 
were  very  pathetick.  Johnson  bluntly  denied  it. 
“I  am  sure  (said  she,)  they  have  affected  me” 
“Why,  (said  Johnson,  smiling,  and  rolling  him¬ 
self  about,)  that  is,  because,  dearest,  you’re  a 
dunce.”  When  she  some  time  afterwards  men¬ 
tioned  this  to  him,  he  said  with  equal  truth  and 
politeness;  “Madam,  if  I  had  thought  so,  I  cer¬ 
tainly  should  not  have  said  it.” 

Another  evening  Johnson’s  kind  indulgence 
towards  me  had  a  pretty  difficult  trial.  I  had 
dined  at  the  Duke  of  Montrose’s  with  a  very 
agreeable  party,  and  his  Grace,  according  to 
his  usual  custom,  had  circulated  the  bottle  very 
freely.  Lord  Graham  and  I  went  together  to 
Miss  Monckton’s,  where  I  certainly  was  in  ex¬ 
traordinary  spirits,  and  above  all  fear  or  awe.  In 
the  midst  of  a  great  number  of  persons  of  the 
first  rank,  amongst  whom  I  recollect  with  con¬ 
fusion,  a  noble  lady  of  the  most  stately  decorum, 
I  placed  myself  next  to  Johnson,  and  thinking 
myself  now  fully  his  match,  talked  to  him  in  a 
loud  and  boisterous  manner,  desirous  to  let  the 
company  know  how  I  could  contend  with  Ajax. 
I  particularly  remember  pressing  him  upon  the 
value  of  the  pleasures  of  the  imagination,  and  as 
an  illustration  of  my  argument,  asking  him, 
“What,  Sir,  supposing  I  were  to  fancy  that  the 

- - (naming  the  most  charming  Duchess  in  his 

Majesty’s  dominions)  were  in  love  with  me, 
should  I  not  be  very  happy?”  My  friend  with 
much  address  evaded  my  interrogatories,  and 
kept  me  as  quiet  as  possible;  but  it  may  easily  be 
conceived  how  he  must  have  felt.* 1  However, 

xNext  day  I  endeavoured  to  give  what  had  hap¬ 
pened  the  most  ingenious  turn  I  could,  by  the  fol¬ 
lowing  verses: 

To  the  Honourable  Miss  Monckton 

Not  that  with  th *  excellent  Montrose 
I  had  the  happiness  to  dine; 

Not  that  I  late  from  table  rose. 

From  Graham's  wit,  from  generous  wine. 


JOHNSON  477 

when  a  few  days  afterwards  I  waited  upon  him 
and  made  an  apology,  he  behaved  with  the 
most  friendly  gentleness. 

While  I  remained  in  London  this  year,  John¬ 
son  and  I  dined  together  at  several  places.  I  rec¬ 
ollect  a  placid  day  at  Dr.  Butter’s,  who  had  now 
removed  from  Derby  to  Lower  Grosvenor-street, 
London;  but  of  his  conversation  on  that  and 
other  occasions  during  this  period,  I  neglected 
to  keep  any  regular  record,  and  shall  therefore 
insert  here  some  miscellaneous  articles  which  I 
find  in  my  Johnsonian  notes. 

His  disorderly  habits,  when  “making  provision 
for  the  day  that  was  passing  over  him,”  appear 
from  the  following  anecdote,  communicated  to 
me  by  Mr.  John  Nichols: — “In  the  year  1763,  a 
young  bookseller,  who  was  an  apprentice  to  Mr. 
Whiston,  waited  on  him  with  a  subscription  to 
his  Shakspeare:  and  observing  that  the  Doctor 
made  no  entry  in  any  book  of  the  subscriber’s 
name,  ventured  diffidently  to  ask,  whether  he 
would  please  to  have  the  gentleman’s  address, 
that  it  might  be  properly  inserted  in  the  printed 
list  of  subscribers.  shall  print  no  list  of  subscrib¬ 
er s’;  said  Johnson,  with  great  abruptness:  but 
almost  immediately  recollecting  himself,  added, 
very  complacently,  ‘Sir,  I  have  two  very  cogent 
reasons  for  not  printing  any  list  of  subscribers; 
— one,  that  I  have  lost  all  the  names, — the  oth¬ 
er,  that  I  have  spent  all  the  money.’  ” 

Johnson  could  not  brook  appearing  to  be 
worsted  in  argument,  even  when  he  had  taken 
the  wrong  side,  to  shew  the  force  and  dexterity 
of  his  talents.  When,  therefore,  he  perceived  that 
his  opponent  gained  ground,  he  had  recourse 
to  some  sudden  mode  of  robust  sophistry.  Once 
when  I  was  pressing  upon  him  with  visible  advan¬ 
tage,  he  stopped  me  thus: — “My  dear  Boswell, 
let’s  have  no  more  of  this;  you’ll  make  nothing 
of  it.  I’d  rather  have  you  whistle  a  Scotch  tune.” 

It  was  not  these  alone  which  led 
On  sacred  manners  to  encroach; 

And  made  me  feel  what  most  I  dread, 

Johnson’s  just frown,  and  self-reproach. 

But  when  I  enter'd,  not  abash'd. 

From  your  bright  eyes  were  shot  such  rays, 

At  once  intoxication  flash'd , 

And  all  my  frame  was  in  a  blaze. 

But  not  a  brilliant  blaze  I  own. 

Of  the  dull  smoke  I'm  yet  asham'd; 

I  was  a  dreary  ruin  grown, 

And  not  enlighten'd  though  inflam'd. 

Victim  at  once  to  wine  and  love, 

I  hope ,  Maria,  you'll  forgive; 

While  I  invoke  the  powers  above. 

That  henceforth  I  may  wiser  live. 

The  lady  was  generously  forgiving,  returned  me 
an  obliging  answer,  and  I  thus  obtained  an  Act  of 
Oblivion,  and  took  care  never  to  offend  again. 


478  BOSWELL  [1781 


Care,  however,  must  be  taken  to  distinguish 
between  Johnson  when  he  “talked  for  victory,” 
and  Johnson  when  he  had  no  desire  but  to  in¬ 
form  and  illustrate,  “One  of  Johnson’s  principal 
talents  (says  an  eminent  friend  of  his)1  was  shewn 
in  maintaining  the  wrong  side  of  an  argument, 
and  in  a  splendid  perversion  of  the  truth.  If  you 
could  contrive  to  have  his  fair  opinion  on  a  sub¬ 
ject,  and  without  any  bias  from  personal  preju¬ 
dice,  or  from  a  wish  to  be  victorious  in  argu¬ 
ment,  it  was  wisdom  itself,  not  only  convincing, 
but  overpowering.” 

He  had,  however,  all  his  life  habituated  him¬ 
self  to  consider  conversation  as  a  trial  of  intel¬ 
lectual  vigour  and  skill;  and  to  this,  I  think,  we 
may  venture  to  ascribe  that  unexampled  rich¬ 
ness  and  brilliancy  which  appeared  in  his  own. 
As  a  proof  at  once  of  his  eagerness  for  colloquial 
distinction,  and  his  high  notion  of  this  eminent 

friend,  he  once  addressed  him  thus:  “ - , 

we  now  have  been  several  hours  together;  and 
you  have  said  but  one  thing  for  which  I  envied 
you.” 

He  disliked  much  all  speculative  desponding 
considerations,  which  tended  to  discourage  men 
from  diligence  and  exertion.  He  was  in  this  like 
Dr.  Shaw,  the  great  traveller,  who  Mr.  Daines 
Barrington  told  me,  used  to  say,  “I  hate  a  cui 
botio  man.”  Upon  being  asked  by  a  friend  what 
he  should  think  of  a  man  who  was  apt  to  say  non 
est  tanti; — “That  he’s  a  stupid  fellow,  Sir;  (an¬ 
swered  Johnson):  What  would  these  tanti  men 
be  doing  the  while?”  When  I  in  a  low-spirited 
fit,  was  talking  to  him  with  indifference  of  the 
pursuits  which  generally  engage  us  in  a  course 
of  action,  and  inquiring  a  reason  for  taking  so 
much  trouble;  “Sir  (said  he,  in  an  animated 
tone)  it  is  driving  on  the  system  of  life.” 

He  told  me,  that  he  was  glad  that  I  had,  by 
General  Oglethorpe’s  means,  become  acquaint¬ 
ed  with  Dr.  Shebbeare.  Indeed  that  gentleman, 
whatever  objections  were  made  to  him,  had 
knowledge  and  abilities  much  above  the  class  of 
ordinary  writers,  and  deserves  to  be  remembered 
as  a  respectable  name  in  literature,  were  it  only 
for  his  admirable  Letters  on  the  English  Nation , 
under  the  name  of  “Battista  Angeloni,  a  Jesuit.” 

Johnson  and  Shebbeare2  were  frequently 
named  together,  as  having  in  former  reigns  had 
no  predilection  for  the  family  of  Hanover.  The 
authour  of  the  celebrated  Heroick  Epistle  to  Sir  Wil- 

The  late  Right  Hon.  William  Gerard  Hamil¬ 
ton.  [M.] 

2I  recollect  a  ludicrous  paragraph  in  the  news¬ 
papers,  that  the  King  had  pensioned  both  a  He- 
bear  and  a  iSfo-bear. 


Ham  Chambers ,  introduces  them  in  one  line,  in  a 
list  of  those  “who  tasted  the  sweets  of  his  present 
Majesty’s  reign.”  Such  was  Johnson’s  candid 
relish  of  the  merit  of  that  satire,  that  he  allowed 
Dr.  Goldsmith,  as  he  told  me,  to  read  it  to  him 
from  beginning  to  end,  and  did  not  refuse  his 
praise  to  its  execution. 

Goldsmith  could  sometimes  take  adventurous 
liberties  with  him,  and  escape  unpunished.  Beau- 
clerk  told  me  that  when  Goldsmith  talked  of  a 
project  for  having  a  third  Theatre  in  London, 
solely  for  the  exhibition  of  new  plays,  in  order  to 
deliver  authours  from  the  supposed  tyranny  of 
managers,  Johnson  treated  it  slightingly;  upon 
which  Goldsmith  said,  “Ay,  ay,  this  may  be 
nothing  to  you,  who  can  now  shelter  yourself 
behind  the  corner  of  a  pension”;  and  that  John¬ 
son  bore  this  with  good-humour. 

Johnson  praised  the  Earl  of  Carlisle’s  Poems, 
which  his  Lordship  had  published  with  his  name, 
as  not  disdaining  to  be  a  candidate  for  literary 
fame.  My  friend  was  of  opinion,  that  when  a 
man  of  rank  appeared  in  that  character,  he  de¬ 
served  to  have  his  merit  handsomely  allowed.3 
In  this  I  think  he  was  more  liberal  than  Mr. 
William  Whitehead,  in  his  Elegy  to  Lord  Villiers) 
in  which  under  the  pretext  of  “superiour  toils, 

3Men  of  rank  and  fortune,  however,  should  be 
pretty  well  assured  of  having  a  real  claim  to  the 
approbation  of  the  publick,  as  writers,  before  they 
venture  to  stand  forth.  Dryden,  in  his  preface  to 
All  for  Love ,  thus  expresses  himself: 

“Men  of  pleasant  conversation  (at  least  esteemed 
so)  and  endued  with  a  trifling  kind  of  fancy,  per¬ 
haps  helped  out  by  [with]  a  smattering  of  Latin, 
are  ambitious  to  distinguish  themselves  from  the 
herd  of  gentlemen,  by  their  poetry: 

Rarus  enimferme  sensus  communis  in  ilia 

Fortuna. - [Juvenal,  viii.  73.] 

And  is  not  this  a  wretched  affectation,  not  to  be 
contented  with  what  fortune  has  done  for  them, 
and  sit  down  quietly  with  their  estates,  but  they 
must  call  their  wits  in  question,  and  needlessly  ex¬ 
pose  their  nakedness  to  publick  view?  Not  consid¬ 
ering  that  they  are  not  to  expect  the  same  appro¬ 
bation  from  sober  men,  which  they  have  found 
from  their  flatterers  after  the  third  bottle:  If  a  little 
glittering  in  discourse  has  passed  them  on  us  for 
witty  men,  where  was  the  necessity  of  undeceiving 
the  world?  Would  a  man  who  has  an  ill  title  to  an 
estate,  but  yet  is  in  possession  of  it,  would  he  bring 
it  of  his  own  accord  to  be  tried  at  Westminster? 
We  who  write,  if  we  want  the  talents  [talent],  yet 
have  the  excuse  that  we  do  it  for  a  poor  subsist¬ 
ence;  but  what  can  be  urged  in  their  defence,  who, 
not  having  the  vocation  of  poverty  to  scribble,  out 
of  mere  wantonness  take  pains  to  make  themselves 
ridiculous?  Horace  was  certainly  in  the  right  where 
he  said,  That  no  man  is  satisfied  with  his  own  con¬ 
dition.5  A  poet  is  not  pleased,  because  he  is  not 
rich;  and  the  rich  are  discontented  because  the 
poets  will  not  admit  them  of  their  number.55 


1781  ] 

demanding  all  their  care,’5  he  discovers  a  jeal¬ 
ousy  of  the  great  paying  their  court  to  the  Muses: 

- to  the  chosen  few 

Who  dare  excel ,  thy  fostering  aid  afford , 

Their  arts ,  their  magick  powers,  with  honours  due 
Exalt ; — but  be  thyself  what  they  record . 

Johnson  had  called  twice  on  the  Bishop  of 
Killaloe  before  his  Lordship  set  out  for  Ireland, 
having  missed  him  the  first  time.  He  said,  “It 
would  have  hung  heavy  on  my  heart  if  I  had 
not  seen  him.  No  man  ever  paid  more  attention 
to  another  than  he  has  done  to  me;1  and  I  have 
neglected  him,  not  wilfully,  but  from  being  oth¬ 
erwise  occupied.  Always,  Sir,  set  a  high  value 
on  spontaneous  kindness.  He  whose  inclination 
prompts  him  to  cultivate  your  friendship  of  his 
own  accord,  will  love  you  more  than  one  whom 
you  have  been  at  pains  to  attach  to  you.” 

Johnson  told  me,  that  he  was  once  much 
pleased  to  find  that  a  carpenter,  who  lived  near 
him,  was  very  ready  to  shew  him  some  things  in 
his  business  which  he  wished  to  see:  “It  v/as 
paying  (said  he,)  respect  to  literature.” 

I  asked  him  if  he  was  not  dissatisfied  with  hav¬ 
ing  so  small  a  share  of  wealth,  and  none  of  those 
distinctions  in  the  state  which  are  the  objects  of 
ambition.  He  had  only  a  pension  of  three  hun¬ 
dred  a  year.  Why  was  he  not  in  such  circum¬ 
stances  as  to  keep  his  coach?  Why  had  he  not 
some  considerable  office?  Johnson.  “Sir,  I  have 
never  complained  of  the  world;  nor  do  I  think 
that  I  have  reason  to  complain.  It  is  rather  to 
be  wondered  at  that  I  have  so  much.  My  pen¬ 
sion  is  more  out  of  the  usual  course  of  things 
than  any  instance  that  I  have  known.  Here,  Sir, 
was  a  man  avowedly  no  friend  to  Government 
at  the  time,  who  got  a  pension  without  asking 
for  it.  I  never  courted  the  great;  they  sent  for 

LThis  gave  me  very  great  pleasure,  for  there  had 
been  once  a  pretty  smart  altercation  between  Dr. 
Barnard  and  him,  upon  a  question,  whether  a  man 
could  improve  himself  after  the  age  of  forty-five; 
when  Johnson  in  a  hasty  humour,  expressed  him¬ 
self  in  a  manner  not  quite  civil.  Dr.  Barnard  made 
it  the  subject  of  a  copy  of  pleasant  verses,  in  which 
he  supposed  himself  to  learn  different  perfections 
from  different  men.  They  concluded  with  delicate 
irony: 

Johnson  shall  teach  me  how  to  place 
In  fairest  light  each  borrow’d  grace; 

From  him  I’ll  learn  to  write; 

Copy  his  clear  familiar  style , 

And  by  the  roughness  of  his  file 
Grow ,  like  himself,  polite. 

I  know  not  whether  Johnson  ever  saw  the  poem, 
but  I  had  occasion  to  find  that  as  Dr.  Barnard  and 
he  knew  each  other  better,  their  mutual  regard 
increased. 


479 

me;  but  I  think  they  now  give  me  up.  They  are 
satisfied;  they  have  seen  enough  of  me.”  Upon 
my  observing  that  I  could  not  believe  this,  for 
they  must  certainly  be  highly  pleased  by  his  con¬ 
versation;  conscious  of  his  own  superiority,  he 
answered,  “No,  Sir;  great  lords  and  great  ladies 
don’t  love  to  have  their  mouths  stopped.”  This 
was  very  expressive  of  the  effect  which  the  force 
of  his  understanding  and  brilliancy  of  his  fancy 
could  not  but  produce;  and,  to  be  sure,  they 
must  have  found  themselves  strangely  dimin¬ 
ished  in  his  company.  When  I  warmly  declared 
how  happy  I  was  at  all  times  to  hear  him; — 
“Yes,  Sir,  (said  he);  but  if  you  were  Lord  Chan¬ 
cellor,  it  would  not  be  so:  you  would  then  con¬ 
sider  your  own  dignity.” 

There  was  much  truth  and  knowledge  of  hu¬ 
man  nature  in  this  remark.  But  certainly  one 
should  think,  that  in  whatever  elevated  state  of 
life  a  man  who  knew  the  value  of  the  conversa¬ 
tion  of  Johnson  might  be  placed,  though  he 
might  prudently  avoid  a  situation  in  which  he 
might  appear  lessened  by  comparison;  yet  he 
would  frequently  gratify  himself  in  private  with 
the  participation  of  the  rich  intellectual  enter¬ 
tainment  which  Johnson  could  furnish.  Strange, 
however,  it  is,  to  consider  how  few  of  the  great 
sought  his  society;  so  that  if  one  were  disposed 
to  take  occasion  for  satire  on  that  account,  very 
conspicuous  objects  present  themselves.  His  no¬ 
ble  friend,  Lord  Elibank,  well  observed,  that  if 
a  great  man  procured  an  interview  with  John¬ 
son,  and  did  not  wish  to  see  him  more,  it  shewed 
a  mere  idle  curiosity,  and  a  wretched  want  of 
relish  for  extraordinary  powers  of  mind.  Mrs. 
Thrale  justly  and  wittily  accounted  for  such  con¬ 
duct  by  saying,  that  Johnson’s  conversation  was 
by  much  too  strong  for  a  person  accustomed  to 
obsequiousness  and  flattery;  it  was  mustard  in  a 
young  child's  mouth! 

One  day,  when  I  told  him  that  I  was  a  zeal¬ 
ous  Tory,  but  not  enough  “according  to  knowl¬ 
edge,”  and  should  be  obliged  to  him  for  “a  rea¬ 
son,”  he  was  so  candid,  and  expressed  himself 
so  well,  that  I  begged  of  him  to  repeat  what  he 
had  said,  and  I  wrote  down  as  follows: 

Of  Tory  and  Whig 

“A  wise  Tory  and  a  wise  Whig,  I  believe,  will 
agree.  Their  principles  are  the  same,  though 
their  modes  of  thinking  are  different.  A  high 
Tory  makes  government  unintelligible:  it  is  lost 
in  the  clouds.  A  violent  Whig  makes  it  imprac¬ 
ticable:  he  is  for  allowing  so  much  liberty  to  ev¬ 
ery  man,  that  there  is  not  power  enough  to  gov¬ 
ern  any  man.  The  prejudice  of  the  Tory  is  for 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


BOSWELL 


480 

establishment;  the  prejudice  of  the  Whig  is  for 
innovation.  A  Tory  does  not  wish  to  give  more 
real  power  to  Government;  but  that  Govern¬ 
ment  should  have  more  reverence.  Then  they  dif¬ 
fer  as  to  the  Church.  The  Tory  is  not  for  giving 
more  legal  power  to  the  Clergy,  but  wishes  they 
should  have  a  considerable  influence,  founded  on 
the  opinion  of  mankind;  the  Whig  is  for  limiting 
and  watching  them  with  a  narrow  jealousy.” 

To  Mr.  Perkins 

Sir,  However  often  I  have  seen  you,  I  have 
hitherto  forgotten  the  note,  but  I  have  now  sent 
it;  with  my  good  wishes  for  the  prosperity  of 
you  and  your  partner,1  of  whom,  from  our  short 
conversation,  I  could  not  judge  otherwise  than 
favourably.  I  am,  Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

June  2,  1781 

On  Saturday,  June  2,  I  set  out  for  Scotland, 
and  had  promised  to  pay  a  visit  on  my  way,  as  I 
sometimes  did,  at  Southill,  in  Bedfordshire,  at 
the  hospitable  mansion  of ’Squire  Dilly,  the  eld¬ 
er  brother  of  my  worthy  friends,  the  booksellers, 
in  the  Poultry.  Dr.  Johnson  agreed  to  be  of  the 
party  this  year,  with  Mr.  Charles  Dilly  and  me, 
and  to  go  and  see  Lord  Bute’s  seat  at  Luton  Hoe. 
He  talked  little  to  us  in  the  carriage,  being  chief¬ 
ly  occupied  in  reading  Dr.  Watson’s2  second 
volume  of  Chemical  Essays ,  which  he  liked  very 
well,  and  his  own  Prince  of  Abyssinia ,  on  which 
he  seemed  to  be  intensely  fixed;  having  told  us, 
that  he  had  not  looked  at  it  since  it  was  first 
published.  I  happened  to  take  it  out  of  my  pocket 
this  day,  and  he  seized  upon  it  with  avidity.  He 
pointed  out  to  me  the  following  remarkable  pas¬ 
sage: 

“By  what  means  (said  the  prince)  are  the  Eu¬ 
ropeans  thus  powerful;  or  why,  since  they  can 
so  easily  visit  Asia  and  Africa  for  trade  or  con¬ 
quest,  cannot  the  Asiaticks  and  Africans  invade 
their  coasts,  plant  colonies  in  their  ports,  and 
give  laws  to  their  natural  princes?  The  same 
wind  that  carries  them  back  would  bring  us 

AMr.  Barclay,  a  descendant  of  Robert  Barclay, 
of  Ury,  the  celebrated  apologist  of  the  people  called 
Quakers,  and  remarkable  for  maintaining  the  prin¬ 
ciples  of  his  venerable  progenitor,  with  as  much  of 
the  elegance  of  modern  manners,  as  is  consistent 
with  primitive  simplicity. 

2Now  Bishop  of  Llandaff,  one  of  the  poorest  Bish- 
opricks  in  this  kingdom.  His  Lordship  has  written 
with  much  zeal  to  show  the  propriety  of  equalizing 
the  revenues  of  Bishops.  He  has  informed  us  that 
he  has  burnt  all  his  chemical  papers.  The  friends 
of  our  excellent  constitution,  now  assailed  on  every 
side  by  innovators  and  levellers,  would  have  less 
regretted  the  suppression  of  some  of  his  Lordship’s 
other  writings. 


[  1781 

thither.”  “They  are  more  powerful,  Sir,  than 
we,  (answered  Imlac,)  because  they  are  wiser. 
Knowledge  will  always  predominate  over  ig¬ 
norance,  as  man  governs  the  other  animals.  But 
why  their  knowledge  is  more  than  ours,  I  know 
not  what  reason  can  be  given,  but  the  unsearch¬ 
able  will  of  the  Supreme  Being.” 

He  said,  “This,  Sir,  no  man  can  explain  oth¬ 
erwise.” 

VVe  stopped  at  Welwyn,  where  I  wished  much 
to  see,  in  company  with  Dr.  Johnson,  the  resi¬ 
dence  of  the  authour  of  Night  Thoughts;  which 
was  then  possessed  by  his  son,  Mr.  Young.  Here 
some  address  was  requisite,  for  I  was  not  ac¬ 
quainted  with  Mr.  Young,  and  had  I  proposed 
to  Dr.  Johnson  that  we  should  send  to  him,  he 
would  have  checked  my  wish,  and  perhaps  been 
offended.  I  therefore  concerted  with  Mr.  Dilly, 
that  I  should  steal  away  from  Dr.  Johnson  and 
him,  and  try  what  reception  I  could  procure 
from  Mr.  Young;  if  unfavourable,  nothing  was 
to  be  said;  but  if  agreeable,  I  should  return  and 
notify  it  to  them.  I  hastened  to  Mr.  Young’s, 
found  he  was  at  home,  sent  in  word  that  a  gen¬ 
tleman  desired  to  wait  upon  him,  and  was  shewn 
into  a  parlour,  where  he  and  a  young  lady,  his 
daughter,  were  sitting.  He  appeared  to  be  a 
plain,  civil,  country  gentleman;  and  when  I 
begged  pardon  for  presuming  to  trouble  him, 
but  that  I  wished  much  to  see  his  place,  if  he 
would  give  me  leave;  he  behaved  very  courte¬ 
ously,  and  answered,  ‘By  all  means,  Sir;  we  are 
just  going  to  drink  tea;  will  you  sit  down?’  I 
thanked  him,  but  said,  that  Dr.  Johnson  had 
come  with  me  from  London,  and  I  must  return 
to  the  inn  and  drink  tea  with  him;  that  my  name 
was  Boswell,  I  had  travelled  with  him  in  the 
Hebrides.  “Sir,  (said  he,)  I  should  think  it  a 
great  honour  to  see  Dr.  Johnson  here.  Will  you 
allow  me  to  send  for  him?”  Availing  myself  of 
this  opening,  I  said  that  “I  would  go  myself  and 
bring  him,  when  he  had  drunk  tea;  he  knew 
nothing  of  my  calling  here.”  Having  been  thus 
successful,  I  hastened  back  to  the  inn,  and  in¬ 
formed  Dr.  Johnson  that  “Mr.  Young,  son  of 
Dr.  Young,  the  authour  of  Night  Thoughts ,  whom 
I  had  just  left,  desired  to  have  the  honour  of  see¬ 
ing  him  at  the  house  where  his  father  lived.” 
Dr.  Johnson  luckily  made  no  inquiry  how  this 
invitation  had  arisen,  but  agreed  to  go,  and 
when  we  entered  Mr.  Young’s  parlour,  he  ad¬ 
dressed  him  with  a  very  polite  bow,  “Sir,  I  had 
a  curiosity  to  come  and  see  this  place.  I  had  the 
honour  to  know  that  great  man,  your  father.” 
We  went  into  the  garden,  where  we  found  a 
gravel  walk,  on  each  side  of  which  was  a  row  of 


1781]  LIFE  OF 

trees,  planted  by  Dr.  Young,  which  formed  a 
handsome -Go thick  arch;  Dr.  Johnson  called  it 
a  fine  grove.  I  beheld  it  with  reverence. 

We  sat  some  time  in  the  summer-house,  on 
the  outside  wall  of  which  was  inscribed,  “Am- 
bulantes  in  horto  audiebant  vocem  Dei”;  and  in  ref¬ 
erence  to  a  brook  by  which  it  is  situated,  “Vi¬ 
vendi  rede  qui  prorogat  horam”  &c.  I  said  to  Mr. 
Young,  that  I  had  been  told  his  father  was  cheer¬ 
ful.  “Sir,  (said  he,)  he  was  too  well-bred  a  man 
not  to  be  cheerful  in  company;  but  he  was 
gloomy  when  alone.  He  never  was  cheerful  after 
my  mother’s  death,  and  he  had  met  with  many 
disappointments.”  Dr.  Johnson  observed  to  me 
afterwards,  “That  this  was  no  favourable  ac¬ 
count  of  Dr.  Young;  for  it  is  not  becoming  in  a 
man  to  have  so  little  acquiescence  in  the  ways  of 
Providence,  as  to  be  gloomy  because  he  has  not 
obtained  as  much  preferment  as  he  expected; 
nor  to  continue  gloomy  for  the  loss  of  his  wife. 
Grief  has  its  time.”  The  last  part  of  this  censure 
was  theoretically  made.  Practically,  we  know 
that  grief  for  the  loss  of  a  wife  may  be  continued 
very  long,  in  proportion  as  affection  has  been 
sincere.  No  man  knew  this  better  than  Dr. 
Johnson. 

We  went  into  the  church,  and  looked  at  the 
monument  erected  by  Mr.  Young  to  his  father. 
Mr.  Young  mentioned  an  anecdote,  that  his 
father  had  received  several  thousand  pounds  of 
subscription-money  for  his  Universal  Passion ,  but 
had  lost  it  in  the  South-Sea.1  Dr.  Johnson  thought 
this  must  be  a  mistake;  for  he  had  never  seen  a 
subscription-book. 

Upon  the  road  we  talked  of  the  uncertainty 
of  profit  with  which  authours  and  booksellers 
engage  in  the  publication  of  literary  works. 
Johnson.  “My  judgement  I  have  found  is  no 
certain  rule  as  to  the  sale  of  a  book.”  Boswell. 
“Pray,  Sir,  have  you  been  much  plagued  with 
authours  sending  you  their  works  to  revise?” 
Johnson.  “No,  Sir;  I  have  been  thought  a  sour, 
surly  fellow.”  Boswell.  “Very  lucky  for  you, 
Sir, — in  that  respect.”  I  must  however  observe, 
that  notwithstanding  what  he  now  said,  which 
he  no  doubt  imagined  at  the  time  to  be  the  fact, 
there  was,  perhaps,  no  man  who  more  frequent¬ 
ly  yielded  to  the  solicitations  even  of  very  ob¬ 
scure  authours,  to  read  their  manuscripts,  or 
more  liberally  assisted  them  with  advice  and 
correction. 

He  found  himself  very  happy  at  ’Squire  Dil- 

xThis  assertion  is  disproved  by  a  comparison  of 
dates.  The  first  four  satires  of  Young  were  pub¬ 
lished  in  1725;  the  South  Sea  scheme  (which  ap¬ 
pears  to  be  meant,)  was  in  1720.  [M.] 


JOHNSON  481 

ly’s,  where  there  is  always  abundance  of  excel¬ 
lent  fare,  and  hearty  welcome. 

On  Sunday,  June  3,  we  all  went  to  Southill 
church,  which  is  very  near  to  Mr.  Dilly’s  house. 
It  being  the  first  Sunday  of  the  month,  the  holy 
sacrament  was  administered,  and  I  staid  to  par¬ 
take  of  it.  When  I  came  afterwards  into  Dr. 
Johnson’s  room,  he  said,  “You  did  right  to  stay 
and  receive  the  communion;  I  had  not  thought 
of  it.”  This  seemed  to  imply  that  he  did  not 
choose  to  approach  the  altar  without  a  previous 
preparation,  as  to  which  good  men  entertain  dif¬ 
ferent  opinions,  some  holding  that  it  is  irrever¬ 
ent  to  partake  of  that  ordinance  without  con¬ 
siderable  premeditation;  others,  that  whoever  is 
a  sincere  Christian,  and  in  a  proper  frame  of 
mind  to  discharge  any  other  ritual  duty  of  our 
religion,  may,  without  scruple,  discharge  this 
most  solemn  one.  A  middle  notion  I  believe  to 
be  the  just  one,  which  is,  that  communicants 
need  not  think  a  long  train  of  preparatory  forms 
indispensably  necessary;  but  neither  should  they 
rashly  and  lightly  venture  upon  so  aweful  and 
mysterious  an  institution.  Christians  must  judge 
each  for  himself,  what  degree  of  retirement  and 
self-examination  is  necessary  upon  each  occasion. 

Being  in  a  frame  of  mind  which,  I  hope  for 
the  felicity  of  human  nature,  many  experience, 
— in  fine  weather, — at  the  country  house  of  a 
friend, — consoled  and  elevated  by  pious  exer¬ 
cises, — I  expressed  myself  with  an  unrestrained 
fervour  to  my c  c  Guide,  Philosopher,  and  Friend’  ’ ; 
“My  dear  Sir,  I  would  fain  be  a  good  man;  and 
I  am  very  good  now.  I  fear  God,  and  honour 
the  King,  I  wish  to  do  no  ill,  and  to  be  benev¬ 
olent  to  all  mankind.”  He  looked  at  me  with  a 
benignant  indulgence;  but  took  occasion  to  give 
me  wise  and  salutary  caution.  “Do  not,  Sir,  ac¬ 
custom  yourself  to  trust  to  impressions.  There  is  a 
middle  state  of  mind  between  conviction  and 
hypocrisy,  of  which  many  are  conscious.  By 
trusting  to  impressions,  a  man  may  gradually 
come  to  yield  to  them,  and  at  length  be  subject 
to  them,  so  as  not  to  be  a  free  agent,  or  what  is 
the  same  thing  in  effect,  to  suppose  that  he  is  not 
a  free  agent.  A  man  who  is  in  that  state,  should 
not  be  suffered  to  live;  if  he  declares  he  cannot 
help  acting  in  a  particular  way,  and  is  irresist¬ 
ibly  impelled,  there  can  be  no  confidence  in 
him,  no  more  than  in  a  tyger.  But,  Sir,  no  man 
believes  himself  to  be  impelled  irresistibly;  we 
know  that  he  who  says  he  believes  it,  lies.  Fa¬ 
vourable  impressions  at  particular  moments,  as 
to  the  state  of  our  souls,  may  be  deceitful  and 
dangerous.  In  general  no  man  can  be  sure  of  his 
acceptance  with  God;  some,  indeed,  may  have 


BOSWELL 


482 

had  it  revealed  to  them.  St.  Paul,  who  wrought 
miracles,  may  have  had  a  miracle  wrought  on 
himself,  and  may  have  obtained  supernatural 
assurance  of  pardon,  and  mercy,  and  beatitude; 
yet  St.  Paul,  though  he  expresses  strong  hope, 
also  expresses  fear,  lest  having  preached  to  oth¬ 
ers,  he  himself  should  be  a  cast-away.” 

The  opinion  of  a  learned  Bishop  of  our  ac¬ 
quaintance,  as  to  there  being  merit  in  religious 
faith,  being  mentioned;— Johnson.  “Why,  yes, 
Sir,  the  most  licentious  man,  were  hell  open  be¬ 
fore  him,  would  not  take  the  most  beautiful 
strumpet  to  his  arms.  We  must,  as  the  Apostle 
says,  live  by  faith,  not  by  sight.” 

I  talked  to  him  of  original  sin,1  in  consequence 
of  the  fall  of  man,  and  of  the  atonement  made 
by  our  Saviour.  After  some  conversation,  which 
he  desired  me  to  remember,  he,  at  my  request, 
dictated  to  me  as  follows: — 

“With  respect  to  original  sin,  the  inquiry  is  not 
necessary;  for  whatever  is  the  cause  of  human 
corruption,  men  are  evidently  and  confessedly 
so  corrupt,  that  all  the  laws  of  heaven  and  earth 
are  insufficient  to  restrain  them  from  crimes. 

“Whatever  difficulty  there  may  be  in  the  con¬ 
ception  of  vicarious  punishments,  it  is  an  opin¬ 
ion  which  has  had  possession  of  mankind  in  all 
ages.  There  is  no  nation  that  has  not  used  the 
practice  of  sacrifices.  Whoever,  therefore,  denies 
the  propriety  of  vicarious  punishments,  holds  an 
opinion  which  the  sentiments  and  practice  of 
mankind  have  contradicted,  from  the  beginning 
of  the  world.  The  great  sacrifice  for  the  sins  of 
mankind  was  offered  at  the  death  of  the  Mes¬ 
siah,  who  is  called  in  Scripture  ‘The  Lamb  of 
God,  that  taketh  away  the  sins  of  the  world.’  To 
judge  of  the  reasonableness  of  the  scheme  of  re¬ 
demption,  it  must  be  considered  as  necessary  to 
the  government  of  the  universe,  that  God  should 
make  known  his  perpetual  and  irreconcileable 
detestation  of  moral  evil.  He  might  indeed  pun¬ 
ish,  and  punish  only  the  offenders;  but  as  the 
end  of  punishment  is  not  revenge  of  crimes,  but 
propagation  of  virtue,  it  was  more  becoming  the 

xDr.  Ogden,  in  his  second  sermon  On  the  Articles 
of  the  Christian  Faith ,  with  admirable  acuteness  thus 
addresses  the  opposers  of  that  Doctrine,  which  ac¬ 
counts  for  the  confusion,  sin  and  misery,  which  we 
find  in  this  life:  “It  would  be  severe  in  God,  you 
think,  to  degrade  us  to  such  a  sad  state  as  this,  for 
the  offence  of  our  first  parents:  but  you  can  allow 
him  to  place  us  in  it  without  any  inducement.  Are 
our  calamaties  lessened  for  not  being  ascribed  to 
Adam?  If  your  condition  be  unhappy,  is  it  not  still 
unhappy,  whatever  was  the  occasion?  with  the  ag¬ 
gravation  of  this  reflection,  that  if  it  was  as  good 
as  it  was  at  first  designed,  there  seems  to  be  some¬ 
what  the  less  reason  to  look  for  its  amendment.” 


[  1781 

Divine  clemency  to  find  another  manner  of  pro¬ 
ceeding,  less  destructive  to  man,  and  at  least 
equally  powerful  to  promote  goodness.  The  end 
of  punishment  is  to  reclaim  and  warn.  That  pun¬ 
ishment  will  both  reclaim  and  warn,  which 
shews  evidently  such  abhorrence  of  sin  in  God, 
as  may  deter  us  from  it,  or  strike  us  with  dread 
of  vengeance  when  we  have  committed  it.  This 
is  effected  by  vicarious  punishment.  Nothing 
could  more  testify  the  opposition  between  the 
nature  of  God  and  moral  evil,  or  more  amply 
display  his  justice,  to  men  and  angels,  to  all  or¬ 
ders  and  successions  of  beings,  than  that  it  was 
necessary  for  the  highest  and  purest  nature,  even 
for  Divinity  itself,  to  pacify  the  demands  of 
vengeance,  by  a  painful  death;  of  which  the  nat¬ 
ural  effect  will  be,  that  when  justice  is  appeased, 
there  is  a  proper  place  for  the  exercise  of  mercy; 
and  that  such  propitiation  shall  supply,  in  some 
degree,  the  imperfections  of  our  obedience,  and 
the  inefficacy  of  our  repentance:  for,  obedience 
and  repentance,  such  as  we  can  perform,  are 
still  necessary.  Our  Saviour  has  told  us,  that  he 
did  not  come  to  destroy  the  law,  but  to  fulfill;  to 
fulfill  the  typical  law,  by  the  performance  of 
what  those  types  had  foreshewn;  and  the  moral 
law,  by  precepts  of  greater  purity  and  higher 
exaltation.” 

[Here  he  said,  “God  bless  you  with  it.”  I  ac¬ 
knowledged  myself  much  obliged  to  him;  but  I 
begged  that  he  would  go  on  as  to  the  propiti¬ 
ation  being  the  chief  object  of  our  most  holy  faith. 
He  then  dictated  this  one  other  paragraph.] 

“The  peculiar  doctrine  of  Christianity  is,  that 
of  an  universal  sacrifice,  and  perpetual  propiti¬ 
ation.  Other  prophets  only  proclaimed  the  will 
and  the  threatenings  of  God.  Christ  satisfied 
his  justice.” 

The  Reverend  Mr.  Palmer,2  Fellow  of  Queen’s 
College,  Cambridge,  dined  with  us.  He  expressed 

2This  unfortunate  person,  whose  full  name  was 
Thomas  Fysche  Palmer,  afterwards  went  to  Dun¬ 
dee,  in  Scotland,  where  he  officiated  as  minister  to 
a  congregation  of  the  sect  who  called  themselves 
Unitarians ,  from  a  notion  that  they  distinctively 
worship  one  God,  because  they  deny  the  mysterious 
doctrine  of  the  Trinity.  They  do  not  advert  that 
the  great  body  of  the  Christian  Church,  in  main¬ 
taining  that  mystery,  maintain  also  the  Unity  of 
the  God-head;  the  “Trinity  in  Unity! — three 
persons  and  one  God.”  The  Church  humbly  adores 
the  Divinity  as  exhibited  in  the  holy  Scriptures. 
The  Unitarian  sect  vainly  presumes  to  compre¬ 
hend  and  define  the  Almighty.  Mr.  Palmer  hav¬ 
ing  heated  his  mind  with  political  speculations, 
became  so  much  dissatisfied  with  our  excellent 
Constitution,  as  to  compose,  publish,  and  circu¬ 
late  writings,  which  were  found  to  be  so  seditious 
and  dangerous,  that  upon  being  found  guilty  by  a 


1781]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  483 


a  wish  that  a  better  provision  were  made  for 
parish-clerks.  Johnson.  “Yes,  Sir,  a  parish-clerk 
should  be  a  man  who  is  able  to  make  a  will,  or 
write  a  letter  for  any  body  in  the  parish.” 

I  mentioned  Lord  Monboddo’s  notion1  that 
the  ancient  Egyptians,  with  all  their  learning, 
and  all  their  arts,  were  not  only  black,  but 
woolly-haired.  Mr.  Palmer  asked  how  did  it  ap¬ 
pear  upon  examining  the  mummies?  Dr.  John¬ 
son  approved  of  this  test. 

Although  upon  most  occasions  I  never  heard 
a  more  strenuous  advocate  for  the  advantages 
of  wealth,  than  Dr.  Johnson:  he  this  day,  I  know 
not  from  what  caprice,  took  the  other  side.  “I 
have  not  observed  (said  he,)  that  men  of  very 
large  fortunes  enjoy  any  thing  extraordinary 
that  makes  happiness.  What  has  the  Duke  of 
Bedford?  What  has  the  Duke  of  Devonshire? 
The  only  great  instance  that  I  have  ever  known 
of  the  enjoyment  of  wealth  was,  that  of  Jamaica 
Dawkins,  who,  going  to  visit  Palmyra,  and  hear¬ 
ing  that  the  way  was  infested  by  robbers,  hired 
a  troop  of  Turkish  horse  to  guard  him.” 

Dr.  Gibbons,  the  Dissenting  minister,  being 
mentioned,  he  said,  “I  took  to  Dr.  Gibbons.” 
And  addressing  himself  to  Mr.  Charles  Dilly, 
added,  “I  shall  be  glad  to  see  him.  Tell  him,  if 
he’ll  call  on  me,  and  dawdle  over  a  dish  of  tea 
in  an  afternoon,  I  shall  take  it  kind.” 

The  Reverend  Mr.  Smith,  Vicar  of  Southill, 
a  very  respectable  man,  with  a  very  agreeable 
family,  sent  an  invitation  to  us  to  drink  tea.  I 
remarked  Dr.  Johnson’s  very  respectful  polite¬ 
ness.  Though  always  fond  of  changing  the  scene, 
he  said,  “We  must  have  Mr.  Dilly’s  leave.  We 
cannot  go  from  your  house,  Sir,  without  your 
permission.”  We  all  went,  and  were  well  satis¬ 
fied  with  our  visit.  I  however  remember  noth¬ 
ing  particular,  except  a  nice  distinction  which 
Dr.  Johnson  made  with  respect  to  the  power  of 
memory,  maintaining  that  forgetfulness  was  a 
man’s  own  fault.  “To  remember  and  to  recol¬ 
lect  (said  he,)  are  different  things.  A  man  has 
not  the  power  to  recollect  what  is  not  in  his 
mind;  but  when  a  thing  is  in  his  mind  he  may 
remember  it.”  The  remark  was  occasioned  by 
my  leaning  back  on  a  chair,  which  a  little  before 
I  had  perceived  to  be  broken,  and  pleading  for- 

Jury,  the  Court  of  Justiciary  in  Scotland  sentenced 
him  to  transportation  for  fourteen  years.  A  loud 
clamour  against  this  sentence  was  made  by  some 
Members  of  both  Houses  of  Parliament;  but  both 
Houses  approved  of  it  by  a  great  majority;  and  he 
was  conveyed  to  the  settlement  for  convicts  in  New 
South  Wales. 

xTaken  from  Herodotus,  ii.  104. 


getfulness  as  an  excuse.  “Sir,  (said  he,)  its  being 
broken  was  certainly  in  your  mind.” 

When  I  observed  that  a  housebreaker  was  in 
general  very  timorous;  Johnson.  “No  wonder, 
Sir;  he  is  afraid  of  being  shot  getting  into  a  house, 
or  hanged  when  he  has  got  out  of  it.” 

He  told  us,  that  he  had  in  one  day  written  six 
sheets  of  a  translation  from  the  French,  adding, 
“I  should  be  glad  to  see  it  now.  I  wish  that  I  had 
copies  of  all  the  pamphlets  written  against  me, 
as  it  is  said  Pope  had.  Had  I  known  that  I  should 
make  so  much  noise  in  the  world,  I  should  have 
been  at  pains  to  collect  them.  I  believe  there  is 
hardly  a  day  in  which  there  is  not  something 
about  me  in  the  news-papers.” 

On  Monday,  June  4,  we  all  went  to  Luton- 
Hoe,  to  see  Lord  Bute’s  magnificent  seat,  for 
which  I  had  obtained  a  ticket.  As  we  entered 
the  park,  I  talked  in  a  high  style  of  my  old  friend¬ 
ship  with  Lord  Mountstuart,  and  said,  “I  shall 
probably  be  much  at  this  place.”  The  Sage, 
aware  of  human  vicissitudes,  gently  checked  me : 
“Don’t  you  be  too  sure  of  that.”  He  made  two 
or  three  peculiar  observations;  as  when  shewn 
the  botanical  garden,  “Is  not  every  garden  a  bo¬ 
tanical  garden?”  When  told  that  there  was  a 
shrubbery  to  the  extent  of  several  miles:  “That 
is  making  a  very  foolish  use  of  the  ground;  a  lit¬ 
tle  of  it  is  very  well.”  When  it  was  proposed 
that  we  should  walk  on  the  pleasure-ground; 
“Don’t  let  us  fatigue  ourselves.  Why  should  we 
walk  there?  Here’s  a  fine  tree,  let’s  get  to  the  top 
of  it.”  But  upon  the  whole,  he  was  very  much 
pleased.  He  said,  “This  is  one  of  the  places  I  do 
not  regret  having  come  to  see.  It  is  a  very  state¬ 
ly  place,  indeed;  in  the  house  magnificence  is 
not  sacrificed  to  convenience,  nor  convenience 
to  magnificence.  The  library  is  very  splendid: 
the  dignity  of  the  rooms  is  very  great;  and  the 
quantity  of  pictures  is  beyond  expectation,  be¬ 
yond  hope.” 

It  happened  without  any  previous  concert, 
that  we  visited  the  seat  of  Lord  Bute  upon  the 
King’s  birthday;  we  dined  and  drank  his 
Majesty’s  health  at  an  inn,  in  the  village  of 
Luton. 

In  the  evening  I  put  him  in  mind  of  his  prom¬ 
ise  to  favour  me  with  a  copy  of  his  celebrated 
Letter  to  the  Earl  of  Chesterfield,  and  he  was  at 
last  pleased  to  comply  with  this  earnest  request, 
by  dictating  it  to  me  from  his  memory;  for  he 
believed  that  he  himself  had  no  copy.  There  was 
an  animated  glow  in  his  countenance  while  he 
thus  recalled  his  high-minded  indignation. 

He  laughed  heartily  at  a  ludicrous  action  in 
the  Court  of  Session,  in  which  I  was  Counsel. 


484  BOSWELL  [1781 


The  Society  of  Procurators ,  or  Attornies,  entitled 
to  practise  in  the  inferiour  courts  at  Edinburgh, 
had  obtained  a  royal  charter,  in  which  they  had 
taken  care  to  have  their  ancient  designation  of 
Procurators  changed  into  that  of  Solicitors ,  from  a 
notion,  as  they  supposed,  that  it  was  more  gen¬ 
teel;  and  this  new  title  they  displayed  by  a  pub- 
lick  advertisement  for  a  General  Meeting  at  their 
Hall. 

It  has  been  said,  that  the  Scottish  nation  is 
not  distinguished  for  humour;  and,  indeed,  what 
happened  on  this  occasion  may  in  some  degree 
justify  the  remark:  for  although  this  society  had 
contrived  to  make  themselves  a  very  prominent 
object  for  the  ridicule  of  such  as  might  stoop  to 
it,  the  only  joke  to  which  it  gave  rise,  was  the  fol¬ 
lowing  paragraph,  sent  to  the  news-paper  called 
The  Caledonian  Mercury:  — 

“A  correspondent  informs  us,  that  the  Wor¬ 
shipful  Society  of  Chaldeans ,  Cadies ,  or  Running 
Stationers  of  this  city  are  resolved,  in  imitation, 
and  encouraged  by  the  singular  success  of  their 
brethren,  of  an  equally  respectable  Society,  to  ap¬ 
ply  for  a  Charter  of  their  Privileges,  particular¬ 
ly  of  the  sole  privilege  of  procuring,  in  the  most 
extensive  sense  of  the  word,  exclusive  of  chair¬ 
men,  porters,  penny-post  men,  and  other  infer¬ 
iour  ranks;  their  brethren  the  R — y — l  S — l- 
l— rs,  alias  P — c — rs,  before  the  inferiour  Courts 
of  this  City,  always  excepted. 

“Should  the  Worshipful  Society  be  success¬ 
ful,  they  are  farther  resolved  not  to  he  puff ed  up 
thereby,  but  to  demean  themselves  with  more 
equanimity  and  decency  than  their  R-y-l,  learned , 
and  very  modest  brethren  above  mentioned  have 
done,  upon  their  late  dignification  and  exalta¬ 
tion. M 

A  majority  of  the  members  of  the  Society 
prosecuted  Mr.  Robertson,  the  publisher  of  the 
paper,  for  damages;  and  the  first  judgement  of 
the  whole  Court  very  wisely  dismissed  the  ac¬ 
tion:  Solventur  risu  tabula ,  tu  missus  abibis .  But  a 
new  trial  or  review  was  granted  upon  a  petition, 
according  to  the  forms  in  Scotland.  This  peti¬ 
tion  I  was  engaged  to  answer,  and  Dr.  Johnson 
with  great  alacrity  furnished  me  this  evening 
with  what  follows: 

“All  injury  is  either  of  the  person,  the  fortune, 
or  the  fame.  Now  it  is  a  certain  thing,  it  is  pro¬ 
verbially  known,  that  a  jest  breaks  no  bones.  They 
never  have  gained  half-a-crown  less  in  the  whole 
profession  since  this  mischievous  paragraph  has 
appeared;  and,  as  to  their  reputation,  What  is 
their  reputation  but  an  instrument  of  getting 
money?  If,  therefore,  they  have  lost  no  money, 
the  question  upon  reputation  may  be  answered 


by  a  very  old  position,  —  De  minimis  non  curat 
Prat  or. 

“Whether  there  was,  or  was  not,  an  animus 
injuriandi ,  is  not  worth  inquiring,  if  no  injuria  can 
be  proved.  But  the  truth  is,  there  was  no  animus 
injuriandi.  It  was  only  an  animus  irritandij  which, 
happening  to  be  exercised  upon  a  genus  irritabile , 
produced  unexpected  violence  of  resentment. 
Their  irritability  arose  only  from  an  opinion  of 
their  own  importance,  and  their  delight  in  their 
new  exaltation.  What  might  have  been  borne 
by  a  Procurator  could  not  be  born  by  a  Solicitor. 
Your  Lordships  well  know,  that  honores  mutant 
mores.  Titles  and  dignities  play  strongly  on  the 
fancy.  As  a  madman  is  apt  to  think  himself 
grown  suddenly  great,  so  he  that  grows  sudden¬ 
ly  great  is  apt  to  borrow  a  little  from  the  mad¬ 
man.  To  co-operate  with  their  resentment  would 
be  to  promote  their  phrenzy;  nor  is  it  possible 
to  guess  to  what  they  might  proceed,  if  to  the 
new  title  of  Solicitor,  should  be  added  the  ela¬ 
tion  of  victory  and  triumph. 

“We  consider  your  Lordships  as  the  protec¬ 
tors  of  our  rights,  and  the  guardians  of  our  vir¬ 
tues;  but  believe  it  not  included  in  your  high 
office,  that  you  should  flatter  our  vices,  or  solace 
our  vanity:  and,  as  vanity  only  dictates  this 
prosecution,  it  is  humbly  hoped  your  Lordships 
will  dismiss  it. 

“If  every  attempt,  however  light  or  ludicrous, 
to  lessen  another’s  reputation,  is  to  be  punished 
by  a  judicial  sentence,  what  punishment  can  be 
sufficiently  severe  for  him  who  attempts  to  di¬ 
minish  the  reputation  of  the  Supreme  Court  of 
Justice,  by  reclaiming  upon  a  cause  already  deter¬ 
mined,  without  any  change  in  the  state  of  the 
question?  Does  it  not  imply  hopes  that  the  Judges 
will  change  their  opinion?  Is  not  uncertainty 
and  inconstancy  in  the  highest  degree  disrepu¬ 
table  to  a  Court?  Does  it  not  suppose,  that  the 
former  judgement  was  temerarious  or  negli¬ 
gent?  Does  it  not  lessen  the  confidence  of  the 
publick?  Will  it  not  be  said,  that  jus  est  aut  incog- 
nitum  aut  vagum?  and  will  not  the  consequence 
be  drawn,  misera  est  servitus?  Will  not  the  rules  of 
action  be  obscure?  Will  not  he  who  knows  him¬ 
self  wrong  to-day,  hope  that  the  Courts  of  Jus¬ 
tice  will  think  him  right  to-morrow?  Surely,  my 
Lords,  these  are  attempts  of  dangerous  tenden¬ 
cy,  which  the  Solicitors,  as  men  versed  in  the 
law,  should  have  foreseen  and  avoided.  It  was 
natural  for  an  ignorant  printer  to  appeal  from 
the  Lord  Ordinary;  but  from  lawyers,  the  de- 

!Mr.  Robertson  altered  this  word  to  jocandi ,  he 
having  found  in  Blackstone  that  to  irritate  is  ac¬ 
tionable. 


1781  ]  LIFE  OF 

scendants  of  lawyers,  who  have  practised  for 
three  hundred  years,  and  have  now  raised  them¬ 
selves  to  a  higher  denomination,  it  might  be  ex¬ 
pected,  that  they  should  know  the  reverence  due 
to  a  judicial  determination;  and,  having  been 
once  dismissed,  should  sit  down  in  silence.” 

I  am  ashamed  to  mention,  that  the  Court,  by 
a  plurality  of  voices,  without  having  a  single  ad¬ 
ditional  circumstance  before  them,  reversed  their 
own  judgement,  made  a  serious  matter  of  this 
dull  and  foolish  joke,  and  adjudged  Mr.  Rob¬ 
ertson  to  pay  to  the  Society  five  pounds  (ster¬ 
ling  money)  and  costs  of  suit.  The  decision  will 
seem  strange  to  English  lawyers. 

On  Tuesday,  June  5,  Johnson  was  to  return 
to  London.  He  was  very  pleasant :at  breakfast;  I 
mentioned  a  friend  of  mine  having  resolved  never 
to  marry  a  pretty  woman.  Johnson.  “Sir,  it  is  a 
very  foolish  resolution  to  resolve  not  to  marry  a 
pretty  woman.  Beauty  is  of  itself  very  estima¬ 
ble.  No,  Sir,  I  would  prefer  a  pretty  woman,  un¬ 
less  there  are  objections  to  her.  A  pretty  woman 
may  be  foolish;  a  pretty  woman  may  be  wicked; 
a  pretty  woman  may  not  like  me.  But  there  is  no 
such  danger  in  marrying  a  pretty  woman  as  is 
apprehended:  she  will  not  be  persecuted  if  she 
does  not  invite  persecution.  A  pretty  woman,  if 
she  has  a  mind  to  be  wicked,  can  find  a  readier 
way  than  another;  and  that  is  all.” 

I  accompanied  him  in  Mr.  Dilly’s  chaise  to 
Shefford,  where  talking  of  Lord  Bute’s  never  go¬ 
ing  to  Scotland,  he  said,  “As  an  Englishman,  I 
should  wish  all  the  Scotch  gentlemen  should  be 
educated  in  England;  Scotland  would  become 
a  province;  they  would  spend  all  their  rents  in 
England.”  This  is  a  subject  of  much  consequence, 
and  much  delicacy.  The  advantage  of  an  Eng¬ 
lish  education  is  unquestionably  very  great  to 
Scotch  gentlemen  of  talents  and  ambition;  and 
regular  visits  to  Scotland,  and  perhaps  other 
means,  might  be  effectually  used  to  prevent 
them  from  being  totally  estranged  from  their 
native  country,  any  more  than  a  Cumberland 
or  Northumberland  gentleman  who  has  been 
educated  in  the  South  of  England.  I  own,  in¬ 
deed,  that  it  is  no  small  misfortune  for  Scotch 
gentlemen,  who  have  neither  talents  nor  ambi¬ 
tion,  to  be  educated  in  England,  where  they 
may  be  perhaps  distinguished  only  by  a  nick¬ 
name,  lavish  their  fortune  in  giving  expensive 
entertainments  to  those  who  laugh  at  them,  and 
saunter  about  as  mere  idle  insignificant  hangers 
on  even  upon  the  foolish  great;  when  if  they  had 
been  judiciously  brought  up  at  home,  they  might 
have  been  comfortable  and  creditable  members 
of  society. 


JOHNSON  485 

At  Shefford  I  had  another  affectionate  part¬ 
ing  from  my  revered  friend,  who  was  taken  up 
by  the  Bedford  coach  and  carried  to  the  metrop¬ 
olis.  I  went  with  Messieurs  Dilly,  to  see  some 
friends  at  Bedford;  dined  with  the  officers  of  the 
militia  of  the  county,  and  next  day  proceeded 
on  my  journey. 

To  Bennet  Langton,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  How  welcome  your  account  of 
yourself  and  your  invitation  to  your  new  house 
was  to  me,  I  need  not  tell  you,  who  consider  our 
friendship  not  only  as  formed  by  choice,  but  as 
matured  by  time.  We  have  been  now  long 
enough  acquainted  to  have  many  images  in 
common,  and  therefore  to  have  a  source  of  con¬ 
versation  which  neither  the  learning  nor  the  wit 
of  a  new  companion  can  supply. 

My  Lives  are  now  published;  and  if  you  will 
tell  me  whither  I  shall  send  them,  that  they  may 
come  to  you,  I  will  take  care  that  you  shall  not 
be  without  them. 

You  will,  perhaps,  be  glad  to  hear,  that  Mrs. 
Thrale  is  disencumbered  of  her  brewhouse;  and 
that  it  seemed  to  the  purchaser  so  far  from  an 
evil,  that  he  was  content  to  give  for  it  an  hun¬ 
dred  and  thirty-five  thousand  pounds.  Is  the 
nation  ruined? 

Please  to  make  my  respectful  compliments 
to  Lady  Rothes,  and  keep  me  in  the  memory  of 
all  the  little  dear  family,  particularly  pretty 
Mrs.  Jane.  I  am,  Sir,  your  affectionate  humble 
servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

Bolt-Court,  June  6,  1781 

Johnson’s  charity  to  the  poor  was  uniform  and 
extensive,  both  from  inclination  and  principle. 
He  not  only  bestowed  liberally  out  of  his  own 
purse,  but  what  is  more  difficult  as  well  as  rare, 
would  beg  from  others,  when  he  had  proper  ob¬ 
jects  in  view.  This  he  did  judiciously  as  well  as 
humanely.  Mr.  Philip  Metcalfe  tells  me,  that 
when  he  has  asked  him  for  some  money  for  per¬ 
sons  in  distress,  and  Mr.  Metcalfe  has  offered 
what  Johnson  thought  too  much,  he  insisted  on 
taking  less,  saying,  “No,  no,  Sir;  we  must  not 
pamper  them.” 

I  am  indebted  to  Mr.  Malone,  one  of  Sir 
Joshua  Reynolds’s  executors,  for  the  following 
note,  which  was  found  among  his  papers  after 
his  death,  and  which,  we  may  presume,  his  un¬ 
affected  modesty  prevented  him  from  commun¬ 
icating  to  me  with  the  other  letters  from  Dr. 
Johnson  with  which  he  was  pleased  to  furnish 
me.  However  slight  in  itself,  as  it  does  honour  to 
that  illustrious  painter,  and  most  amiable  man, 
I  am  happy  to  introduce  it. 


486  BOSWELL  [1781 


To  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds 

Dear  Sir,  It  was  not  before  yesterday  that  I 
received  your  splendid  benefaction.  To  a  hand 
so  liberal  in  distributing,  I  hope  nobody  will 
envy  the  power  of  acquiring.  I  am,  dear  Sir, 
your  obliged  and  most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

June  23,  1781 

To  Thomas  Astle,  Esq,. 

Sir,  I  am  ashamed  that  you  have  been  forced 
to  call  so  often  for  your  books,  but  it  has  been 
by  no  fault  on  either  side.  They  have  never 
been  out  of  my  hands,  nor  have  I  ever  been  at 
home  without  seeing  you;  for  to  see  a  man  so 
skilful  in  the  antiquities  of  my  country,  is  an  op¬ 
portunity  of  improvement  not  willingly  to  be 
missed. 

Your  notes  on  Alfred1  appear  to  me  very  judi¬ 
cious  and  accurate,  but  they  are  too  few.  Many 
things  familiar  to  you,  are  unknown  to  me,  and 
to  most  others;  and  you  must  not  think  too  fa¬ 
vourably  of  your  readers:  by  supposing  them 
knowing,  you  will  leave  them  ignorant.  Meas¬ 
ure  of  land,  and  value  of  money,  it  is  of  great 
importance  to  state  with  care.  Had  the  Saxons 
any  gold  coin? 

I  have  much  curiosity  after  the  manners  and 
transactions  of  the  middle  ages,  but  have  wanted 
either  diligence  or  opportunity,  or  both.  You, 
Sir,  have  great  opportunities,  and  I  wish  you 
both  diligence  and  success.  I  am,  Sir,  &c. 

Sam.  Johnson 

July  17,  1781 

The  following  curious  anecdote  I  insert  in 
Dr.  Burney’s  own  words: 

“Dr.  Burney  related  to  Dr.  Johnson  the  par¬ 
tiality  which  his  writings  had  excited  in  a  friend 
of  Dr.  Burney’s,  the  late  Mr.  Bewley,  well  known 
in  Norfolk  by  the  name  of  the  Philosopher  of  Mas - 
singham:  who,  from  the  Ramblers  and  Plan  of  his 
Dictionary ,  and  long  before  the  authour’s  fame 
was  established  by  the  Dictionary  itself,  or  any 
other  work,  had  conceived  such  a  reverence  for 
him,  that  he  urgently  begged  Dr.  Burney  to  give 
him  the  cover  of  the  first  letter  he  had  received 
from  him,  as  a  relick  of  so  estimable  a  writer. 
This  was  in  1 755.  In  1 760,  when  Dr.  Burney  vis¬ 
ited  Dr.  Johnson  at  the  Temple  in  London,  where 
he  had  then  chambers,  he  happened  to  arrive 
there  before  he  was  up;  and  being  shewn  into 
the  room  where  he  was  to  breakfast,  finding 
himself  alone,  he  examined  the  contents  of  the 
apartment,  to  try  whether  he  could  undiscov¬ 
ered  steal  anything  to  send  to  his  friend  Bewley, 

xThe  will  of  King  Alfred,  alluded  to  in  this  let¬ 
ter,  from  the  original  Saxon,  in  the  library  of  Mr. 
Astle,  has  been  printed  at  the  expense  of  the  Uni¬ 
versity  of  Oxford. 


as  another  reliek  of  the  admirable  Dr.  Johnson. 
But  finding  nothing  better  to  his  purpose,  he 
cut  some  bristles  off  his  hearth-broom,  and  en¬ 
closed  them  in  a  letter  to  his  country  enthusiast, 
who  received  them  with  due  reverence.  The 
Doctor  was  so  sensible  of  the  honour  done  him 
by  a  man  of  genius  and  science,  to  whom  he  was 
an  utter  stranger,  that  he  said  to  Dr.  Burney, 
‘Sir,  there  is  no  man  possessed  of  the  smallest 
portion  of  modesty,  but  must  be  flattered  with 
the  admiration  of  such  a  man.  I’ll  give  him  a  set 
of  my  Lives ,  if  he  will  do  me  the  honour  to  ac¬ 
cept  of  them.’  In  this  he  kept  his  word;  and  Dr. 
Burney  had  not  only  the  pleasure  of  gratifying 
his  friend  with  a  present  more  worthy  of  his  ac¬ 
ceptance  than  the  segment  from  the  hearth- 
broom,  but  soon  after  of  introducing  him  to  Dr. 
Johnson  himself  in  Boit-court,  with  whom  he 
had  the  satisfaction  of  conversing  a  considerable 
time,  not  a  fortnight  before  his  death;  which 
happened  in  St.  Martin’s-street,  during  his  visit 
to  Dr.  Burney,  in  the  house  where  the  great  Sir 
Isaac  Newton  had  lived  and  died  before.” 

In  one  of  his  little  memorandum-books  is  the 
following  minute: 

“August  g,  3  p.m.,  aetat.  72,  in  the  summer¬ 
house  at  Streatham. 

“After  innumerable  resolutions  formed  and 
neglected,  I  have  retired  hither,  to  plan  a  life  of 
greater  diligence,  in  hope  that  I  may  yet  be  use¬ 
ful,  and  be  daily  better  prepared  to  appear  be¬ 
fore  my  Creator  and  my  Judge,  from  whose  in¬ 
finite  mercy  I  humbly  call  for  assistance  and 
support. 

“My  purpose  is, 

“To  pass  eight  hours  every  day  in  some  serious 
employment. 

“Having  prayed,  I  purpose  to  employ  the 
next  six  weeks  upon  the  Italian  language,  for 
my  settled  study.” 

How  venerably  pious  does  he  appear  in  these 
moments  of  solitude,  and  how  spirited  are  his 
resolutions  for  the  improvement  of  his  mind, 
even  in  elegant  literature,  at  a  very  advanced 
period  of  life,  and  when  afflicted  with  many  com¬ 
plaints. 

In  autumn  he  went  to  Oxford,  Birmingham, 
Lichfield,  and  Ashbourne,  for  which  very  good 
reasons  might  be  given  in  the  conjectural  yet 
positive  manner  of  writers,  who  are  proud  to  ac¬ 
count  for  every  event  which  they  relate.  He  him¬ 
self,  however,  says,  “The  motives  of  my  journey 
I  hardly  know;  I  omitted  it  last  year,  and  am 
not  willing  to  miss  it  again.”2 

2 Prayers  and  Meditations ,  p.  201. 


1782  ] 

But  some  good  considerations  arise,  amongst 
which  is  the  kindly  recollection  of  Mr.  Hector, 
surgeon  at  Birmingham:  “Hector  is  likewise  an 
old  friend,  the  only  companion  of  my  childhood 
that  passed  through  the  school  with  me.  We  have 
always  loved  one  another;  perhaps  we  may  be 
made  better  by  some  serious  conversation,  of 
which  however  I  have  no  distinct  hope.”  He 
says  too,  “At  Lichfield,  my  native  place,  I  hope 
to  shew  a  good  example  by  frequent  attendance 
on  publick  worship.” 

My  correspondence  with  him  during  the  rest 
of  this  year  was,  I  know  not  why,  very  scanty, 
and  all  on  my  side.  I  wrote  him  one  letter  to  in¬ 
troduce  Mr.  Sinclair  (now  Sir  John),  the  mem¬ 
ber  for  Caithness,  to  his  acquaintance;  and  in¬ 
formed  him  in  another  that  my  wife  had  again 
been  affected  with  alarming  symptoms  of  illness. 

1 782 :  iETAT.  73.] — In  1 782,  his  complaints  in¬ 
creased,  and  the  history  of  his  life  this  year,  is 
little  more  than  a  mournful  recital  of  the  varia¬ 
tions  of  his  illness,  in  the  midst  of  which,  how¬ 
ever,  it  will  appear  from  his  letters,  that  the 
powers  of  his  mind  were  in  no  degree  impaired. 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  I  sit  down  to  answer  your  letter 
on  the  same  day  in  which  I  received  it,  and  am 
pleased  that  my  first  letter  of  the  year  is  to  you. 
No  man  ought  to  be  at  ease  while  he  knows 
himself  in  the  wrong;  and  I  have  not  satisfied 
myself  with  my  long  silence.  The  letter  relating 
to  Mr.  Sinclair,  however,  was,  I  believe,  never 
brought. 

My  health  has  been  tottering  this  last  year; 
and  I  can  give  no  very  laudable  account  of  my 
time.  I  am  always  hoping  to  do  better  than  I 
have  ever  hitherto  done. 

My  journey  to  Ashbourne  and  Staffordshire 
was  not  pleasant;  for  what  enjoyment  has  a  sick 
man  visiting  the  sick? — Shall  we  ever  have  anoth¬ 
er  frolick  like  our  journey  to  the  Hebrides? 

I  hope  that  dear  Mrs.  Boswell  will  surmount 
her  complaints;  in  losing  her  you  would  lose 
your  anchor,  and  be  tost,  without  stability,  by 
the  waves  of  life.1 1  wish  both  her  and  you  very 
many  years,  and  very  happy. 

For  some  months  past  I  have  been  so  with¬ 
drawn  from  the  world,  that  I  can  send  you 
nothing  particular.  All  your  friends,  however, 
are  well,  and  will  be  glad  of  your  return  to  Lon¬ 
don.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  yours  most  affectionately, 

Sam.  Johnson 

January  5,  1 782 

At  a  time  when  he  was  less  able  than  he  had 
once  been  to  sustain  a  shock,  he  was  suddenly 

Hhe  truth  of  this  has  been  proved  by  sad  ex¬ 
perience.  [Mrs.  Boswell  died  June  4,  1789. — M.] 


487 

deprived  of  Mr.  Levett,  which  event  he  thus 
communicated  to  Dr.  Lawrence: 

Sir,  Our  old  friend,  Mr.  Levett,  who  was  last 
night  eminently  cheerful,  died  this  morning. 
The  man  who  lay  in  the  same  room,  hearing  an 
uncommon  noise,  got  up  and  tried  to  make  him 
speak,  but  without  effect.  He  then  called  Mr. 
Holder,  the  apothecary,  who,  though  when  he 
came  he  thought  him  dead,  opened  a  vein,  but 
could  draw  no  blood.  So  has  ended  the  long  life 
of  a  very  useful  and  very  blameless  man.  I  am, 
Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

Jan.  17,  1782 

In  one  of  his  memorandum-books  in  my  pos¬ 
session,  is  the  following  entry: — “January  20, 
Sunday.  Robert  Levett  was  buried  in  the  church¬ 
yard  of  Bridewell,  between  one  and  two  in  the 
afternoon.  He  died  on  Thursday  17,  about  sev¬ 
en  in  the  morning,  by  an  instantaneous  death. 
He  was  an  old  and  faithful  friend;  I  have  known 
him  from  about  46.  Commendavi.  May  God  have 
mercy  on  him.  May  he  have  mercy  on  me.” 

Such  was  Johnson’s  affectionate  regard  for 
Levett,2  that  he  honoured  his  memory  with  the 
following  pathetick  verses: 

Condemn’d  to  Hope's  delusive  mine , 

As  on  we  toil  from  day  to  day , 

By  sudden  blast  or  slow  decline 
Our  social  comforts  drop  away. 

Well  try'd  through  many  a  varying  year. 

See  Levett  to  the  grave  descend; 

Officious ,  innocent ,  sincere , 

Of  every  friendless  name  the  friend. 

Tet  still  he  fills  affection's  eye , 

Obscurely  wise ,  and  coarsely  kind; 

Nor ,  letter'd  arrogance ,3  deny 
Thy  praise  to  merit  unrefin'd. 

When  fainting  Nature  call'd for  aid. 

And  hov'ring  Death  prepar'd  the  blow , 

His  vigorous  remedy  display'd 

The  power  of  art  without  the  show. 

In  Misery's  darkest  caverns  known. 

His  ready  help  was  ever  nigh , 

Where  hopeless  Anguish  pour'd  his  groan. 

And  lonely  want  retir'd  to  die  A 

No  summons  mock'd  by  chill  delay. 

No  petty  gains  disdain'd  by  pride; 

The  modest  wants  of  every  day 
The  toil  of  every  day  supply' d. 

2See  an  account  of  him  in  The  Gentleman's  Maga¬ 
zine,  Feb.,  1785. 

3In  both  editions  of  Sir  John  Hawkins’s  Life  of 
Dr.  Johnson,  “letter’d  ignorance"  is  printed. 

4Johnson  repeated  this  line  to  me  thus: 

And  Labour  steals  an  hour  to  die. 

But  he  afterwards  altered  it  to  the  present  reading. 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


488 

His  virtues  walk’d  their  narrow  round , 

Nor  made  a  pause ,  nor  left  a  void; 

And  sure  the  Eternal  Master  found 
His  single  talent  well  employ’d . 

The  busy  day ,  the  peacejid  night , 

Unfelt ,  uncounted,  glided  by; 

His  frame  was  firm ,  his  powers  were  bright , 

Though  now  his  eightieth  year  was  nigh . 

Then,  with  no  throbs  of  fiery  pain. 

No  cold  gradations  of  decay, 

Death  broke  at  once  the  vital  chain. 

And freed  his  soul  the  nearest  way. 

In  one  of  Johnson’s  registers  of  this  year,  there 
occurs  the  following  curious  passage: — “Jan. 
20.  The  Ministry  is  dissolved.  I  prayed  with 
Francis  and  gave  thanks.”1 

It  has  been  the  subject  of  discussion,  wheth¬ 
er  there  are  two  distinct  particulars  mentioned 
here?  or  that  we  are  to  understand  the  giving  of 
thanks  to  be  in  consequence  of  the  dissolution  of 
the  Ministry?  In  support  of  the  last  of  these  con¬ 
jectures  may  be  urged  his  mean  opinion  of  that 
Ministry,  which  has  frequently  appeared  in  the 
course  of  this  work;  and  it  is  strongly  confirmed 
by  what  he  said  on  the  subject  to  Mr.  Seward: 
— “I  am  glad  the  Ministry  is  removed.  Such  a 
bunch  of  imbecility  never  disgraced  a  country. 
If  they  sent  a  messenger  into  the  City  to  take  up 
a  printer,  the  messenger  was  taken  up  instead  of 
the  printer,  and  committed  by  the  sitting  Aider- 
man.  If  they  sent  one  army  to  the  relief  of  an¬ 
other,  the  first  army  was  defeated  and  taken  be¬ 
fore  the  second  arrived.  I  will  not  say  that  what 
they  did  was  always  wrong;  but  it  was  always 
done  at  a  wrong  time.” 

To  Mrs.  Strahan 

Dear  Madam,  Mrs.  Williams  shewed  me  your 
kind  letter.  This  little  habitation  is  now  but  a 
melancholy  place,  clouded  with  the  gloom  of 
disease  and  death.  Of  the  four  inmates,  one  has 
been  suddenly  snatched  away;  two  are  oppressed 
by  very  afflictive  and  dangerous  illness;  and  I 
tried  yesterday  to  gain  some  relief  by  a  third 
bleeding,  from  a  disorder  which  has  for  some 
time  distressed  me,  and  I  think  myself  to-day 
much  better. 

I  am  glad,  dear  Madam,  to  hear  that  you  are 
so  far  recovered  as  to  go  to  Bath.  Let  me  once 
more  entreat  you  to  stay  till  your  health  is  not 
only  obtained,  but  confirmed.  Your  fortune  is 
such  as  that  no  moderate  expence  deserves 
your  care;  and  you  have  a  husband,  who,  I  be¬ 
lieve,  does  not  regard  it.  Stay,  therefore,  till  you 
are  quite  well.  I  am,  for  my  part,  very  much  de- 

1  Prayers  and  Meditations ,  p.  209  [207]. 


[  1 782 

serted;  but  complaint  is  useless.  I  hope  God  will 
bless  you,  and  I  desire  you  to  form  the  same 
wish  for  me.  I  am,  dear  Madam,  your  most 
humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

Feb .  4,  1782 

To  Edmond  Malone,  Esq. 

Sir,  I  have  for  many  weeks  been  so  much  out 
of  order,  that  I  have  gone  out  only  in  a  coach  to 
Mrs.  Thrale’s,  where  I  can  use  all  the  freedom 
that  sickness  requires.  Do  not,  therefore,  take  it 
amiss,  that  I  am  not  with  you  and  Dr.  Farmer. 
I  hope  hereafter  to  see  you  often.  I  am,  Sir, 
your  most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

Feb .  27,  1782 

To  the  Same 

Dear  Sir,  I  hope  I  grow  better,  and  shall 
soon  be  able  to  enjoy  the  kindness  of  my  friends. 
I  think  this  wild  adherence  to  Chatterton2  more 
unaccountable  than  the  obstinate  defence  of 
Ossian.  In  Ossian  there  is  a  national  pride, 
which  may  be  forgiven,  though  it  cannot  be  ap¬ 
plauded.  In  Chatterton  there  is  nothing  but  the 
resolution  to  say  again  what  has  once  been 
said.  I  am,  Sir,  your  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

March  7,  1782 

These  short  letters  shew  the  regard  which  Dr. 
Johnson  entertained  for  Mr.  Malone,  who  the 
more  he  is  known  is  the  more  highly  valued.  It 
is  much  to  be  regretted  that  Johnson  was  pre¬ 
vented  from  sharing  the  elegant  hospitality  of 
that  gentleman’s  table,  at  which  he  would  in 
every  respect  have  been  fully  gratified.  Mr.  Ma¬ 
lone,  who  has  so  ably  succeeded  him  as  an  Ed¬ 
itor  of  Shakspeare,  has,  in  his  Preface,  done  great 
and  just  honour  to  Johnson’s  memory. 

To  Mrs.  Lucy  Porter,  in  Lichfield 

Dear  Madam,  I  went  away  from  Lichfield 
ill,  and  have  had  a  troublesome  time  with  my 
breath;  for  some  weeks  I  have  been  disordered 
by  a  cold,  of  which  I  could  not  get  the  violence 
abated,  till  I  had  been  let  blood  three  times. 
I  have  not,  however,  been  so  bad  but  that  I 
could  have  written,  and  am  sorry  that  I  neg¬ 
lected  it. 

2This  note  was  in  answer  to  one  which  accom¬ 
panied  one  of  the  earliest  pamphlets  on  the  sub¬ 
ject  of  Chatterton’s  forgery,  entitled  Cursory  Ob¬ 
servations  on  the  Poems  attributed  to  Thomas  Rowley, 
&c.  Mr.  Thomas  Warton’s  very  able  Inquiry  ap¬ 
peared  about  three  months  afterwards;  and  Mr. 
Tyrwhitt’s  admirable  Vindication  of  his  Appendix  in 
the  summer  of  the  same  year,  left  the  believers  in 
this  daring  imposture  nothing  but  “the  resolution 
to  say  again  what  had  been  said  before.”  [M.] 


BOSWELL 


1782]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  489 


My  dwelling  is  but  melancholy;  both  Wil¬ 
liams,  and  Desmoulins,  and  myself,  are  very 
sickly:  Frank  is  not  well;  and  poor  Levett  died 
in  his  bed  the  other  day,  by  a  sudden  stroke;  I 
suppose  not  one  minute  passed  between  health 
and  death;  so  uncertain  are  human  things. 

Such  is  the  appearance  of  the  world  about 
me;  I  hope  your  scenes  are  more  cheerful.  But 
whatever  befalls  us,  though  it  is  wise  to  be  seri¬ 
ous,  it  is  useless  and  foolish,  and  perhaps  sinful, 
to  be  gloomy.  Let  us,  therefore,  keep  ourselves 
as  easy  as  we  can;  though  the  loss  of  friends  will 
be  felt,  and  poor  Levett  had  been  a  faithful  ad¬ 
herent  for  thirty  years. 

Forgive  me,  my  dear  love,  the  omission  of 
writing;  I  hope  to  mend  that  and  my  other 
faults.  Let  me  have  your  prayers. 

Make  my  compliments  to  Mrs.  Cobb,  and 
Miss  Adey,  and  Mr.  Pearson,  and  the  whole 
company  of  my  friends.  I  am,  my  dear,  your 
most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

London,  March  2,  1782 

To  the  Same 

Dear  Madam,  My  last  was  but  a  dull  letter, 
and  I  know  not  that  this  will  be  much  more 
cheerful;  I  am,  however,  willing  to  write,  be¬ 
cause  you  are  desirous  to  hear  from  me. 

My  disorder  has  now  begun  its  ninth  week, 
for  it  is  not  yet  over.  I  was  last  Thursday 
blooded  for  the  fourth  time,  and  have  since 
found  myself  much  relieved,  but  I  am  very  ten¬ 
der  and  easily  hurt;  so  that  since  we  parted  I 
have  had  but  little  comfort,  but  I  hope  that 
the  spring  will  recover  me;  and  that  in  the 
summer  I  shall  see  Lichfield  again,  for  I  will 
not  delay  my  visit  another  year  to  the  end  of 
autumn. 

I  have,  by  advertising,  found  poor  Mr.  Lev¬ 
ett  5s  brothers  in  Yorkshire,  who  will  take  the 
little  he  has  left;  it  is  but  little,  yet  it  will  be  wel¬ 
come,  for  I  believe  they  are  of  very  low  condi¬ 
tion. 

To  be  sick,  and  to  see  nothing  but  sickness 
and  death,  is  but  a  gloomy  state;  but  I  hope 
better  times,  even  in  this  world,  will  come,  and 
whatever  this  world  may  withhold  or  give,  we 
shall  be  happy  in  a  better  state.  Pray  for  me,  my 
dear  Lucy. 

Make  my  compliments  to  Mrs.  Cobb,  and 
Miss  Adey,  and  my  old  friend  Hetty  Baily,  and 
to  all  the  Lichfield  ladies.  I  am,  dear  Madam, 
yours,  affectionately, 

Sam.  Johnson 

Bolt-court,  Fleet-street 

March  19,  1782 

On  the  day  on  which  this  letter  was  written, 
he  thus  feelingly  mentions  his  respected  friend 
and  physician,  Dr.  Lawrence: — “Poor  Law¬ 


rence  has  almost  lost  the  sense  of  hearing;  and  I 
have  lost  the  conversation  of  a  learned,  intelli¬ 
gent,  and  communicative  companion,  and  a 
friend  whom  long  familiarity  has  much  endeared. 
Lawrence  is  one  of  the  best  men  whom  I  have 
known. — Nostrum  omnium  miserere  DeusP 1 

It  was  Dr.  Johnson’s  custom  when  he  wrote 
to  Dr.  Lawrence  concerning  his  own  health,  to 
use  the  Latin  language.  I  have  been  favoured 
by  Miss  Lawrence  with  one  of  these  letters  as  a 
specimen: 

T.  Lawrencio,  Medico ,  S. 

Novum  frigus,  nova  tussis,  nova  spirandi  difficult 
tas ,  novam  sanguinis  missionem  suadent ,  quam  tamen 
te  inconsulto  nolim  fieri.  Ad  te  venire  vix  possum ,  nec 
est  cur  ad  me  venias.  Licere  vel  non  licere  uno  verbo 
dicendum  est;  cater  a  mihi  et  Holder  o1  reliqueris.  Si 
per  te  licet ,  imperatur  nuncio  Holderum  ad  me  de- 
ducere . 

Maiis  Calendis,  1 782 

Postquam  tu  discesseris,  quo  me  vertam?3 

'Prayers  and  Meditations ,  p.  207. 

2Mr.  Holder,  in  the  Strand,  Dr.  Johnson’s  apoth¬ 
ecary. 

3Soon  after  the  above  letter,  Dr.  Lawrence  left 
London,  but  not  before  the  palsy  had  made  so 
great  a  progress  as  to  render  him  unable  to  write 
for  himself.  The  following  are  extracts  from  letters 
addressed  by  Dr.  Johnson  to  one  of  his  daughters: 

“You  will  easily  believe  with  what  gladness  I 
read  that  you  had  heard  once  again  that  voice  to 
which  we  have  all  so  often  delighted  to  attend. 
May  you  often  hear  it.  If  we  had  his  mind,  and 
his  tongue,  we  could  spare  the  rest. 

“I  am  not  vigorous,  but  much  better  than  when 
dear  Dr.  Lawrence  held  my  pulse  the  last  time. 
Be  so  kind  as  to  let  me  know,  from  one  little  inter¬ 
val  to  another,  the  state  of  his  body.  I  am  pleased 
that  he  remembers  me,  and  hope  that  it  never  can 
be  possible  for  me  to  forget  him.  July  22,1 782.” 

“I  am  much  delighted  even  with  the  small 
advances  which  dear  Dr.  Lawrence  makes  to¬ 
wards  recovery.  If  we  could  have  again  but  his 
mind,  and  his  tongue  in  his  mind,  and  his  right 
hand,  we  should  not  much  lament  the  rest.  I 
should  not  despair  of  helping  the  swelled  hand  by 
electricity,  if  it  were  frequently  and  diligently  sup¬ 
plied. 

“Let  me  know  from  time  to  time  whatever  hap¬ 
pens;  and  I  hope  I  need  not  tell  you,  how  much  I 
am  interested  in  every  change.  Aug.  26,  1782.” 

“Though  the  account  with  which  you  favoured 
me  in  your  last  letter  could  not  give  me  the  pleas¬ 
ure  that  I  wished,  yet  I  was  glad  to  receive  it;  for 
my  affection  to  my  dear  friend  makes  me  desirous 
of  knowing  his  state,  whatever  it  be.  I  beg,  there¬ 
fore,  that  you  continue  to  let  me  know,  from  time 
to  time,  all  that  you  observe. 

“Many  fits  of  severe  illness  have,  for  about  three 
months  past,  forced  my  kind  physician  often  upon 
my  mind.  I  am  now  better;  and  hope  gratitude, 
as  well  as  distress,  can  be  a  motive  to  remem¬ 
brance.  Bolt-court,  Fleet-street,  Feb.  4,  1783.” 


490 


BOSWELL 


To  Captain  Langton,1  in  Rochester 

Dear  Sir,  It  is  now  long  since  we  saw  one 
another;  and  whatever  has  been  the  reason 
neither  you  have  written  to  me,  nor  I  to  you.  To 
let  friendship  die  away  by  negligence  and  si¬ 
lence,  is  certainly  not  wise.  It  is  voluntarily  to 
throw  away  one  of  the  greatest  comforts  of  this 
weary  pilgrimage,  of  which  when  it  is,  as  it 
must  be,  taken  finally  away,  he  that  travels  on 
alone,  will  wonder  how  his  esteem  could  be  so 
little.  Do  not  forget  me;  you  see  that  I  do  not 
forget  you.  It  is  pleasing  in  the  silence  of  solitude 
to  think,  that  there  is  one  at  least,  however  dis¬ 
tant,  of  whose  benevolence  there  is  little  doubt, 
and  whom  there  is  yet  hope  of  seeing  again. 

Of  my  life,  from  the  time  we  parted,  the  his¬ 
tory  is  mournful.  The  spring  of  last  year  de¬ 
prived  me  of  Thrale,  a  man  whose  eye  for  fifteen 
years  had  scarcely  been  turned  upon  me  but 
with  respect  or  tenderness;  for  such  another 
friend,  the  general  course  of  human  things  will 
not  suffer  man  to  hope.  I  passed  the  summer  at 
Streatham,  but  there  was  no  Thrale;  and  hav¬ 
ing  idled  away  the  summer  with  a  weakly  body 
and  neglected  mind,  I  made  a  journey  to  Staf¬ 
fordshire  on  the  edge  of  winter.  The  season  was 
dreary,  I  was  sickly,  and  found  the  friends  sickly 
whom  I  went  to  see.  After  a  sorrowful  sojourn,  I 
returned  to  a  habitation  possessed  for  the  pres¬ 
ent  by  two  sick  women,  where  my  dear  old 
friend,  Mr.  Levett,  to  whom  as  he  used  to  tell 
me,  I  owe  your  acquaintance,  died  a  few  weeks 
ago,  suddenly  in  his  bed;  there  passed  not,  I  be¬ 
lieve,  a  minute  between  health  and  death.  At 
night,  as  at  Mrs.  Thrale’s  I  was  musing  in  my 
chamber,  I  thought  with  uncommon  earnestness, 
that  however  I  might  alter  my  mode  of  life,  or 
whithersoever  I  might  remove,  I  would  endeav¬ 
our  to  retain  Levett  about  me;  in  the  morning 
my  servant  brought  me  word  that  Levett  was 
called  to  another  state,  a  state  for  which,  I 
think,  he  was  not  unprepared,  for  he  was  very 
useful  to  the  poor.  How  much  soever  I  valued 
him,  I  now  wish  that  I  had  valued  him  more. 

I  have  myself  been  ill  more  than  eight  weeks 
of  a  disorder,  from  which  at  the  expence  of 
about  fifty  ounces  of  blood,  I  hope  I  am  now 
recovering. 

You,  dear  Sir,  have,  I  hope,  a  more  cheerful 
scene;  you  see  George  fond  of  his  book,  and  the 
pretty  misses  airy  and  lively,  with  my  own  little 
Jenny  equal  to  the  best:  and  in  whatever  can 
contribute  to  your  quiet  or  pleasure,  you  have 
Lady  Rothes  ready  to  concur.  May  whatever 
you  enjoy  of  good  be  encreased,  and  whatever 
you  suffer  of  evil  be  diminished.  I  am,  dear  Sir, 
your  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

Bolt-court,  Fleet-street 

March  20,  1782 

JMr.  Langton  being  at  this  time  on  duty  at 
Rochester,  he  is  addressed  by  his  military  title. 


[  1782 

To  Mr.  Hector,  in  Birmingham2 

Dear  Sir,  I  hope  I  do  not  very  grossly  flatter 
myself  to  imagine  that  you  and  dear  Mrs.  Care¬ 
less3  will  be  glad  to  hear  some  account  of  me.  I 
performed  the  journey  to  London  with  very  lit¬ 
tle  inconvenience,  and  came  safe  to  my  habita¬ 
tion,  where  I  found  nothing  but  ill  health,  and, 
of  consequence,  very  little  cheerfulness.  I  then 
went  to  visit  a  little  way  into  the  country,  where 
I  got  a  complaint  by  a  cold  which  has  hung 
eight  weeks  upon  me,  and  from  which  I  am,  at 
the  expence  of  fifty  ounces  of  blood,  not  yet  free. 
I  am  afraid  I  must  once  more  owe  my  recovery 
to  warm  weather,  which  seems  to  make  no  ad¬ 
vances  towards  us. 

Such  is  my  health,  which  will,  I  hope,  soon 
grow  better.  In  other  respects  I  have  no  reason 
to  complain.  I  know  not  that  I  have  written 
anything  more  generally  commended  than  the 
Lives  of  the  Poets;  and  have  found  the  world  will¬ 
ing  enough  to  caress  me,  if  my  health  had  in¬ 
vited  me  to  be  in  much  company;  but  this  sea¬ 
son  I  have  been  almost  wholly  employed  in 
nursing  myself. 

When  summer  comes  I  hope  to  see  you  again, 
and  will  not  put  off  my  visit  to  the  end  of  the 
year.  I  have  lived  so  long  in  London,  that  I  did 
not  remember  the  difference  of  seasons. 

Your  health,  when  I  saw  you,  was  much  im¬ 
proved.  You  will  be  prudent  enough  not  to  put 
it  in  danger.  I  hope,  when  we  meet  again,  we 
shall  all  congratulate  each  other  upon  fair  pros¬ 
pects  of  longer  life;  though  what  are  the  pleas¬ 
ures  of  the  longest  life,  when  placed  in  compari¬ 
son  with  a  happy  death?  I  am,  dear  Sir,  yours 
most  affectionately, 

Sam.  Johnson 

London,  March  21,  1782 

To  the  Same 

\}Vithout  a  date ,  but  supposed 
to  be  about  this  time ] 

Dear  Sir,  That  you  and  dear  Mrs.  Careless 
should  have  care  or  curiosity  about  my  health, 
gives  me  that  pleasure  which  every  man  feels 
from  finding  himself  not  forgotten.  In  age  we 
feel  again  that  love  of  our  native  place  and  our 
early  friends,  which  in  the  bustle  or  amusements 
of  middle  life  were  overborne  and  suspended. 
You  and  I  should  now  naturally  cling  to  one 
another:  we  have  outlived  most  of  those  who 
could  pretend  to  rival  us  in  each  other’s  kind¬ 
ness.  In  our  walk  through  life  we  have  dropped 
our  companions,  and  are  now  to  pick  such  as 
chance  may  offer  us,  or  to  travel  on  alone.  You, 
indeed,  have  a  sister,  with  whom  you  can  divide 
the  day:  I  have  no  natural  friend  left;  but  Provi- 

2A  part  of  this  letter  having  been  torn  off,  I 
have,  from  the  evident  meaning,  supplied  a  few 
words  and  half-words  at  the  ends  and  beginnings 
of  lines. 

3See  p.  290. 


1782]  LIFE  OF 

dence  has  been  pleased  to  preserve  me  from  neg¬ 
lect;  I  have  not  wanted  such  alleviations  of  life 
as  friendship  could  supply.  My  health  has  been, 
from  my  twentieth  year,  such  as  has  seldom  af¬ 
forded  me  a  single  day  of  ease;  but  it  is  at  least 
not  worse:  and  I  sometimes  make  myself  believe 
that  it  is  better.  My  disorders  are,  however,  still 
sufficiently  oppressive. 

I  think  of  seeing  Staffordshire  again  this  au¬ 
tumn,  and  intend  to  find  my  way  through  Bir¬ 
mingham,  where  I  hope  to  see  you  and  dear 
Mrs.  Careless  well.  I  am,  Sir,  your  affectionate 
friend. 

Sam.  Johnson 

I  wrote  to  him  at  different  dates;  regretted 
that  I  could  not  come  to  London  this  spring,  but 
hoped  we  should  meet  somewhere  in  the  sum¬ 
mer;  mentioned  the  state  of  my  affairs,  and  sug¬ 
gested  hopes  of  some  preferment;  informed  him, 
that  as  The  Beauties  of  Johnson  had  been  pub¬ 
lished  in  London,  some  obscure  scribbler  had 
published  at  Edinburgh  what  he  called  The  De¬ 
formities  of  Johnson. 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  The  pleasure  which  we  used  to  re¬ 
ceive  from  each  other  on  Good-Friday  and  Eas- 
ter-day,  we  must  be  this  year  content  to  miss. 
Let  us,  however,  pray  for  each  other,  and  hope 
to  see  one  another  yet  from  time  to  time  with 
mutual  delight.  My  disorder  has  been  a  cold, 
which  impeded  the  organs  of  respiration,  and 
kept  me  many  weeks  in  a  state  of  great  uneasi¬ 
ness;  but  by  repeated  phlebotomy  it  is  now  re¬ 
lieved;  and  next  to  the  recovery  of  Mrs.  Boswell, 
I  flatter  myself,  that  you  will  rejoice  at  mine. 

What  we  shall  do  in  the  summer  it  is  yet  too 
early  to  consider.  You  want  to  know  what  you 
shall  do  now;  I  do  not  think  this  time  of  bustle 
and  confusion  likely  to  produce  any  advantage 
to  you.  Every  man  has  those  to  reward  and 
gratify  who  have  contributed  to  his  advance¬ 
ment.  To  come  hither  with  such  expectations  at 
the  expence  of  borrowed  money,  which,  I  find, 
you  know  not  where  to  borrow,  can  hardly  be 
considered  as  prudent.  I  am  sorry  to  find,  what 
your  solicitation  seems  to  imply,  that  you  have 
already  gone  the  whole  length  of  your  credit. 
This  is  to  set  the  quiet  of  your  whole  life  at  haz¬ 
ard.  If  you  anticipate  your  inheritance,  you  can 
at  last  inherit  nothing;  all  that  you  receive  must 
pay  for  the  past.  You  must  get  a  place,  or  pine 
in  penury,  with  the  empty  name  of  a  great  es¬ 
tate.  Poverty,  my  dear  friend,  is  so  great  an  evil, 
and  pregnant  with  so  much  temptation,  and  so 
much  misery,  that  I  cannot  but  earnestly  enjoin 
you  to  avoid  it.  Live  on  what  you  have;  live  if 
you  can  on  less;  do  not  borrow  either  for  vanity 
or  pleasure;  the  vanity  will  end  in  shame,  and 
the  pleasure  in  regret:  stay  therefore  at  home,  till 
you  have  saved  money  for  your  journey  hither. 


JOHNSON  491 

The  Beauties  of  Johnson  are  said  to  have  got 
money  to  the  collector;  if  the  Deformities  have 
the  same  success,  I  shall  be  still  a  more  extensive 
benefactor. 

Make  my  compliments  to  Mrs.  Boswell,  who 
is,  I  hope,  reconciled  to  me;  and  to  the  young 
people  whom  I  never  have  offended. 

You  never  told  me  the  success  of  your  plea 
against  the  Solicitors.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  most 
affectionate, 

Sam.  Johnson 

London,  March  28,  1782 

Notwithstanding  his  afflicted  state  of  body  and 
mind  this  year,  the  following  correspondence  af¬ 
fords  a  proof  not  only  of  his  benevolence  and 
conscientious  readiness  to  relieve  a  good  man 
from  errour,  but  by  his  cloathing  one  of  the  sen¬ 
timents  in  his  Rambler  in  different  language,  not 
inferiour  to  that  of  the  original,  shews  his  ex¬ 
traordinary  command  of  clear  and  forcible  ex¬ 
pression. 

A  clergyman  at  Bath  wrote  to  him,  that  in 
The  Morning  Chronicle ,  a  passage  in  The  Beauties 
of  Johnson,  article  Death,  had  been  pointed  out 
as  supposed  by  some  readers  to  recommend  sui¬ 
cide,  the  words  being,  “To  die  is  the  fate  of  man; 
but  to  die  with  lingering  anguish  is  generally  his 
folly”;  and  respectfully  suggesting  to  him,  that 
such  an  erroneous  notion  of  any  sentence  in  the 
writings  of  an  acknowledged  friend  of  religion 
and  virtue,  should  not  pass  uncontradicted. 

Johnson  thus  answered  the  clergyman’s  letter: 

To  the  Reverend  Mr. - ,  at  Bath 

Sir,  Being  now  in  the  country  in  a  state  of  re¬ 
covery,  as  I  hope,  from  a  very  oppressive  disor¬ 
der,  I  cannot  neglect  the  acknowledgement  of 
your  Christian  letter.  The  book  called  The  Beau¬ 
ties  of  Johnson  is  the  production  of  I  know  not 
whom:  I  never  saw  it  but  by  casual  inspection, 
and  considered  myself  as  utterly  disengaged 
from  its  consequences.  Of  the  passage  you  men¬ 
tion  I  remember  some  notice  in  some  paper;  but 
knowing  that  it  must  be  misrepresented,  I 
thought  of  it  no  more,  nor  do  I  know  where  to  find 
it  in  my  own  books.  I  am  accustomed  to  think 
little  of  news-papers;  but  an  opinion  so  weighty 
and  serious  as  yours  has  determined  me  to  do, 
what  I  should,  without  your  seasonable  admo¬ 
nition, have  omitted ;  and  I  will  direct  my  thought 
to  be  shewn  in  its  true  state.1  If  I  could  find  the 
passage,  I  would  direct  you  to  it.  I  suppose  the 
tenour  is  this:  Acute  diseases  are  the  immediate 

1What  follows  appeared  in  The  Morning  Chron¬ 
icle  of  May  29,  1782: — SCA  correspondent  having 
mentioned,  in  The  Morning  Chronicle  of  December 
12,  the  last  clause  of  the  following  paragraph,  as 
seeming  to  favour  suicide;  we  are  requested  to 
print  the  whole  passage,  that  its  true  meaning  may 


492 

and  inevitable  strokes  of  Heaven;  but  of  them 
the  pain  is  short,  and  the  conclusion  speedy; 
chronical  disorders,  by  which  we  are  suspended 
in  tedious  torture  between  life  and  death,  are 
commonly  the  effect  of  our  own  misconduct  and 
intemperance.  To  die,  &c. — This,  Sir,  you  see 
is  all  true  and  all  blameless.  I  hope,  some  time 
in  the  next  week,  to  have  all  rectified.  My 
health  has  been  lately  much  shaken:  if  you  fa¬ 
vour  me  with  any  answer,  it  will  be  a  comfort  to 
me  to  know  that  I  have  your  prayers.  I  am,  &c., 

Sam.  Johnson 

May  15,  1782 

This  letter,  as  might  be  expected,  had  its  full 
effect,  and  the  clergyman  acknowledged  it  in 
grateful  and  pious  terms.1 

The  following  letters  require  no  extracts  from 
mine  to  introduce  them: 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  The  earnestness  and  tenderness  of 
your  letter  is  such,  that  I  cannot  think  myself 
shewing  it  more  respect  than  it  claims  by  sitting 
down  to  answer  it  the  day  on  which  I  received 
it. 

This  year  has  afflicted  me  with  a  very  irk¬ 
some  and  severe  disorder.  My  respiration  has 
been  much  impeded,  and  much  blood  has  been 
taken  away.  I  am  now  harrassed  by  a  catar- 
rhous  cough,  from  which  my  purpose  is  to  seek 
relief  by  change  of  air;  and  I  am,  therefore,  pre¬ 
paring  to  go  to  Oxford. 

Whether  I  did  right  in  dissuading  you  from 
coming  to  London  this  spring,  I  will  not  deter¬ 
mine.  You  have  not  lost  much  by  missing  my 
company;  I  have  scarcely  been  well  for  a  single 
week.  I  might  have  received  comfort  from  your 
kindness;  but  you  would  have  seen  me  afflicted, 
and,  perhaps,  found  me  peevish.  Whatever  might 
have  been  your  pleasure  or  mine,  I  know  not 
how  I  could  have  honestly  advised  you  to  come 
hither  with  borrowed  money.  Do  not  accustom 
yourself  to  consider  debt  only  as  an  inconveni¬ 
ence;  you  will  find  it  a  calamity.  Poverty  takes 
away  so  many  means  of  doing  good,  and  pro¬ 
duces  so  much  inability  to  resist  evil,  both  natu¬ 
ral  and  moral,  that  it  is  by  all  virtuous  means  to 


appear,  which  is  not  to  recommend  suicide  but 
exercise. 

“Exercise  cannot  secure  us  from  that  dissolu¬ 
tion  to  which  we  are  decreed:  but  while  the  soul 
and  body  continue  united,  it  can  make  the  asso¬ 
ciation  pleasing,  and  give  probable  hope  that  they 
shall  be  disjoined  by  an  easy  separation.  It  was  a 
principle  among  the  ancients,  that  acute  diseases 
are  from  Heaven,  and  chronical  from  ourselves; 
the  dart  of  death,  indeed,  falls  from  Heaven,  but 
we  poison  it  by  our  own  misconduct:  to  die  is  the 
fate  of  man;  but  to  die  with  lingering  anguish  is 
generally  his  folly.” 

xThe  Correspondence  may  be  seen  at  length  in 
The  Gentleman's  Magazine ,  1 786. 


[  1782 

be  avoided.  Consider  a  man  whose  fortune  is 
very  narrow;  whatever  be  his  rank  by  birth,  or 
whatever  his  reputation  by  intellectual  excel¬ 
lence,  what  good  can  he  do?  or  what  evil  can  he 
prevent?  That  he  cannot  help  the  needy  is  evi¬ 
dent;  he  has  nothing  to  spare.  But,  perhaps,  his 
advice  or  admonition  may  be  useful.  His  pover¬ 
ty  will  destroy  his  influence:  many  more  can 
find  that  he  is  poor,  than  that  he  is  wise;  and 
few  will  reverence  the  understanding  that  is  of 
so  little  advantage  to  its  owner.  I  say  nothing  of 
the  personal  wretchedness  of  a  debtor,  which, 
however,  has  passed  into  a  proverb.  Of  riches, 
it  is  not  necessary  to  write  the  praise.  Let  it, 
however,  be  remembered,  that  he  who  has  money 
to  spare,  has  it  always  in  his  power  to  benefit 
others;  and  of  such  power  a  good  man  must  al¬ 
ways  be  desirous. 

I  am  pleased  with  your  account  of  Easter.2 
We  shall  meet,  I  hope  in  autumn,  both  well 
and  both  cheerful;  and  part  each  the  better  for 
the  other’s  company. 

Make  my  compliments  to  Mrs.  Boswell,  and 
to  the  young  charmers.  I  am,  &c. 

Sam.  Johnson 

London,  June  3,  1 782 

To  Mr.  Perkins 

Dear  Sir,  I  am  much  pleased  that  you  are 
going  a  very  long  journey,  which  may  by  prop¬ 
er  conduct  restore  your  health  and  prolong  your 
life. 

Observe  these  rules: 

1.  Turn  all  care  out  of  your  head  as  soon  as 
you  mount  the  chaise. 

2.  Do  not  think  about  frugality;  your  health 
is  worth  more  than  it  can  cost. 

3.  Do  not  continue  any  day’s  journey  to  fa¬ 
tigue. 

4.  Take  now  and  then  a  day’s  rest. 

5.  Get  a  smart  sea-sickness,  if  you  can. 

6.  Cast  away  all  anxiety,  and  keep  your  mind 
easy. 

This  last  direction  is  the  principal;  with  an 
unquiet  mind,  neither  exercise,  nor  diet,  nor 
physick,  can  be  of  much  use. 

I  wish  you,  dear  Sir,  a  prosperous  journey, 
and  a  happy  recovery.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  most 
affectionate,  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

July  28,  1782 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  Being  uncertain  whether  I  should 
have  any  call  this  autumn  into  the  country,  I 
did  not  immediately  answer  your  kind  letter.  I 
have  no  call;  but  if  you  desire  to  meet  me  at 
Ashbourne,  I  believe  I  can  come  thither;  if  you 
had  rather  come  to  London,  I  can  stay  at  Streat- 
ham;  take  your  choice. 

2 Which  I  celebrated  in  the  Church  of  England 
chapel  at  Edinburgh,  founded  by  Lord  Chief  Bar¬ 
on  Smith,  of  respectable  and  pious  memory. 


BOSWELL 


1782  ] 

This  year  has  been  very  heavy.  From  the 
middle  of  January  to  the  middle  of  June  I  was 
battered  by  one  disorder  after  another!  I  am 
now  very  much  recovered,  and  hope  still  to  be 
better.  What  happiness  it  is  that  Mrs.  Boswell 
has  escaped. 

My  Lives  are  reprinting,  and  I  have  forgotten 
the  authour  of  Gray’s  character:1  write  imme¬ 
diately,  and  it  may  be  perhaps  yet  inserted. 

Of  London  or  Ashbourne  you  have  your  free 
choice;  at  any  place  I  shall  be  glad  to  see  you.  I 
am,  dear  Sir,  yours,  &c. 

Sam.  Johnson 

Aug.  24,  1782 

On  the  30th  of  August,  I  informed  him  that 
my  honoured  father  had  died  that  morning;  a 
complaint  under  which  he  had  long  laboured 
having  suddenly  come  to  a  crisis,  while  I  was 
upon  a  visit  at  the  seat  of  Sir  Charles  Preston, 
from  whence  I  had  hastened  the  day  before,  up¬ 
on  receiving  a  letter  by  express. 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  I  have  struggled  through  this  year 
with  so  much  infirmity  of  body,  and  such 
strong  impressions  of  the  fragility  of  life,  that 
death,  whenever  it  appears,  fills  me  with  melan¬ 
choly;  and  I  cannot  hear  without  emotion,  of 
the  removal  of  any  one,  whom  I  have  known, 
into  another  state. 

Your  father’s  death  had  every  circumstance 
that  could  enable  you  to  bear  it;  it  was  at  a  ma¬ 
ture  age,  and  it  was  expected;  and  as  his  general 
life  had  been  pious,  his  thoughts  had  doubtless 
for  many  years  past  been  turned  upon  eternity. 
That  you  did  not  find  him  sensible  must  doubt¬ 
less  grieve  you;  his  disposition  towards  you  was 
undoubtedly  that  of  a  kind,  though  not  of  a 
fond  father.  Kindness,  at  least  actual,  is  in  our 
power,  but  fondness  is  not;  and  if  by  negligence 
or  imprudence  you  had  extinguished  his  fond¬ 
ness,  he  could  not  at  will  rekindle  it.  Nothing 
then  remained  between  you  but  mutual  forgive¬ 
ness  of  each  other’s  faults,  and  mutual  desire  of 
each  other’s  happiness. 

I  shall  long  to  know  his  final  disposition  of 
his  fortune. 

You,  dear  Sir,  have  now  a  new  station,  and 
have  therefore  new  cares,  and  new  employments. 
Life,  as  Cowley  seems  to  say,  ought  to  resemble 
a  well-ordered  poem;  of  which  one  rule  gener¬ 
ally  received  is,  that  the  exordium  should  be 
simple,  and  should  promise  little.  Begin  your 
new  course  of  life  with  the  least  show,  and  the 
least  expence  possible;  you  may  at  pleasure  en- 
crease  both,  but  you  cannot  easily  diminish 
them.  Do  not  think  your  estate  your  own,  while 
any  man  can  call  upon  you  for  money  which 
you  cannot  pay;  therefore,  begin  with  timorous 

^he  Reverend  Mr.  Temple,  Vicar  of  St.  Glu- 
vias,  Cornwall. 


493 

parsimony.  Let  it  be  your  first  care  not  to  be  in 
any  man’s  debt. 

When  the  thoughts  are  extended  to  a  future 
state,  the  present  life  seems  hardly  worthy  of  all 
those  principles  of  conduct,  and  maxims  of  pru¬ 
dence,  which  one  generation  of  men  has  trans¬ 
mitted  to  another;  but  upon  a  closer  view,  when 
it  is  perceived  how  much  evil  is  produced,  and 
how  much  good  is  impeded  by  embarrassment 
and  distress,  and  how  little  room  the  expedients 
of  poverty  leave  for  the  exercise  of  virtue,  it 
grows  manifest  that  the  boundless  importance 
of  the  next  life  enforces  some  attention  to  the  in¬ 
terests  of  this. 

Be  kind  to  the  old  servants,  and  secure  the 
kindness  of  the  agents  and  factors;  do  not  dis¬ 
gust  them  by  asperity,  or  unwelcome  gaiety,  or 
apparent  suspicion.  From  them  you  must  learn 
the  real  state  of  your  affairs,  the  characters  of 
your  tenants,  and  the  value  of  your  lands. 

Make  my  compliments  to  Mrs.  Boswell;  I 
think  her  expectations  from  air  and  exercise  are 
the  best  that  she  can  form.  I  hope  she  will  live 
long  and  happily. 

I  forget  whether  I  told  you  that  Rasay  has 
been  here;  we  dined  cheerfully  together.  I  en¬ 
tertained  lately  a  young  gentleman  from  Cor- 
richatachin. 

I  received  your  letters  only  this  morning.  I 
am,  dear  Sir,  yours,  &c. 

Sam.  Johnson 

London,  Sept.  7,  1782 

In  answer  to  my  next  letter,  I  received  one 
from  him,  dissuading  me  from  hastening  to  him 
as  I  had  proposed;  what  is  proper  for  publica¬ 
tion  is  the  following  paragraph,  equally  just  and 
tender: — “One  expence,  however,  I  would  not 
have  you  to  spare:  let  nothing  be  omitted  that 
can  preserve  Mrs.  Boswell,  though  it  should  be 
necessary  to  transplant  her  for  a  time  into  a  soft¬ 
er  climate.  She  is  the  prop  and  stay  of  your  life. 
How  much  must  your  children  suffer  by  losing 
her.” 

My  wife  was  now  so  much  convinced  of  his 
sincere  friendship  for  me,  and  regard  for  her, 
that,  without  any  suggestion  on  my  part,  she 
wrote  him  a  very  polite  and  grateful  letter: 

Dr.  Johnson  to  Mrs.  Boswell 

Dear  Lady,  I  have  not  often  received  so 
much  pleasure  as  from  your  invitation  to  Au- 
chinleck.  The  journey  thither  and  back  is,  in¬ 
deed,  too  great  for  the  latter  part  of  the  year; 
but  if  my  health  were  fully  recovered,  I  would 
suffer  no  little  heat  and  cold,  nor  a  wet  or  a 
rough  road  to  keep  me  from  you.  I  am,  indeed, 
not  without  hope  of  seeing  Auchinleck  again; 
but  to  make  it  a  pleasant  place  I  must  see  its 
lady  well,  and  brisk,  and  airy.  For  my  sake. 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


494 

therefore,  among  many  greater  reasons,  take 
care,  dear  Madam,  of  your  health,  spare  no  ex¬ 
pence,  and  want  no  attendance  that  can  pro¬ 
cure  ease,  or  preserve  it.  Be  very  careful  to 
keep  your  mind  quiet;  and  do  not  think  it  too 
much  to  give  an  account  of  your  recovery  to, 
Madam,  yours,  &c. 

Sam.  Johnson 

London,  Sept .  7,  1782 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  Having  passed  almost  this  whole 
year  in  a  succession  of  disorders,  I  went  in  Oc¬ 
tober  to  Brighthelmston,  whither  I  came  in  a 
state  of  so  much  weakness,  that  I  rested  four 
times  in  walking  between  the  inn  and  the  lodg¬ 
ing.  By  physick  and  abstinence  I  grew  better, 
and  am  now  reasonably  easy,  though  at  a  great 
distance  from  health.  I  am  afraid,  however,  that 
health  begins,  after  seventy,  and  long  before,  to 
have  a  meaning  different  from  that  which  it  had 
at  thirty.  But  it  is  culpable  to  murmur  at  the  es¬ 
tablished  order  of  the  creation,  as  it  is  vain  to 
oppose  it.  He  that  lives  must  grow  old;  and  he 
that  would  rather  grow  old  than  die,  has  God 
to  thank  for  the  infirmities  of  old  age. 

At  your  long  silence  I  am  rather  angry.  You 
do  not,  since  now  you  are  the  head  of  your 
house,  think  it  worth  your  while  to  try  whether 
you  or  your  friend  can  live  longer  without  writ¬ 
ing,  nor  suspect  that  after  so  many  years  of 
friendship,  that  when  I  do  not  write  to  you,  I 
forget  you.  Put  all  such  useless  jealousies  out 
of  your  head,  and  disdain  to  regulate  your 
own  practice  by  the  practice  of  another,  or 
by  any  other  principle  than  the  desire  of  doing 
right. 

Your  oeconomy,  I  suppose,  begins  now  to  be 
settled;  your  expences  are  adjusted  to  your  rev¬ 
enue,  and  all  your  people  in  their  proper  places. 
Resolve  not  to  be  poor:  whatever  you  have, 
spend  less.  Poverty  is  a  great  enemy  to  human 
happiness;  it  certainly  destroys  liberty,  and  it 
makes  some  virtues  impracticable,  and  others 
extremely  difficult. 

Let  me  know  the  history  of  your  life,  since 
your  accession  to  your  estate.  How  many  houses, 
how  many  cows,  how  much  land  in  your  own 
hand,  and  what  bargains  you  make  with  your 
tenants.  .  .  . 

Of  my  Lives  of  the  Poets ,  they  have  printed  a 
new  edition  in  octavo,  I  hear,  of  three  thousand. 
Did  I  give  a  set  to  Lord  Hailes?  If  I  did  not,  I 
will  do  it  out  of  these.  What  did  you  make  of  all 
your  copy? 

Mrs.  Thrale  and  the  three  Misses  are  now 
for  the  winter  in  Argyll-street.  Sir  Joshua  Rey¬ 
nolds  has  been  out  of  order,  but  is  well  again; 
and  I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  affectionate  humble 
servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

London,  Dec,  7,  1782 


[  1782 

To  Dr.  Samuel  Johnson 

Edinburgh,  Dec,  20,  1782 

Dear  Sir,  I  was  made  happy  by  your  kind 
letter,  which  gave  us  the  agreeable  hopes  of  see¬ 
ing  you  in  Scotland  again. 

I  am  much  flattered  by  the  concern  you  are 
pleased  to  take  in  my  recovery.  I  am  better, 
and  hope  to  have  it  in  my  power  to  convince 
you  by  my  attention  of  how  much  consequence 
I  esteem  your  health  to  the  world  and  to  my¬ 
self.  I  remain,  Sir,  with  grateful  respect,  your 
obliged  and  obedient  servant, 

Margaret  Boswell 

The  death  of  Mr.  Thrale  had  made  a  very 
material  alteration  with  respect  to  Johnson’s  re¬ 
ception  in  that  family.  The  manly  authority  of 
the  husband  no  longer  curbed  the  lively  exu¬ 
berance  of  the  lady;  and  as  her  vanity  had  been 
fully  gratified,  by  having  the  Colossus  of  Litera¬ 
ture  attached  to  her  for  many  years,  she  gradual¬ 
ly  became  less  assiduous  to  please  him.  Whether 
her  attachment  to  him  was  already  divided  by 
another  object,  I  am  unable  to  ascertain;  but  it 
is  plain  that  Johnson’s  penetration  was  alive  to 
her  neglect  or  forced  attention;  for  on  the  6th  of 
October  this  year,  we  find  him  making  a  “ part¬ 
ing  use  of  the  library”  at  Streatham,  and  pro¬ 
nouncing  a  prayer,  which  he  composed  on  leav¬ 
ing  Mr.  Thrale’s  family:1 

“Almighty  God,  Father  of  all  mercy,  help  me 
by  thy  grace,  that  I  may,  with  humble  and  sin¬ 
cere  thankfulness,  remember  the  comforts  and 
conveniences  which  I  have  enjoyed  at  this  place; 
and  that  I  may  resign  them  with  holy  submis¬ 
sion,  equally  trusting  in  thy  protection  when 
thou  givest,  and  when  thou  takest  away.  Have 
mercy  upon  me,  O  Lord,  have  mercy  upon  me. 

“To  thy  fatherly  protection,  O  Lord,  I  com¬ 
mend  this  family.  Bless,  guide,  and  defend  them, 
that  they  may  so  pass  through  this  world,  as  fi¬ 
nally  to  enjoy  in  thy  presence  everlasting  happi¬ 
ness,  for  Jesus  Christ’s  sake.  Amen.” 

One  cannot  read  this  prayer,  without  some 
emotions  not  very  favourable  to  the  lady  whose 
conduct  occasioned  it. 

In  one  of  his  memorandum-books  I  find,  “Sun¬ 
day,  went  to  church  at  Streatham.  Templo  vale - 
dixi  cum  osculoP 

He  met  Mr.  Philip  Metcalfe  often  at  Sir  Josh¬ 
ua  Reynolds’s,  and  other  places,  and  was  a  good 
deal  with  him  at  Brighthelmston  this  autumn, 
being  pleased  at  once  with  his  excellent  table 
and  animated  conversation.  Mr.  Metcalfe  shewed 
him  great  respect,  and  sent  him  a  note  that  he 
might  have  the  use  of  his  carriage  whenever  he 

1 Prayers  and  Meditations ,  p.  214. 


BOSWELL 


1783] 

pleased.  Johnson  (3rd  October,  1782)  returned 
this  polite  answer: — “Mr.  Johnson  is  very  much 
obliged  by  the  kind  offer  of  the  carriage,  but  he 
has  no  desire  of  using  Mr.  Metcalfe’s  carriage, 
except  when  he  can  have  the  pleasure  of  Mr. 
Metcalfe’s  company.”  Mr.  Metcalfe  could  not 
but  be  highly  pleased  that  his  company  was  thus 
valued  by  Johnson,  and  he  frequently  attended 
him  in  airings.  They  also  went  together  to  Chi¬ 
chester,  and  they  visited  Petworth,  and  Cowdry, 
the  venerable  seat  of  the  Lords  Montacute.  “Sir, 
(said  Johnson,)  I  should  like  to  stay  here  four- 
and-twenty  hours.  We  see  here  how  our  ances¬ 
tors  lived.” 

That  his  curiosity  was  still  unabated,  appears 
from  two  letters  to  Mr.  John  Nichols,  of  the  10th 
and  20th  of  October  this  year.  In  one  he  says, 
“I  have  looked  into  your  Anecdotes ,  and  you  will 
hardly  thank  a  lover  of  literary  history  for  tell¬ 
ing  you,  that  he  has  been  much  informed  and 
gratified.  I  wish  you  would  add  your  own  dis¬ 
coveries  and  intelligence  to  those  of  Dr.  Raw- 
linson,  and  undertake  the  Supplement  to  Wood. 
Think  of  it.”  In  the  other,  “I  wish,  Sir,  you 
could  obtain  some  fuller  information  of  Jortin, 
Markland,  and  Thirlby.  They  were  three  con¬ 
temporaries  of  great  eminence.” 

To  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds 

Dear  Sir,  I  heard  yesterday  of  your  late  dis¬ 
order,  and  should  think  ill  of  myself  if  I  had 
heard  of  it  without  alarm.  I  heard  likewise  of 
your  recovery,  which  I  sincerely  wish  to  be 
complete  and  permanent.  Your  country  has 
been  in  danger  of  losing  one  of  its  brightest  or¬ 
naments,  and  I  of  losing  one  of  my  oldest  and 
kindest  friends:  but  I  hope  you  will  still  live 
long,  for  the  honour  of  the  nation:  and  that 
more  enjoyment  of  your  elegance,  your  intelli¬ 
gence,  and  your  benevolence,  is  still  reserved 
for,  dear  Sir,  your  most  affectionate,  &c. 

Sam.  Johnson 

Brighthelmston,  Nov.  14,  1782 

The  Reverend  Mr.  Wilson  having  dedicated 
to  him  his  Archceological  Dictionary ,  that  mark  of 
respect  was  thus  acknowledged: 

To  the  Reverend  Mr.  Wilson, 
Clitheroe,  Lancashire 

Reverend  Sir,  That  I  have  long  omitted  to 
return  you  thanks  for  the  honour  conferred 
upon  me  by  your  Dedication,  I  entreat  you 
with  great  earnestness  not  to  consider  as  more 
faulty  than  it  is.  A  very  importunate  and  op¬ 
pressive  disorder  has  for  some  time  debarred  me 
from  the  pleasures,  and  obstructed  me  in  the 
duties  of  life.  The  esteem  and  kindness  of  wise 
and  good  men  is  one  of  the  last  pleasures  which 


495 

I  can  be  content  to  lose;  and  gratitude  to  those 
from  whom  this  pleasure  is  received,  is  a  duty  of 
which  I  hope  never  to  be  reproached  with  the 
final  neglect.  I  therefore  now  return  you  thanks 
for  the  notice  which  I  have  received  from  you, 
and  which  I  consider  as  giving  to  my  name  not 
only  more  bulk,  but  more  weight;  not  only  as 
extending  its  superficies,  but  as  increasing  its 
value.  Your  book  was  evidently  wanted,  and 
will,  I  hope,  find  its  way  into  the  school,  to 
which,  however,  I  do  not  mean  to  confine  it;  for 
no  man  has  so  much  skill  in  ancient  rites  and 
practices  as  not  to  want  it.  As  I  suppose  myself  to 
owe  part  of  your  kindness  to  my  excellent  friend, 
Dr.  Patten,  he  has  likewise  a  just  claim  to  my 
acknowledgements,  which  I  hope  you,  Sir,  will 
transmit.  There  will  soon  appear  a  new  edition 
of  my  Poetical  Biography;  if  you  will  accept  of  a 
copy  to  keep  me  in  your  mind,  be  pleased  to 
let  me  know  how  it  may  be  conveniently  con¬ 
veyed  to  you.  The  present  is  small,  but  it  is  given 
with  good  will  by,  Reverend  Sir,  your  most,  &c. 

Sam.  Johnson 

December  31,  1782 

1783:  je tat.  74.] — In  1783,  he  was  more  se¬ 
verely  afflicted  than  ever,  as  will  appear  in  the 
course  of  his  correspondence;  but  still  the  same 
ardour  for  literature,  the  same  constant  piety, 
the  same  kindness  for  his  friends,  and  the  same 
vivacity  both  in  conversation  and  writing,  dis¬ 
tinguished  him. 

Having  given  Dr.  Johnson  a  full  account  of 
what  I  was  doing  at  Auchinleck,  and  particular¬ 
ly  mentioned  what  I  knew  would  please  him, — 
my  having  brought  an  old  man  of  eighty-eight 
from  a  lonely  cottage  to  a  comfortable  habita¬ 
tion  within  my  enclosures,  where  he  had  good 
neighbours  near  to  him, — I  received  an  answer 
in  February,  of  which  I  extract  what  follows: 

“I  am  delighted  with  your  account  of  your 
activity  at  Auchinleck,  and  wish  the  old  gentle¬ 
man,  whom  you  have  so  kindly  removed,  may 
live  long  to  promote  your  prosperity  by  his  pray¬ 
ers.  You  have  now  a  new  character  and  new 
duties:  think  on  them  and  practise  them. 

“Make  an  impartial  estimate  of  your  revenue, 
and  whatever  it  is,  live  upon  less.  Resolve  never 
to  be  poor.  Frugality  is  not  only  the  basis  of 
quiet,  but  of  beneficence.  No  man  can  help  oth¬ 
ers  that  wants  help  himself;  we  must  have  enough 
before  we  have  to  spare. 

“I  am  glad  to  find  that  Mrs.  Boswell  grows 
well;  and  hope  that  to  keep  her  well,  no  care 
nor  caution  will  be  omitted.  May  you  long  live 
happily  together. 

“When  you  come  hither,  pray  bring  with  you 
Baxter’s  Anacreon.  I  cannot  get  that  edition  in 
London.” 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


496  BOSWELL  [1783 


On  Friday,  March  2 1,  having  arrived  in  Lon¬ 
don  the  night  before,  I  was  glad  to  find  him  at 
Mrs.  Thrale’s  house,  in  Argyll-street,  appear¬ 
ances  of  friendship  between  them  being  still  kept 
up.  I  was  shewn  into  his  room,  and  after  the  first 
salutation  he  said,  “I  am  glad  you  are  come.  I 
am  very  ill.”  He  looked  pale,  and  was  distressed 
with  a  difficulty  of  breathing;  but  after  the  com¬ 
mon  inquiries  he  assumed  his  usual  strong  ani¬ 
mated  style  of  conversation.  Seeing  me  now  for 
the  first  time  as  a  Laird ,  or  proprietor  of  land,  he 
began  thus:  “Sir,  the  superiority  of  a  country- 
gentleman  over  the  people  upon  his  estate  is  very 
agreeable;  and  he  who  says  he  does  not  feel  it  to 
be  agreeable,  lies;  for  it  must  be  agreeable  to 
have  a  casual  superiority  over  those  who  are  by 
nature  equal  with  us.”  Boswell.  “Yet,  Sir,  we 
see  great  proprietors  of  land  who  prefer  living 
in  London.”  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  the  pleasure 
of  living  in  London,  the  intellectual  superiority 
that  is  enjoyed  there,  may  counterbalance  the 
other.  Besides,  Sir,  a  man  may  prefer  the  state 
of  the  country-gentleman  upon  the  whole,  and 
yet  there  may  never  be  a  moment  when  he  is 
willing  to  make  the  change  to  quit  London  for 
it.”  He  said,  “It  is  better  to  have  five  per  cent. 
out  of  land  than  out  of  money,  because  it  is  more 
secure ;  but  the  readiness  of  transfer,  and  prompt¬ 
ness  of  interest,  make  many  people  rather  choose 
the  funds.  Nay,  there  is  another  disadvantage 
belonging  to  land,  compared  with  money.  A 
man  is  not  so  much  afraid  of  being  a  hard  cred¬ 
itor,  as  of  being  a  hard  landlord.”  Boswell.  “Be¬ 
cause  there  is  a  sort  of  kindly  connection  be¬ 
tween  a  landlord  and  his  tenants.”  Johnson. 
“No,  Sir;  many  landlords  with  us  never  see  their 
tenants.  It  is  because  if  a  landlord  drives  away 
his  tenants,  he  may  not  get  others;  whereas  the 
demand  for  money  is  so  great,  it  may  always  be 
lent.” 

He  talked  with  regret  and  indignation  of  the 
factious  opposition  to  Government  at  this  time, 
and  imputed  it  in  a  great  measure  to  the  Rev¬ 
olution.  “Sir,  (said  he,  in  a  low  voice,  having 
come  nearer  to  me,  while  his  old  prejudices 
seemed  to  be  fermenting  in  his  mind,)  this  Han¬ 
overian  family  is  isolee  here.  They  have  no  friends. 
Now  the  Stuarts  had  friends  who  stuck  by  them 
so  late  as  1745.  When  the  right  of  the  King  is 
not  reverenced,  there  will  not  be  reverence  for 
those  appointed  by  the  King.” 

His  observation  that  the  present  royal  family 
has  no  friends,  has  been  too  much  justified  by 
the  very  ungrateful  behaviour  of  many  who 
were  under  great  obligations  to  his  Majesty;  at 
the  same  time  there  are  honourable  exceptions; 


and  the  very  next  year  after  this  conversation,  and 
ever  since,  the  King  has  had  as  extensive  and  gen¬ 
erous  support  as  ever  was  given  to  any  monarch, 
and  has  had  the  satisfaction  of  knowing  that  he 
was  more  and  more  endeared  to  his  people. 

He  repeated  to  me  his  verses  on  Mr.  Levett, 
with  an  emotion  which  gave  them  full  effect; 
and  then  he  was  pleased  to  say,  “You  must  be 
as  much  with  me  as  you  can.  You  have  done  me 
good.  You  cannot  think  how  much  better  I  am 
since  you  came  in.” 

He  sent  a  message  to  acquaint  Mrs.  Thrale 
that  I  was  arrived.  I  had  not  seen  her  since  her 
husband’s  death.  She  soon  appeared,  and  fa¬ 
voured  me  with  an  invitation  to  stay  to  dinner, 
which  I  accepted.  There  was  no  other  company 
but  herself  and  three  of  her  daughters,  Dr.  John¬ 
son,  and  I.  She  too  said,  she  was  very  glad  I  was 
come,  for  she  was  going  to  Bath,  and  should 
have  been  sorry  to  leave  Dr.  Johnson  before  I 
came.  This  seemed  to  be  attentive  and  kind; 
and  I  who  had  not  been  informed  of  any  change, 
imagined  all  to  be  as  well  as  formerly.  He  was 
little  inclined  to  talk  at  dinner,  and  went  to 
sleep  after  it;  but  when  he  joined  us  in  the  draw¬ 
ing-room,  he  seemed  revived,  and  was  again 
himself. 

Talking  of  conversation,  he  said,  “There  must, 
in  the  first  place,  be  knowledge,  there  must  be 
materials;  in  the  second  place,  there  must  be  a 
command  of  words;  in  the  third  place,  there 
must  be  imagination,  to  place  things  in  such 
views  as  they  are  not  commonly  seen  in;  and  in 
the  fourth  place,  there  must  be  presence  of  mind, 
and  a  resolution  that  is  not  to  be  overcome  by 
failures:  this  last  is  an  essential  requisite;  for 
want  of  it  many  people  do  not  excel  in  conver¬ 
sation.  Now  /  want  it:  I  throw  up  the  game  up¬ 
on  losing  a  trick.”  I  wondered  to  hear  him  talk 
thus  of  himself,  and  said,  “I  don’t  know,  Sir, 
how  this  may  be;  but  I  am  sure  you  beat  other 
people’s  cards  out  of  their  hands.”  I  doubt 
whether  he  heard  this  remark.  While  he  went  on 
talking  triumphantly,  I  was  fixed  in  admiration, 
and  said  to  Mrs.  Thrale,  “O,  for  short-hand  to 
take  this  down !”  “You’ll  carry  it  all  in  your  head, 
(said  she;)  a  long  head  is  as  good  as  short-hand.” 

It  has  been  observed  and  wondered  at,  that 
Mr.  Charles  Fox  never  talked  with  any  freedom 
in  the  presence  of  Dr.  Johnson,  though  it  is  well 
known,  and  I  myself  can  witness,  that  his  con¬ 
versation  is  various,  fluent,  and  exceedingly 
agreeable.  Johnson’s  own  experience,  however, 
of  that  gentleman’s  reserve  was  a  sufficient  rea¬ 
son  for  his  going  on  thus:  “Fox  never  talks  in 
private  company;  not  from  any  determination 


1783]  LIFE  OF 

not  to  talk,  but  because  he  has  not  the  first  mo¬ 
tion.  A  man  who  is  used  to  the  applause  of  the 
House  of  Commons,  has  no  wish  for  that  of  a 
private  company.  A  man  accustomed  to  throw 
for  a  thousand  pounds,  if  set  down  to  throw  for 
sixpence,  would  not  be  at  the  pains  to  count  his 
dice.  Burke’s  talk  is  the  ebullition  of  his  mind; 
he  does  not  talk  from  a  desire  of  distinction,  but 
because  his  mind  is  full.” 

He  thus  curiously  characterised  one  of  our  old 
acquaintance:  “********  [s  a  good  man,  Sir; 
but  he  is  a  vain  man  and  a  liar.  He,  however, 
only  tells  lies  of  vanity;  of  victories,  for  instance, 
in  conversation,  which  never  happened.”  This 
alluded  to  a  story  which  I  had  repeated  from 
that  gentleman,  to  entertain  Johnson  with  its 
wild  bravado:  “This  Johnson,  Sir,  (said  he,) 
whom  you  are  all  afraid  of  will  shrink,  if  you 
come  close  to  him  in  argument  and  roar  as  loud 
as  he.  He  once  maintained  the  paradox,  that 
there  is  no  beauty  but  in  utility.  ‘Sir,  (said  I,) 
what  say  you  to  the  peacock’s  tail,  which  is  one 
of  the  most  beautiful  objects  in  nature,  but  would 
have  as  much  utility  if  its  feathers  were  all  of 
one  colour.’  He  felt  what  I  thus  produced,  and 
had  recourse  to  his  usual  expedient,  ridicule; 
exclaiming,  ‘A  peacock  has  a  tail,  and  a  fox  has 
a  tail’;  and  then  he  burst  out  into  a  laugh.  ‘Well, 
Sir,  (said  I,  with  a  strong  voice,  looking  him  full 
in  the  face,)  you  have  unkennelled  your  fox; 
pursue  him  if  you  dare.’  He  had  not  a  word  to 
say,  Sir.”  Johnson  told  me,  that  this  was  a  fic¬ 
tion  from  beginning  to  end.1 

After  musing  for  some  time,  he  said,  “I  won¬ 
der  how  I  should  have  any  enemies;  for  I  do 
harm  to  nobody.”2  Boswell.  “In  the  first  place, 

1Were  I  to  insert  all  the  stories  which  have  been 
told  of  contests  boldly  maintained  with  him,  imag¬ 
inary  victories  obtained  over  him,  of  reducing  him 
to  silence,  and  of  making  him  own  that  his  an¬ 
tagonist  had  the  better  of  him  in  argument,  my 
volumes  would  swell  to  an  immoderate  size.  One 
instance,  I  find,  has  circulated  both  in  conversa¬ 
tion  and  in  print;  that  when  he  would  not  allow 
the  Scotch  writers  to  have  merit,  the  late  Dr.  Rose, 
of  Chiswick,  asserted,  that  he  could  name  one 
Scotch  writer,  whom  Dr.  Johnson  himself  would 
allow  to  have  written  better  than  any  man  of  the 
age;  and  upon  Johnson’s  asking  who  it  was,  an¬ 
swered,  “Lord  Bute,  when  he  signed  the  warrant 
for  your  pension.”  Upon  which  Johnson,  struck 
with  the  repartee,  acknowledged  that  this  was  true. 
When  I  mentioned  it  to  Johnson,  “Sir,  (said  he,) 
if  Rose  said  this,  I  never  heard  it.” 

2This  reflection  was  very  natural  in  a  man  of  a 
good  heart,  who  was  not  conscious  of  any  ill-will 
to  mankind,  though  the  sharp  sayings  which  were 
sometimes  produced  by  his  discrimination  and  vi¬ 
vacity,  which  he  perhaps  did  not  recollect,  were,  I 
am  afraid,  too  often  remembered  with  resentment. 


JOHNSON  497 

Sir,  you  will  be  pleased  to  recollect,  that  you  set 
out  with  attacking  the  Scotch;  so  you  got  a 
whole  nation  for  your  enemies.”  Johnson.  “Why, 
I  own,  that  by  my  definition  of  oats  I  meant  to 
vex  them.”  Boswell.  “Pray,  Sir,  can  you  trace 
the  cause  of  your  antipathy  to  the  Scotch?” 
Johnson.  “I  cannot,  Sir.”  Boswell.  “Old  Mr. 
Sheridan  says,  it  was  because  they  sold  Charles 
the  First.”  Johnson.  “Then,  Sir,  old  Mr.  Sher¬ 
idan  has  found  out  a  very  good  reason.” 

Surely  the  most  obstinate  and  sulky  nation¬ 
ality,  the  most  determined  aversion  to  this  great 
and  good  man,  must  be  cured,  when  he  is  seen 
thus  playing  with  one  of  his  prejudices,  of  which 
he  candidly  admitted  that  he  could  not  tell  the 
reason.  It  was,  however,  probably  owing  to  his 
having  had  in  his  view  the  worst  part  of  the 
Scottish  nation,  the  needy  adventurers,  many 
of  whom  he  thought  were  advanced  above  their 
merits  by  means  which  he  did  not  approve.  Had 
he  in  his  early  life  been  in  Scotland,  and  seen 
the  worthy,  sensible,  independent  gentlemen, 
who  live  rationally  and  hospitably  at  home,  he 
never  could  have  entertained  such  unfavourable 
and  unjust  notions  of  his  fellow-subjects.  And 
accordingly  we  find,  that  when  he  did  visit  Scot¬ 
land,  in  the  latter  period  of  his  life,  he  was  fully 
sensible  of  all  that  it  deserved,  as  I  have  already 
pointed  out,  when  speaking  of  his  Journey  to  the 
Western  Islands , 

Next  day,  Saturday,  March  22,  I  found  him 
still  at  Mrs.  Thrale’s,  but  he  told  me  that  he  was 
to  go  to  his  own  house  in  the  afternoon.  He  was 
better,  but  I  perceived  he  was  but  an  unruly  pa¬ 
tient,  for  Sir  Lucas  Pepys,  who  visited  him, 
while  I  was  with  him  said,  “If  you  were  tract¬ 
able ,  Sir,  I  should  prescribe  for  you.” 

I  related  to  him  a  remark  which  a  respectable 
friend  had  made  to  me,  upon  the  then  state  of 
Government,  when  those  who  had  been  long  in 
opposition  had  attained  to  power,  as  it  was  sup¬ 
posed,  against  the  inclination  of  the  Sovereign. 
“You  need  not  be  uneasy  (said  this  gentleman,) 
about  the  King.  He  laughs  at  them  all;  he  plays 
them  one  against  another.”  Johnson.  “Don’t 
think  so,  Sir.  The  King  is  as  much  oppressed  as 
a  man  can  be.  If  he  plays  them  one  against  an¬ 
other,  he  wins  nothing.” 

I  had  paid  a  visit  to  General  Oglethorpe  in 
the  morning,  and  was  told  by  him  that  Dr. 
Johnson  saw  company  on  Saturday  evenings, 
and  he  would  meet  me  at  Johnson’s  that  night. 
When  I  mentioned  this  to  Johnson,  not  doubt¬ 
ing  that  it  would  please  him,  as  he  had  a  great 
value  for  Oglethorpe,  the  fretfulness  of  his  dis¬ 
ease  unexpectedly  shewed  itself;  his  anger  sud- 


BOSWELL 


498 

denly  kindled,  and  he  said,  with  vehemence, 
“Did  not  you  tell  him  not  to  come?  Am  I  to  be 
hunted  in  this  manner?”  I  satisfied  him  that  I 
could  not  divine  that  the  visit  would  not  be  con¬ 
venient,  and  that  I  certainly  could  not  take  it 
upon  me  of  my  own  accord  to  forbid  the  General. 

I  found  Dr.  Johnson  in  the  evening  in  Mrs. 
Williams’s  room,  at  tea  and  coffee  with  her  and 
Mrs.  Desmoulins,  who  were  also  both  ill;  it  was 
a  sad  scene,  and  he  was  not  in  very  good  hu¬ 
mour.  He  said  of  a  performance  that  had  lately 
come  out,  “Sir,  if  you  should  search  all  the  mad¬ 
houses  in  England,  you  would  not  find  ten  men 
who  would  write  so,  and  think  it  sense.” 

I  was  glad  when  General  Oglethorpe’s  arriv¬ 
al  was  announced,  and  we  left  the  ladies.  Dr. 
Johnson  attended  him  in  the  parlour,  and  was 
as  courteous  as  ever.  The  General  said  he  was 
busy  reading  the  writers  of  the  middle  age.  John¬ 
son  said  they  were  very  curious.  Oglethorpe. 
“The  House  of  Commons  has  usurped  the  pow¬ 
er  of  the  nation’s  money,  and  used  it  tyrannical¬ 
ly.  Government  is  now  carried  on  by  corrupt 
influence,  instead  of  the  inherent  right  in  the 
King.”  Johnson.  “Sir,  the  want  of  inherent  right 
in  the  King  occasions  all  this  disturbance.  What 
we  did  at  the  Revolution  was  necessary:  but  it 
broke  our  constitution.”1  Oglethorpe.  “My 
father  did  not  think  it  necessary.” 

On  Sunday,  March  23,  I  breakfasted  with 
Dr.  Johnson,  who  seemed  much  relieved,  having 
taken  opium  the  night  before.  He  however  pro¬ 
tested  against  it,  as  a  remedy  that  should  be  giv¬ 
en  with  the  utmost  reluctance,  and  only  in  ex¬ 
treme  necessity.  I  mentioned  how  commonly  it 
was  used  in  Turkey,  and  that  therefore  it  could 
not  be  so  pernicious  as  he  apprehended.  He 
grew  warm  and  said,  “Turks  take  opium,  and 
Christians  take  opium;  but  Russel,  in  his  Ac¬ 
count  of  Aleppo,  tells  us,  that  it  is  as  disgraceful  in 
Turkey  to  take  too  much  opium,  as  it  is  with  us 
to  get  drunk.  Sir,  it  is  amazing  how  things  are 
exaggerated.  A  gentleman  was  lately  telling  in  a 
company  where  I  was  present,  that  in  France  as 
soon  as  a  man  of  fashion  marries,  he  takes  an 
opera  girl  into  keeping;  and  this  he  mentioned 
as  a  general  custom.  Tray,  Sir,  (said  I,)  how 

XI  have,  in  my  Journal  of  a  Tour  to  the  Hebrides , 
fully  expressed  my  sentiments  upon  this  subject. 
The  Revolution  was  necessary ,  but  not  a  subject  for 
glory;  because  it  for  a  long  time  blasted  the  gen¬ 
erous  feelings  of  Loyalty.  And  now,  when  by  the 
benignant  effect  of  time  the  present  Royal  Family 
are  established  in  our  affections ,  how  unwise  it  is 
to  revive  by  celebrations  the  memory  of  a  shock, 
which  it  would  surely  have  been  better  that  our 
constitution  had  not  required. 


[  17S3 

many  opera  girls  may  there  be?’  He  answered, 
cAbout  fourscore.’  ‘Well  then,  Sir,  (said  I,)  you 
see  there  can  be  no  more  than  fourscore  men  of 
fashion  who  can  do  this.’  ” 

Mrs.  Desmoulins  made  tea;  and  she  and  I 
talked  before  him  upon  a  topick  which  he  had 
once  borne  patiently  from  me  when  we  were  by 
ourselves, — his  not  complaining  of  the  world, 
because  he  was  not  called  to  some  great  office, 
nor  had  attained  to  great  wealth.  He  flew  into  a 
violent  passion,  I  confess  with  some  justice,  and 
commanded  us  to  have  done.  “Nobody,  (said 
he,)  has  a  right  to  talk  in  this  manner,  to  bring 
before  a  man  his  own  character,  and  the  events 
of  his  life,  when  he  does  not  choose  it  should  be 
done.  I  never  have  sought  the  world;  the  world 
was  not  to  seek  me.  It  is  rather  wonderful  that 
so  much  has  been  done  for  me.  All  the  com¬ 
plaints  which  are  made  of  the  world  are  unjust. 
I  never  knew  a  man  of  merit  neglected:  it  was 
generally  by  his  own  fault  that  he  failed  of  suc¬ 
cess.  A  man  may  hide  his  head  in  a  hole:  he  may 
go  into  the  country,  and  publish  a  book  now 
and  then,  which  nobody  reads,  and  then  com¬ 
plain  he  is  neglected.  There  is  no  reason  why 
any  person  should  exert  himself  for  a  man  who 
has  written  a  good  book:  he  has  not  written  it 
for  any  individual.  I  may  as  well  make  a  present 
to  the  postman  who  brings  me  a  letter.  When 
patronage  was  limited,  an  authour  expected  to 
find  a  Maecenas,  and  complained  if  he  did  not 
find  one.  Why  should  he  complain?  This  Mae¬ 
cenas  has  others  as  good  as  he,  or  others  who 
have  got  the  start  of  him.”  Boswell.  “But  sure¬ 
ly,  Sir,  you  will  allow  that  there  are  men  of  mer¬ 
it  at  the  bar,  who  never  get  practice.”  Johnson. 
“Sir,  you  are  sure  that  practice  is  got  from  an 
opinion  that  the  person  employed  deserves  it 
best;  so  that  if  a  man  of  merit  at  the  bar  does 
not  get  practice,  it  is  from  errour,  not  from  in¬ 
justice.  He  is  not  neglected.  A  horse  that  is 
brought  to  market  may  not  be  bought,  though 
he  is  a  very  good  horse:  but  that  is  from  ignor¬ 
ance,  not  from  intention.” 

There  was  in  this  discourse  much  novelty,  in¬ 
genuity,  and  discrimination,  such  as  is  seldom 
to  be  found.  Yet  I  cannot  help  thinking  that 
men  of  merit,  who  have  no  success  in  life,  may 
be  forgiven  for  lamenting ,  if  they  are  not  allowed 
to  complain.  They  may  consider  it  as  hard  that 
their  merit  should  not  have  its  suitable  distinc¬ 
tion.  Though  there  is  no  intentional  injustice 
towards  them  on  the  part  of  the  world,  their 
merit  not  having  been  perceived,  they  may  yet 
repine  against  fortune ,  or  fate ,  or  by  whatever 
rfame  they  choose  to  call  the  supposed  mytho- 


1783]  LIFE  OF 

logical  power  of  Destiny .  It  has,  however,  oc¬ 
curred  to  me,  as  a  consolatory  thought,  that 
men  of  merit  should  consider  thus: — How  much 
harder  would  it  be  if  the  same  persons  had  both 
all  the  merit  and  all  the  prosperity.  Would  not 
this  be  a  miserable  distribution  for  the  poor 
dunces?  Would  men  of  merit  exchange  their  in¬ 
tellectual  superiority,  and  the  enjoyments  aris¬ 
ing  from  it,  for  external  distinction  and  the 
pleasures  of  wealth?  If  they  would  not,  let  them 
not  envy  others,  who  are  poor  where  they  are 
rich,  a  compensation  which  is  made  to  them. 
Let  them  look  inwards  and  be  satisfied;  recol¬ 
lecting  with  conscious  pride  what  Virgil  finely 
says  of  the  Corycius  Senex,  and  which  I  have,  in 
another  place,1  with  truth  and  sincerity  applied 
to  Mr.  Burke: 

Regum  cequabat  opes  animis . 

On  the  subject  of  the  right  employment  of 
wealth,  Johnson  observed,  “A  man  cannot  make 
a  bad  use  of  his  money,  so  far  as  regards  Soci¬ 
ety,  if  he  does  not  hoard  it;  for  if  he  either  spends 
it  or  lends  it  out,  Society  has  the  benefit.  It  is  in 
general  better  to  spend  money  than  to  give  it 
away;  for  industry  is  more  promoted  by  spend¬ 
ing  money  than  by  giving  it  away.  A  man  who 
spends  his  money  is  sure  he  is  doing  good  with 
it:  he  is  not  so  sure  when  he  gives  it  away.  A 
man  who  spends  ten  thousand  a  year  will  do 
more  good  than  a  man  who  spends  two  thou¬ 
sand  and  gives  away  eight.” 

In  the  evening  I  came  to  him  again.  He  was 
somewhat  fretful  from  his  illness.  A  gentleman 
asked  him,  whether  he  had  been  abroad  to-day. 
“Don’t  talk  so  childishly,  (said  he.)  You  may  as 
well  ask  if  I  hanged  myself  to-day.55 1  mentioned 
politicks.  Johnson.  “Sir,  I5d  as  soon  have  a  man 
to  break  my  bones  as  talk  to  me  of  publick  af¬ 
fairs,  internal  or  external.  I  have  lived  to  see 
things  all  as  bad  as  they  can  be.55 

Having  mentioned  his  friend  the  second  Lord 
Southwell,  he  said,  “Lord  Southwell  was  the 
highest-bred  man  without  insolence  that  I  ever 
was  in  company  with;  the  most  qualitied  I  ever 
saw.  Lord  Orrery  was  not  dignified:  Lord  Ches¬ 
terfield  was,  but  he  was  insolent.  Lord  ******* 
is  a  man  of  coarse  manners,  but  a  man  of  abili¬ 
ties  and  information.  I  don’t  say  he  is  a  man  I 
would  set  at  the  head  of  a  nation,  though  per¬ 
haps  he  may  be  as  good  as  the  next  Prime  Min¬ 
ister  that  comes;  but  he  is  a  man  to  be  at  the 
head  of  a  Club;  I  don’t  say  our  Club;  for  there’s 

better  to  the  People  of  Scotland  against  the  at¬ 
tempt  to  diminish  the  number  of  the  Lords  of  Ses¬ 
sion,  1785. 


JOHNSON  499 

no  such  Club.”  Boswell.  “But,  Sir,  was  he  not 
once  a  factious  man?”  Johnson.  “O  yes,  Sir;  as 
factious  a  fellow  as  could  be  found:  one  who  was 
for  sinking  us  all  into  the  mob.”  Boswell.  “How 
then,  Sir,  did  he  get  into  favour  with  the  King?” 
Johnson.  “Because,  Sir,  I  suppose  he  promised 
the  King  to  do  whatever  the  King  pleased.” 

He  said,  “Goldsmith’s  blundering  speech  to 
Lord  Shelburne,  which  has  been  so  often  men¬ 
tioned,  and  which  he  really  did  make  to  him, 
was  only  a  blunder  in  emphasis:  4 1  wonder  they 
should  call  your  Lordship  Malagrida ,  for  Mala- 
grida  was  a  very  good  man’;  meant,  I  wonder 
they  should  use  Malagrida  as  a  term  of  reproach.” 

Soon  after  this  time  I  had  an  opportunity  of 
seeing,  by  means  of  one  of  his  friends,  a  proof 
that  his  talents,  as  well  as  his  obliging  service  to 
authours,  were  ready  as  ever.  He  had  revised 
The  Village ,  an  admirable  poem,  by  the  Rever¬ 
end  Mr.  Crabbe.  Its  sentiments  as  to  the  false 
notions  of  rustick  happiness  and  rustick  virtue 
were  quite  congenial  with  his  own;  and  he  had 
taken  the  trouble  not  only  to  suggest  slight  cor¬ 
rections  and  variations,  but  to  furnish  some  lines, 
when  he  thought  he  could  give  the  writer’s  mean¬ 
ing  better  than  in  the  words  of  the  manuscript.2 

On  Sunday,  March  30, 1  found  him  at  home  in 
the  evening,  and  had  the  pleasure  to  meet  with 
Dr.  Brocklesby,  whose  reading,  and  knowledge 
of  life,  and  good  spirits,  supply  him  with  a  never- 
failing  source  of  conversation.  He  mentioned  a 
respectable  gentleman,  who  became  extremely 
penurious  near  the  close  of  his  life.  Johnson  said 
there  must  have  been  a  degree  of  madness  about 
him.  “Not  at  all,  Sir,  (said  Dr.  Brocklesby,) 
his  judgement  was  entire.”  Unluckily,  however, 
he  mentioned  that  although  he  had  a  fortune  of 
twenty-seven  thousand  pounds,  he  denied  him¬ 
self  many  comforts,  from  an  apprehension  that 

2I  shall  give  an  instance,  marking  the  original 
by  Roman,  and  Johnson’s  substitution  in  Italick 
characters: 

In  fairer  scenes,  where  peaceful  pleasures  spring, 
Tityrus,  the  pride  of  Mantuan  swains,  might  sing: 
But  charmed  by  him,  or  smitten  with  his  views, 
Shall  modern  poets  court  the  Mantuan  muse? 
From  Truth  and  Nature  shall  we  widely  stray, 
Where  Fancy  leads,  or  Virgil  led  the  way? 

On  Mincio’s  banks ,  in  Casafs  bounteous  reigny 
If  Tityrus  found  the  golden  age  again , 

Must  sleepy  bards  the  flattering  dream  prolong , 
Mechanick  echoes  of  the  Mantuan  song? 

From  Truth  and  Nature  shall  we  widely  stray, 
Where  Virgil ,  not  where  Fancy ,  leads  the  way? 

Here  we  find  Johnson’s  poetical  and  critical 
powers  undiminished.  I  must  however,  observe, 
that  the  aids  he  gave  to  this  poem,  as  to  The  Travel¬ 
ler  and  Deserted  Village  of  Goldsmith,  were  so  small 
as  by  no  means  to  impair  the  distinguished  merit 
of  the  authour. 


BOSWELL 


500 

he  could  not  afford  them.  “Nay,  Sir,  (cried  John¬ 
son,)  when  the  judgement  is  so  disturbed  that  a 
man  cannot  count,  that  is  pretty  well.” 

I  shall  here  insert  a  few  of  Johnson’s  sayings, 
without  the  formality  of  dates,  as  they  have  no 
reference  to  any  particular  time  or  place. 

“The  more  a  man  extends  and  varies  his  ac¬ 
quaintance  the  better.”  This,  however,  was 
meant  with  a  just  restriction;  for,  he  on  another 
occasion  said  to  me,  “Sir,  a  man  may  be  so 
much  of  every  thing,  that  he  is  nothing  of  any 
thing.” 

“Raising  the  wages  of  day-labourers  is  wrong; 
for  it  does  not  make  them  live  better,  but  only 
makes  them  idler,  and  idleness  is  a  very  bad 
thing  for  human  nature.” 

“It  is  a  very  good  custom  to  keep  a  journal  for 
a  man’s  own  use;  he  may  write  upon  a  card  a 
day  all  that  is  necessary  to  be  written,  after  he 
has  had  experience  of  life.  At  first  there  is  a  great 
deal  to  be  written,  because  there  is  a  great  deal 
of  novelty;  but  when  once  a  man  has  settled  his 
opinions,  there  is  seldom  much  to  be  set  down.” 

“There  is  nothing  wonderful  in  the  journal 
which  we  see  Swift  kept  in  London,  for  it  con¬ 
tains  slight  topicks,  and  it  might  soon  be  written.” 

I  praised  the  accuracy  of  an  account-book  of 
a  lady  whom  I  mentioned.  Johnson.  “Keeping 
accounts,  Sir,  is  of  no  use  when  a  man  is  spend¬ 
ing  his  own  money,  and  has  nobody  to  whom 
he  is  to  account.  You  won’t  eat  less  beef  to-day, 
because  you  have  written  down  what  it  cost  yes¬ 
terday.”  I  mentioned  another  lady  who  thought 
as  he  did,  so  that  her  husband  could  not  get  her 
to  keep  an  account  of  the  expence  of  the  family, 
as  she  thought  it  enough  that  she  never  exceeded 
the  sum  allowed  her.  Johnson.  “Sir,  it  is  fit  she 
should  keep  an  account,  because  her  husband 
wishes  it;  but  1  do  not  see  its  use.”  I  maintained 
that  keeping  an  account  has  this  advantage,  that 
it  satisfies  a  man  that  his  money  has  not  been 
lost  or  stolen,  which  he  might  sometimes  be  apt 
to  imagine,  were  there  no  written  state  of  his  ex¬ 
pence;  and  beside,  a  calculation  of  oeconomy  so 
as  not  to  exceed  one’s  income,  cannot  be  made 
without  a  view  of  the  different  articles  in  figures, 
that  one  may  see  how  to  retrench  in  some  par¬ 
ticulars  less  necessary  than  others.  This  he  did 
not  attempt  to  answer. 

Talking  of  an  acquaintance  of  ours,  whose 
narratives,  which  abounded  in  curious  and  in¬ 
teresting  topicks,  were  unhappily  found  to  be 
very  fabulous;  I  mentioned  Lord  Mansfield’s 
having  said  to  me,  “Suppose  we  believe  one  half 
of  what  he  tells.”  Johnson.  “Ay;  but  we  don’t 
know  whicfi  to  believe.  By  his  lying  we  lose 


[  I7^3 

not  only  our  reverence  for  him,  but  all  comfort 
in  his  conversation.”  Boswell.  “May  we  not 
take  it  as  amusing  fiction?”  Johnson.  “Sir,  the 
misfortune  is,  that  you  will  insensibly  believe  as 
much  of  it  as  you  incline  to  believe.” 

It  is  remarkable,  that  notwithstanding  their 
congeniality  in  politicks,  he  never  was  acquaint¬ 
ed  with  a  late  eminent  noble  judge,  whom  I  have 
heard  speak  of  him  as  a  writer,  with  great  re¬ 
spect.  Johnson,  I  know  not  upon  what  degree  of 
investigation,  entertained  no  exalted  opinion  of 
his  Lordship’s  intellectual  character.  Talking  of 
him  to  me  one  day,  he  said,  “It  is  wonderful, 
Sir,  with  how  little  real  superiority  of  mind  men 
can  make  an  eminent  figure  in  publick  life.” He 
expressed  himself  to  the  same  purpose  concern¬ 
ing  another  law-Lord,  who,  it  seems,  once  took 
a  fancy  to  associate  with  the  wits  of  London;  but 
with  so  little  success,  that  Foote  said,  “What  can 
he  mean  by  coming  among  us?  He  is  not  only 
dull  himself,  but  the  cause  of  dullness  in  others.” 
Trying  him  by  the  test  of  his  colloquial  powers, 
Johnson  had  found  him  very  defective.  He  once 
said  to  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  “This  man  now  has 
been  ten  years  about  town,  and  has  made  noth¬ 
ing  of  it”;  meaning  as  a  companion.1  He  said  to 
me,  “I  never  heard  any  thing  from  him  in  com¬ 
pany  that  was  at  ail  striking;  and  depend  upon 
it,  Sir,  it  is  when  you  come  close  to  a  man  in 
conversation,  that  you  discover  what  his  real 
abilities  are;  to  make  a  speech  in  a  publick  as¬ 
sembly  is  a  knack.  Now  I  honour  Thurlow,  Sir; 
Thurlow  is  a  fine  fellow;  he  fairly  puts  his  mind 
to  yours.” 

After  repeating  to  him  some  of  his  pointed, 
lively  sayings,  I  said,  “It  is  a  pity,  Sir,  you  don’t 
always  remember  your  own  good  things,  that 
you  may  have  a  laugh  when  you  will.”  John¬ 
son.  “Nay,  Sir,  it  is  better  that  I  forget  them, 
that  I  may  be  reminded  of  them,  and  have  a 
laugh  on  their  being  brought  to  my  recollection.  ” 

When  I  recalled  to  him  his  having  said  as  we 
sailed  up  Loch-lomond,  “That  if  he  wore  any 
thing  fine,  it  should  be  very  fine”;  I  observed  that 
all  his  thoughts  were  upon  a  great  scale.  John¬ 
son.  “Depend  upon  it,  Sir,  every  man  will  have 
as  fine  a  thing  as  he  can  get;  as  a  large  diamond 
for  his  ring.”  Boswell.  “Pardon  me,  Sir:  a  man 

knowing  as  well  as  I  do  what  precision  and 
elegance  of  oratory  his  Lordship  can  display,  I 
cannot  but  suspect  that  his  unfavourable  appear¬ 
ance  in  a  social  circle,  which  drew  such  animad¬ 
versions  upon  him,  must  be  owing  to  a  cold  affec¬ 
tation  of  consequence,  from  being  reserved  and 
stiff.  If  it  be  so,  and  he  might  be  an  agreeable  man 
if  he  would,  we  cannot  be  sorry  that  he  misses  his 
aim. 


1783]  LIFE  OF 

of  a  narrow  mind  will  not  think  of  it,  a  slight 
trinket  will  satisfy  him: 

Nec  sujferre  queat  majoris  pondera  gemma. 

I  told  him  I  should  send  him  some  Essays 
which  I  had  written,  which  I  hoped  he  would 
be  so  good  as  to  read,  and  pick  out  the  good 
ones.  Johnson.  “Nay,  Sir,  send  me  only  the  good 
ones;  don’t  make  me  pick  them.” 

I  heard  him  once  say,  “Though  the  proverb 
Nullum  numen  abest ,  si  sit  prudentia ,  does  not  al¬ 
ways  prove  true,  we  may  be  certain  of  the  con¬ 
verse  of  it,  Nullum  numen  adest ,  si  sit  imprudentia .” 

Once,  when  Mr.  Seward  was  going  to  Bath, 
and  asked  his  commands,  he  said,  “Tell  Dr.  Har¬ 
rington  that  I  wish  he  would  publish  another 
volume  of  the  Nugce  antiques?  it  is  a  very  pretty 
book.”  Mr.  Seward  seconded  this  wish,  and  rec¬ 
ommended  to  Dr.  Harrington  to  dedicate  it  to 
Johnson,  and  take  for  his  motto,  what  Catullus 
says  to  Cornelius  Nepos: 

- namque  tu  solebas , 

Me  as  esse  aliquid  putare  nugas. 

As  a  small  proof  of  his  kindliness  and  delicacy 
of  feeling,  the  following  circumstance  may  be 
mentioned:  One  evening  when  we  were  in  the 
street  together,  and  I  told  him  I  was  going  to 
sup  at  Mr.  Beauclerk’s,  he  said,  “I’ll  go  with 
you.”  After  having  walked  part  of  the  way,  seem¬ 
ing  to  recollect  something,  he  suddenly  stopped 
and  said,  “I  cannot  go, — but  I  do  not  love  Beau- 
clerk  the  less” 

On  the  frame  of  his  portrait,  Mr.  Beauclerk 
had  inscribed, — 

- Ingenium  ingens 

Inculto  latet  hoc  sub  corpore. 

After  Mr.  Beauclerk’s  death,  when  it  became 
Mr.  Langton’s  property,  he  made  the  inscrip¬ 
tion  be  defaced.  Johnson  said  complacently,  “It 
was  kind  in  you  to  take  it  off”;  and  then  aftter  a 
short  pause,  added,  “and  not  unkind  in  him  to 
put  it  on.” 

He  said,  “How  few  of  his  friends’  houses  would 
a  man  choose  to  be  at  when  he  is  sick.”  He  men¬ 
tioned  one  or  two.  I  recollect  only  Thrale’s. 

He  observed,  “There  is  a  wicked  inclination 
in  most  people  to  suppose  an  old  man  delayed 
in  his  intellects.  If  a  young  or  middle-aged  man, 
when  leaving  a  company,  does  not  recollect 
where  he  laid  his  hat,  it  is  nothing;  but  if  the 
same  inattention  is  discovered  in  an  old  man, 
people  will  shrug  up  their  shoulders,  and  say, 
cHis  memory  is  going.’  ” 

Tt  has  since  appeared. 


JOHNSON  501 

When  I  once  talked  to  him  of  some  of  the  say¬ 
ings  which  every  body  repeats,  but  nobody  knows 
where  to  find,  such  as  Quos  Deus  vult  per dere,  pri- 
us  dementat ;2  he  told  me  that  he  was  once  offered 
ten  guineas  to  point  out  from  whence  Semel  in- 
sanivimus  omnes  was  taken.  He  could  not  do  it; 
but  many  years  afterwards  met  with  it  by  chance 
in  Johannes  Baptista  Mantuanus. 

I  am  very  sorry  that  I  did  not  take  a  note  of 
an  eloquent  argument  in  which  he  maintained 
that  the  situation  of  Prince  of  Wales  was  the  hap¬ 
piest  of  any  person’s  in  the  kingdom,  even  be¬ 
yond  that  of  the  Sovereign.  I  recollect  only — 
the  enjoyment  of  hope, — the  high  superiority  of 
rank,  without  the  anxious  cares  of  government, — 
and  a  great  degree  of  power,  both  from  natur¬ 
al  influence  wisely  used,  and  from  the  sanguine 
expectations  of  those  who  look  forward  to  the 
chance  of  future  favour. 

Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  communicated  to  me  the 
following  particulars: 

Johnson  thought  the  poems  published  as  trans¬ 
lations  from  Ossian  had  so  little  merit,  that  he 
said,  “Sir,  a  man  might  write  such  stuff  for  ev¬ 
er,  if  he  would  abandon  his  mind  to  it.” 

With  the  following  elucidation  of  the  saying — 
Quos  Deus  (it  should  rather  be — Quem  Jupiter)  vult 
perdere ,  prius  dementat — Mr.  Boswell  was  furnished 
by  Mr.  Pitts: — “Perhaps  no  scrap  of  Latin  what¬ 
ever  has  been  more  quoted  than  this.  It  occasion¬ 
ally  falls  even  from  those  who  are  scrupulous  even 
to  pedantry  in  their  Latinity,  and  will  not  admit  a 
word  into  their  compositions,  which  has  not  the 
sanction  of  the  first  age.  The  word  demento  is  of  no 
authority,  either  as  a  verb  active  or  neuter. — After 
a  long  search  for  the  purpose  of  deciding  a  bet, 
some  gentlemen  of  Cambridge  found  it  among 
the  fragments  of  Euripides,  in  what  edition  I  do 
not  recollect,  where  it  is  given  as  a  translation  of  a 
Greek  Iambick:  ”0v  Geos  0eAei  dxoXe<rai,  xp<£r’ 

aTro4>pevaL. 

The  above  scrap  was  found  in  the  hand-writing 
of  a  suicide  of  fashion,  Sir  D.  O.,  some  years  ago, 
lying  on  the  table  of  the  room  where  he  had  de¬ 
stroyed  himself.  The  suicide  was  a  man  of  classical 
acquirements:  he  left  no  other  paper  behind  him.” 

Another  of  these  proverbial  sayings. 

Incidit  in  Scyllam ,  cupiens  vitare  Charybdim , 

I,  in  a  note  on  a  passage  in  The  Merchant  of  Venice , 
traced  to  its  source.  It  occurs  (with  a  slight  varia¬ 
tion)  in  the  Alexandreis  of  Philip  Gualtier  (a  poet  of 
the  thirteenth  century),  which  was  printed  at  Lyons 
in  1558.  Darius  is  the  person  addressed: — 

- Quo  tendis  inertem , 

Rex  periture,  fugam?  nescis,  heu!  perdite ,  nescis 

Quem  fugias:  hostes  incurris  dum  fugis  hostem; 

Incidis  in  Scyllam,  cupiens  vitare  Charybdim. 

A  line  not  less  frequently  quoted  was  suggested 
for  inquiry  in  a  note  on  The  Rape  of  Lucrece: 

Solamen  miseris  socios  habuisse  doloris - : 

But  the  author  of  this  verse  has  not,  I  believe,  been 
discovered.  [M.] 


5°2 

He  said,  “A  man  should  pass  a  part  of  his  time 
with  the  laughers,  by  which  means  any  thing  ri¬ 
diculous  or  particular  about  him  might  be  pre¬ 
sented  to  his  view,  and  corrected.”  I  observed, 
he  must  have  been  a  bold  laugher  who  would 
have  ventured  to  tell  Dr.  Johnson  of  any  of  his 
particularities.1 

Having  observed  the  vain  ostentatious  im¬ 
portance  of  many  people  in  quoting  the  author¬ 
ity  of  Dukes  and  Lords,  as  having  been  in  their 
company,  he  said,  he  went  to  the  other  extreme, 
and  did  not  mention  his  authority  when  he  should 
have  done  it,  had  it  not  been  that  of  a  Duke  or 
a  Lord. 

Dr.  Goldsmith  said  once  to  Dr.  Johnson,  that 
he  wished  for  some  additional  members  to  The 
Literary  Club,  to  give  it  an  agreeable  variety; 
for  (said  he,)  there  can  now  be  nothing  new 
among  us:  we  have  travelled  over  one  another’s 
minds.  Johnson  seemed  a  little  angry,  and  said, 
“Sir,  you  have  not  travelled  over  my  mind,  I 
promise  you.”  Sir  Joshua,  however,  thought 
Goldsmith  right;  observing,  that  “when  people 
have  lived  a  great  deal  together,  they  know  what 
each  of  them  will  say  on  every  subject.  A  new 
understanding,  therefore,  is  desirable;  because 
though  it  may  only  furnish  the  same  sense  upon 
a  question  which  would  have  been  furnished  by 
those  with  whom  we  are  accustomed  to  live,  yet 
this  sense  will  have  a  different  colouring;  and 
colouring  is  of  much  effect  in  every  thing  else  as 
well  as  in  painting.” 

Johnson  used  to  say  that  he  made  it  a  constant 
rule  to  talk  as  well  as  he  could  both  as  to  senti¬ 
ment  and  expression,  by  which  means,  what  had 
’  een  originally  effort  became  familiar  and  easy. 
The  consequence  of  this,  Sir  Joshua  observed, 
was,  that  his  common  conversation  in  all  com¬ 
panies  was  such  as  to  secure  him  universal  at¬ 
tention,  as  something  above  the  usual  colloquial 
style  was  expected. 

Yet,  though  Johnson  had  this  habit  in  com¬ 
pany,  when  another  mode  was  necessary,  in  or¬ 
der  to  investigate  truth,  he  could  descend  to  a 
language  intelligible  to  the  meanest  capacity. 
An  instance  of  this  was  witnessed  by  Sir  Joshua 
Reynolds,  when  they  were  present  at  an  exam- 

T  am  happy,  however,  to  mention  a  pleasing  in¬ 
stance  of  his  enduring  with  great  gentleness  to  hear 
one  of  his  most  striking  particularities  pointed  out: 
— Miss  Hunter,  a  niece  of  his  friend  Christopher 
Smart,  when  a  very  young  girl,  struck  by  his  ex¬ 
traordinary  motions,  said  to  him,  “Pray,  Dr.  John¬ 
son,  why  do  you  make  such  strange  gestures?” 
“From  bad  habit,”  he  replied.  “Do  you,  my  dear, 
take  care  to  guard  against  bad  habits.”  This  I  was 
told  by  the  young  lady's  brother  at  Margate. 


[  *783 

ination  of  a  little  blackguard  boy,  by  Mr.  Saun¬ 
ders  Welch,  the  late  Westminster  Justice.  Welch, 
who  imagined  that  he  was  exalting  himself  in 
Dr.  Johnson’s  eyes  by  using  big  words,  spoke  in 
a  manner  that  was  utterly  unintelligble  to  the 
boy;  Dr.  Johnson  perceiving  it,  addressed  him¬ 
self  to  the  boy,  and  changed  the  pompous  phrase¬ 
ology  into  colloquial  language.  Sir  Joshua  Rey¬ 
nolds,  who  was  much  amused  by  this  procedure, 
which  seemed  a  kind  of  reversing  of  what  might 
have  been  expected  from  the  two  men,  took  no¬ 
tice  of  it  to  Dr.  Johnson,  as  they  walked  away  by 
themselves.  Johnson  said,  that  it  was  continually 
the  case;  and  that  he  was  always  obliged  to  trans¬ 
late  the Justice’s  swelling  diction,  (smiling,)  so  as 
that  his  meaning  might  be  understood  by  the  vul¬ 
gar,  from  whom  information  was  to  be  obtained. 

Sir  Joshua  once  observed  to  him,  that  he  had 
talked  above  the  capacity  of  some  people  with 
whom  they  had  been  in  company  together.  “No 
matter,  Sir,  (said  Johnson;)  they  consider  it  as  a 
compliment  to  be  talked  to,  as  if  they  were  wiser 
than  they  are.  So  true  is  this,  Sir,  that  Baxter 
made  it  a  rule  in  every  sermon  that  he  preached, 
to  say  something  that  was  above  the  capacity  of 
his  audience.”2 

Johnson’s  dexterity  in  retort,  when  he  seemed 
to  be  driven  to  an  extremity  by  his  adversary, 
was  very  remarkable.  Of  his  power  in  this  re¬ 
spect,  our  common  friend,  Mr.  Windham,  of 
Norfolk,  has  been  pleased  to  furnish  me  with  an 
eminent  instance.  However  unfavourable  to 
Scotland,  he  uniformly  gave  liberal  praise  to 
George  Buchanan,  as  a  writer.  In  a  conversa¬ 
tion  concerning  the  literary  merits  of  the  two 
countries,  in  which  Buchanan  was  introduced, 
a  Scotchman,  imagining  that  on  this  ground  he 
should  have  an  undoubted  triumph  over  him, 
exclaimed,  “Ah,  Dr.  Johnson,  what  would  you 
have  said  of  Buchanan,  had  he  been  an  English¬ 
man?”  “Why,  Sir,  (said  Johnson,  after  a  little 
pause,)  I  should  not  have  said  of  Buchanan,  had 
he  been  an  Englishman ,  what  I  will  now  say  of 
him  as  a  Scotchman , — that  he  was  the  only  man 
of  genius  his  country  ever  produced.” 

And  this  brings  to  my  recollection  another 
instance  of  the  same  nature.  I  once  reminded 
him  that  when  Dr.  Adam  Smith  was  expatiating 
on  the  beauty  of  Glasgow,  he  had  cut  him  short 
by  saying,  “Pray,  Sir,  have  you  ever  seen  Brent- 

2The  justness  of  this  remark  is  confirmed  by  the 
following  story,  for  which  I  am  indebted  to  Lord 
Eliot: — A  country  parson,  who  wras  remarkable  for 
quoting  scraps  of  Latin  in  his  sermons,  having  died, 
one  of  his  parishioners  was  asked  how  he  liked  his 
successor.  “He  is  a  very  good  preacher,”  was  his 
answer,  “but  no  latinerP 


BOSWELL 


1 783  ]  L I F  E  O  F 

ford?35  and  I  took  the  liberty  to  add,  “My  dear 
Sir,  surely  that  was  shocking”  “Why,  then,  Sir, 
(he  replied,)  you  have  never  seen  Brentford.53 

Though  his  usual  phrase  for  conversation  was 
talk ,  yet  he  made  a  distinction;  for  when  he  once 
told  me  that  he  dined  the  day  before  at  a  friend's 
house,  with  “a  very  pretty  company33;  and  I 
asked  him  if  there  was  good  conversation,  he  an¬ 
swered,  “No,  Sir;  we  had  talk  enough,  but  no 
conversation ;  there  was  nothing  discussed.” 

Talking  of  the  success  of  the  Scotch  in  Lon¬ 
don,  he  imputed  it  in  a  considerable  degree  to 
their  spirit  of  nationality.  “You  know,  Sir,  (said 
he,)  that  no  Scotchman  publishes  a  book,  or  has 
a  play  brought  upon  the  stage,  but  there  are  five 
hundred  people  ready  to  applaud  him.33 

He  gave  much  praise  to  his  friend  Dr.  Burney’s 
elegant  and  entertaining  travels,  and  told  Mr. 
Seward  that  he  had  them  in  his  eye,  when  writ¬ 
ing  his  Journey  to  the  Western  Islands  of  Scotland . 

Such  was  his  sensibility,  and  so  much  was  he 
affected  by  pathetick  poetry,  that,  when  he  was 
reading  Dr.  Beattie’s  Hermit  in  my  presence,  it 
brought  tears  into  his  eyes. 

He  disapproved  much  of  mingling  real  facts 
with  fiction.  On  this  account  he  censured  a  book 
entitled  Love  and  Madness . 

Mr.  Hoole  told  him,  he  was  born  in  Moor- 
fields,  and  had  received  part  of  his  early  instruc¬ 
tion  in  Grub-street.  “Sir,  (said  Johnson,  smiling,) 
you  have  been  regularly  educated.33  Having  asked 
who  was  his  instructor,  and  Mr.  Hoole  having 
answered,  “My  uncle,  Sir,  who  was  a  taylor”; 
Johnson,  recollecting  himself,  said,  “Sir,  I  knew 
him;  we  called  him  the  metaphysical  taylor.  He 
was  of  a  club  in  Old-street,  with  me  and  George 
Psalmanazar,  and  some  others:  but  pray,  Sir, 
was  he  a  good  taylor?33  Mr.  Hoole  having  an¬ 
swered  that  he  believed  he  was  too  mathemati¬ 
cal,  and  used  to  draw  squares  and  triangles  on 
his  shop-board,  so  that  he  did  not  excel  in  the 
cut  of  a  coat; — “I  am  sorryfor  it  (said  Johnson,) 
for  I  would  have  every  man  to  be  master  of  his 
own  business.33 

In  pleasant  reference  to  himself  and  Mr. 
Hoole,  as  brother  authours,  he  often  said,  “Let 
you  and  I,  Sir,  go  together,  and  eat  a  beef-steak 
in  Grub-street.55 

Sir  William  Chambers,  that  great  Architect,1 
whose  works  shew  a  sublimity  of  genius,  and  who 

xThe  Honourable  Horace  Walpole,  late  Earl  of 
Orford,  thus  bears  testimony  to  this  gentleman's 
merit  as  a  writer: — “Mr.  Chambers’s  Treatise  on 
Civil  Architecture  is  the  most  sensible  book,  and  the 
most  exempt  from  prejudices,  that  ever  was  writ¬ 
ten  on  that  science.33 — Preface  to  Anecdotes  of  Paint¬ 
ing  in  England. 


JOHNSON  503 

is  esteemed  by  all  who  know  him  for  his  social, 
hospitable,  and  generous  qualities,  submitted  the 
manuscript  of  his  Chinese  Architecture  to  Dr.  John¬ 
son’s  perusal.  Johnson  was  much  pleased  with 
it,  and  said,  “It  wants  no  addition  nor  correc¬ 
tion,  but  a  few  lines  of  introduction55;  which  he 
furnished,  and  Sir  William  adopted.2 

He  said  to  Sir  William  Scott,  “The  age  is  run¬ 
ning  mad  after  innovation;  all  the  business  of 
the  world  is  to  be  done  in  a  new  way;  men  are 
to  be  hanged  in  a  new  way;  Tyburn  itself  is  not 
safe  from  the  fury  of  innovation.”  It  having  been 
argued  that  this  was  an  improvement, — “No, 
Sir,  (said  he,  eagerly,)  it  is  not  an  improvement: 
they  object  that  the  old  method  drew  together 
a  number  of  spectators.  Sir,  executions  are  in¬ 
tended  to  draw  spectators.  If  they  do  not  draw 
spectators  they  don’t  answer  their  purpose.  The 
old  method  was  most  satisfactory  to  all  parties; 
the  publick  was  gratified  by  a  procession;  the 
criminal  was  supported  by  it.  Why  is  all  this  to 
be  swept  away?”  I  perfectly  agree  with  Dr.  John¬ 
son  upon  this  head,  and  am  persuaded  that  exe¬ 
cutions  now,  the  solemn  procession  being  dis¬ 
continued,  have  not  nearly  the  effect  which  they 
formerly  had.  Magistrates  both  in  London,  and 
elsewhere,  have,  I  am  afraid,  in  this  had  too  much 
regard  to  their  own  ease. 

Of  Dr.  Hurd,  Bishop  of  Worcester,  Johnson 
said  to  a  friend,  “Hurd,  Sir,  is  one  of  a  set  of 
men  who  account  for  every  thing  systematical¬ 
ly;  for  instance,  it  has  been  a  fashion  to  wear 
scarlet  breeches:  these  men  would  tell  you,  that 
according  to  causes  and  effects,  no  other  wear 
could  at  that  time  have  been  chosen.”  He,  how¬ 
ever,  said  of  him  at  another  time  to  the  same 
gentleman,  “Hurd,  Sir,  is  a  man  whose  acquaint¬ 
ance  is  a  valuable  acquisition.” 

That  learned  and  ingenious  Prelate,  it  is  well 
known,  published  at  one  period  of  his  life  Moral 
and  Political  Dialogues ,  with  a  woefully  whiggish 

2The  introductory  lines  are  these: — “It  is  diffi¬ 
cult  to  avoid  praising  too  little  or  too  much.  The 
boundless  panegyricks  which  have  been  lavished 
upon  the  Chinese  learning,  policy,  and  arts,  shew 
with  what  power  novelty  attracts  regard,  and  how 
naturally  esteem  swells  into  admiration.  I  am  far 
from  desiring  to  be  numbered  among  the  exaggera- 
tors  of  Chinese  excellence.  I  consider  them  as 
great,  or  wise,  only  in  comparison  with  the  nations 
that  surround  them;  and  have  no  intention  to 
place  them  in  competition  either  with  the  ancients 
or  with  the  moderns  of  this  part  of  the  world;  yet 
they  must  be  allowed  to  claim  our  notice  as  a  dis¬ 
tinct  and  very  singular  race  of  men:  as  the  inhabi¬ 
tants  of  a  region  divided  by  its  situation  from  all 
civilized  countries,  who  have  formed  their  own 
manners,  and  invented  their  own  arts,  without  the 
assistance  of  example.33 


BOSWELL 


5°4 

cast.  Afterwards,  his  Lordship  having  thought 
better,  came  to  see  his  errour,  and  republished 
the  work  with  a  more  constitutional  spirit.  John¬ 
son,  however,  was  unwilling  to  allow  him  full 
credit  for  his  political  conversion.  I  remember 
when  his  Lordship  declined  the  honour  of  being 
Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  Johnson  said,  “I  am 
glad  he  did  not  go  to  Lambeth;  for,  after  all,  I 
fear  he  is  a  Whig  in  his  heart.” 

Johnson’s  attention  to  precision  and  clearness 
in  expression  was  very  remarkable.  He  disap¬ 
proved  of  parentheses;  and  I  believe  in  all  his 
voluminous  writings,  not  half  a  dozen  of  them 
will  be  found.  He  never  used  the  phrases  the  for¬ 
mer  and  the  latter ,  having  observed,  that  they  of¬ 
ten  occasioned  obscurity;  he  therefore  contrived 
to  construct  his  sentences  so  as  not  to  have  occa¬ 
sion  for  them,  and  would  even  rather  repeat  the 
same  words,  in  order  to  avoid  them.  Nothing  is 
more  common  than  to  mistake  surnames  when 
we  hear  them  carelessly  uttered  for  the  first  time. 
To  prevent  this,  he  used  not  only  to  pronounce 
them  slowly  and  distinctly,  but  to  take  the  trou¬ 
ble  of  spelling  them;  a  practice  which  I  have 
often  followed;  and  which  I  wish  were  general. 

Such  was  the  heat  and  irritability  of  his  blood, 
that  not  only  did  he  pare  his  nails  to  the  quick; 
but  scraped  the  joints  of  his  fingers  with  a  pen¬ 
knife,  till  they  seemed  quite  red  and  raw. 

The  heterogeneous  composition  of  human  na¬ 
ture  was  remarkably  exemplified  in  Johnson.  His 
liberality  in  giving  his  money  to  persons  in  dis¬ 
tress  was  extraordinary.  Yet  there  lurked  about 
him  a  propensity  to  paultry  saving.  One  day  I 
owned  to  him  that  “I  was  occasionally  troubled 
with  a  fit  of  narrowness .”  “Why,  Sir,  (said  he,)  so 
am  I.  But  I  do  not  tell  it .”  He  has  now  and  then 
borrowed  a  shilling  of  me;  and  when  I  asked  for 
it  aga*in,  seemed  to  be  rather  out  of  humour.  A 
droll  little  circumstance  once  occurred:  as  if  he 
meant  to  reprimand  my  minute  exactness  as  a 
creditor,  he  thus  addressed  me; — “Boswell,  lend 
me  sixpence — not  to  be  repaid 

This  great  man’s  attention  to  small  things  was 
very  remarkable.  As  an  instance  of  it,  he  one 
day  said  to  me,  “Sir,  when  you  get  silver  in  change 
for  a  guinea,  look  carefully  at  it;  you  may  find 
some  curious  piece  of  coin.” 

Though  a  stern  true-born  Englishman ,  and  fully 
prejudiced  against  all  other  nations,  he  had  dis¬ 
cernment  enough  to  see,  and  candour  enough 
to  censure,  the  cold  reserve  too  common  among 
Englishmen  towards  strangers:  “Sir,  (said  he,) 
two  men  of  any  other  nation  who  are  shewn  in¬ 
to  a  room  together,  at  a  house  where  they  are 
both  visitors,  will  immediately  find  some  con¬ 


[  1783 

versation.  But  two  Englishmen  will  probably  go 
each  to  a  different  window,  and  remain  in  ob¬ 
stinate  silence.  Sir,  we  as  yet  do  not  enough  un¬ 
derstand  the  common  rights  of  humanity.” 

Johnson  was  at  a  certain  period  of  his  life  a 
good  deal  with  the  Earl  of  Shelburne,  now  Mar¬ 
quis  of  Lansdown,  as  he  doubtless  could  not  but 
have  a  due  value  for  that  nobleman’s  activity  of 
mind,  and  uncommon  acquisitions  of  important 
knowledge,  however  much  he  might  disapprove 
of  other  parts  of  his  Lordship’s  character,  which 
were  widely  different  from  his  own. 

Maurice  Morgann,  Esq.,  authour  of  the  very 
ingenious  Essay  on  the  character  of  Falstaff J  being 
a  particular  friend  of  his  Lordship,  had  once  an 
opportunity  of  entertaining  Johnson  for  a  day 
or  two  at  Wickham,  when  its  Lord  was  absent, 
and  by  him  I  have  been  favoured  with  two  anec¬ 
dotes. 

One  is  not  a  little  to  the  credit  of  Johnson’s 
candour.  Mr.  Morgann  and  he  had  a  dispute 
pretty  late  at  night,  in  which  Johnson  would  not 
give  up,  though  he  had  the  wrong  side,  and  in 
short,  both  kept  the  field.  Next  morning,  when 
they  met  in  the  breakfasting-room,  Dr.  Johnson 
accosted  Mr.  Morgann  thus: — “Sir,  I  have  been 
thinking  on  our  dispute  last  night — Tou  were  in 
the  right” 

The  other  was  as  follows: — Johnson,  for  sport 
perhaps,  or  from  the  spirit  of  contradiction,  ea¬ 
gerly  maintained  that  Derrick  had  merit  as  a 
writer.  Mr.  Morgann  argued  with  him  directly, 
in  vain.  At  length  he  had  recourse  to  this  device. 
“Pray,  Sir,  (said  he,)  whether  do  you  reckon 
Derrick  or  Smart  the  best  poet?”  Johnson  at  once 
felt  himself  roused;  and  answered,  “Sir,  there  is 
no  settling  the  point  of  precedency  between  a 
louse  and  a  flea.” 

Once,  when  checking  my  boasting  too  fre¬ 
quently  of  myself  in  company,  he  said  to  me, 
“Boswell,  you  often  vaunt  so  much,  as  to  pro¬ 
voke  ridicule.  You  put  me  in  mind  of  a  man  who 
was  standing  in  the  kitchen  of  an  inn  with  his 
back  to  the  fire,  and  thus  accosted  the  person 
next  him,  ‘Do  you  know,  Sir,  who  I  am?’  ‘No, 
Sir,  (said  the  other,)  I  have  not  that  advantage.’ 
‘Sir,  (said  he,)  I  am  the  great  Twalmley,  who 
invented  the  New  Flood-gate  Iron.’  ”2  The  Bish¬ 
op  of  Killaloe,  on  my  repeating  the  story  to  him, 

Johnson  being  asked  his  opinion  of  this  Essay, 
answered,  “Why,  Sir,  we  shall  have  the  man  come 
forth  again;  and  as  he  has  proved  Falstaff  to  be  no 
coward,  he  may  prove  Iago  to  be  a  very  good 
character.” 

2What  the  great  Twalmley  was  so  proud  of  hav¬ 
ing  invented,  was  neither  more  nor  less  than  a 
kind  of  box-iron  for  smoothing  linen. 


1 783  ]  LIFE  OF 

defended  Twalmley,  by  observing,  that  he  was 
entitled  to  the  epithet  of  great ;  for  Virgil  in  his 
groupe  of  worthies  in  the  Elysian  fields — 

Hie  manus  ob  patriam pugnando  vulnera  passi ,  &c. 
mentions 

Inventas  aut  qui  vitam  excoluere per  artes. 

He  was  pleased  to  say  to  me  one  morning  when 
we  were  left  alone  in  his  study,  “Boswell,  I  think 
I  am  easier  with  you  than  with  almost  any  body.55 

He  would  not  allow  Mr.  David  Hume  any 
credit  for  his  political  principles,  though  similar 
to  his  own;  saying  of  him,  “Sir,  he  was  a  Tory 
by  chance.55 

His  acute  observation  of  human  life  made  him 
remark,  “Sir,  there  is  nothing  by  which  a  man 
exasperates  most  people  more,  than  by  display¬ 
ing  a  superiour  ability  or  brilliancy  in  conversa¬ 
tion.  They  seem  pleased  at  the  time;  but  their 
envy  makes  them  curse  him  in  their  hearts.55 

My  readers  will  probably  be  surprised  to 
hear  that  the  great  Dr.  Johnson  could  amuse 
himself  with  so  slight  and  playful  a  species  of  com¬ 
position  as  a  Charade .  I  have  recovered  one  which 
he  made  on  Dr.  Barnard ,  now  Lord  Bishop  of 
Killaloe;  who  has  been  pleased  for  many  years 
to  treat  me  with  so  much  intimacy  and  social 
ease,  that  I  may  presume  to  call  him  not  only 
my  Right  Reverend,  but  my  very  dear  Friend. 
I  therefore  with  peculiar  pleasure  give  to  the 
world  a  just  and  elegant  compliment  thus  paid 
to  his  Lordship  by  Johnson. 

Charade 

My  first1  shuts  out  thieves  from  your  house  or  your  room , 

My  second2  expresses  a  Syrian  perfume. 

My  whole3  is  a  man  in  whose  converse  is  shar'd , 

The  strength  of  a  Bar  and  the  sweetness  of  Nard. 

Johnson  asked  Richard  Owen  Cambridge, 
Esq.,  if  he  had  read  the  Spanish  translation  of 
Sallust ,  said  to  be  written  by  a  Prince  of  Spain, 
with  the  assistance  of  his  tutor,  who  is  professed¬ 
ly  the  authour  of  a  treatise  annexed,  on  the  Phoe¬ 
nician  language. 

Mr.  Cambridge  commended  the  work,  par¬ 
ticularly  as  he  thought  the  Translator  understood 
his  authour  better  than  is  commonly  the  case 
with  Translators:  but  said,  he  was  disappointed 
in  the  purpose  for  which  he  borrowed  the  book; 
to  see  whether  a  Spaniard  could  be  better  fur¬ 
nished  with  inscriptions  from  monuments,  coins, 
or  other  antiquities  which  he  might  more  prob¬ 
ably  find  on  a  coast,  so  immediately  opposite  to 
Carthage,  than  the  Antiquaries  of  any  other 

JBar. 

2Nard. 

3Barnard. 


JOHNSON  505 

countries.  Johnson.  “I  am  very  sorry  you  was 
not  gratified  in  your  expectations.55  Cambridge. 
“The  language  would  have  been  of  little  use,  as 
there  is  no  history  existing  in  that  tongue  to  bal¬ 
ance  the  partial  accounts  which  the  Roman  writ¬ 
ers  have  left  us.55  Johnson.  “No,  Sir.  They  have 
not  been  partial ,  they  have  told  their  own  story, 
without  shame  or  regard  to  equitable  treatment 
of  their  injured  enemy;  they  had  no  compunc¬ 
tion,  no  feeling  for  a  Carthaginian.  Why,  Sir, 
they  would  never  have  borne  VirgiPs  descrip¬ 
tion  of  ^Eneas’s  treatment  of  Dido,  if  she  had  not 
been  a  Carthaginian.55 

I  gratefully  acknowledge  this  and  other  com¬ 
munications  from  Mr.  Cambridge,  whom,  if  a 
beautiful  villa  on  the  banks  of  the  Thames,  a  few 
miles  distant  from  London,  a  numerous  and  ex¬ 
cellent  library,  which  he  accurately  knows  and 
reads,  a  choice  collection  of  pictures,  which  he 
understands  and  relishes,  an  easy  fortune,  an 
amiable  family,  an  extensive  circle  of  friends  and 
acquaintance,  distinguished  by  rank,  fashion  and 
genius,  a  literary  fame,  various,  elegant  and  still 
increasing,  colloquial  talents  rarely  to  be  found, 
and  with  all  these  means  of  happiness,  enjoying, 
when  well  advanced  in  years,  health  and  vigour 
of  body,  serenity  and  animation  of  mind,  do  not 
entitle  to  be  addressed  fortunate  senex 1 1  know  not 
to  whom,  in  any  age,  that  expression  could  with 
propriety  have  been  used.  Long  may  he  live  to 
hear  and  to  feel  it ! 

Johnson’s  love  of  little  children,  which  he  dis¬ 
covered  upon  all  occasions,  calling  them  “pretty 
dears,55  and  giving  them  sweetmeats,  was  an  un¬ 
doubted  proof  of  the  real  humanity  and  gentle¬ 
ness  of  his  disposition. 

His  uncommon  kindness  to  his  servants,  and 
serious  concern,  not  only  for  their  comfort  in  this 
world,  but  their  happiness  in  the  next,  was  an¬ 
other  unquestionable  evidence  of  what  all,  who 
were  intimately  acquainted  with  him,  knew  to 
be  true. 

Nor  would  it  be  just,  under  this  head,  to  omit 
the  fondness  which  he  shewed  for  animals  which 
he  had  taken  under  his  protection.  I  never  shall 
forget  the  indulgence  with  which  he  treated 
Hodge,  his  cat:  for  whom  he  himself  used  to  go 
out  and  buy  oysters,  lest  the  servants  having  that 
trouble  should  take  a  dislike  to  the  poor  crea¬ 
ture.  I  am,  unluckily,  one  of  those  who  have  an 
antipathy  to  a  cat,  so  that  I  am  uneasy  when  in 
the  room  with  one;  and  I  own,  I  frequently  suf¬ 
fered  a  good  deal  from  the  presence  of  this  same 
Hodge.  I  recollect  him  one  day  scrambling  up 
Dr.  Johnson’s  breast,  apparently  with  much  satis¬ 
faction,  while  my  friend  smiling  and  half-whis- 


BOSWELL 


5°6 

tling,  rubbed  down  his  back,  and  pulled  him  by 
the  tail;  and  when  I  observed  he  was  a  fine  cat, 
saying,  “Why  yes,  Sir,  but  I  have  had  cats  whom 
I  liked  better  than  this”;  and  then  as  if  perceiv¬ 
ing  Hodge  to  be  out  of  countenance,  adding, 
“but  he  is  a  very  fine  cat,  a  very  fine  cat  indeed.” 

This  reminds  me  of  the  ludicrous  account 
which  he  gave  Mr.  Langton,  of  the  despicable 
state  of  a  young  Gentleman  of  good  family.  “Sir, 
when  I  heard  of  him  last,  he  was  running  about 
town  shooting  cats.”  And  then  in  a  sort  of  kind¬ 
ly  reverie,  he  bethought  himself  of  his  own  fa¬ 
vourite  cat,  and  said,  “But  Hodge  shan’t  be  shot; 
no,  no,  Hodge  shall  not  be  shot.” 

He  thought  Mr.  Beauclerk  made  a  shrewd  and 
judiciousremarktoMr.  Langton,  who,  after  hav¬ 
ing  been  for  the  first  time  in  company  with  a 
well-known  wit  about  town,  was  warmly  admir¬ 
ing  and  praising  him,  “See  him  again,”  said 
Beauclerk. 

His  respect  for  the  Hierarchy,  and  particular¬ 
ly  the  Dignitaries  of  the  Church,  has  been  more 
than  once  exhibited  in  the  course  of  this  work. 
Mr.  Seward  saw  him  presented  to  the  Arch-bish¬ 
op  of  York,  and  described  his  Bow  to  an  Arch- 
Bishop,  as  such  a  studied  elaboration  of  homage, 
such  an  extension  of  limb,  such  a  flexion  of  body, 
as  have  seldom  or  ever  been  equalled. 

I  cannot  help  mentioning  with  much  regret, 
that  by  my  own  negligence  I  lost  an  opportuni¬ 
ty  of  having  the  history  of  my  family  from  its 
founder  Thomas  Boswell,  in  1504,  recorded  and 
illustrated  by  Johnson’s  pen.  Such  was  his  good¬ 
ness  to  me,  that  when  I  presumed  to  solicit  him 
for  so  great  a  favour,  he  was  pleased  to  say,  “Let 
me  have  all  the  materials  you  can  collect,  and  I 
will  do  it  both  in  Latin  and  English;  then  let  it 
be  printed  and  copies  of  it  be  deposited  in  vari¬ 
ous  places  for  security  and  preservation.”  I  can 
now  only  do  the  best  I  can  to  make  up  for  this 
loss,  keeping  my  great  Master  steadily  in  view. 
Family  histories,  like  the  imagines  majorum  of  the 
Ancients,  excite  to  virtue;  and  I  wish  that  they 
who  really  have  blood,  would  be  more  careful 
to  trace  and  ascertain  its  course.  Some  have  af¬ 
fected  to  laugh  at  the  history  of  the  house  of 
Yvery:  it  would  be  well  if  many  others  would 
transmit  their  pedigrees  to  posterity,  with  the 
same  accuracy  and  generous  zeal  with  which  the 
Noble  Lord  who  compiled  that  work  has  hon¬ 
oured  and  perpetuated  his  ancestry. 

On  Thursday,  April  10,  I  introduced  to  him, 
at  his  house  in  Bolt-court,  the  Honourable  and 
Reverend  William  Stuart,  son  of  the  Earl  of 
Bute;  a  gentleman  truly  worthy  of  being  knowm 
to  Johnson;  being,  with  all  the  advantages  of 


[  1783 

high  birth,  learning,  travel,  and  elegant  man¬ 
ners,  an  exemplary  parish  priest  in  every  respect. 

After  some  compliments  on  both  sides,  the 
tour  which  Johnson  and  I  had  made  to  the  Heb¬ 
rides  was  mentioned.  Johnson.  “I  got  an  acqui¬ 
sition  of  more  ideas  by  it  than  by  any  thing  that 
I  remember.  I  saw  quite  a  different  system  of 
life.”  Boswell.  “You  would  not  like  to  make 
the  same  journey  again?”  Johnson.  “Why  no, 
Sir;  not  the  same:  it  is  a  tale  told.  Gravina,  an 
Italian  critick,  observes,  that  every  man  desires 
to  see  that  of  which  he  has  read;  but  no  man  de¬ 
sires  to  read  an  account  of  what  he  has  seen:  so 
much  does  description  fall  short  of  reality.  Des¬ 
cription  only  excites  curiosity:  seeing  satisfies  it. 
Other  people  may  go  and  see  the  Hebrides.”  Bos¬ 
well.  “  I  should  wish  to  go  and  see  some  country 
totally  different  from  what  I  have  been  used  to; 
such  as  Turkey,  where  religion  and  every  thing 
else  are  different.”  Johnson.  “Yes,  Sir;  there  are 
two  objects  of  curiosity, — the  Christian  world, 
and  the  Mahometan  world.  All  the  rest  may  be 
considered  as  barbarous.”  Boswell.  “Pray,  Sir, 
is  the  Turkish  Spy  a  geniune  book?”  Johnson. 
“No,  Sir.  Mrs.  Manley,  in  her  Life,  says  that  her 
father  wrote  the  first  two  volumes:  and  in  an¬ 
other  book,  Dunton's  Life  and  Errours,  we  find 
that  the  rest  was  written  by  one  Sault ,  at  two 
guineas  a  sheet,  under  the  direction  of  Dr. 
Midgeley.”1 

Boswell.  “This  has  been  a  very  factious  reign, 
owing  to  the  too  great  indulgence  of  Govern¬ 
ment.”  Johnson,  “/think  so,  Sir.  What  at  first 
was  lenity,  grew  timidity.  Yet  this  is  reasoning 
a  posteriori ,  and  may  not  be  just.  Supposing  a 
few  had  at  first  been  punished,  I  believe  faction 
would  have  been  crushed;  but  it  might  have 
been  said,  that  it  was  a  sanguinary  reign.  A 
man  cannot  tell  d.  priori  what  will  be  best  for 
Government  to  do.  This  reign  has  been  very  un¬ 
fortunate.  We  have  had  an  unsuccessful  war; 
but  that  does  not  prove  that  wc  have  been  ill 
governed.  One  side  or  other  must  prevail  in  war, 
as  one  or  other  must  win  at  play.  When  we  beat 
Louis  we  were  not  better  governed;  nor  were 
the  French  better  governed  when  Louis  beat  us.” 

On  Saturday,  April  12,  I  visited  him,  in  com¬ 
pany  with  Mr.  Windham,  of  Norfolk,  whom, 
though  a  Whig,  he  highly  valued.  One  of  the 
best  things  he  ever  said  was  to  this  gentleman; 
who,  before  he  set  out  for  Ireland  as  Secretary 

rFhe  real  authour  was  I.  P.  Marana,  a  Genoese, 
who  died  at  Paris  in  1693.  John  Dunton  in  his  Life 
says,  that  Mr.  William  Bradshaw  received  from  Dr. 
Midgeley  forty  shillings  a  sheet  for  writing  part  ol 
the  Turkish  Spy;  but  I  do  not  find  that  he  any 
where  mentions  Sault  as  engaged  in  that  work.  [M.] 


1783  ]  LIFE  OF 

to  Lord  Northington,  when  Lord  Lieutenant, 
expressed  to  the  Sage  some  modest  and  virtuous 
doubts,  whether  he  could  bring  himself  to  prac¬ 
tise  those  arts  which  it  is  supposed  a  person  in 
that  situation  has  occasion  to  employ.  “Don’t 
be  afraid,  Sir,  (said  Johnson,  with  a  pleasant 
smile,)  you  will  soon  make  a  very  pretty  rascal.” 

He  talked  to-day  a  good  deal  of  the  wonderful 
extent  and  variety  of  London,  and  observed, 
that  men  of  curious  inquiry  might  see  in  it  such 
modes  of  life  as  very  few  could  even  imagine.  He 
in  particular  recommended  to  us  to  explore  Wap- 
pingy  which  we  resolved  to  do.1 

Mr.  Lowe,  the  painter,  who  was  with  him, 
was  very  much  distressed  that  a  large  picture 
which  he  had  painted  was  refused  to  be  received 
into  the  Exhibition  of  the  Royal  Academy.  Mrs. 
Thrale  knew  Johnson’s  character  so  superficial¬ 
ly,  as  to  represent  him  as  unwilling  to  do  small 
acts  of  benevolence;  and  mentions  in  particular, 
that  he  would  hardly  take  the  trouble  to  write  a 
letter  in  favour  of  his  friends.  The  truth,  how¬ 
ever,  is,  that  he  was  remarkable,  in  an  extraor¬ 
dinary  degree,  for  what  she  denies  to  him;  and, 
above  all,  for  this  very  sort  of  kindness,  writing 
letters  for  those  to  whom  his  solicitations  might 
be  of  service.  He  now  gave  Mr.  Lowe  the  fol¬ 
lowing,  of  which  I  was  diligent  enough,  with  his 
permission,  to  take  copies  at  the  next  coffee¬ 
house,  while  Mr.  Windham  was  so  good  as  to 
stay  by  me. 

To  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds 

Sir,  Mr.  Lowe  considers  himself  as  cut  off 
from  all  credit  and  all  hope,  by  the  rejection  of 
his  picture  from  the  Exhibition.  Upon  this  work 
he  has  exhausted  all  his  powers,  and  suspended 
all  his  expectations:  and,  certainly,  to  be  re¬ 
fused  an  opportunity  of  taking  the  opinion  of 
the  publick,  is  in  itself  a  very  great  hardship.  It 
is  to  be  condemned  without  a  trial. 

If  you  could  procure  the  revocation  of  this 
incapacitating  edict,  you  would  deliver  an  un¬ 
happy  man  from  great  affliction.  The  Council 
has  sometimes  reversed  its  own  determination; 
and  I  hope,  that  by  your  interposition  this  luck¬ 
less  picture  may  be  got  admitted.  I  am,  &c. 

Sam.  Johnson 

April  12,  1783 

To  Mr.  Barry 

Sir,  Mr.  Lowe’s  exclusion  from  the  exhibi¬ 
tion  gives  him  more  trouble  than  you  and  the 

1We  accordingly  carried  our  scheme  into  execu¬ 
tion,  in  October,  1 792 ;  but  whether  from  that  uni¬ 
formity  which  has  in  modem  times,  in  a  great  de¬ 
gree,  spread  through  every  part  of  the  Metropolis, 
or  from  our  want  of  sufficient  exertion,  we  were 
disappointed. 


JOHNSON  507 

other  gentlemen  of  the  Council  could  imagine 
or  intend.  He  considers  disgrace  and  ruin  as  the 
inevitable  consequence  of  your  determination. 

He  says,  that  some  pictures  have  been  re¬ 
ceived  after  rejection;  and  if  there  be  any  such 
precedent,  I  earnestly  entreat  that  you  will  use 
your  interest  in  his  favour.  Of  his  work  I  can  say 
nothing;  I  pretend  not  to  judge  of  painting;  and 
this  picture  I  never  saw:  but  I  conceive  it  ex¬ 
tremely  hard  to  shut  out  any  man  from  the  pos¬ 
sibility  of  success;  and  therefore  I  repeat  my 
request  that  you  will  propose  the  re-considera- 
tion  of  Mr.  Lowe’s  case;  and  if  there  be  any 
among  the  Council  with  whom  my  name  can 
have  any  weight,  be  pleased  to  communicate  to 
them  the  desire  of,  Sir,  your  most  humble  serv¬ 
ant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

April  12,  1783 

Such  intercession  was  too  powerful  to  be  re¬ 
sisted;  and  Mr.  Lowe’s  performance  was  ad¬ 
mitted  at  Somerset  Place.  The  subject,  as  I  rec¬ 
ollect,  was  the  Deluge,  at  that  point  of  time 
when  the  water  was  verging  to  the  top  of  the 
last  uncovered  mountain.  Near  to  the  spot  was 
seen  the  last  of  the  antediluvian  race,  exclusive 
of  those  who  were  saved  in  the  ark  of  Noah. 
This  was  one  of  those  giants,  then  the  inhabi¬ 
tants  of  the  earth,  who  had  still  strength  to  swim, 
and  with  one  of  his  hands  held  aloft  his  infant 
child.  Upon  the  small  remaining  dry  spot  ap¬ 
peared  a  famished  lion,  ready  to  spring  at  the 
child  and  devour  it.  Mr.  Lowe  told  me  that 
Johnson  said  to  him,  “Sir,  your  picture  is  noble 
and  probable.”  “A  compliment,  indeed,  (said 
Mr.  Lowe,)  from  a  man  who  cannot  lie,  and 
cannot  be  mistaken.” 

About  this  time  he  wrote  to  Mrs.  Lucy  Porter, 
mentioning  his  bad  health,  and  that  he  intend¬ 
ed  a  visit  to  Lichfield.  “It  is,  (says  he,)  with  no 
great  expectation  of  amendment  that  I  make 
every  year  a  journey  into  the  country;  but  it  is 
pleasant  to  visit  those  whose  kindness  has  been 
often  experienced.” 

On  April  18,  (being  Good-Friday,)  I  found 
him  at  breakfast,  in  his  usual  manner  upon  that 
day,  drinking  tea  without  milk,  and  eating  a 
cross-bun  to  prevent  faintness;  we  went  to  St. 
Clement’s  church,  as  formerly.  When  we  came 
home  from  church,  he  placed  himself  on  one  of 
the  stone-seats  at  his  garden-door,  and  I  took 
the  other,  and  thus  in  the  open  air  and  in  a 
placid  frame  of  mind,  he  talked  away  very  eas¬ 
ily.  Johnson.  “Were  I  a  country  gentleman,  I 
should  not  be  very  hospitable,  I  should  not  have 
crowds  in  my  house.”  Boswell.  “Sir  Alexander 
Dick  tells  me,  that  he  remembers  having  a  thou  • 


BOSWELL 


5°8 

sand  people  in  a  year  to  dine  at  his  house:  that 
is,  reckoning  each  person  as  one,  each  time  that 
he  dined  there.”  Johnson.  “That,  Sir,  is  about 
three  a  day.”  Boswell.  “How  your  statement 
lessens  the  idea.”  Johnson.  “That,  Sir,  is  the 
good  of  counting.  It  brings  every  thing  to  a  cer¬ 
tainty,  which  before  floated  in  the  mind  indefi¬ 
nitely.”  Boswell.  “But  Omne  ignotum  pro  magni- 
fico  est :  one  is  sorry  to  have  this  diminished.” 
Johnson.  “Sir,  you  should  not  allow  yourself  to 
be  delighted  with  errour.”  Boswell.  “Three  a 
day  seem  but  few.”  Johnson.  “Nay,  Sir,  he  who 
entertains  three  a  day,  does  very  liberally.  And 
if  there  is  a  large  family,  the  poor  entertain 
those  three,  for  they  eat  what  the  poor  would 
get:  there  must' be  superfluous  meat;  it  must  be 
given  to  the  poor,  or  thrown  out.”  Boswell.  “I 
observe  in  London,  that  the  poor  go  about  and 
gather  bones,  which  I  understand  are  manu¬ 
factured.”  Johnson.  “Yes,  Sir;  they  boil  them, 
and  extract  a  grease  from  them  for  greasing 
wheels  and  other  purposes.  Of  the  best  pieces 
they  make  a  mock  ivory,  which  is  used  for  hafts 
to  knives,  and  various  other  things;  the  coarser 
pieces  they  burn  and  pound,  and  sell  the  ashes.” 
Boswell.  “For  what  purpose,  Sir?”  Johnson. 
“Why,  Sir,  for  making  a  furnace  for  the  chym- 
ists  for  melting  iron.  A  paste  made  of  burnt 
bones  will  stand  a  stronger  heat  than  any  thing 
else.  Consider,  Sir;  if  you  are  to  melt  iron,  you 
cannot  line  your  pot  with  brass,  because  it  is 
softer  than  iron,  and  would  melt  sooner;  nor 
with  iron,  for  though  malleable  iron  is  harder 
than  cast  iron,  yet  it  would  not  do;  but  a  paste 
of  burnt-bones  will  not  melt.”  Boswell.  “'Do 
you  know,  Sir,  I  have  discovered  a  manufacture 
to  a  great  extent,  of  what  you  only  piddle  at, — 
scraping  and  drying  the  peel  of  oranges.1  At  a 
place  in  Newgate-street,  there  is  a  prodigious 
quantity  prepared,  which  they  sell  to  the  dis¬ 
tillers.”  Johnson.  “Sir,  I  believe  they  make  a 
higher  thing  out  of  them  than  a  spirit;  they 
make  what  is  called  orange-butter,  the  oil  of 
the  orange  inspissated,  which  they  mix  perhaps 
with  common  pomatum,  and  make  it  fragrant. 
The  oil  does  not  fly  off  in  the  drying.” 

Boswell.  “I  wish  to  have  a  good  walled  gar¬ 
den.”  Johnson.  “I  don’t  think  it  would  be  worth 
the  expence  to  you.  We  compute  in  England,  a 
park  wall  at  a  thousand  pounds  a  mile;  now  a 

fft  is  suggested  to  me  by  an  anonymous  Anno¬ 
tator  on  my  Work,  that  the  reason  why  Dr.  John¬ 
son  collected  the  peels  of  squeezed  oranges  may  be 
found  in  the  58th  [358th]  Letter  in  Mrs.  Piozzi’s 
Collection ,  where  it  appears  that  he  recommended 
“dried  orange-peel,  finely  powdered,”  as  a  medi¬ 
cine. 


[  1783 

garden-wall  must  cost  at  least  as  much.  You  in¬ 
tend  your  trees  should  grow  higher  than  a  deer 
will  leap.  Now  let  us  see;  for  a  hundred  pounds 
you  could  only  have  forty-four  square  yards, 
which  is  very  little;  for  two  hundred  pounds, 
you  may  have  eighty-four  square  yards,  which 
is  very  well.  But  when  will  you  get  the  value  of 
two  hundred  pounds  of  walls,  in  fruit,  in  your 
climate?  No,  Sir,  such  contention  with  Nature 
is  not  worth  while.  I  would  plant  an  orchard, 
and  have  plenty  of  such  fruit  as  ripen  well  in 
your  country.  My  friend,  Dr.  Madden,  of  Ire¬ 
land,  said,  that  £in  an  orchard  there  should  be 
enough  to  eat,  enough  to  lay  up,  enough  to  be 
stolen,  and  enough  to  rot  upon  the  ground.’ 
Cherries  are  an  early  fruit,  you  may  have  them; 
and  you  may  have  the  early  apples  and  pears.” 
Boswell.  “We  cannot  have  nonpareils.”  John¬ 
son.  “Sir,  you  can  no  more  have  nonpareils 
than  you  can  have  grapes.”  Boswell.  “We  have 
them,  Sir;  but  they  are  very  bad.”  Johnson. 
“Nay,  Sir,  never  try  to  have  a  thing  merely  to 
shew  that  you  cannot  have  it.  From  ground  that 
would  let  for  forty  shillings  you  may  have  a 
large  orchard;  and  you  see  it  costs  you  only  for¬ 
ty  shillings.  Nay,  you  may  graze  the  ground 
when  the  trees  are  grown  up;  you  cannot  while 
they  are  young.”  Boswell.  “Is  not  a  good  gar¬ 
den  a  very  common  thing  in  England,  Sir?” 
Johnson.  “Not  so  common,  Sir,  as  you  imagine. 
In  Lincolnshire  there  is  hardly  an  orchard;  in 
Staffordshire  very  little  fruit.”  Boswell.  “Has 
Langton  no  orchard?”  Johnson.  “No,  Sir.” 
Boswell.  “How  so,  Sir?”  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir, 
from  the  general  negligence  of  the  county.  He 
has  it  not,  because  nobody  else  has  it.”  Boswell. 
“A  hot-house  is  a  certain  thing;  I  may  have 
that.”  Johnson.  “A  hot-house  is  pretty  certain; 
but  you  must  first  build  it,  then  you  must  keep 
fires  in  it,  and  you  must  have  a  gardener  to  take 
care  of  it.”  Boswell.  “But  if  I  have  a  gardener 
at  any  rate? — ’’Johnson.  “Why,  yes.”  Boswell. 
“I’d  have  it  near  my  house;  there  is  no  need  to 
have  it  in  the  orchard.”  Johnson.  “Yes,  I’d 
have  it  near  my  house.  I  would  plant  a  great 
many  currants;  the  fruit  is  good,  and  they  make 
a  pretty  sweetmeat.” 

I  record  this  minute  detail,  which  some  may 
think  trifling,  in  order  to  shew  clearly  how  this 
great  man,  whose  mind  could  grasp  such  large 
and  extensive  subjects,  as  he  has  shewn  in  his 
literary  labours,  was  yet  well-informed  in  the 
common  affairs  of  life,  and  loved  to  illustrate 
them. 

Mr.  Walker,  the  celebrated  master  of  elocu¬ 
tion,  came  in,  and  then  we  went  up  stairs  into 


1783] 

the  study.  I  asked  him  if  he  had  taught  many 
clergymen.  Johnson.  “I  hope  not.”  Walker. 
“I  have  taught  only  one,  and  he  is  the  best 
reader  I  ever  heard,  not  by  my  teaching,  but  by 
his  own  natural  talents.”  Johnson.  “Were  he 
the  best  reader  in  the  world,  I  would  not  have 
it  told  that  he  was  taught.”  Here  was  one  of  his 
peculiar  prejudices.  Could  it  be  any  disadvan¬ 
tage  to  the  clergyman  to  have  it  known  that  he 
was  taught  an  easy  and  graceful  delivery?  Bos¬ 
well.  “Will  you  not  allow,  Sir,  that  a  man  may 
be  taught  to  read  well?”  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir, 
so  far  as  to  read  better  than  he  might  do  without 
being  taught,  yes.  Formerly  it  was  supposed 
that  there  was  no  difference  in  reading,  but  that 
one  read  as  well  as  another.”  Boswell.  “It  is 
wonderful  to  see  old  Sheridan  as  enthusiastick 
about  oratory  as  ever.”  Walker.  “His  enthu¬ 
siasm  as  to  what  oratory  will  do,  may  be  too 
great:  but  he  reads  well.”  Johnson.  “He  reads 
well,  but  he  reads  low;  and  you  know  it  is  much 
easier  to  read  low  than  to  read  high;  for  when 
you  read  high,  you  are  much  more  limited,  your 
loudest  note  can  be  but  one,  and  so  the  variety 
is  less  in  proportion  to  the  loudness.  Now  some 
people  have  occasion  to  speak  to  an  extensive 
audience,  and  must  speak  loud  to  be  heard.” 
Walker.  “The  art  is  to  read  strong,  though 
low.” 

Talking  of  the  origin  of  language;  Johnson. 
“It  must  have  come  by  inspiration.  A  thousand, 
nay,  a  million  of  children  could  not  invent  a 
language.  While  the  organs  are  pliable,  there  is 
not  understanding  enough  to  form  a  language; 
by  the  time  that  there  is  understanding  enough, 
the  organs  become  stiff.  We  know  that  after  a 
certain  age  we  cannot  learn  to  pronounce  a  new 
language.  No  foreigner,  who  comes  to  England 
when  advanced  in  life,  ever  pronounces  English 
tolerably  well;  at  least  such  instances  are  very 
rare.  When  I  maintain  that  language  must  have 
come  by  inspiration,  I  do  not  mean  that  inspira¬ 
tion  is  required  for  rhetorick,  and  all  the  beau¬ 
ties  of  language;  for  when  once  man  has  lan¬ 
guage,  we  can  conceive  that  he  may  gradually 
form  modifications  of  it.  I  mean  only  that  in¬ 
spiration  seems  to  me  to  be  necessary  to  give 
man  the  faculty  of  speech;  to  inform  him  that 
he  may  have  speech;  which  I  think  he  could  no 
more  find  out  without  inspiration,  than  cows  or 
hogs  would  think  of  such  a  faculty.”  Walker. 
“Do  you  think,  Sir,  that  there  are  any  perfect 
synonimes  in  any  language?”  Johnson.  “Orig¬ 
inally  there  were  not;  but  by  using  words  negli¬ 
gently,  or  in  poetry,  one  word  comes  to  be 
confounded  with  another.” 


509 

He  talked  of  Dr.  Dodd.  “A  friend  of  mine, 
(said  he,)  came  to  me  and  told  me,  that  a  lady 
wished  to  have  Dr.  Dodd’s  picture  in  a  bracelet, 
and  asked  me  for  a  motto.  I  said,  I  could  think 
of  no  better  than  Currat  Lex .  I  was  very  willing 
to  have  him  pardoned,  that  is,  to  have  the  sen¬ 
tence  changed  to  transportation:  but,  when  he 
was  once  hanged,  I  did  not  wish  he  should  be 
made  a  saint.” 

Mrs.  Burney,  wife  of  his  friend  Dr.  Burney, 
came  in,  and  he  seemed  to  be  entertained  with 
her  conversation. 

Garrick’s  funeral  was  talked  of  as  extrava¬ 
gantly  expensive.  Johnson,  from  his  dislike  of 
exaggeration,  would  not  allow  that  it  was  dis¬ 
tinguished  by  any  extraordinary  pomp.  “Were 
there  not  six  horses  to  each  coach?”  said  Mrs. 
Burney.  Johnson.  “Madam,  there  were  no  more 
six  horses  than  six  phoenixes.” 

Mrs.  Burney  wondered  that  some  very  beau¬ 
tiful  new  buildings  should  be  erected  in  Moor- 
fields,  in  so  shocking  a  situation  as  between  Bed¬ 
lam  and  St.  Luke’s  Hospital;  and  said  she  could 
not  live  there.  Johnson.  “Nay,  Madam,  you  see 
nothing  there  to  hurt  you.  You  no  more  think  of 
madness  by  having  windows  that  look  to  Bed¬ 
lam,  than  you  think  of  death  by  having  windows 
that  look  to  a  church- yard.”  Mrs.  Burney. 
“We  may  look  to  a  church-yard,  Sir;  for  it  is 
right  that  we  should  be  kept  in  mind  of  death.” 
Johnson.  “Nay,  Madam,  if  you  go  to  that,  it  is 
right  that  we  should  be  kept  in  mind  of  mad¬ 
ness,  which  is  occasioned  by  too  much  indul¬ 
gence  of  imagination.  I  think  a  very  moral  use 
may  be  made  of  these  new  buildings:  I  would 
have  those  who  have  heated  imaginations  live 
there,  and  take  warning.”  Mrs.  Burney.  “But, 
Sir,  many  of  the  poor  people  that  are  mad,  have 
become  so  from  disease,  or  from  distressing 
events.  It  is,  therefore,  not  their  fault,  but  their 
misfortune;  and,  therefore,  to  think  of  them  is  a 
melancholy  consideration.” 

Time  passed  on  in  conversation  till  it  was  too 
late  for  the  service  of  the  church  at  three  o’clock. 
I  took  a  walk,  and  left  him  alone  for  some  time; 
then  returned,  and  we  had  coffee  and  conversa¬ 
tion  again  by  ourselves. 

I  stated  the  character  of  a  noble  friend  of 
mine,  as  a  curious  case  for  his  opinion: — “He  is 
the  most  inexplicable  man  to  me  that  I  ever 
knew.  Can  you  explain  him,  Sir?  He  is,  I  really 
believe,  noble-minded,  generous,  and  princely. 
But  his  most  intimate  friends  may  be  separated 
from  him  for  years,  without  his  ever  asking  a 
question  concerning  them.  He  will  meet  them 
with  a  formality,  a  coldness,  a  stately  indiffer- 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


BOSWELL 


5IQ 

ence;  but  when  they  come  close  to  him,  and 
fairly  engage  him  in  conversation,  they  find  him 
as  easy,  pleasant,  and  kind,  as  they  could  wish. 
One  then  supposes  that  what  is  so  agreeable  will 
soon  be  renewed;  but  stay  away  from  him  for 
half  a  year,  and  he  will  neither  call  on  you,  nor 
send  to  inquire  about  you.”  Johnson.  “Why, 
Sir,  I  cannot  ascertain  his  character  exactly,  as 
I  do  not  know  him;  but  I  should  not  like  to  have 
such  a  man  for  my  friend.  He  may  love  study, 
and  wish  not  to  be  interrupted  by  his  friends; 
Amici fures  temporis.  He  may  be  a  frivolous  man, 
and  be  so  much  occupied  with  petty  pursuits, 
that  he  may  not  want  friends.  Or  he  may  have  a 
notion  that  there  is  a  dignity  in  appearing  in¬ 
different,  while  he  in  fact  may  not  be  more  in¬ 
different  at  his  heart  than  another.” 

We  went  to  evening  prayers  at  St.  Clement’s, 
at  seven,  and  then  parted. 

On  Sunday,  April  20,  being  Easter-day,  after 
attending  solemn  service  at  St.  Paul’s,  I  came  to 
Dr.  Johnson,  and  found  Mr.  Lowe,  the  painter, 
sitting  with  him.  Mr.  Lowe  mentioned  the  great 
number  of  new  buildings  of  late  in  London,  yet 
that  Dr.  Johnson  had  observed,  that  the  number 
of  inhabitants  was  not  increased.  Johnson. 
“Why,  Sir,  the  bills  of  mortality  prove  that  no 
more  people  die  now  than  formerly;  so  it  is 
plain  no  more  live.  The  register  of  births  proves 
nothing,  for  not  one  tenth  of  the  people  in  Lon¬ 
don  are  born  there.”  Boswell.  “I  believe,  Sir,  a 
great  many  of  the  children  born  in  London  die 
early.”  Johnson.  “Why,  yes,  Sir.”  Boswell. 
“But  those  who  do  live,  are  as  stout  and  strong 
people  as  any:  Dr.  Price  says,  they  must  be  nat¬ 
urally  stonger  to  get  through.”  Johnson.  “That 
is  system,  Sir.  A  great  traveller  observes,  that  it 
is  said  there  are  no  weak  or  deformed  people 
among  the  Indians;  but  he  with  much  sagacity 
assigns  the  reason  of  this,  which  is,  that  the 
hardship  of  their  life  as  hunters  and  fishers  does 
not  allow  weak  or  diseased  children  to  grow  up. 
Now  had  I  been  an  Indian,  I  must  have  died 
early;  my  eyes  would  not  have  served  me  to  get 
food.  I  indeed  now  could  fish,  give  me  English 
tackle;  but  had  I  been  an  Indian  I  must  have 
starved,  or  they  would  have  knocked  me  on  the 
head,  when  they  saw  I  could  do  nothing.”  Bos¬ 
well.  “Perhaps  they  would  have  taken  care  of 
you:  we  are  told  they  are  fond  of  oratory,  you 
would  have  talked  to  them.”  Johnson.  “Nay, 
Sir,  I  should  not  have  lived  long  enough  to  be 
fit  to  talk;  I  should  have  been  dead  before  I  was 
ten  years  old.  Depend  upon  it,  Sir,  a  savage, 
when  he  is  hungry,  will  not  carry  about  with 
him  a  looby  of  nine  years  old,  who  cannot  help 


[  1783 

himself.  They  have  no  affection,  Sir.”  Boswell. 
“I  believe  natural  affection,  of  which  we  hear 
so  much,  is  very  small.”  Johnson.  “Sir,  natural 
affection  is  nothing:  but  affection  from  princi¬ 
ple  and  established  duty  is  sometimes  wonder¬ 
fully  strong.”  Lowe.  “A  hen,  Sir,  will  feed  her 
chickens  in  preference  to  herself.”  Johnson. 
“But  we  don’t  know  that  the  hen  is  hungry;  let 
the  hen  be  fairly  hungry,  and  I’ll  warrant  she’ll 
peck  the  corn  herself.  A  cock,  1  believe,  will  feed 
hens  instead  of  himself;  but  we  don’t  know  that 
the  cock  is  hungry.”  Boswell.  “And  that,  Sir, 
is  not  from  affection  but  gallantry.  But  some  of 
the  Indians  have  affection.”  Johnson.  “Sir, 
that  they  help  some  of  their  children  is  plain; 
for  some  of  them  live,  which  they  could  not  do 
without  being  helped.” 

I  dined  with  him;  the  company  were,  Mrs. 
Williams,  Mrs.  Desmoulins,  and  Mr.  Lowe.  He 
seemed  not  to  be  well,  talked  little,  grew  drowsy 
soon  after  dinner,  and  retired,  upon  which  I 
went  away. 

Having  next  day  gone  to  Mr.  Burke’s  seat  in 
the  country,  from  whence  I  was  recalled  by  an 
express,  that  a  near  relation  of  mine  had  killed 
his  antagonist  in  a  duel,  and  was  himself  dan¬ 
gerously  wounded,  I  saw  little  of  Dr.  Johnson 
till  Monday,  April  28,  when  I  spent  a  consider¬ 
able  part  of  the  day  with  him,  and  introduced 
the  subject,  which  then  chiefly  occupied  my 
mind.  Johnson.  “I  do  not  see,  Sir,  that  fighting 
is  absolutely  forbidden  in  Scripture;  I  see  re¬ 
venge  forbidden,  but  not  self-defence.”  Bos¬ 
well.  “The  Quakers  say  it  is;  ‘Unto  him  that 
smiteth  thee  on  one  cheek,  offer  him  also  the 
other.’  ”  Johnson.  “But  stay,  Sir;  the  text  is 
meant  only  to  have  the  effect  of  moderating  pas¬ 
sion;  it  is  plain  that  we  are  not  to  take  it  in  a 
literal  sense.  We  see  this  from  the  context,  where 
there  are  other  recommendations,  which  I  war¬ 
rant  you  the  Quaker  will  not  take  literally;  as, 
for  instance,  ‘From  him  that  would  borrow  of 
thee,  turn  thou  not  away.’  Let  a  man  whose 
credit  is  bad,  come  to  a  Quaker,  and  say,  ‘Well, 
Sir,  lend  me  a  hundred  pounds’;  he’ll  find  him 
as  unwilling  as  any  other  man.  No,  Sir,  a  man 
may  shoot  the  man  who  invades  his  character, 
as  he  may  shoot  him  who  attempts  to  break  into 
his  house.1  So  in  1745,  my  friend,  Tom  Cum- 

II  think  it  necessary  to  caution  my  readers 
against  concluding  that  in  this  or  any  other  con¬ 
versation  of  Dr.  Johnson,  they  have  his  serious  and 
deliberate  opinion  on  the  subject  of  duelling.  In 
my  Journal  of  a  Tour  to  the  Hebrides ,  3rd  edit.,  p. 
386  [p.  366,  Oct.  24],  it  appears  that  he  made  this 
frank  confession: — “Nobody  at  times,  talks  more 
laxly  than  I  do”;  and yibid.,  p.  231  [Sept.  19,  1773], 


1783]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


ming,  the  Quaker,  said,  he  would  not  fight,  but 
he  would  drive  an  ammunition  cart;  and  we 
know  that  the  Quakers  have  sent  flannel  waist¬ 
coats  to  our  soldiers,  to  enable  them  to  fight 
better.”  Boswell.  “When  a  man  is  the  aggressor, 
and  by  ill-usage  forces  on  a  duel  in  which  he  is 
killed,  have  we  not  little  ground  to  hope  that  he 
is  gone  into  a  state  of  happiness?”  Johnson. 
“Sir,  we  are  not  to  judge  determinately  of  the 
state  in  which  a  man  leaves  this  life.  He  may  in 
a  moment  have  repented  effectually,  and  it  is 
possible  may  have  been  accepted  by  God.  There 
is  in  Camden's  Remains ,  an  epitaph  upon  a  very 
wicked  man,  who  was  killed  by  a  fall  from  his 
horse,  in  which  he  is  supposed  to  say, 

Between  the  stirrup  and  the  ground , 

1  mercy  ask'd,  I  mercy  found." 

Boswell.  “Is  not  the  expression  in  the  Burial- 
service,  ‘in  the  sure  and  certain  hope  of  a  blessed 
resurrection,5  too  strong  to  be  used  indiscrim¬ 
inately,  and,  indeed,  sometimes  when  those  over 
whose  bodies  it  is  said,  have  been  notoriously 
profane?55  Johnson.  “It  is  sure  and  certain  hope , 
Sir;  not  belief .”  I  did  not  insist  further;  but  can¬ 
not  help  thinking  that  less  positive  words  would 
be  more  proper.* 1 

“He  fairly  owned  he  could  not  explain  the  ration¬ 
ality  of  duelling.”  We  may,  therefore,  infer,  that  he 
could  not  think  that  justifiable,  which  seems  so 
inconsistent  with  the  spirit  of  the  Gospel.  At  the 
same  time  it  must  be  confessed,  that  from  the  prev¬ 
alent  notions  of  honour,  a  gentleman  who  receives 
a  challenge  is  reduced  to  a  dreadful  alternative.  A 
remarkable  instance  of  this  is  furnished  by  a  clause 
in  the  will  of  the  late  Colonel  Thomas,  of  the 
Guards,  written  the  night  before  he  fell  in  a  duel, 
Sept.  3,  1783: — “In  the  first  place,  I  commit  my 
soul  to  Almighty  God,  in  hopes  of  his  mercy  and 
pardon  for  the  irreligious  step  I  now  (in  compli¬ 
ance  with  the  unwarrantable  customs  of  this  wick¬ 
ed  world)  put  myself  under  the  necessity  of  taking.” 

1Upon  this  objection  the  Reverend  Mr.  Ralph 
Churton,  Fellow  of  Brazen-nose  College,  Oxford, 
has  favoured  me  with  the  following  satisfactory 
observation: — “The  passage  in  the  Burial-service 
does  not  mean  the  resurrection  of  the  person  in¬ 
terred,  but  the  general  resurrection;  it  is  in  sure 
and  certain  hope  of  the  resurrection;  not  his  resur¬ 
rection.  Where  the  deceased  is  really  spoken  of, 
the  expression  is  very  different  ‘as  our  hope  in  this 
our  brother  doth’  [rest  in  Christ];  a  mode  of  speech 
consistent  with  every  thing  but  absolute  certainty 
that  the  person  departed  doth  not  rest  in  Christ, 
which  no  one  can  be  assured  of,  without  immediate 
revelation  from  Heaven.  In  the  first  of  these  places 
also,  ‘eternal  life’  does  not  necessarily  mean  eter¬ 
nity  of  bliss,  but  merely  the  eternity  of  the  state, 
whether  in  happiness  or  in  misery,  to  ensue  upon 
the  resurrection;  which  is  probably  the  sense  of 
‘the  life  everlasting,’  in  the  Apostles’  Creed.  See 
Wheatly  and  Bennet  on  the  Common  Prayer .” 


Talking  of  a  man  who  was  grown  very  fat,  so 
as  to  be  incommoded  with  corpulency;  he  said, 
“He  eats  too  much,  Sir.55  Boswell.  “I  don’t 
know,  Sir;  you  will  see  one  man  fat  who  eats 
moderately,  and  another  lean  who  eats  a  great 
deal.”  Johnson.  £CNay,  Sir,  whatever  may  be 
the  quantity  that  a  man  eats,  it  is  plain  that  if 
he  is  too  fat,  he  has  eaten  more  than  he  should 
have  done.  One  man  may  have  a  digestion  that 
consumes  food  better  than  common;  but  it  is 
certain  that  solidity  is  encreased  by  putting 
something  to  it.55  Boswell.  “But  may  not  solids 
swell  and  be  distended?”  Johnson.  “Yes,  Sir, 
they  may  swell  and  be  distended;  but  that  is  not 
fat.” 

We  talked  of  the  accusation  against  a  gentle¬ 
man  for  supposed  delinquencies  in  India.  John¬ 
son.  “What  foundation  there  is  for  accusation  I 
know  not,  but  they  will  not  get  at  him.  Wher6$ 
bad  actions  are  committed  at  so  great  a  distance, 
a  delinquent  can  obscure  the  evidence  till  the 
scent  becomes  cold;  there  is  a  cloud  between, 
which  cannot  be  penetrated:  therefore  all  dis¬ 
tant  power  is  bad.  I  am  clear  that  the  best  plan 
for  the  government  of  India  is  a  despotick  gov- 
ernour;  for  if  he  be  a  good  man,  it  is  evidently 
the  best  government;  and  supposing  him  to  be  a 
bad  man,  it  is  better  to  have  one  plunderer  than 
many.  A  governour  whose  power  is  checked, 
lets  others  plunder,  that  he  himself  may  be  al¬ 
lowed  to  plunder;  but  if  despotick,  he  sees  that 
the  more  he  lets  others  plunder,  the  less  there 
will  be  for  himself,  so  he  restrains  them;  and 
though  he  himself  plunders,  the  country  is  a 
gainer,  compared  with  being  plundered  by 
numbers.” 

I  mentioned  the  very  liberal  payment  which 
had  been  received  for  reviewing;  and,  as  evi¬ 
dence  of  this,  that  it  had  been  proved  in  a  trial, 
that  Dr.  Shebbeare  had  received  six  guineas  a 
sheet  for  that  kind  of  literary  labour.  Johnson. 
“Sir,  he  might  get  six  guineas  for  a  particular 
sheet,  but  not  communibus  sheetibus .”  Boswell. 
“Pray,  Sir,  by  a  sheet  of  review  is  it  meant  that 
it  shall  be  all  of  the  writer’s  own  composition,  or 
are  extracts,  made  from  the  book  reviewed,  de¬ 
ducted?”  Johnson.  “No,  Sir:  it  is  a  sheet,  no 
matter  of  what.”  Boswell.  “I  think  that  it  is 
not  reasonable.”  Johnson.  “Yes,  Sir,  it  is.  A 
man  will  more  easily  write  a  sheet  all  his  own, 
than  read  an  octavo  volume  to  get  extracts.”  To 
one  of  Johnson’s  wonderful  fertility  of  mind  I 
believe  writing  was  really  easier  than  reading 
and  extracting;  but  with  ordinary  men  the  case 
is  very  different.  A  great  deal,  indeed,  will  de¬ 
pend  upon  the  care  and  judgement  with  which 


5X2 

the  extracts  are  made.  I  can  suppose  the  opera¬ 
tion  to  be  tedious  and  difficult:  but  in  many  in¬ 
stances  we  must  observe  crude  morsels  cut  out 
of  books  as  if  at  random;  and  when  a  large  ex¬ 
tract  is  made  from  one  place,  it  surely  may  be 
done  with  very  little  trouble.  One  however,  I 
must  acknowledge,  might  be  led,  from  the  prac¬ 
tice  of  reviewers,  to  suppose  that  they  take  a 
pleasure  in  original  writing;  for  we  often  find, 
that  instead  of  giving  an  accurate  account  of 
what  has  been  done  by  the  authour  whose  work 
they  are  reviewing,  which  is  surely  the  proper 
business  of  a  literary  journal,  they  produce 
some  plausible  and  ingenious  conceits  of  their 
own,  upon  the  topicks  which  have  been  dis¬ 
cussed. 

Upon  being  told  that  old  Mr.  Sheridan,  in¬ 
dignant  at  the  neglect  of  his  oratorical  plans, 
had  threatened  to  go  to  America;  Johnson.  “I 
hope  he  will  go  to  America.”  Boswell.  “The 
Americans  don’t  want  oratory.”  Johnson.  “But 
we  can  want  Sheridan.” 

On  Monday,  April  29,  I  found  him  at  home 
in  the  forenoon,  and  Mr.  Seward  with  him. 
Horace  having  been  mentioned;  Boswell. 
“There  is  a  great  deal  of  thinking  in  his  works. 
One  finds  there  almost  every  thing  but  religion.” 
Seward.  “He  speaks  of  his  returning  to  it,  in 
his  Ode  P arcus  Deorum  cultor  et  injrequens .”  John¬ 
son.  “Sir,  he  was  not  in  earnest:  this  was  merely 
poetical.”  Boswell.  “There  are,  I  am  afraid, 
many  people  who  have  no  religion  at  all.” 
Seward.  “And  sensible  people  too.”  Johnson. 
“Why,  Sir,  not  sensible  in  that  respect.  There 
must  be  either  a  natural  or  a  moral  stupidity,  if 
one  lives  in  a  total  neglect  of  so  very  important 
a  concern.”  Seward.  “I  wonder  that  there 
should  be  people  without  religion.”  Johnson. 
“Sir,  you  need  not  wonder  at  this,  when  you 
consider  how  large  a  proportion  of  almost  every 
man’s  life  is  passed  without  thinking  of  it.  I  my¬ 
self  was  for  some  years  totally  regardless  of  reli¬ 
gion.  It  had  dropped  out  of  my  mind.  It  was  at 
an  early  part  of  my  life.  Sickness  brought  it 
back,  and  I  hope  I  have  never  lost  it  since.” 
Boswell.  “My  dear  Sir,  what  a  man  must  you 
have  been  without  religion !  Why  you  must  have 
gone  on  drinking,  and  swearing,  and — ”  John¬ 
son.  (with  a  smile,)  “I  drank  enough  and  swore 
enough,  to  be  sure.”  Seward.  “One  should 
think  that  sickness  and  the  view  of  death  would 
make  more  men  religious.”  Johnson.  “Sir,  they 
do  not  know  how  to  go  about  it:  they  have  not 
the  first  notion.  A  man  who  has  never  had 
religion  before,  no  more  grows  religious  when 
he  is  sick,  than  a  man  who  has  never  learnt 


[  1783 

figures  can  count  when  he  has  need  of  calcula¬ 
tion.” 

I  mentioned  a  worthy  friend  of  ours  whom  we 
valued  much,  but  observed  that  he  was  too 
ready  to  introduce  religious  discourse  upon  all 
occasions.  Johnson.  “Why,  yes,  Sir,  he  will  intro¬ 
duce  religious  discourse  without  seeing  whether 
it  will  end  in  instruction  and  improvement,  or 
produce  some  profane  jest.  He  would  introduce 
it  in  the  company  of  Wilkes,  and  twenty  more 
such.” 

I  mentioned  Dr.  Johnson’s  excellent  distinc¬ 
tion  between  liberty  of  conscience  and  liberty 
of  teaching.  Johnson.  “Consider,  Sir;  if  you 
have  children  whom  you  wish  to  educate  in  the 
principles  of  the  Church  of  England,  and  there 
comes  a  Quaker  who  tries  to  pervert  them  to  his 
principles,  you  would  drive  away  the  Quaker. 
You  would  not  trust  to  the  predomination  of 
right,  which  you  believe  is  in  your  opinions;  you 
would  keep  wrong  out  of  their  heads.  Now  the 
vulgar  are  the  children  of  the  State.  If  any  one 
attempts  to  teach  them  doctrines  contrary  to 
what  the  State  approves,  the  magistrate  may 
and  ought  to  restrain  him.”  Seward.  “Would 
you  restrain  private  conversation,  Sir?”  John¬ 
son.  “Why,  Sir,  it  is  difficult  to  say  where  pri¬ 
vate  conversation  begins,  and  where  it  ends.  If 
we  three  should  discuss  even  the  great  question 
concerning  the  existence  of  a  Supreme  Being  by 
ourselves,  we  should  not  be  restrained;  for  that 
would  be  to  put  an  end  to  all  improvement. 
But  if  we  should  discuss  it  in  the  presence  of  ten 
boarding-school  girls,  and  as  many  boys,  I  think 
the  magistrate  would  do  well  to  put  us  in  the 
stocks,  to  finish  the  debate  there.” 

Lord  Hailes  had  sent  him  a  present  of  a  cur¬ 
ious  little  printed  poem,  on  repairing  the  Uni¬ 
versity  of  Aberdeen,  by  David  Malloch ,  which 
he  thought  would  please  Johnson,  as  affording 
clear  evidence  that  Mallet  had  appeared  even 
as  a  literary  character  by  the  name  of  Malloch; 
his  changing  which  to  one  of  softer  sound,  had 
given  Johnson  occasion  to  introduce  him  into 
his  Dictionary ,  under  the  article  Alias.1  This  piece 
was,  I  suppose,  one  of  Mallet’s  first  essays.  It  is 
preserved  in  his  works,  with  several  variations. 
Johnson  having  read  aloud,  from  the  beginning 
of  it,  where  there  were  some  common-place  as¬ 
sertions  as  to  the  superiority  of  ancient  times; — 
“How  false  (said  he,)  is  all  this,  to  say  that  in 
ancient  times  learning  was  not  a  disgrace  to  a 
Peer  as  it  is  now.  In  ancient  times  a  Peer  was  as 

1Malloch  continued  to  write  his  name  thus,  after 
he  came  to  London.  His  verses  prefixed  to  the  second 
edition  of  Thomson’s  Winter  are  so  subscribed.  [M.] 


BOSWELL 


1783] 

ignorant  as  any  one  else.  He  would  have  been 
angry  to  have  it  thought  he  could  write  his  name. 
Men  in  ancient  times  dared  to  stand  forth  with 
a  degree  of  ignorance  with  which  nobody  would 
dare  now  to  stand  forth.  I  am  always  angry 
when  I  hear  ancient  times  praised  at  the  expence 
of  modern  times.  There  is  now  a  great  deal  more 
learning  in  the  world  than  there  was  formerly; 
for  it  is  universally  diffused.  You  have,  perhaps, 
no  man  who  knows  as  much  Greek  and  Latin 
as  Bentley;  no  man  who  knows  as  much  math- 
ematicks  as  Newton:  but  you  have  many  more 
men  who  know  Greek  and  Latin,  and  who  know 
mathematicks.” 

On  Thursday,  May  1,  I  visited  him  in  the 
evening  along  with  young  Mr.  Burke.  He  said, 
“It  is  strange  that  there  should  be  so  little  read¬ 
ing  in  the  world,  and  so  much  writing.  People 
in  general  do  not  willingly  read,  if  they  can  have 
any  thing  else  to  amuse  them.  There  must  be 
an  external  impulse;  emulation,  or  vanity,  or 
avarice.  The  progress  which  the  understanding 
makes  through  a  book,  has  more  pain  than 
pleasure  in  it.  Language  is  scanty,  and  inade¬ 
quate  to  express  the  nice  gradations  and  mix¬ 
tures  of  our  feelings.  No  man  reads  a  book  of 
science  from  pure  inclination.  The  books  that 
we  do  read  with  pleasure  are  light  compositions, 
which  contain  a  quick  succession  of  events.  How¬ 
ever,  I  have  this  year  read  all  Virgil  through.  I 
read  a  book  of  the  JEneid  every  night,  so  it  was 
done  in  twelve  nights,  and  I  had  great  delight 
in  it.  The  Georgicks  did  not  give  me  so  much 
pleasure,  except  the  fourth  book.  The  Eclogues  I 
have  almost  all  by  heart.  I  do  not  think  the  story 
of  the  JEneid  interesting.  I  like  the  story  of  the 
Odyssey  much  better;  and  this  not  on  account  of 
the  wonderful  things  which  it  contains;  for  there 
are  wonderful  things  enough  in  the  /Eneid; — the 
ships  of  the  Trojans  turned  to  sea-nymphs, — the 
tree  at  Polydorus’s  tomb  dropping  blood.  The 
story  of  the  Odyssey  is  interesting,  as  a  great  part 
of  it  is  domestick.  It  has  been  said,  there  is  pleas¬ 
ure  in  writing,  particularly  in  writing  verses.  I 
allow  you  may  have  pleasure  from  writing,  after 
it  is  over,  if  you  have  written  well;  but  you  don’t 
go  willingly  to  it  again.  I  know  when  I  have 
been  writing  verses,  I  have  run  my  finger  down 
the  margin,  to  see  how  many  I  had  made,  and 
how  few  I  had  to  make.” 

He  seemed  to  be  in  a  very  placid  humour,  and 
although  I  have  no  note  of  the  particulars  of 
young  Mr.  Burke’s  conversation,  it  is  but  justice 
to  mention  in  general,  that  it  was  such  that  Dr. 
Johnson  said  to  me  afterwards,  “He  did  very 
well  indeed:  I  have  a  mind  to  tell  his  father.” 


5*3 

To  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds 

Dear  Sir,  The  gentleman  who  waits  on  you 
with  this,  is  Mr.  Cruikshanks,  who  wishes  to 
succeed  his  friend  Dr.  Hunter  as  Professor  of 
Anatomy  in  the  Royal  Academy.  His  qualifica¬ 
tions  are  very  generally  known,  and  it  adds  dig¬ 
nity  to  the  institution  that  such  men1  are  candi¬ 
dates.  I  am,  Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

May  2,  1 783 

I  have  no  minute  of  any  interview  with  John¬ 
son  till  Thursday,  May  15,  when  I  find  what 
follows: — Boswell.  “I  wish  much  to  be  in  Par¬ 
liament,  Sir.”  Johnson.  “Why,  Sir,  unless  you 
come  resolved  to  support  any  administration, 
you  would  be  the  worse  for  being  in  Parliament, 
because  you  would  be  obliged  to  live  more  ex¬ 
pensively.”  Boswell.  “Perhaps,  Sir,  I  should 
be  the  less  happy  for  being  in  Parliament.  I  nev¬ 
er  would  sell  my  vote,  and  I  should  be  vexed  if 
things  went  wrong.”  Johnson.  “That’s  cant, 
Sir.  It  would  not  vex  you  more  in  the  house, 
than  in  the  gallery:  publick  affairs  vex  no  man.” 
Boswell.  “Have  not  they  vexed  yourself  a  lit¬ 
tle,  Sir?  Have  not  you  been  vexed  by  all  the  tur¬ 
bulence  of  this  reign,  and  by  that  absurd  vote  of 
the  House  of  Commons,  ‘That  the  influence  of 
the  Grown  has  increased,  is  increasing,  and  ought 
to  be  diminished?’  ’’Johnson.  “Sir,  I  have  never 
slept  an  hour  less,  nor  eat  an  ounce  less  meat.  I 
would  have  knocked  the  factious  dogs  on  the 
head,  to  be  sure;  but  I  was  not  vexed”  Boswell. 
“I  declare,  Sir,  upon  my  honour,  I  did  imagine 
I  was  vexed,  and  took  a  pride  in  it;  but  it  was , 
perhaps,  cant;  for  I  own  I  neither  ate  less,  nor 
slept  less.”  Johnson.  “My  dear  friend,  clear 
your  mind  of  cant.  You  may  talk  as  other  people 
do:  you  may  say  to  a  man,  ‘Sir,  I  am  your  most 
humble  servant.’  You  are  not  his  most  humble 
servant.  You  may  say,  ‘These  are  bad  times;  it 
is  a  melancholy  thing  to  be  reserved  to  such 
times.’  You  don’t  mind  the  times.  You  tell  a 
man,  ‘I  am  sorry  you  had  such  bad  weather  the 
last  day  of  your  journey,  and  were  so  much  wet.’ 
You  don’t  care  six-pence  whether  he  is  wet  or 
dry.  You  may  talk  in  this  manner;  it  is  a  mode 
of  talking  in  Society:  but  don’t  think  foolishly.” 

I  talked  of  living  in  the  country.  Johnson. 
“Don’t  set  up  for  what  is  called  hospitality;  it  is 
a  waste  of  time,  and  a  waste  of  money;  you  are 
eaten  up,  and  not  the  more  respected  for  your 
liberality.  If  your  house  be  like  an  inn,  nobody 
cares  for  you.  A  man  who  stays  a  week  with  an¬ 
other,  makes  him  a  slave  for  a  week.”  Boswell. 

JLet  it  be  remembered  by  those  who  accuse  Dr. 
Johnson  of  illiberality  that  both  were  Scotchmen . 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


5H 

“But  there  are  people,  Sir,  who  make  their 
houses  a  home  to  their  guests,  and  are  themselves 
quite  easy.”  Johnson.  “Then,  Sir,  home  must 
be  the  same  to  the  guests,  and  they  need  not 
come.” 

Here  he  discovered  a  notion  common  enough 
in  persons  not  much  accustomed  to  entertain 
company,  that  there  must  be  a  degree  of  elab¬ 
orate  attention,  otherwise  company  will  think 
themselves  neglected;  and  such  attention  is  no 
doubt  very  fatiguing.  He  proceeded:  CT  would 
not,  however,  be  a  stranger  in  my  own  county; 
I  would  visit  my  neighbours,  and  receive  their 
visits;  but  I  would  not  be  in  haste  to  return  vis¬ 
its.  If  a  gentleman  comes  to  see  me,  I  tell  him  he 
does  me  a  great  deal  of  honour.  I  do  not  go  to 
see  him  perhaps  for  ten  weeks;  then  we  are  very 
complaisant  to  each  other.  No,  Sir,  you  will  have 
much  more  influence  by  giving  or  lending  mon¬ 
ey  where  it  is  wanted,  than  by  hospitality.” 

On  Saturday,  May  1 7,  I  saw  him  for  a  short 
time.  Having  mentioned  that  I  had  that  morn¬ 
ing  been  with  old  Mr.  Sheridan,  he  remembered 
their  former  intimacy  with  a  cordial  warmth, 
and  said  to  me,  “Tell  Mr.  Sheridan,  I  shall  be 
glad  to  see  him,  and  shake  hands  with  him.” 
Boswell.  “It  is  to  me  very  wonderful  that  re¬ 
sentment  should  be  kept  up  so  long.”  Johnson. 
“Why,  Sir,  it  is  not  altogether  resentment  that 
he  does  not  visit  me;  it  is  partly  falling  out  of  the 
habit, — partly  disgust,  as  one  has  at  a  drug  that 
has  made  him  sick.  Besides,  he  knows  that  I 
laugh  at  his  oratory.” 

Another  day  I  spoke  of  one  of  our  friends,  of 
whom  he,  as  well  as  I,  had  a  very  high  opinion. 
He  expatiated  in  his  praise;  but  added,  “Sir,  he 
is  a  cursed  Whig,  a  bottomless  Whig,  as  they  all 
are  now.” 

I  mentioned  my  expectations  from  the  inter¬ 
est  of  an  eminent  person  then  in  power;  adding, 
“but  I  have  no  claim  but  the  claim  of  friend¬ 
ship;  however,  some  people  will  go  a  great  way 
from  that  motive.”  Johnson.  “Sir,  they  will  go 
all  the  way  from  that  motive.”  A  gentleman 
talked  of  retiring.  “Never  think  of  that,”  said 
Johnson.  The  gentleman  urged,  “I  should  then 
do  no  ill.”  Johnson.  “Nor  no  good  either.  Sir, 
it  would  be  a  civil  suicide.” 

On  Monday,  May  26,  I  found  him  at  tea,  and 
the  celebrated  Miss  Burney,  the  authour  of  Eve¬ 
lina  and  Cecilia ,  with  him.  I  asked  if  there  would 
be  any  speakers  in  Parliament,  if  there  were  no 
places  to  be  obtained.  Johnson.  “Yes,  Sir.  Why 
do  you  speak  here?  Either  to  instruct  and  enter¬ 
tain,  which  is  a  benevolent  motive;  or  for  dis¬ 
tinction,  which  is  a  selfish  motive.”  I  mentioned 


[  1783 

Cecilia .  Johnson,  (with  an  air  of  animated  satis¬ 
faction,)  “Sir,  if  you  talk  of  Cecilia ,  talk  on.” 

We  talked  of  Mr.  Barry’s  exhibition  of  his  pic¬ 
tures.  Johnson.  ‘‘Whatever  the  hand  may  have 
done,  the  mind  has  done  its  part.  There  is  a 
grasp  of  mind  there  which  you  find  nowhere 
else.”1 

I  asked  whether  a  man  naturally  virtuous,  or 
one  who  has  overcome  wicked  inclinations,  is 
the  best.  Johnson.  “Sir,  to  you ,  the  man  who 
has  overcome  wicked  inclinations  is  not  the  best. 
He  has  more  merit  to  himselj'.  I  would  rather 
trust  my  money  to  a  man  who  has  no  hands, 
and  so  a  physical  impossibility  to  steal,  than  to 
a  man  of  the  most  honest  principles.  There  is  a 
witty  satirical  story  of  Foote.  He  had  a  small 
bust  of  Garrick  placed  upon  his  bureau.  ‘You 
may  be  surprized  (said  he,)  that  I  allow  him  to 
be  so  near  my  gold; — but  you  will  observe  he 
has  no  hands.’  ” 

On  Friday,  May  29,  being  to  set  out  for  Scot¬ 
land  next  morning,  I  passed  a  part  of  the  day 
with  him  in  more  than  usual  earnestness;  as  his 
health  was  in  a  more  precarious  state  than  at 
any  time  when  I  had  parted  from  him.  He,  how¬ 
ever,  was  quick  and  lively,  and  critical  as  usual. 
I  mentioned  one  who  was  a  very  learned  man. 
Johnson.  “Yes,  Sir,  he  has  a  great  deal  of  learn¬ 
ing;  but  it  never  lies  straight.  There  is  never  one 
idea  by  the  side  of  another;  ’tis  all  entangled: 
and  then  he  drives  it  so  aukwardly  upon  con¬ 
versation.” 

I  stated  to  him  an  anxious  thought,  by  which 
a  sincere  Christian  might  be  disturbed,  even 
when  conscious  of  having  lived  a  good  life,  so 
far  as  is  consistent  with  human  infirmity;  he 
might  fear  that  he  should  afterwards  fall  away, 
and  be  guilty  of  such  crimes  as  would  render  all 
his  former  religion  in  vain.  Could  there  be,  up¬ 
on  this  aweful  subject,  such  a  thing  as  balancing 
of  accounts?  Suppose  a  man  who  has  led  a  good 
life  for  seven  years,  commits  an  act  of  wicked¬ 
ness,  and  instantly  dies;  will  his  former  good 
life  have  any  effect  in  his  favour?  Johnson.  “Sir, 
if  a  man  has  led  a  good  life  for  seven  years,  and 
then  is  hurried  by  passion  to  do  what  is  wrong, 
and  is  suddenly  carried  off,  depend  upon  it  he 
will  have  the  reward  of  his  seven  years’  good 
life;  God  will  not  take  a  catch  of  him.  Upon  this 
principle  Richard  Baxter  believes  that  a  Suicide 
may  be  saved.  ‘If,  (says  he,)  it  should  be  object¬ 
ed  that  what  I  maintain  may  encourage  suicide, 
I  answer,  I  am  not  to  tell  a  lie  to  prevent  it.’  ” 

JIn  Mr.  Barry’s  printed  analysis,  or  description 
of  these  pictures,  he  speaks  of  Johnson’s  character 
in  the  highest  terms. 


BOSWELL 


1783]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  515 


Boswell.  “But  does  not  the  text  say,  {As  the 
tree  falls,  so  it  must  lie?5  55  Johnson.  “Yes,  Sir;  as 
the  tree  falls:  but, — (after  a  little  pause) — that 
is  meant  as  to  the  general  state  of  the  tree,  not 
what  is  the  effect  of  a  sudden  blast.55  In  short, 
he  interpreted  the  expression  as  referring  to  con¬ 
dition,  not  to  position.  The  common  notion, 
therefore,  seems  to  be  erroneous;  and  Shen- 
stone’s  witty  remark  on  Divines  trying  to  give 
the  tree  a  jerk  upon  a  death-bed,  to  make  it  lie 
favourably,  is  not  well  founded. 

I  asked  him  what  works  of  Richard  Baxter’s 
I  should  read.  He  said,  “Read  any  of  them;  they 
are  all  good.55 

He  said,  “Get  as  much  force  of  mind  as  you 
can.  Live  within  your  income.  Always  have 
something  saved  at  the  end  of  the  year.  Let  your 
imports  be  more  than  your  exports,  and  you’ll 
never  go  far  wrong.55 

I  assured  him,  that  in  the  extensive  and  var¬ 
ious  range  of  his  acquaintance  there  never  had 
been  any  one  who  had  a  more  sincere  respect 
and  affection  for  him  than  I  had.  He  said,  “I 
believe  it,  Sir.  Were  I  in  distress,  there  is  no  man 
to  whom  I  should  sooner  come  than  to  you.  I 
should  like  to  come  and  have  a  cottage  in  your 
park,  toddle  about,  live  mostly  on  milk,  and  be 
taken  care  of  by  Mrs.  Boswell.  She  and  I  are 
good  friends  now;  are  we  not?55 

Talking  of  devotion,  he  said,  “Though  it  be 
true  that  cGod  dwelleth  not  in  temples  made 
with  hands,5  yet  in  this  state  of  being,  our  minds 
are  more  piously  affected  in  places  appropriat¬ 
ed  to  divine  worship,  than  in  others.  Some  peo¬ 
ple  have  a  particular  room  in  their  house,  where 
they  say  their  prayers;  of  which  I  do  not  disap¬ 
prove,  as  it  may  animate  their  devotion.55 

He  embraced  me,  and  gave  me  his  blessing, 
as  usual  when  I  was  leaving  him  for  any  length 
of  time.  I  walked  from  his  door  to-day,  with  a 
fearful  apprehension  of  what  might  happen  be¬ 
fore  I  returned. 

To  the  Right  Honourable 
William  Windham 

Sir,  The  bringer  of  this  letter  is  the  father  of 
Miss  Philips,1  a  singer,  who  comes  to  try  her 
voice  on  the  stage  at  Dublin. 

Mr.  Philips  is  one  of  my  old  friends;  and  as  I 
am  of  opinion  that  neither  he  nor  his  daughter 
will  do  any  thing  that  can  disgrace  their  bene¬ 
factors,  I  take  the  liberty  of  entreating  you  to 
countenance  and  protect  them  so  far  as  may  be 
suitable  to  your  station2  and  character;  and 

xNow  the  celebrated  Mrs.  Crouch. 

2 Mr.  Windham  was  at  this  time  in  Dublin,  Sec¬ 
retary  to  the  Earl  of  Northington,  then  Lord  Lieu¬ 
tenant  of  Ireland. 


shall  consider  myself  as  obliged  by  any  favour¬ 
able  notice  which  they  shall  have  the  honour  of 
receiving  from  you.  I  am,  Sir,  your  most  hum¬ 
ble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

London,  May  31,  1783 

The  following  is  another  instance  of  his  ac¬ 
tive  benevolence: 

To  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds 

Dear  Sir,  I  have  sent  you  some  of  my  god¬ 
son’s3  performances,  of  which  I  do  not  pretend 
to  form  any  opinion.  When  I  took  the  liberty  of 
mentioning  him  to  you,  I  did  not  know  what  I 
have  since  been  told,  that  Mr.  Moser  had  ad¬ 
mitted  him  among  the  Students  of  the  Acad¬ 
emy.  What  more  can  be  done  for  him  I  earnest¬ 
ly  entreat  you  to  consider;  for  I  am  very  desir¬ 
ous  that  he  should  derive  some  advantage  from 
my  connection  with  him.  If  you  are  inclined  to 
see  him,  I  will  bring  him  to  wait  on  you,  at  any 
time  that  you  shall  be  pleased  to  appoint.  I  am, 
Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

June  2,  1 783 

My  anxious  apprehensions  at  parting  with 
him  this  year,  proved  to  be  but  too  well  found¬ 
ed;  for  not  long  afterwards  he  had  a  dreadful 
stroke  of  the  palsy,  of  which  there  are  very  full 
and  accurate  accounts  in  letters  written  by  him¬ 
self,  to  shew  with  what  composure  of  mind,  and 
resignation  to  the  Divine  Will,  his  steady  piety 
enabled  him  to  behave. 

To  Mr.  Edmund  Allen 

Dear  Sir,  It  has  pleased  God,  this  morning, 
to  deprive  me  of  the  powers  of  speech;  and  as  I 
do  not  know  but  that  it  may  be  his  further  good 
pleasure  to  deprive  me  soon  of  my  senses,  I  re¬ 
quest  you  will  on  the  receipt  of  this  note,  come 
to  me,  and  act  for  me,  as  the  exigencies  of  my 
case  may  require.  I  am,  sincerely  yours, 

Sam.  Johnson 

June  17,  1783 

To  the  Reverend  Dr.  John  Taylor 

Dear  Sir,  It  has  pleased  God,  by  a  Paraly- 
tick  stroke  in  the  night,  to  deprive  me  of  speech. 

I  am  very  desirous  of  Dr.  Heberden’s  assist¬ 
ance,  as  I  think  my  case  is  not  past  remedy.  Let 
me  see  you  as  soon  as  it  is  possible.  Bring  Dr. 
Heberden  with  you,  if  you  can;  but  come  your¬ 
self  at  all  events.  I  am  glad  you  are  so  well, 
when  I  am  so  dreadfully  attacked. 

I  think  that  by  a  speedy  application  of  stimu¬ 
lants  much  may  be  done.  I  question  if  a  vomit, 
vigorous  and  rough,  would  not  rouse  the  organs 
of  speech  to  action.  As  it  is  too  early  to  send,  I 

3Son  of  Mr.  Samuel  Paterson. 


516 

will  try  to  recollect  what  I  can,  that  can  be  sus¬ 
pected  to  have  brought  on  this  dreadful  dis¬ 
tress. 

1  have  been  accustomed  to  bleed  frequently 
for  an  asthmatick  complaint;  but  have  forborne 
for  some  time  by  Dr.  Pepys’s  persuasion,  who 
perceived  my  legs  beginning  to  swell.  I  some¬ 
times  alleviate  a  painful,  or  more  properly  an 
oppressive,  constriction  of  my  chest,  by  opiates; 
and  have  lately  taken  opium  frequently,  but 
the  last,  or  two  last  times,  in  smaller  quantities. 
My  largest  dose  is  three  grains,  and  last  night  I 
took  but  two.  You  will  suggest  these  things  (and 
they  are  all  that  I  can  call  to  mind)  to  Dr. 
Heberden.  I  am,  &c. 

Sam.  Johnson 

June  17,  1783 

Two  days  after  he  wrote  thus  to  Mrs.  Thrale:1 

“On  Monday,  the  16th,  I  sat  for  my  picture, 
and  walked  a  considerable  way  with  little  in¬ 
convenience.  In  the  afternoon  and  evening  I 
felt  myself  light  and  easy,  and  began  to  plan 
schemes  of  life.  Thus  I  went  to  bed,  and  in  a 
short  time  waked  and  sat  up,  as  has  been  long 
my  custom,  when  I  felt  a  confusion  and  indis¬ 
tinctness  in  my  head,  which  lasted,  I  suppose, 
about  half  a  minute.  I  was  alarmed,  and  prayed 
God,  that  however  he  might  afflict  my  body,  he 
would  spare  my  understanding.  This  prayer, 
that  I  might  try  the  integrity  of  my  faculties,  I 
made  in  Latin  verse.  The  lines  were  not  very 
good,  but  I  knew  them  not  to  be  very  good:  I 
made  them  easily,  and  concluded  myself  to  be 
unimpaired  in  my  faculties. 

“Soon  after  I  perceived  that  I  had  suffered  a 
paralytick  stroke,  and  that  my  speech  was  taken 
from  me.  I  had  no  pain,  and  so  little  dejection 
in  this  dreadful  state,  that  I  wondered  at  my 
own  apathy,  and  considered  that  perhaps  death 
itself,  when  it  should  come,  would  excite  less 
horrour  than  seems  now  to  attend  it. 

“In  order  to  rouse  the  vocal  organs,  I  took 
two  drams.  Wine  has  been  celebrated  for  the 
production  of  eloquence.  I  put  myself  into  vio¬ 
lent  motion,  and  I  think  repeated  it;  but  all  was 
vain.  I  then  went  to  bed,  and  strange  as  it  may 
seem,  I  think  slept.  When  I  saw  light,  it  was 
time  to  contrive  what  I  should  do.  Though  God 
stopped  my  speech,  he  left  me  my  hand;  I  en¬ 
joyed  a  mercy  which  was  not  granted  to  my 
dear  friend  Lawrence,  who  now  perhaps  over¬ 
looks  me  as  I  am  writing,  and  rejoices  that  I 
have  what  he  wanted.  My  first  note  was  neces¬ 
sarily  to  my  servant,  who  came  in  talking,  and 
could  not  immediately  comprehend  why  he 
should  read  what  I  put  into  his  hands. 

Wol.  ii,  p.  268,  of  Mrs.  Thrale’s  Collection . 


[  1783 

“I  then  wrote  a  card  to  Mr.  Allen,  that  I 
might  have  a  discreet  friend  at  hand,  to  act  as 
occasion  should  require.  In  penning  this  note,  I 
had  some  difficulty;  my  hand,  I  knew  not  how 
nor  why,  made  wrong  letters.  I  then  wrote  to 
Dr.  Taylor  to  come  to  me,  and  bring  Dr.  Heber¬ 
den;  and  I  sent  to  Dr.  Brocklesby,  who  is  my 
neighbour.  My  physicians  are  very  friendly, 
and  give  me  great  hopes;  but  you  may  imagine 
my  situation.  I  have  so  far  recovered  my  vocal 
powers,  as  to  repeat  the  Lord’s  Prayer  with  no 
very  imperfect  articulation.  My  memory,  I  hope, 
yet  remains  as  it  was;  but  such  an  attack  pro¬ 
duces  solicitude  for  the  safety  of  every  faculty.” 

To  Mr.  Thomas  Davies 

Dear  Sir,  I  have  had,  indeed,  a  very  heavy 
blow;  but  God,  who  yet  spares  my  life,  I  hum¬ 
bly  hope  will  spare  my  understanding,  and  re¬ 
store  my  speech.  As  I  am  not  at  all  helpless,  I 
want  no  particular  assistance,  but  am  strongly 
affected  by  Mrs.  Davies’s  tenderness;  and  when 
I  think  she  can  do  me  good,  shall  be  very  glad 
to  call  upon  her.  I  had  ordered  friends  to  be 
shut  out;  but  one  or  two  have  found  the  way  in; 
and  if  you  come  you  shall  be  admitted:  for  I 
know  not  whom  I  can  see,  that  will  bring  more 
amusement  on  his  tongue,  or  more  kindness  in 
his  heart.  I  am,  & c. 

Sam.  Johnson 

June  18,  1783 

It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  preserve  such  a 
memorial  of  Johnson’s  regard  for  Mr.  Davies, 
to  whom  I  was  indebted  for  my  introduction  to 
him.2  He  indeed  loved  Davies  cordially,  of  which 
I  shall  give  the  following  little  evidence.  One 
day  when  he  had  treated  him  with  too  much 
asperity,  Tom,  who  was  not  without  pride  and 
spirit,  went  off  in  a  passion;  but  he  had  hardly 
reached  home  when  Frank,  who  had  been  sent 
after  him,  delivered  this  note: — “Come,  come, 
dear  Davies,  I  am  always  sorry  when  we  quarrel ; 
send  me  word  that  we  are  friends.” 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  Your  anxiety  about  my  health  is 
very  friendly,  and  very  agreeable  with  your  gen¬ 
eral  kindness.  I  have,  indeed,  had  a  very  fright¬ 
ful  blow.  On  the  17th  of  last  month,  about 
three  in  the  morning,  as  near  as  I  can  guess,  I 
perceived  myself  almost  totally  deprived  of 
speech.  I  had  no  pain.  My  organs  were  so  ob¬ 
structed,  that  I  could  say  no ,  but  could  scarcely 
say  yes.  I  wrote  the  necessary  directions,  for  it 

2Poor  Derrick,  however,  though  he  did  not  him¬ 
self  introduce  me  to  Dr.  Johnson  as  he  promised, 
had  the  merit  of  introducing  me  to  Davies,  the  im¬ 
mediate  introductor. 


BOSWELL 


1783]  LIFE  OF 

pleased  God  to  spare  my  hand,  and  sent  for  Dr. 
Heberden  and  Dr.  Brocklesby.  Between  the  time 
in  which  I  discovered  my  own  disorder,  and 
that  in  which  I  sent  for  the  doctors,  I  had,  I  be¬ 
lieve,  in  spite  of  my  surprize  and  solicitude,  a 
little  sleep,  and  Nature  began  to  renew  its  oper- 
tions.  They  came,  and  gave  the  directions  which 
the  disease  required,  and  from  that  time  I  have 
been  continually  improving  in  articulation.  I 
can  now  speak,  but  the  nerves  are  weak,  and  I 
cannot  continue  discourse  long;  but  strength, 
I  hope,  will  return.  The  physicians  consider  me 
as  cured.  I  was  last  Sunday  at  church.  On  Tues¬ 
day  I  took  an  airing  to  Hampstead,  and  dined 
with  the  club,  where  Lord  Palmerston  was 
proposed,  and,  against  my  opinion,  was  rejected.1 
I  designed  to  go  next  week  with  Mr.  Langton 
to  Rochester,  where  I  purpose  to  stay  about  ten 
days,  and  then  try  some  other  air.  I  have  many 
kind  invitations.  Your  brother  has  very  frequent¬ 
ly  inquired  after  me.  Most  of  my  friends  have, 
indeed,  been  very  attentive.  Thank  dear  Lord 
Hailes  for  his  present. 

I  hope  you  found  at  your  return  every  thing 
gay  and  prosperous,  and  your  lady,  in  parti¬ 
cular,  quite  recovered  and  confirmed.  Pay  her 
my  respects.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  most  humble 
servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

London,  July  3,  1783 

To  Mrs.  Lucy  Porter,  in  Litchfield 

Dear  Madam,  The  account  which  you  give 
of  your  health  is  but  melancholy.  May  it  please 
God  to  restore  you.  My  disease  affected  my 
speech,  and  still  continues,  in  some  degree,  to  ob¬ 
struct  my  utterance;  my  voice  is  distinct  enough 
for  a  while;  but  the  organs  being  still  weak  are 
quickly  weary:  but  in  other  respects  I  am,  I 
think,  rather  better  than  I  have  lately  been; 
and  can  let  you  know  my  state  without  the  help 
of  any  other  hand. 

In  the  opinion  of  my  friends,  and  in  my  own, 
I  am  gradually  mending.  The  Physicians  con¬ 
sider  me  as  cured;  and  I  had  leave,  four  days 
ago,  to  wash  the  cantharides  from  my  head. 
Last  Tuesday  I  dined  at  the  club. 

I  am  going  next  week  into  Kent,  and  purpose 
to  change  the  air  frequently  this  summer; 
whether  I  shall  wander  so  far  as  Staffordshire  I 
cannot  tell.  I  should  be  glad  to  come.  Return  my 
thanks  to  Mrs.  Cobb,  and  Mr.  Pearson,  and  all 
that  have  shewn  attention  to  me. 

Let  us,  my  dear,  pray  for  one  another,  and 
consider  our  sufferings  as  notices  mercifully  giv¬ 
en  us  to  prepare  ourselves  for  another  state. 

I  live  now  but  in  a  melancholy  way.  My  old 
friend  Mr.  Levett  is  dead,  who  lived  with  me  in 
the  house,  and  was  useful  and  companionable; 
Mrs.  Desmoulins  is  gone  away;  and  Mrs.  Wil¬ 
lis  Lordship  was  soon  after  chosen,  and  is  now 
a  member  of  the  club. 


JOHNSON  517 

liams  is  so  much  decayed,  that  she  can  add  little 
to  another’s  gratifications.  The  world  passes 
away,  and  we  are  passing  with  it;  but  there  is, 
doubtless,  another  world,  which  will  endure  for 
ever.  Let  us  ail  fit  ourselves  for  it.  I  am,  &c. 

Sam.  Johnson 

London,  July  5,  1 783 

Such  was  the  general  vigour  of  his  constitu¬ 
tion,  that  he  recovered  from  this  alarming  and 
severe  attack  with  wonderful  quickness;  so  that 
in  July  he  was  able  to  make  a  visit  to  Mr.  Lang¬ 
ton  at  Rochester,  where  he  passed  about  a  fort¬ 
night,  and  made  little  excursions  as  easily  as  at 
any  time  of  his  life.  In  August  he  went  as  far  as 
the  neighbourhood  of  Salisbury,  to  Heale,  the 
seat  of  William  Bowles,  Esq.,  a  gentleman  whom 
I  have  heard  him  praise  for  exemplary  religious 
order  in  his  family.  In  his  diary  I  find  a  short 
but  honourable  mention  of  this  visit: — “August 
28,  I  came  to  Heale  without  fatigue.  30,  I  am 
entertained  quite  to  my  mind.” 

To  Dr.  Brocklesby 

Heale,  near  Salisbury,  Aug.  29,  1783 

Dear  Sir,  Without  appearing  to  want  a  just 
sense  of  your  kind  attention,  I  cannot  omit  to 
give  an  account  of  the  day  which  seemed  to  ap¬ 
pear  in  some  sort  perilous.  I  rose  at  five  and 
went  out  at  six,  and  having  reached  Salisbury 
about  nine,  went  forward  a  few  miles  in  my 
friend’s  chariot.  I  was  no  more  wearied  with 
the  journey,  though  it  was  a  high-hung,  rough 
coach,  than  I  should  have  been  forty  years  ago. 
We  shall  now  see  what  air  will  do.  The  country 
is  all  a  plain;  and  the  house  in  which  I  am,  so 
far  as  I  can  judge  from  my  window,  for  I  write 
before  I  have  left  my  chamber,  is  sufficiently 
pleasant. 

Be  so  kind  as  to  continue  your  attention  to 
Mrs.  Williams;  it  is  great  consolation  to  the 
well,  and  still  greater  to  the  sick,  that  they  find 
themselves  not  neglected;  and  I  know  that  you 
will  be  desirous  of  giving  comfort  even  where 
you  have  no  great  hope  of  giving  help. 

Since  I  wrote  the  former  part  of  the  letter,  I 
find  that  by  the  course  of  the  post  I  cannot  send 
it  before  the  thirty-first.  I  am,  &c. 

Sam.  Johnson 

While  he  was  here  he  had  a  letter  from  Dr. 
Brocklesby,  acquainting  him  of  the  death  of 
Mrs.  Williams,  which  affected  him  a  good  deal. 
Though  for  several  years  her  temper  had  not 
been  complacent,  she  had  valuable  qualities, 
and  her  departure  left  a  blank  in  his  house. 
Upon  this  occasion  he,  according  to  his  habitual 
course  of  piety,  composed  a  prayer.2 

2 Prayers  and  Meditations ,  p.  226. 


BOSWELL 


518 

I  shall  here  insert  a  few  particulars  concern¬ 
ing  him,  with  which  I  have  been  favoured  by 
one  of  his  friends. 

“He  had  once  conceived  the  design  of  writing 
the  Life  of  Oliver  Cromwell,  saying,  that  he 
thought  it  must  be  highly  curious  to  trace  his 
extraordinary  rise  to  the  supreme  power,  from 
so  obscure  a  beginning.  He  at  length  laid  aside 
his  scheme,  on  discovering  that  all  that  can  be 
told  of  him  is  already  in  print;  and  that  it  is  im¬ 
practicable  to  procure  any  authentick  informa¬ 
tion  in  addition  to  what  the  world  is  already 
possessed  of.”1 

“He  had  likewise  projected,  but  at  what  part 
of  his  life  is  not  known,  a  work  to  shew  how 
small  a  quantity  of  real  fiction  there  is  in  the 
world;  and  that  the  same  images,  with  very 
little  variation,  have  served  all  the  authours 
who  have  ever  written.” 

“His  thoughts  in  the  latter  part  of  his  life  were 
frequently  employed  on  his  deceased  friends. 
He  often  muttered  these,  or  such  like  sentences: 
‘Poor  man !  and  then  he  died.5  ” 

“Speaking  of  a  certain  literary  friend,  cHe  is  a 
very  pompous  puzzling  fellow,  (said  he;)  he 
lent  me  a  letter  once  that  somebody  had  written 
to  him,  no  matter  what  it  was  about;  but  he 
wanted  to  have  the  letter  back,  and  expressed  a 
mighty  value  for  it;  he  hoped  it  was  to  be  met 
with  again,  he  would  not  lose  it  for  a  thousand 
pounds.  I  layed  my  hand  upon  it  soon  after¬ 
wards,  and  gave  it  him.  I  believe  I  said,  I  was 
very  glad  to  have  met  with  it.  O,  then  he  did 
not  know  that  it  signified  any  thing.  So  you  see, 
when  the  letter  was  lost  it  was  worth  a  thou¬ 
sand  pounds,  and  when  it  was  found  it  was  not 
worth  a  farthing.’  ” 

“The  style  and  character  of  his  conversation 
is  pretty  generally  known;  it  was  certainly  con¬ 
ducted  in  conformity  with  a  precept  of  Lord 
Bacon,  but  it  is  not  clear,  I  apprehend,  that  this 
conformity  was  either  perceived  or  intended  by 
Johnson.  The  precept  alluded  to  is  as  follows: 
‘In  all  kinds  of  speech,  either  pleasant,  grave, 
severe,  or  ordinary,  it  is  convenient  to  speak 
leisurely,  and  rather  drawingly  than  hastily: 
because  hasty  speech  confounds  the  memory, 
and  oftentimes,  besides  the  unseemliness,  drives 
the  man  either  to  stammering,  a  non-plus,  or 

!Mr.  Malone  observes,  “This,  however,  was  cer¬ 
tainly  a  mistake,  as  appears  from  the  Memoirs  pub¬ 
lished  by  Mr.  Noble.  Had  Johnson  been  furnished 
with  the  materials  which  the  industry  of  that  gen¬ 
tleman  has  procured,  and  with  others  which,  it  is 
believed,  are  yet  preserved  in  manuscript,  he 
would,  without  doubt,  have  produced  a  most  val¬ 
uable  and  curious  history  of  Cromwell’s  life.” 


[  1783 

harping  on  that  which  should  follow  ;  whereas  a 
slow  speech  confirmeth  the  memory,  addeth  a 
conceit  of  wisdom  to  the  hearers,  besides  a  seem¬ 
liness  of  speech  and  countenance.5  Dr.  Johnson’s 
method  of  conversation  was  certainly  calculated 
to  excite  attention,  and  to  amuse  and  instruct, 
(as  it  happened,)  without  wearying  or  confusing 
his  company.  He  was  always  most  perfectly 
clear  and  perspicuous;  and  his  language  was  so 
accurate,  and  his  sentences  so  neatly  constructed, 
that  his  conversation  might  have  been  all  printed 
without  any  correction.  At  the  same  time,  it  was 
easy  and  natural;  the  accuracy  of  it  had  no  ap¬ 
pearance  of  labour,  constraint,  or  stiffness;  he 
seemed  more  correct  than  others,  by  the  force 
of  habit,  and  the  customary  exercises  of  his 
powerful  mind.” 

“He  spoke  often  in  praise  of  French  literature. 
‘The  French  are  excellent  in  this,  (he  would 
say,)  they  have  a  book  on  every  subject.5  From 
what  he  had  seen  of  them  he  denied  them  the 
praise  of  superiour  politeness,  and  mentioned, 
with  very  visible  disgust,  the  custom  they  have 
of  spitting  on  the  floors  of  their  apartments. 
‘This,  (said  the  Doctor,)  is  as  gross  a  thing  as 
can  well  be  done;  and  one  wonders  how  any 
man,  or  set  of  men,  can  persist  in  so  offensive  a 
practice  for  a  whole  day  together;  one  should 
expect  that  the  first  effort  towards  civilization 
would  remove  it  even  among  savages.5  55 

“Baxter’s  Reasons  of  the  Christian  Religion ,  he 
thought  contained  the  best  collection  of  the  evi¬ 
dences  of  the  divinity  of  the  Christian  system.” 

“Chymistry  was  always  an  interesting  pursuit 
with  Dr.  Johnson.  Whilst  he  was  in  Wiltshire, 
he  attended  some  experiments  that  were  made 
by  a  physician  at  Salisbury,  on  the  new  kinds  of 
air.  In  the  course  of  the  experiments  frequent 
mention  being  made  of  Dr.  Priestley,  Dr.  John¬ 
son  knit  his  brows,  and  in  a  stern  manner  in¬ 
quired,  ‘Why  do  we  hear  so  much  of  Dr.  Priest¬ 
ley?’2  He  was  very  properly  answered,  ‘Sir,  be- 

2I  do  not  wonder  at  Johnson’s  displeasure  when 
the  name  of  Dr.  Priestley  was  mentioned;  for  I 
know  no  writer  who  has  been  suffered  to  publish 
more  pernicious  doctrines.  I  shall  instance  only 
three.  First,  Materialism ;  by  which  mind  is  denied 
to  human  nature;  which,  if  believed,  must  deprive 
us  of  every  elevated  principle.  Secondly,  Necessity; 
or  the  doctrine  that  every  action,  whether  good  or 
bad,  is  included  in  an  unchangeable  and  unavoid¬ 
able  system;  a  notion  utterly  subversive  of  moral 
government.  Thirdly,  that  we  have  no  reason  to 
think  that  the  future  world,  (which,  as  he  is  pleased 
to  inform  us,  will  be  adapted  to  our  merely  improved 
nature,)  will  be  materially  different  from  this; 
which,  if  believed,  would  sink  wretched  mortals 
into  despair,  as  they  could  no  longer  hope  for  the 
“rest  that  remaineth  for  the  people  of  God”  [He- 


1783]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


cause  we  are  indebted  to  him  for  these  important 
discoveries.’  On  this  Dr.  Johnson  appeared  well 
content;  and  replied,  ‘Well,  well,  I  believe  we 
are;  and  let  every  man  have  the  honour  he  has 
merited.’  ” 

“A  friend  was  one  day,  about  two  years  be¬ 
fore  his  death,  struck  with  some  instance  of  Dr. 
Johnson’s  great  candour.  ‘Well,  Sir,  (said  he,)  I 
will  always  say  that  you  are  a  very  candid  man.5 
‘Will  you,  (replied  the  Doctor,)  I  doubt  then 
you  will  be  very  singular.  But,  indeed,  Sir,  (con¬ 
tinued  he,)  I  look  upon  myself  to  be  a  man  very 
much  misunderstood.  I  am  not  an  uncandid, 
nor  am  I  a  severe  man.  I  sometimes  say  more 
than  I  mean,  in  jest;  and  people  are  apt  to  be¬ 
lieve  me  serious:  however,  I  am  more  candid 
than  I  was  when  I  was  younger.  As  I  know 
more  of  mankind  I  expect  less  of  them,  and  am 
ready  now  to  call  a  man  a  good  man ,  upon  easier 
terms  than  I  was  formerly.’  ” 

On  his  return  from  Heale  he  wrote  to  Dr. 
Burney: 

“I  came  home  on  the  18th  at  noon  to  a  very 
disconsolate  house.  You  and  I  have  lost  our 
friends;  but  you  have  more  friends  at  home.  My 

brews,  4.  9],  or  for  that  happiness  which  is  re¬ 
vealed  to  us  as  something  beyond  our  present  con¬ 
ceptions;  but  would  feel  themselves  doomed  to  a 
continuation  of  the  uneasy  state  under  which  they 
now  groan.  I  say  nothing  of  the  petulant  intem¬ 
perance  with  which  he  dares  to  insult  the  vene¬ 
rable  establishments  of  his  country. 

As  a  specimen  of  his  writings,  I  shall  quote  the 
following  passage,  which  appears  to  me  equally  ab¬ 
surd  and  impious,  and  which  might  have  been  re¬ 
torted  upon  him  by  the  men  who  were  prosecuted 
for  burning  his  house.  “I  cannot,  (says  he,)  as  a 
necessarian ,  [meaning  necessitarian ,]  hate  any  man ;  be¬ 
cause  I  consider  him  as  being ,  in  all  respects,  just 
what  God  has  made  him  to  be;  and  also  as  doing  with 
respect  to  me ,  nothing  but  what  he  was  expressly  de¬ 
signed  and  appointed  to  do;  God  being  the  only  cause , 
and  men  nothing  more  than  the  instruments  in  his 
hands  to  execute  all  his  pleasure .” — Illustrations  of 
Philosophical  Necessity ,  p.  1 1 1 . 

The  Reverend  Dr.  Parr,  in  a  late  tract,  appears 
to  suppose  that  Dr.  Johnson  not  only  endured ,  but  al¬ 
most  solicited,  an  interview  with  Dr.  Priestley.  Injustice 
to  Dr.  Johnson,  I  declare  my  firm  belief  that  he 
never  did.  My  illustrious  friend  was  particularly 
resolute  in  not  giving  countenance  to  men  whose 
writings  he  considered  as  pernicious  to  society.  I 
was  present  at  Oxford  when  Dr.  Price,  even  before 
he  had  rendered  himself  so  generally  obnoxious  by 
his  zeal  for  the  French  Revolution,  came  into  a 
company  where  Johnson  was,  who  instantly  left 
the  room.  Much  more  would  he  have  reprobated 
Dr.  Priestley. 

Whoever  wishes  to  see  a  perfect  delineation  of 
this  Literary  Jack  of  all  Trades ,  may  find  it  in  an  in¬ 
genious  tract,  entitled,  “A  small  Whole-Length 
of  Dr.  Priestley,”  printed  for  Rivingtons,  in  St. 
Paul’s  Church- Yard. 


domestick  companion  is  taken  from  me.  She  is 
much  missed,  for  her  acquisitions  were  many, 
and  her  curiosity  universal;  so  that  she  partook 
of  every  conversation.  I  am  not  well  enough  to 
go  much  out;  and  to  sit,  and  eat,  or  fast  alone, 
is  very  wearisome.  I  always  mean  to  send  my 
compliments  to  all  the  ladies.” 

His  fortitude  and  patience  met  with  severe 
trials  during  this  year.  The  stroke  of  the  palsy 
has  been  related  circumstantially;  but  he  was 
also  afflicted  with  the  gout,  and  was  besides 
troubled  with  a  complaint  which  not  only  was 
attended  with  immediate  inconvenience,  but 
threatened  him  with  a  chirurgical  operation, 
from  which  most  men  would  shrink.  The  com¬ 
plaint  was  a  sarcocele ,  which  Johnson  bore  with 
uncommon  firmness,  and  was  not  at  all  fright¬ 
ened  while  he  looked  forward  to  amputation. 
He  was  attended  by  Mr.  Pott  and  Mr.  Cruik- 
shank.  I  have  before  me  a  letter  of  the  30th  of 
July  this  year,  to  Mr.  Cruikshank,  in  which  he 
says,  “I  am  going  to  put  myself  into  your  hands” ; 
and  another,  accompanying  a  set  of  his  Lives  of 
the  Poets ,  in  which  he  says,  “I  beg  your  accep¬ 
tance  of  these  volumes,  as  an  acknowledgement 
of  the  great  favours  which  you  have  bestowed 
on,  Sir,  your  most  obliged  and  most  humble 
servant.”  I  have  in  my  possession  several  more 
letters  from  him  to  Mr.  Cruikshank,  and  also  to 
Dr.  Mudge  at  Plymouth,  which  it  would  be  im¬ 
proper  to  insert,  as  they  are  filled  with  unpleas¬ 
ing  technical  details.  I  shall,  however,  extract 
from  his  letters  to  Dr.  Mudge  such  passages  as 
shew  either  a  felicity  of  expression,  or  the  un¬ 
daunted  state  of  his  mind. 

“My  conviction  of  your  skill,  and  my  belief  of 
your  friendship,  determine  me  to  intreat  your 
opinion  and  advice.” — “In  this  state  I  with  great 
earnestness  desire  you  to  tell  me  what  is  to  be 
done.  Excision  is  doubtless  necessary  to  the  cure, 
and  I  know  not  any  means  of  palliation.  The 
operation  is  doubtless  painful;  but  is  it  danger¬ 
ous?  The  pain  I  hope  to  endure  with  decency; 
but  I  am  loth  to  put  life  into  much  hazard.” — 
“By  representing  the  gout  as  an  antagonist  to 
the  palsy,  you  have  said  enough  to  make  it  wel¬ 
come.  This  is  not  strictly  the  first  fit,  but  I  hope 
it  is  as  good  as  the  first;  for  it  is  the  second  that 
ever  confined  me;  and  the  first  was  ten  years 
ago,  much  less  fierce  and  fiery  than  this.” — 
“Write,  dear  Sir,  what  you  can  to  inform  or  en¬ 
courage  me.  The  operation  is  not  delayed  by 
any  fears  or  objections  of  mine.” 

To  Bennet  Langton,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  You  may  very  reasonably  charge 
me  with  insensibility  of  your  kindness,  and  that 


520 

of  Lady  Rothes,  since  I  have  suffered  so  much 
time  to  pass  without  paying  any  acknowledge¬ 
ment.  I  now,  at  last,  return  my  thanks;  and 
why  I  did  it  not  sooner  I  ought  to  tell  you.  I 
went  into  Wiltshire  as  soon  as  I  well  could,  and 
was  there  much  employed  in  palliating  my  own 
malady.  Disease  produces  much  selfishness.  A 
man  in  pain  is  looking  after  ease;  and  lets  most 
other  things  go  as  chance  shall  dispose  of  them. 
In  the  meantime  I  have  lost  a  companion,1  to 
whom  I  have  had  recourse  for  domestick  amuse¬ 
ment  for  thirty  years,  and  whose  variety  of 
knowledge  never  was  exhausted;  and  now  re¬ 
turn  to  a  habitation  vacant  and  desolate.  I 
carry  about  a  very  troublesome  and  dangerous 
complaint,  which  admits  no  cure  but  by  the 
chirurgical  knife.  Let  me  have  your  prayers.  I 
am,  &c. 

Sam.  Johnson 

London,  Sept.  29,  1783 

Happily  the  complaint  abated  without  his 
being  put  to  the  torture  of  amputation.  But  we 
must  surely  admire  the  manly  resolution  which 
he  discovered  while  it  hung  over  him. 

In  a  letter  to  the  same  gentleman  he  writes, 
‘'The  gout  has  within  these  four  days  come  upon 
me  with  a  violence  which  I  never  experienced 
before.  It  made  me  helpless  as  an  infant.”  And 
in  another,  having  mentioned  Mrs.  Williams, 
he  says, — “whose  death  following  that  of  Levett, 
has  now  made  my  house  a  solitude.  She  left  her 
little  substance  to  a  charity-school.  She  is,  I 
hope,  where  there  is  neither  darkness,  nor  want, 
nor  sorrow.” 

I  wrote  to  him,  begging  to  know  the  state  of 
his  health,  and  mentioned  that  Baxter’s  Anacreon , 
“which  is  in  the  library  at  Auchinleck,  was,  I 
find,  collated  by  my  father  in  1 727,  with  the  MS. 
belonging  to  the  University  of  Leyden,  and  he 
has  made  a  number  of  Notes  upon  it.  Would 
you  advise  me  to  publish  a  new  edition  of  it?” 

His  answer  was  dated  September  30: 

“You  should  not  make  your  letters  such  rari¬ 
ties,  when  you  know,  or  might  know,  the  uni¬ 
form  state  of  my  health.  It  is  very  long  since  I 
heard  from  you;  and  that  I  have  not  answered 
is  a  very  insufficient  reason  for  the  silence  of  a 
friend.  Your  Anacreon  is  a  very  uncommon  book; 
neither  London  nor  Cambridge  can  supply  a 
copy  of  that  edition.  Whether  it  should  be  re¬ 
printed,  you  cannot  do  better  than  consult  Lord 
Hailes. — Besides  my  constant  and  radical  dis¬ 
ease,  I  have  been  for  these  ten  days  much  har¬ 
assed  with  the  gout;  but  that  has  now  remitted. 

I  hope  God  will  yet  grant  me  a  little  longer  life, 
and  make  me  less  unfit  to  appear  before  him.” 

1Mrs.  Anna  Williams. 


[  1783 

He  this  autumn  received  a  visit  from  the  cele¬ 
brated  Mrs.  Siddons.  He  gives  this  account  of  it 
in  one  of  his  letters  to  Mrs.  Thrale: 

“Mrs.  Siddons,  in  her  visit  to  me,  behaved 
with  great  modesty  and  propriety,  and  left  noth¬ 
ing  behind  her  to  be  censured  or  despised.  Nei¬ 
ther  praise  nor  money,  the  two  powerful  cor¬ 
rupters  of  mankind,  seem  to  have  depraved  her. 
I  shall  be  glad  to  see  her  again.  Her  brother 
Kemble  calls  on  me,  and  pleases  me  very  well. 
Mrs.  Siddons  and  I  talked  of  plays;  and  she  told 
me  her  intention  of  exhibiting  this  winter  the 
characters  of  Constance,  Catharine,  and  Isa¬ 
bella,  in  Shakspeare.” 

Mr.  Kemble  has  favoured  me  with  the  fol¬ 
lowing  minute  of  what  passed  at  this  visit: 

“When  Mrs.  Siddons  came  into  the  room, 
there  happened  to  be  no  chair  ready  for  her, 
which  he  observing,  said  with  a  smile, c Madam, 
you  who  so  often  occasion  a  want  of  seats  to 
other  people,  will  the  more  easily  excuse  the 
want  of  one  yourself.’ 

“Having  placed  himself  by  her,  he  with  great 
good-humour  entered  upon  a  consideration  of 
the  English  drama;  and,  among  other  inquiries, 
particularly  asked  her  which  of  Shakspeare’s 
characters  she  was  most  pleased  with.  Upon  her 
answering  that  she  thought  the  character  of 
Queen  Catharine,  in  Henry  the  Eighth ,  the  most 
natural: — T  think  so  too,  Madam,  (said  he;) 
and  whenever  you  perform  it,  I  will  once  more 
hobble  out  to  the  theatre  myself.’  Mrs.  Siddons 
promised  she  would  do  herself  the  honour  of 
acting  his  favourite  part  for  him;  but  many  cir¬ 
cumstances  happened  to  prevent  the  represen¬ 
tation  of  King  Henry  the  Eighth  during  the  Doc¬ 
tor’s  life. 

“In  the  course  of  the  evening  he  thus  gave  his 
opinion  upon  the  merits  of  some  of  the  principal 
performers  whom  he  remembered  to  have  seen 
upon  the  stage.  cMrs.  Porter  in  the  vehemence 
of  rage,  and  Mrs.  Clive  in  the  sprightliness  of 
humour,  I  have  never  seen  equalled.  What  Clive 
did  best,  she  did  better  than  Garrick;  but  could 
not  do  half  so  many  things  well;  she  was  a  better 
romp  than  any  I  ever  saw  in  nature.  Pritchard, 
in  common  life,  was  a  vulgar  ideot;  she  would 
talk  of  her  gownd:  but,  when  she  appeared  upon 
the  stage,  seemed  to  be  inspired  by  gentility  and 
understanding.  I  once  talked  with  Colley  Cib¬ 
ber,  and  thought  him  ignorant  of  the  principles 
of  his  art.  Garrick,  Madam,  was  no  declaimer; 
there  was  not  one  of  his  own  scene-shifters  who 
could  not  have  spoken  To  be ,  or  not  to  be ,  better 
than  he  did;  yet  he  was  the  only  actor  I  ever 
saw,  whom  I  could  call  a  master  both  in  tragedy 


BOSWELL 


1783] 

and  comedy;  though  I  liked  him  best  in  comedy. 
A  true  conception  of  character,  and  natural  ex¬ 
pression  of  it,  were  his  distinguished  excellen¬ 
cies.5  Having  expatiated,  with  his  usual  force 
and  eloquence,  on  Mr.  Garrick’s  extraordinary 
eminence  as  an  actor,  he  concluded  with  this 
compliment  to  his  social  talents:  eAnd  after  all, 
Madam,  I  thought  him  less  to  be  envied  on  the 
stage  than  at  the  head  of  a  table.5  55 

Johnson,  indeed,  had  thought  more  upon  the 
subject  of  acting  than  might  be  generally  sup¬ 
posed.  Talking  of  it  one  day  to  Mr.  Kemble,  he 
said,  “Are  you,  Sir,  one  of  those  enthusiasts  who 
believe  yourself  transformed  into  the  very  char¬ 
acter  you  represent?55  Upon  Mr.  Kemble’s  an¬ 
swering  that  he  had  never  felt  so  strong  a  per¬ 
suasion  himself;  “To  be  sure  not,  Sir,  (said 
Johnson;)  the  thing  is  impossible.  And  if  Gar¬ 
rick  really  believed  himself  to  be  that  monster, 
Richard  the  Third,  he  deserved  to  be  hanged 
every  time  he  performed  it.551 

A  pleasing  instance  of  the  generous  attention 
of  one  of  his  friends  has  been  discovered  by  the 
publication  of  Mrs.  Thrale’s  collection  of  Let¬ 
ters.  In  a  letter  to  one  of  the  Miss  Thrales2,  he 
writes, — “A  friend,  whose  name  I  will  tell  when 
your  mamma  has  tried  to  guess  it,  sent  to  my 
physician  to  enquire  whether  this  long  train  of 
illness  had  brought  me  into  difficulties  for  want 
of  money,  with  an  invitation  to  send  to  him  for 

xMy  worthy  friend,  Mr.  John  Nichols,  was  pres¬ 
ent  when  Mr.  Henderson,  the  actor,  paid  a  visit 
to  Dr.  Johnson;  and  was  received  in  a  very  cour¬ 
teous  manner.  See  The  Gentleman's  Magazine ,  June, 
1791- 

I  found  among  Dr.  Johnson’s  papers,  the  follow¬ 
ing  letter  to  him,  from  the  celebrated  Mrs.  Bel¬ 
lamy: 

“To  Dr.  Johnson 

“Sir,  The  flattering  remembrance  of  the  par¬ 
tiality  you  honoured  me  with,  some  years  ago,  as 
well  as  the  humanity  you  are  known  to  possess,  has 
encouraged  me  to  solicit  your  patronage  at  my 
Benefit. 

“By  a  long  Chancery  suit,  and  a  complicated 
train  of  unfortunate  events,  I  am  reduced  to  the 
greatest  distress;  which  obliges  me,  once  more,  to 
request  the  indulgence  of  the  publick. 

“Give  me  leave  to  solicit  the  honour  of  your 
company,  and  to  assure  you,  if  you  grant  my  re¬ 
quest,  the  gratification  I  shall  feel,  from  being  pa¬ 
tronized  by  Dr.  Johnson,  will  be  infinitely  super- 
iour  to  any  advantage  that  may  arise  from  the 
Benefit;  as  I  am,  with  the  profoundest  respect.  Sir, 
your  most  obedient,  humble  servant, 

G.  A.  Bellamy 

“No.  1  o  Duke-street,  St.  James’s,  May  1 1,  1783” 

I  am  happy  in  recording  these  particulars,  which 
prove  that  my  illustrious  friend  lived  to  think  much 
more  favourably  of  Players  than  he  appears  to 
have  done  in  the  early  part  of  his  life. 

2Piozzi  Letters ,  vol.  ii,  p.  328. 


521 

what  occasion  required.  I  shall  write  this  night 
to  thank  him,  having  no  need  to  borrow.55  And 
afterwards,  in  a  letter  to  Mrs.  Thrale, — “Since 
you  cannot  guess,  I  will  tell  you,  that  the  gen¬ 
erous  man  was  Gerald  Hamilton.  I  returned 
him  a  very  thankful  and  respectful  letter.”3 

I  applied  to  Mr.  Hamilton,  by  a  common 
friend,  and  he  has  been  so  obliging  as  to  let  me 
have  Johnson’s  letter  to  him  upon  this  occasion, 
to  adorn  my  collection. 

To  the  Right  Honourable  William  Gerald 
Hamilton 

Dear  Sir,  Your  kind  enquiries  after  my  af¬ 
fairs,  and  your  generous  offers,  have  been  com¬ 
municated  to  me  by  Dr.  Brocklesby.  I  return 
thanks  with  great  sincerity,  having  lived  long 
enough  to  know  what  gratitude  is  due  to  such 
friendship;  and  entreat  that  my  refusal  may  not 
be  imputed  to  sullenness  or  pride.  I  am,  indeed, 
in  no  want.  Sickness  is,  by  the  generosity  of  my 
physicians,  of  little  expence  to  me.  But  if  any 
unexpected  exigence  should  press  me,  you  shall 
see,  dear  Sir,  how  cheerfully  I  can  be  obliged  to 
so  much  liberality.  I  am,  Sir,  your  most  obedi¬ 
ent  and  most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

November  19,  1783 

I  find  in  this,  as  in  former  years,  notices  of  his 
kind  attention  to  Mrs.  Gardiner,  who,  though 
in  the  humble  station  of  a  tallow-chandler  upon 
Snow-hill,  was  a  woman  of  excellent  good  sense, 
pious,  and  charitable.  She  told  me,  she  had  been 
introduced  to  him  by  Mrs.  Masters,  the  poetess, 
whose  volumes  he  revised,  and,  it  is  said,  illum¬ 
inated  here  and  there  with  a  ray  of  his  own 
genius.  Mrs.  Gardiner  was  very  zealous  for  the 
support  of  the  Ladies’  charity-school,  in  the 
parish  of  St.  Sepulchre.  It  is  confined  to  females; 
and,  I  am  told,  it  afforded  a  hint  for  the  story  of 
Betty  Brown  in  The  Idler.  Johnson  this  year,  I 
find,  obtained  for  it  a  sermon  from  the  late 
Bishop  of  St.  Asaph,  Dr.  Shipley,  whom  he,  in 
one  of  his  letters  to  Mrs.  Thrale,  characterises 
as  “knowing  and  conversible” ;  and  whom  all 
who  knew  his  Lordship,  even  those  who  dif¬ 
fered  from  him  in  politicks,  remember  with 
much  respect. 

The  Earl  of  Carlisle  having  written  a  tragedy, 
entitled  The  Father's  Revenge ,  some  of  his  Lord¬ 
ship’s  friends  applied  to  Mrs.  Chapone  to  pre¬ 
vail  on  Dr.  Johnson  to  read  and  give  his  opinion 
of  it,  which  he  accordingly  did,  in  a  letter  to 
that  lady.  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  having  informed 
me  that  this  letter  was  in  Lord  Carlisle’s  pos¬ 
session,  though  I  was  not  fortunate  enough  to 

3Ibid.y  p.  342. 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


522 

have  the  honour  of  being  known  to  his  Lord- 
ship,  trusting  to  the  general  courtesy  of  litera¬ 
ture,  I  wrote  to  him,  requesting  the  favour  of  a 
copy  of  it,  and  to  be  permitted  to  insert  it  in  my 
Life  of  Dr.  Johnson.  His  Lordship  was  so  good  as 
to  comply  with  my  request,  and  has  thus  en¬ 
abled  me  to  enrich  my  work  with  a  very  fine 
piece  of  writing,  which  displays  both  the  critical 
skill  and  politeness  of  my  illustrious  friend;  and 
perhaps  the  curiosity  which  it  will  excite,  may 
induce  the  noble  and  elegant  Authour  to  gratify 
the  world  by  the  publication1  of  a  performance, 
of  which  Dr.  Johnson  has  spoken  in  such  terms. 

To  Mrs.  Chapone 

Madam,  By  sending  the  tragedy  to  me  a  sec¬ 
ond  time,2  I  think  that  a  very  honourable  dis¬ 
tinction  has  been  shewn  me,  and  I  did  not  de¬ 
lay  the  perusal,  of  which  I  am  now  to  tell  the 
effect. 

The  construction  of  the  play  is  not  complete¬ 
ly  regular;  the  stage  is  too  often  vacant,  and  the 
scenes  are  not  sufficiently  connected.  This,  how¬ 
ever,  would  be  called  by  Dryden  only  a  me¬ 
chanical  defect;  which  takes  away  little  from 
the  power  of  the  poem,  and  which  is  seen  rather 
than  felt. 

A  rigid  examiner  of  the  diction  might,  per¬ 
haps,  wish  some  words  changed,  and  some  lines 
more  vigorously  terminated.  But  from  such  pet¬ 
ty  imperfections  what  writer  was  ever  free? 

The  general  form  and  force  of  the  dialogue  is 
of  more  importance.  It  seems  to  want  that  quick¬ 
ness  of  reciprocation  which  characterises  the 
English  drama,  and  is  not  always  sufficiently 
fervid  or  animated. 

Of  the  sentiments  I  remember  not  one  that  I 
wished  omitted.  In  the  imagery  I  cannot  for¬ 
bear  to  distinguish  the  comparison  of  joy  suc¬ 
ceeding  grief  to  light  rushing  on  the  eye  accus¬ 
tomed  to  darkness.  It  seems  to  have  all  that  can 
be  desired  to  make  it  please.  It  is  new,  just,  and 
delightful.3 

With  the  characters,  either  as  conceived  or 
preserved,  I  have  no  fault  to  find;  but  was  much 
inclined  to  congratulate  a  writer,  who,  in  de¬ 
fiance  of  prejudice  and  fashion,  made  the  Arch¬ 
bishop  a  good  man,  and  scorned  all  thoughtless 
applause,  which  a  vicious  churchman  would 
have  brought  him. 

The  catastrophe  is  affecting.  The  Father  and 
Daughter  both  culpable,  both  wretched,  and 

lA  few  copies  only  of  this  tragedy  have  been 
printed,  and  given  to  the  authour’s  friends. 

2Dr.  Johnson  having  been  very  ill  when  the 
tragedy  was  first  sent  to  him,  had  declined  the  con¬ 
sideration  of  it. 

3  I  could  have  borne  my  woes;  that  stranger  Joy 
Wounds  while  it  smiles: —  The  long  imprison'd  wretch , 
Emerging  from  the  night  of  his  damp  cell , 

Shrinks from  the  surfs  bright  beams;  and  that  which flings 
Gladness  o'er  all ,  to  him  is  agony. 


[  1783 

both  penitent,  divide  between  them  our  pity 
and  our  sorrow. 

Thus,  Madam,  I  have  performed  what  I  did 
not  willingly  undertake,  and  could  not  decently 
refuse.  The  noble  writer  will  be  pleased  to  re¬ 
member,  that  sincere  criticism  ought  to  raise  no 
resentment,  because  judgement  is  not  under  the 
controul  of  will;  but  involuntary  criticism,  as  it 
has  still  less  of  choice,  ought  to  be  more  remote 
from  possibility  of  offence.  I  am,  &c. 

Sam.  Johnson 

November  28,  1 783 

I  consulted  him  on  two  questions  of  a  very 
different  nature:  one,  whether  the  unconstitu¬ 
tional  influence  exercised  by  the  Peers  of  Scot¬ 
land  in  the  election  of  the  representatives  of  the 
Commons,  by  means  of  fictitious  qualifications, 
ought  not  to  be  resisted; — the  other,  What,  in 
propriety  and  humanity,  should  be  done  with 
old  horses  unable  to  labour.  I  gave  him  some 
account  of  my  life  at  Auchinleck:  and  expressed 
my  satisfaction  that  the  gentlemen  of  the  county 
had,  at  two  publick  meetings,  elected  me  their 
Erases  or  Chairman. 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  Like  all  other  men  who  have  great 
friends,  you  begin  to  feel  the  pangs  of  neglected 
merit;  and  all  the  comfort  that  I  can  give  you  is, 
by  telling  you  that  you  have  probably  more 
pangs  to  feel,  and  more  neglect  to  suffer.  You 
have,  indeed,  begun  to  complain  too  soon;  and 
I  hope  I  am  the  only  confidant  of  your  discon¬ 
tent.  Your  friends  have  not  yet  had  leisure  to 
gratify  personal  kindness;  they  have  hitherto 
been  busy  in  strengthening  their  ministerial  in¬ 
terest.  If  a  vacancy  happens  in  Scotland,  give 
them  early  intelligence;  and  as  you  can  serve 
Government  as  powerfully  as  any  of  your  prob¬ 
able  competitors,  you  may  make  in  some  sort  a 
warrantable  claim. 

Of  the  exaltations  and  depressions  of  your 
mind  you  delight  to  talk,  and  I  hate  to  hear. 
Drive  all  such  fancies  from  you. 

On  the  day  when  I  received  your  letter,  I 
think,  the  foregoing  page  was  written;  to  which, 
one  disease  or  another  has  hindered  me  from 
making  any  additions.  I  am  now  a  little  better. 
But  sickness  and  solitude  press  me  very  heavily. 
I  could  bear  sickness  better,  if  I  were  relieved 
from  solitude. 

The  present  dreadful  confusion  of  the  pub- 
lick  ought  to  make  you  wrap  yourself  up  in  your 
hereditary  possessions,  which,  though  less  than 
you  may  wish,  are  more  than  you  can  want; 
and  in  an  hour  of  religious  retirement  return 
thanks  to  God,  who  has  exempted  you  from  any 
strong  temptation  to  faction,  treachery,  plun¬ 
der,  and  disloyalty. 

As  your  neighbours  distinguish  you  by  such 
honours  as  they  can  bestow,  content  yourself 


BOSWELL 


1783]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  523 


with  your  station,  without  neglecting  your  pro¬ 
fession.  Your  estate  and  the  Courts  will  find  you 
full  employment;  and  your  mind,  well  occu¬ 
pied,  will  be  quiet. 

The  usurpation  of  the  nobility,  for  they  ap¬ 
parently  usurp  ail  the  influence  they  gain  by 
fraud  and  misrepresentation,  I  think  it  certainly 
lawful,  perhaps  your  duty,  to  resist.  What  is  not 
their  own  they  have  only  by  robbery. 

Your  question  about  the  horses  gives  me  more 
perplexity.  I  know  not  well  what  advice  to  give 
you.  I  can  only  recommend  a  rule  which  you  do 
not  want; — give  as  little  pain  as  you  can.  I  sup¬ 
pose  that  we  have  a  right  to  their  service  while 
their  strength  lasts;  what  we  can  do  with  them 
afterwards  I  cannot  so  easily  determine.  But  let 
us  consider.  Nobody  denies  that  man  has  a  right 
first  to  milk  the  cow,  and  to  shear  the  sheep,  and 
then  to  kill  them  for  his  table.  May  he  not,  by 
parity  of  reason,  first  work  a  horse,  and  then 
kill  him  the  easiest  way,  that  he  may  have  the 
means  of  another  horse,  or  food  for  cows  and 
sheep?  Man  is  influenced  in  both  cases  by  dif¬ 
ferent  motives  of  self-interest.  He  that  rejects 
the  one  must  reject  the  other.  I  am,  &c. 

Sam.  Johnson 

London,  Dec .  24,  1783 

A  happy  and  pious  Christmas;  and  many 
happy  years  to  you,  your  lady,  and  children. 

The  late  ingenious  Mr.  Mickle,  some  time 
before  his  death,  wrote  me  a  letter  concerning 
Dr.  Johnson,  in  which  he  mentions, — “I  was 
upwards  of  twelve  years  acquainted  with  him, 
was  frequently  in  his  company,  always  talked 
with  ease  to  him,  and  can  truly  say^  that  I  never 
received  from  him  one  rough  word. 55 

I71  thi  3  letter  he  relates  his  having,  while  en¬ 
gaged  in  translating  the  Lusiad ,  had  a  dispute  of 
considerable  length  with  Johnson,  who,  as  usu¬ 
al,  declaimed  upon  the  misery  and  corruption 
of  a  sea  life,  and  used  this  expression: — “It  had 
been  happy  for  the  world,  Sir,  if  your  hero 
Gama,  Prince  Henry  of  Portugal,  and  Colum¬ 
bus,  had  never  been  born,  or  that  their  schemes 
had  never  gone  farther  than  their  own  imagi¬ 
nations.55 

“This  sentiment,  (says  Mr.  Mickle,)  which  is 
to  be  found  in  his  Introduction  to  the  World  dis¬ 
played ,  I,  in  my  Dissertation  prefixed  to  the  Lu - 
siad ,  have  controverted;  and  though  authours 
are  said  to  be  bad  judges  of  their  own  works,  I 
am  not  ashamed  to  own  to  a  friend,  that  that 
dissertation  is  my  favourite  above  all  that  I  ever 
attempted  in  prose.  Next  year,  when  the  Lusiad 
was  published,  I  waited  on  Dr.  Johnson,  who 
addressed  me  with  one  of  his  good-humoured 
smiles: — cWell,  you  have  remembered  our  dis¬ 
pute  about  Prince  Henry,  and  have  cited  me 


too.  You  have  done  your  part  very  well  indeed: 
you  have  made  the  best  of  your  argument;  but 
I  am  not  convinced  yet.5 

“Before  publishing  the  Lusiad ,  I  sent  Mr. 
Hoole  a  proof  of  that  part  of  the  introduction, 
in  which  I  make  mention  of  Dr.  Johnson,  your¬ 
self,  and  other  well-wishers  to  the  work,  begging 
it  might  be  shewn  to  Dr.  Johnson.  This  was  ac¬ 
cordingly  done;  and  in  place  of  the  simple  men¬ 
tion  of  him  which  I  had  made,  he  dictated  to 
Mr.  Hoole  the  sentence  as  it  now  stands. 

“Dr.  Johnson  told  me  in  1772,  that,  about 
twenty7  years  before  that  time,  he  himself  had  a 
design  to  translate  the  Lusiad ,  of  the  merit  of 
which  he  spoke  highly,  but  had  been  prevented 
by  a  number  of  other  engagements.55 

Mr.  Mickle  reminds  me  in  this  letter  of  a  con¬ 
versation,  at  dinner  one  day  at  Mr.  Hoole’s 
with  Dr.  Johnson,  when  Mr.  Nicol  the  King’s 
bookseller  and  I  attempted  to  controvert  the 
maxim,  ‘better  that  ten  guilty  should  escape, 
than  one  innocent  person  suffer5;  and  were  an¬ 
swered  by  Dr.  Johnson  with  great  power  of 
reasoning  and  eloquence.  I  am  very  sorry7  that  I 
have  no  record  of  that  day:  but  I  well  recollect 
my  illustrious  friend’s  having  ably  shewn,  that 
unless  civil  institutions  insure  protection  to  the 
innocent,  all  the  confidence  which  mankind 
should  have  in  them  would  be  lost. 

I  shall  here  mention  what,  in  strict  chrono¬ 
logical  arrangement,  should  have  appeared  in 
my  account  of  last  year;  but  may  more  properly 
be  introduced  here,  the  controversy  having  not 
been  closed  till  this.  The  Reverend  Mr.  Shaw, 
a  native  of  one  of  the  Hebrides,  having  enter¬ 
tained  doubts  of  the  authenticity  of  the  poems 
ascribed  to  Ossian,  divested  himself  of  national 
bigotry;  and  having  travelled  in  the  Highlands 
and  Islands  of  Scotland,  and  also  in  Ireland,  in 
order  to  furnish  himself  with  materials  for  a 
Gaelick  Dictionary ,  which  he  afterwards  com¬ 
piled,  was  so  fully  satisfied  that  Dr.  Johnson  was 
in  the  right  upon  the  question,  that  he  candidly 
published  a  pamphlet,  stating  his  conviction 
and  the  proofs  and  reasons  on  which  it  was 
founded.  A  person  at  Edinburgh,  of  the  name  of 
Clark,  answered  this  pamphlet  with  much  zeal, 
and  much  abuse  of  its  authour.  Johnson  took 
Mr.  Shaw  under  his  protection,  and  gave  him 
his  assistance  in  writing  a  reply,  which  has  been 
admired  by  the  best  judges,  and  by  many  been 
considered  as  conclusive.  A  few  paragraphs, 
which  sufficiently  mark  their  great  Authour, 
shall  be  selected: 

“My  assertions  are,  for  the  most  part,  purely 
negative:  I  deny  the  existence  of  Fingal,  because 


BOSWELL 


[  1783 


524 

in  a  long  and  curious  peregrination  through  the 
Gaelick  regions  I  have  never  been  able  to  find 
it.  What  I  could  not  see  myself  I  suspect  to  be 
equally  invisible  to  others;  and  I  suspect  with 
the  more  reason,  as  among  all  those  who  have 
seen  it  no  man  can  shew  it. 

“Mr.  Clark  compares  the  obstinacy  of  those 
who  disbelieve  the  genuineness  of  Ossian  to  a 
blind  man,  who  should  dispute  the  reality  of 
colours,  and  deny  that  the  British  troops  are 
cloathed  in  red.  The  blind  man’s  doubt  would 
be  rational,  if  he  did  not  know  by  experience 
that  others  have  a  power  which  he  himself 
wants:  but  what  perspicacity  has  Mr.  Clark 
which  Nature  has  with-held  from  me  or  the 
rest  of  mankind? 

“The  true  state  of  the  parallel  must  be  this. 
Suppose  a  man,  with  eyes  like  his  neighbours, 
was  told  by  a  boasting  corporal,  that  the  troops, 
indeed,  wore  red  clothes  for  their  ordinary  dress, 
but  that  every  soldier  had  likewise  a  suit  of  black 
velvet,  which  he  put  on  when  the  King  reviews 
them.  This  he  thinks  strange,  and  desires  to  see 
the  fine  clothes,  but  finds  nobody  in  forty  thou¬ 
sand  men  that  can  produce  either  coat  or  waist¬ 
coat.  One,  indeed,  has  left  them  in  his  chest  at 
Port  Mahon;  another  has  always  heard  that  he 
ought  to  have  velvet  clothes  somewhere;  and 
a  third  has  heard  somebody  say,  that  soldiers 
ought  to  wear  velvet.  Can  the  enquirer  be 
blamed  if  he  goes  away  believing  that  a  soldier’s 
red  coat  is  all  that  he  has? 

“But  the  most  obdurate  incredulity  may  be 
shamed  or  silenced  by  acts.  To  overpower  con¬ 
tradictions,  let  the  soldier  shew  his  velvet-coat, 
and  the  Fingalist  the  original  of  Ossian. 

“The  difference  between  us  and  the  blind 
man  is  this: — the  blind  man  is  unconvinced, 
because  he  cannot  see;  and  we,  because  though 
we  can  see,  we  find  that  nothing  can  be  shewn.” 

Notwithstanding  the  complication  of  disor¬ 
ders  under  which  Johnson  now  laboured,  he 
did  not  resign  himself  to  despondency  and  dis¬ 
content,  but  with  wisdom  and  spirit  endeavoured 
to  console  and  amuse  his  mind  with  as  many 
innocent  enjoyments  as  he  could  procure.  Sir 
John  Hawkins  has  mentioned  the  cordiality 
with  which  he  insisted  that  such  of  the  members 
of  the  old  club  in  Ivy-lane  as  survived,  should 
meet  again  and  dine  together,  which  they  did, 
twice  at  a  tavern  and  once  at  his  house:  and 
in  order  to  insure  himself  society  in  the  evening 
for  three  days  in  the  week,  he  instituted  a 
club  at  the  Essex  Head,  in  Essex -street,  then 
kept  by  Samuel  Greaves,  an  old  servant  of  Mr. 
Thrale’s. 


To  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds 

Dear  Sir,  It  is  inconvenient  to  me  to  come 
out,  I  should  else  have  waited  on  you  with  an 
account  of  a  little  evening  Club  which  we  are 
establishing  in  Essex-street,  in  the  Strand,  and 
of  which  you  are  desired  to  be  one.  It  will  be 
held  at  the  Essex  Head,  now  kept  by  an  old 
servant  of  Thrale’s.  The  company  is  numerous, 
and,  as  you  will  see  by  the  list,  miscellaneous. 
The  terms  are  lax,  and  the  expences  light.  Mr. 
Barry  was  adopted  by  Dr.  Brocklesby,  who  joined 
with  me  in  forming  the  plan.  We  meet  thrice  a 
week,  and  he  who  misses  forfeits  two-pence. 

‘If  you  are  willing  to  become  a  member,  draw 
a  line  under  your  name.  Return  the  list.  We 
meet  for  the  first  time  on  Monday  at  eight.  I 
am,  &c. 

Sam.  Johnson 

Dec.  4,  1783 

It  did  not  suit  Sir  Joshua  to  be  one  of  this 
Club.  But  when  I  mention  only  Mr.  Daines 
Barrington,  Dr.  Brocklesby,  Mr.  Murphy,  Mr. 
John  Nichols,  Mr.  Cooke,  Mr.  Joddrel,  Mr. 
Paradise,  Dr.  Horsley,  Mr.  Windham,1  I  shall 
sufficiently  obviate  the  misrepresentation  of  it 
by  Sir  John  Hawkins,  as  if  it  had  been  a  low  ale¬ 
house  association,  by  which  Johnson  was  de¬ 
graded.  Johnson  himself,  like  his  namesake  Old 
Ben,  composed  the  Rules  of  his  Club. 2 

1I  was  in  Scotland  when  this  Club  was  founded, 
and  during  all  the  winter.  Johnson,  however,  de¬ 
clared  I  should  be  a  member,  and  invented  a  word 
upon  the  occasion:  “Boswell  (said  he,)  is  very  club- 
able  man.”  When  I  came  to  town  I  was  proposed 
by  Mr.  Barrington,  and  chosen.  I  believe  there  are 
few  societies  where  there  is  better  conversation  or 
more  decorum.  Several  of  us  resolved  to  continue 
it  after  our  great  founder  was  removed  by  death. 
Other  members  were  added;  and  now,  above  eight 
years  since  that  loss,  we  go  on  happily. 

2  Rules 

“  To-day  deep  thoughts  with  me  resolve  to  drench 
In  mirth ,  which  ajter  no  repentance  draws” — Milton 

“The  Club  shall  consist  of  four-and-twenty. 

“The  meetings  shall  be  on  the  Monday,  Thurs¬ 
day,  and  Saturday  of  every  week;  but  in  the  week 
before  Easter  there  shall  be  no  meeting. 

“Every  member  is  at  liberty  to  introduce  a  friend 
once  a  week,  but  not  oftener. 

“Two  members  shall  oblige  themselves  to  at¬ 
tend  in  their  turn  every  night  from  eight  to  ten,  or 
to  procure  two  to  attend  in  their  room. 

“Every  member  present  at  the  Club  shall  spend 
at  least  sixpence;  and  every  member  who  stays 
away  shall  forfeit  three-pence. 

“The  master  of  the  house  shall  keep  an  account 
of  the  absent  members;  and  deliver  to  the  Presi¬ 
dent  of  the  night  a  list  of  the  forfeits  incurred. 

“When  any  member  returns  after  absence,  he 
shall  immediately  lay  down  his  forfeits;  which  if  he 
omits  to  do,  the  President  shall  require. 

“There  shall  be  no  general  reckoning,  but  every 
man  shall  adjust  his  own  expences. 


1784]  LIFE  OF 

In  the  end  of  this  year  he  was  seized  with  a 
spasmodick  asthma  of  such  violence,  that  he  was 
confined  to  the  house  in  great  pain,  being  some¬ 
times  obliged  to  sit  all  night  in  his  chair,  a  re¬ 
cumbent  posture  being  so  hurtful  to  his  respira¬ 
tion,  that  he  could  not  endure  lying  in  bed ;  and 
there  came  upon  him  at  the  same  time  that  op¬ 
pressive  and  fatal  disease,  a  dropsy.  It  was  a 
very  severe  winter,  which  probably  aggravated 
his  complaints;  and  the  solitude  in  which  Mr. 
Levett  and  Mrs.  Williams  had  left  him,  rendered 
his  life  very  gloomy.  Mrs.  Desmoulins,  who  still 
lived,  was  herself  so  very  ill,  that  she  could  con¬ 
tribute  very  little  to  his  relief.  He,  however,  had 
none  of  that  unsocial  shyness  which  we  com¬ 
monly  see  in  people  afflicted  with  sickness.  He 
did  not  hide  his  head  from  the  world,  in  solitary 
abstraction;  he  did  not  deny  himself  to  the  visits 
of  his  friends  and  acquaintances;  but  at  all  times, 
when  he  was  not  overcome  by  sleep,  was  ready 
for  conversation  as  in  his  best  days. 

To  Mrs.  Lucy  Porter,  in  Lichfield 

Dear  Madam,  You  may  perhaps  think  me 
negligent  that  I  have  not  written  to  you  again 
upon  the  loss  of  your  brother;  but  condolences 
and  consolations  are  such  common  and  such 
useless  things,  that  the  omission  of  them  is  no 
great  crime:  and  my  own  diseases  occupy  my 
mind,  and  engage  my  care.  My  nights  are  mis¬ 
erably  restless,  and  my  days,  therefore,  are  heavy. 
I  try,  however,  to  hold  up  my  head  as  high  as  I 
can. 

I  am  sorry  that  your  health  is  impaired;  per¬ 
haps  the  spring  and  the  summer  may,  in  some 
degree,  restore  it:  but  if  not,  we  must  submit  to 
the  inconveniences  of  time,  as  to  the  other  dis- 

“The  night  of  indispensable  attendance  will 
come  to  every  member  once  a  month.  Whoever 
shall  for  three  months  together  omit  to  attend  him¬ 
self,  or  by  substitution,  nor  shall  make  any  apol¬ 
ogy  in  the  fourth  month,  shall  be  considered  as 
having  abdicated  the  Club. 

“When  a  vacancy  is  to  be  filled,  the  name  of  the 
candidate,  and  of  the  member  recommending  him, 
shall  stand  in  the  Club-room  three  nights.  On  the 
fourth  he  may  be  chosen  by  ballot;  six  members  at 
least  being  present,  and  two-thirds  of  the  ballot 
being  in  his  favour;  or  the  majority,  should  the 
numbers  not  be  divisible  by  three. 

“The  master  of  the  house  shall  give  notice,  six 
days  before,  to  each  of  those  members  whose  turn 
of  necessary  attendance  is  come. 

“The  notice  may  be  in  these  words: — cSir,  On 
- the - of - will  be  your  turn  of  pre¬ 
siding  at  the  Essex-Head.  Your  company  is  there¬ 
fore  earnestly  requested.’ 

“One  penny  shall  be  left  by  each  member  for  the 
waiter.” 

Johnson’s  definition  of  a  Club  in  this  sense,  in  his 
Dictionary ,  is,  “An  assembly  of  good  fellows,  meet¬ 
ing  under  certain  conditions.” 


JOHNSON  525 

pensations  of  Eternal  Goodness.  Pray  for  me, 
and  write  to  me,  or  let  Mr.  Pearson  write  for 
you.  I  am,  &c. 

Sam.  Johnson 

London,  Nov.  29,  1783 

1784:  iETAT.  75.] — And  now  I  am  arrived  at 
the  last  year  of  the  life  of  Samuel  Johnson,  a 
year  in  which,  although  passed  in  severe  indis¬ 
position,  he  nevertheless  gave  many  evidences 
of  the  continuance  of  those  wondrous  powers  of 
mind,  which  raised  him  so  high  in  the  intellec¬ 
tual  world.  His  conversation  and  his  letters  of 
this  year  were  in  no  respect  inferiour  to  those  of 
former  years. 

The  following  is  a  remarkable  proof  of  his  be¬ 
ing  alive  to  the  most  minute  curiosities  of  liter¬ 
ature. 

To  Mr.  Dilly,  Bookseller 
in  the  Poultry 

Sir,  There  is  in  the  world  a  set  of  books  which 
used  to  be  sold  by  the  booksellers  on  the  bridge, 
and  which  I  must  entreat  you  to  procure  me. 
They  are  called  Burton's  Books;  the  title  of  one  is 
Admirable  Curiosities ,  Rarities ,  and  Wonders  in  Eng¬ 
land.  I  believe  there  are  about  five  or  six  of 
them;  they  seem  very  proper  to  allure  back¬ 
ward  readers;  be  so  kind  as  to  get  them  for  me, 
and  send  me  them  with  the  best  printed  edition 
of  Baxter's  Call  to  the  Unconverted.  I  am,  &c. 

Sam.  Johnson 

Jan.  6,  1784 

To  Mr.  Perkins 

Dear  Sir,  I  was  very  sorry  not  to  see  you 
when  you  were  so  kind  as  to  call  on  me;  but  to 
disappoint  friends,  and  if  they  are  not  very 
good-natured,  to  disoblige  them,  is  one  of  the 
evils  of  sickness.  If  you  will  please  to  let  me  know 
which  of  the  afternoons  in  this  week  I  shall  be 
favoured  with  another  visit  by  you  and  Mrs. 
Perkins,  and  the  young  people,  I  will  take  all 
the  measures  that  I  can  to  be  pretty  well  at  that 
time.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

Jan.  21,  1784 

His  attention  to  the  Essex-Head  Club  appears 
from  the  following  letter  to  Mr.  Alderman  Clark, 
a  gentleman  for  whom  he  deservedly  entertained 
a  great  regard. 

To  Richard  Clark,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  You  will  receive  a  requisition,  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  rules  of  the  Club,  to  be  at  the 
house  as  President  of  the  night.  This  turn  comes 
once  a  month,  and  the  member  is  obliged  to  at¬ 
tend,  or  send  another  in  his  place.  You  were  en¬ 
rolled  in  the  Club  by  my  invitation,  and  I  ought 
to  introduce  you;  but  as  I  am  hindered  by  sick- 


526  BOSWELL  [1784 


ness,  Mr.  Hoole  will  very  properly  supply  my 
place  as  introductor,  or  yours  as  President.  I 
hope  in  milder  weather  to  be  a  very  constant 
attendant.  I  am,  Sir,  & c. 

Sam.  Johnson 

Jan.  27,  1784 

You  ought  to  be  informed  that  the  forfeits  be¬ 
gan  with  the  year,  and  that  every  night  of  non- 
attendance  incurs  the  mulct  of  three-pence,  that 
is,  nine-pence  a  week. 

On  the  8  th  of  January  I  wrote  to  him,  anxious¬ 
ly  inquiring  as  to  his  health,  and  enclosing  my 
Letter  to  the  People  of  Scotland ,  on  the  present  state  of 
the  nation . 

“I  trust,  (said  I,)  that  you  will  be  liberal 
enough  to  make  allowance  for  my  differing  from 
you  on  two  points,  (the  Middlesex  Election,  and 
the  American  War,)  when  my  general  principles 
of  government  are  according  to  your  own  heart, 
and  when,  at  a  crisis  of  doubtful  event,  I  stand 
forth  with  honest  zeal  as  an  ancient  and  faithful 
Briton.  My  reason  for  introducing  those  two 
points  was,  that  as  my  opinions  with  regard  to 
them  had  been  declared  at  the  periods  when 
they  were  least  favourable,  I  might  have  the 
credit  of  a  man  who  is  not  a  worshipper  of  min¬ 
isterial  power.” 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  I  hear  of  many  enquiries  which 
your  kindness  has  disposed  you  to  make  after 
me.  I  have  long  intended  you  a  long  letter,  which 
perhaps  the  imagination  of  its  length  hindered 
me  from  beginning.  I  will,  therefore,  content 
myself  with  a  shorter. 

Having  promoted  the  institution  of  a  new 
Club  in  the  neighbourhood,  at  the  house  of  an 
old  servant  of  Thrale’s,  I  went  thither  to  meet 
the  company,  and  was  seized  with  a  spasmodick 
asthma  so  violent,  that  with  difficulty  I  got  to 
my  own  house,  in  which  I  have  been  confined 
eight  or  nine  weeks,  and  from  which  I  know  not 
when  I  shall  be  able  to  go  even  to  church.  The 
asthma,  however,  is  not  the  worst.  A  dropsy 
gains  ground  upon  me;  my  legs  and  thighs  are 
very  much  swollen  with  water,  which  I  should 
be  content  if  I  could  keep  there,  but  I  am  afraid 
that  it  will  soon  be  higher.  My  nights  are  very 
sleepless  and  very  tedious.  And  yet  I  am  ex¬ 
tremely  afraid  of  dying. 

My  physicians  try  to  make  me  hope,  that 
much  of  my  malady  is  the  effect  of  cold,  and 
that  some  degree  at  least  of  recovery  is  to  be  ex¬ 
pected  from  vernal  breezes  and  summer  suns. 
If  my  life  is  prolonged  to  autumn,  I  should  be 
glad  to  try  a  warmer  climate;  though  how  to 
travel  with  a  diseased  body,  without  a  compan¬ 
ion  to  conduct  me,  and  with  very  little  money,  I 
do  not  well  see.  Ramsay  has  recovered  his  limbs 
in  Italy;  and  Fielding  was  sent  to  Lisbon,  where, 


indeed,  he  died;  but  he  was,  I  believe,  past  hope 
when  he  went.  Think  for  me  what  I  can  do. 

I  received  your  pamphlet,  and  when  I  write 
again  may  perhaps  tell  you  some  opinion  about 
it;  but  you  will  forgive  a  man  struggling  with 
disease  his  neglect  of  disputes,  politicks,  and 
pamphlets.  Let  me  have  your  prayers.  My  com¬ 
pliments  to  your  lady,  and  young  ones.  Ask 
your  physicians  about  my  case:  and  desire  Sir 
Alexander  Dick  to  write  me  his  opinion.  I  am, 
dear  Sir,  &c. 

Sam.  Johnson 

Feb.  11,  1784 

To  Mrs.  Lucy  Porter,  in  Lichfield 

My  Dearest  Love,  I  have  been  extremely  ill 
of  an  asthma  and  dropsy,  but  received,  by  the 
mercy  of  God,  sudden  and  unexpected  relief 
last  Thursday,  by  the  discharge  of  twenty  pints 
of  water.  Whether  I  shall  continue  free,  or  shall 
fill  again,  cannot  be  told.  Pray  for  me. 

Death,  my  dear,  is  very  dreadful;  let  us  think 
nothing  worth  our  care  but  how  to  prepare  for 
it:  what  we  know  amiss  in  ourselves  let  us  make 
haste  to  amend,  and  put  our  trust  in  the  mercy 
of  God,  and  the  intercession  of  our  Saviour.  I 
am,  dear  Madam,  your  most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

Feb.  23,  1784 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  I  have  just  advanced  so  far  towards 
recovery  as  to  read  a  pamphlet;  and  you  may 
reasonably  suppose  that  the  first  pamphlet  which 
I  read  was  yours.  I  am  very  much  of  your  opin¬ 
ion,  and,  like  you,  feel  great  indignation  at  the 
indecency  with  which  the  King  is  every  day 
treated.  Your  paper  contains  very  considerable 
knowledge  of  history  and  of  the  constitution, 
very  properly  produced  and  applied.  It  will  cer¬ 
tainly  raise  your  character,1  though  perhaps  it 
may  not  make  you  a  Minister  of  State.  .  .  . 

I  desire  you  to  see  Mrs.  Stewart  once  again, 
and  tell  her,  that  in  the  letter-case  was  a  letter 
relating  to  me,  for  which  I  will  give  her,  if  she  is 
willing  to  give  it  me,  another  guinea.  The  letter 
is  of  consequence  only  to  me.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  &c. 

Sam.  Johnson 

London,  Feb.  27,  1784 

T  sent  it  to  Mr.  Pitt,  with  a  letter,  in  which  I 
thus  expressed  myself: — “My  principles  may  ap¬ 
pear  to  you  too  monarchical:  but  I  know  and  am 
persuaded,  they  are  not  inconsistent  with  the  true 
principles  of  liberty.  Be  this  as  it  may,  you,  Sir,  are 
now  the  Prime  Minister,  called  by  the  Sovereign  to 
maintain  the  rights  of  the  Crown,  as  well  as  those 
of  the  people,  against  a  violent  faction.  As  such, 
you  are  entitled  to  the  warmest  support  of  every 
good  subject  in  every  department.”  He  answered: 
— “I  am  extremely  obliged  to  you  for  the  senti¬ 
ments  you  do  me  the  honour  to  express,  and  have 
observed  with  great  pleasure  the  zealous  and  able 
support  given  to  the  Cause  of  the  Publick  in  the 
work  you  were  so  good  to  transmit  to  me.” 


1784] 

In  consequence  of  Johnson’s  request  that  I 
should  ask  our  physicians  about  his  case,  and 
desire  Sir  Alexander  Dick  to  send  his  opinion,  I 
transmitted  him  a  letter  from  that  very  amiable 
Baronet,  then  in  his  eighty-first  year,  with  his 
faculties  as  entire  as  ever;  and  mentioned  his  ex¬ 
pressions  to  me  in  the  note  accompanying  it: 
“With  my  most  affectionate  wishes  for  Dr.  John¬ 
son’s  recovery,  in  which  his  friends,  his  country, 
and  all  mankind  have  so  deep  a  stake”:  and  at 
the  same  time  a  full  opinion  upon  his  case  by 
Dr.  Gillespie,  who,  like  Dr.  Cullen,  had  the  ad¬ 
vantage  of  having  passed  through  the  grada¬ 
tions  of  surgery  and  pharmacy,  and  by  study 
and  practice  had  attained  to  such  skill,  that  my 
father  settled  on  him  two  hundred  pounds  a 
year  for  five  years,  and  fifty  pounds  a  year  dur¬ 
ing  his  life,  as  an  honorarium  to  secure  his  partic¬ 
ular  attendance.  The  opinion  was  conveyed  in  a 
letter  to  me,  beginning,  “I  am  sincerely  sorry 
for  the  bad  state  of  health  your  very  learned 
and  illustrious  friend,  Dr.  Johnson,  labours  un¬ 
der  at  present.” 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  Presently  after  I  had  sent  away  my 
last  letter,  I  received  your  kind  medical  packet. 
I  am  very  much  obliged  both  to  you  and  your 
physicians  for  your  kind  attention  to  my  disease. 
Dr.  Gillespie  has  sent  me  an  excellent  consilium 
medicum ,  all  solid  practical  experimental  knowl¬ 
edge.  I  am  at  present,  in  the  opinion  of  my  phy¬ 
sicians,  (Dr.  Heberden  and  Dr.  Brocklesby,)  as 
well  as  my  own,  going  on  very  hopefully.  I  have 
just  begun  to  take  vinegar  of  squills.  The  pow¬ 
der  hurt  my  stomach  so  much,  that  it  could  not 
be  continued. 

Return  Sir  Alexander  Dick  my  sincere  thanks 
for  his  kind  letter;  and  bring  with  you  the  rhu¬ 
barb1  which  he  so  tenderly  offers  me. 

I  hope  dear  Mrs.  Boswell  is  now  quite  well, 
and  that  no  evil,  either  real  or  imaginary,  now 
disturbs  you.  I  am,  &c. 

Sam.  Johnson 

London,  March  2,  1784 

I  also  applied  to  three  of  the  eminent  phy¬ 
sicians  who  had  chairs  in  our  celebrated  school 
of  medicine  at  Edinburgh,  Doctors  Cullen,  Hope, 
and  Monro,  to  each  of  whom  I  sent  the  follow¬ 
ing  letter: 

Dear  Sir,  Dr.  Johnson  has  been  very  ill  for 
some  time;  and  in  a  letter  of  anxious  apprehen¬ 
sion  he  writes  to  me,  Ask  your  physicians  about 
my  case. 

1From  his  garden  at  Prestonfield,  where  he  cul¬ 
tivated  that  plant  with  such  success,  that  he  was 
presented  with  a  gold  medal  by  the  Society  of  Lon¬ 
don  for  the  Encouragement  of  Arts,  Manufactures, 
and  Commerce. 


52  7 

This,  you  see,  is  not  authority  for  a  regular 
consultation:  but  I  have  no  doubt  of  your  readi¬ 
ness  to  give  your  advice  to  a  man  so  eminent, 
and  who,  in  his  Life  of  Garth ,  has  paid  your  pro¬ 
fession  a  just  and  elegant  compliment:  “I  be¬ 
lieve  every  man  has  found  in  physicians  great 
liberality  and  dignity  of  sentiment,  very  prompt 
effusions  of  beneficence,  and  willingness  to  exert 
a  lucrative  art,  where  there  is  no  hope  of  lucre. 

Dr.  Johnson  is  aged  seventy-four.  Last  sum¬ 
mer  he  had  a  stroke  of  the  palsy,  from  which  he 
recovered  almost  entirely.  He  had,  before  that, 
been  troubled  with  a  catarrhous  cough.  This 
winter  he  was  seized  with  a  spasmodick  asthma, 
by  which  he  has  been  confined  to  his  house  for 
about  three  months.  Dr.  Brocklesby  writes  to 
me,  that  upon  the  least  admission  of  cold,  there 
is  such  a  constriction  upon  his  breast,  that  he 
cannot  lie  down  in  his  bed,  but  is  obliged  to  sit 
up  all  night,  and  gets  rest  and  sometimes  sleep, 
only  by  means  of  laudanum  and  syrup  of  pop¬ 
pies;  and  that  there  are  cedematous  tumours  on 
his  legs  and  thighs.  Dr.  Brocklesby  trusts  a  good 
deal  to  the  return  of  mild  weather.  Dr.  Johnson 
says,  that  a  dropsy  gains  ground  upon  him;  and 
he  seems  to  think  that  a  warmer  climate  would 
do  him  good.  I  understand  he  is  now  rather  bet¬ 
ter,  and  is  using  vinegar  of  squills.  I  am,  with 
great  esteem,  dear  Sir,  your  most  obedient  hum¬ 
ble  servant, 

James  Boswell 

March  7,  1784 

All  of  them  paid  the  most  polite  attention  to 
my  letter,  and  its  venerable  object.  Dr.  Cullen’s 
words  concerning  him  were,  “It  would  give  me 
the  greatest  pleasure  to  be  of  any  service  to  a 
man  whom  the  publick  properly  esteem,  and 
whom  I  esteem  and  respect  as  much  as  I  do  Dr. 
Johnson.”  Dr.  Hope’s,  “Few  people  have  a  bet¬ 
ter  claim  on  me  than  your  friend,  as  hardly  a 
day  passes  that  I  do  not  ask  his  opinion  about 
this  or  that  word.”  Dr.  Monro’s,  “I  most  sin¬ 
cerely  join  you  in  sympathizing  with  that  very 
worthy  and  ingenious  character,  from  whom 
his  country  has  derived  much  instruction  and 
entertainment.” 

Dr.  Hope  corresponded  with  his  friend  Dr. 
Brocklesby.  Doctors  Cullen  and  Monro  wrote 
their  opinions  and  prescriptions  to  me,  which  I 
afterwards  carried  with  me  to  London,  and,  so 
far  as  they  were  encouraging,  communicated  to 
Johnson.  The  liberality  on  one  hand,  and  grate¬ 
ful  sense  of  it  on  the  other,  I  have  great  satis¬ 
faction  in  recording. 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  I  am  too  much  pleased  with  the 
attention  which  you  and  your  dear  lady2  shew 

2Who  had  written  him  a  very  kind  letter. 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


528  BOSWELL  [1784 


to  my  welfare,  not  to  be  diligent  in  letting  you 
know  the  progress  which  I  make  towards  health. 
The  dropsy,  by  God’s  blessing,  has  now  run  al¬ 
most  totally  away  by  natural  evacuation;  and 
the  asthma,  if  not  irritated  by  cold,  gives  me  lit¬ 
tle  trouble.  While  I  am  writing  this,  I  have  not 
any  sensation  of  debility  or  disease.  But  I  do  not 
yet  venture  out,  having  been  confined  to  the 
house  from  the  thirteenth  of  December,  now  a 
quarter  of  a  year. 

When  it  will  be  fit  for  me  to  travel  as  far  as 
Auchinleck,  I  am  not  able  to  guess;  but  such  a 
letter  as  Mrs.  Boswell’s  might  draw  any  man, 
not  wholly  motionless,  a  great  way.  Pray  tell  the 
dear  lady  how  much  her  civility  and  kindness 
have  touched  and  gratified  me. 

Our  parliamentary  tumults  have  now  begun 
to  subside,  and  the  King’s  authority  is  in  some 
measure  re-established.  Mr.  Pitt  will  have  great 
power:  but  you  must  remember,  that  what  he 
has  to  give  must,  at  least  for  some  time,  be  given 
to  those  who  gave,  and  those  who  preserve,  his 
power.  A  new  minister  can  sacrifice  little  to  es¬ 
teem  or  friendship;  he  must,  till  he  is  settled, 
think  only  of  extending  his  interest.  .  .  . 

If  you  come  hither  through  Edinburgh,  send 
for  Mrs.  Stewart,  and  give  from  me  another 
guinea  for  the  letter  in  the  old  case,  to  which  I 
shall  not  be  satisfied  with  my  claim,  till  she 
gives  it  me. 

Please  to  bring  with  you  Baxter’s  Anacreon; 
and  if  you  procure  heads  of  Hector  Boece ,  the  his¬ 
torian,  and  Arthur  Johnston^  the  poet,  I  will  put 
them  in  my  room;  or  any  other  of  the  fathers  of 
Scottish  literature. 

I  wish  you  an  easy  and  happy  journey,  and 
hope  I  need  not  tell  you  that  you  will  be  wel¬ 
come  to,  dear  Sir,  your  most  affectionate,  hum¬ 
ble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

London,  March  18,  1784 

I  wrote  to  him,  March  28,  from  York,  inform¬ 
ing  him  that  I  had  a  high  gratification  in  the 
triumph  of  monarchical  principles  over  aristo- 
cratical  influence,  in  that  great  country,  in  an 
address  to  the  King;  that  I  was  thus  far  on  my 
way  to  him,  but  that  news  of  the  dissolution  of 
Parliament  having  arrived,  I  was  to  hasten  back 
to  my  own  county,  where  I  had  carried  an  Ad¬ 
dress  to  his  Majesty  by  a  great  majority,  and 
had  some  intention  of  being  a  candidate  to  rep¬ 
resent  the  county  in  Parliament. 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  You  could  do  nothing  so  proper  as 
to  haste  back  when  you  found  the  Parliament 
dissolved.  With  the  influence  which  your  Ad¬ 
dress  must  have  gained  you,  it  may  reasonably 
be  expected  that  your  presence  will  be  of  im¬ 
portance,  and  your  activity  of  effect. 


Your  solicitude  for  me  gives  me  that  pleasure 
which  every  man  feels  from  the  kindness  of  such 
a  friend:  and  it  is  with  delight  I  relieve  it  by 
telling,  that  Dr.  Brocklesby’s  account  is  true, 
and  that  I  am,  by  the  blessing  of  God,  wonder¬ 
fully  relieved. 

You  are  entering  upon  a  transaction  which 
requires  much  prudence.  You  must  endeavour 
to  oppose  without  exasperating;  to  practise  tem¬ 
porary  hostility,  without  producing  enemies  for 
life.  This  is,  perhaps,  hard  to  be  done;  yet  it  has 
been  done  by  many,  and  seems  most  likely  to  be 
effected  by  opposing  merely  upon  general  prin¬ 
ciples,  without  descending  to  personal  or  par¬ 
ticular  censures  or  objections.  One  thing  I  must 
enjoin  you,  which  is  seldom  observed  in  the 
conduct  of  elections;  I  must  entreat  you  to  be 
scrupulous  in  the  use  of  strong  liquors.  One 
night’s  drunkenness  may  defeat  the  labours  of 
forty  days  well  employed.  Be  firm,  but  not  clam¬ 
orous;  be  active,  but  not  malicious;  and  you 
may  form  such  an  interest,  as  may  not  only 
exalt  yourself,  but  dignify  your  family. 

We  are,  as  you  may  suppose,  all  busy  here. 
Mr.  Fox  resolutely  stands  for  Westminster,  and 
his  friends  say  will  carry  the  election.  However 
that  be,  he  will  certainly  have  a  seat.  Mr.  Hoole 
has  just  told  me,  that  the  city  leans  towards  the 
King. 

Let  me  hear,  from  time  to  time,  how  you  are 
employed,  and  what  progress  you  make. 

Make  dear  Mrs.  Boswell,  and  all  the  young 
Boswells,  the  sincere  compliments  of,  Sir,  your 
affectionate  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

London,  March  30,  1 784 

To  Mr.  Langton  he  wrote  with  that  cordial¬ 
ity  which  was  suitable  to  the  long  friendship 
which  had  subsisted  between  him  and  that  gen¬ 
tleman. 

March  27.  “Since  you  left  me,  I  have  con¬ 
tinued  in  my  own  opinion,  and  in  Dr.  Brockles¬ 
by’s,  to  grow  better  with  respect  to  all  my  for¬ 
midable  and  dangerous  distempers:  though  to  a 
body  battered  and  shaken  as  mine  has  lately 
been,  it  is  to  be  feared  that  weak  attacks  may  be 
sometimes  mischievous.  I  have,  indeed,  by  stand¬ 
ing  carelessly  at  an  open  window,  got  a  very 
troublesome  cough,  which  it  has  been  necessary 
to  appease  by  opium,  in  larger  quantities  than  I 
like  to  take,  and  I  have  not  found  it  give  way  so 
readily  as  I  expected;  its  obstinacy,  however, 
seems  at  last  disposed  to  submit  to  the  remedy, 
and  I  know  not  whether  I  should  then  have  a 
right  to  complain  of  any  morbid  sensation.  My 
asthma  is,  I  am  afraid,  constitutional  and  incur¬ 
able;  but  it  is  only  occasional,  and  unless  it  be 
excited  by  labour  or  by  cold,  gives  me  no  mo¬ 
lestation,  nor  does  it  lay  very  close  siege  to  life; 


1784] 

for  Sir  John  Floyer,  whom  the  physical  race 
consider  as  authour  of  one  of  the  best  books  up¬ 
on  it,  panted  on  to  ninety,  as  was  supposed;  and 
why  were  we  content  with  supposing  a  fact  so 
interesting,  of  a  man  so  conspicuous?  because  he 
corrupted,  at  perhaps  seventy  or  eighty,  the  reg¬ 
ister,  that  he  might  pass  for  younger  than  he 
was.  He  was  not  much  less  than  eighty,  when  to 
a  man  of  rank  who  modestly  asked  his  age,  he 
answered,  ‘Go  look’;  though  he  was  in  general  a 
man  of  civility  and  elegance. 

“The  ladies,  I  find,  are  at  your  house  all  well, 
except  Miss  Langton,  who  will  probably  soon 
recover  her  health  by  light  suppers.  Let  her  eat 
at  dinner  as  she  will,  but  not  take  a  full  stomach 
to  bed.  Pay  my  sincere  respects  to  dear  Miss 
Langton  in  Lincolnshire,  let  her  know  that  I 
mean  not  to  break  our  league  of  friendship,  and 
that  I  have  a  set  of  Lives  for  her,  when  I  have  the 
means  of  sending  it.” 

April  8.  “I  am  still  disturbed  by  my  cough; 
but  what  thanks  have  I  not  to  pay,  when  my 
cough  is  the  most  painful  sensation  that  I  feel? 
and  from  that  I  expect  hardly  to  be  released, 
while  winter  continues  to  gripe  us  with  so  much 
pertinacity.  The  year  has  now  advanced 
eighteen  days  beyond  the  equinox,  and  still 
there  is  very  little  remission  of  the  cold.  When 
warm  weather  comes,  which  surely  must  come 
at  last,  I  hope  it  will  help  both  me  and  your 
young  lady. 

“The  man  so  busy  about  addresses  is  neither 
more  nor  less  than  our  own  Boswell,  who  had 
come  as  far  as  York  towards  London,  but  turned 
back  on  the  dissolution,  and  is  said  now  to  stand 
for  some  place.  Whether  to  wish  him  success, 
his  best  friends  hesitate. 

“Let  me  have  your  prayers  for  the  comple¬ 
tion  of  my  recovery:  I  am  now  better  than  I 
ever  expected  to  have  been.  May  God  add  to 
his  mercies  the  grace  that  may  enable  me  to  use 
them  according  to  his  will.  My  compliments  to 
all.” 

April  13.  “I  had  this  evening  a  note  from 
Lord  Portmore,1  desiring  that  I  would  give  you 
an  account  of  my  health.  You  might  have  had 
it  with  less  circumduction.  I  am,  by  God’s  bless¬ 
ing,  I  believe,  free  from  all  morbid  sensations, 
except  a  cough,  which  is  only  troublesome.  But 
I  am  still  weak,  and  can  have  no  great  hope  of 

JTo  which  Johnson  returned  this  answer: 

£To  the  Right  Honourable  Earl  of  Portmore 

“Dr.  Johnson  acknowledges  with  great  respect 
the  honour  of  Lord  Portmore’s  notice.  He  is  better 
than  he  was;  and  will,  as  his  Lordship  directs, 
write  to  Mr.  Langton. 

“Bolt-court,  Fleet-street,  April  13,  1784” 


529 

strength  till  the  weather  shall  be  softer.  The 
summer,  if  it  be  kindly,  will,  I  hope,  enable  me 
to  support  the  winter.  God,  who  has  so  won¬ 
derfully  restored  me,  can  preserve  me  in  all 
seasons. 

“Let  me  inquire  in  my  turn  after  the  state  of 
your  family,  great  and  little.  I  hope  Lady  Rothes 
and  Miss  Langton  are  both  well.  That  is  a 
good  basis  of  content.  Then  how  goes  George 
on  with  his  studies?  How  does  Miss  Mary? 
And  how  does  my  own  Jenny?  I  think  I  owe 
Jenny  a  letter,  which  I  will  take  care  to  pay. 
In  the  mean  time  tell  her  that  I  acknowledge 
the  debt. 

“Be  pleased  to  make  my  compliments  to  the 
ladies.  If  Mrs.  Langton  comes  to  London,  she 
will  favour  me  with  a  visit,  for  I  am  not  well 
enough  to  go  out.” 

To  Ozias  Humphry,2  Esq. 

Sir,  Mr.  Hoole  has  told  me  with  what  benev¬ 
olence  you  listened  to  a  request  which  I  was  al¬ 
most  afraid  to  make,  of  leave  to  a  young  painter3 
to  attend  you  from  time  to  time  in  your  paint¬ 
ing-room,  to  see  your  operations,  and  receive 
your  instructions. 

The  young  man  has  perhaps  good  parts,  but 
has  been  without  a  regular  education.  He  is  my 
god-son,  and  therefore  I  interest  myself  in  his 
progress  and  success,  and  shall  think  myself 
much  favoured  if  I  receive  from  you  a  permis¬ 
sion  to  send  him. 

My  health  is,  by  God’s  blessing,  much  re¬ 
stored,  but  I  am  not  yet  allowed  by  my  physi¬ 
cians  to  go  abroad;  nor,  indeed,  do  I  think  my¬ 
self  yet  able  to  endure  the  weather.  I  am,  Sir, 
your  most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

April  5,  1784 

2The  eminent  painter,  representative  of  the  an¬ 
cient  family  of  Homfrey  (now  Humphry)  in  the 
west  of  England;  who,  as  appears  from  their  arms 
which  they  have  invariably  used,  have  been,  (as  I 
have  seen  authenticated  by  the  best  authority,) 
one  of  those  among  the  Knights  and  Esquires  of 
honour  who  are  represented  by  Holinshed  as  hav¬ 
ing  issued  from  the  Tower  of  London  on  coursers 
apparelled  for  the  justes,  accompanied  by  ladies  of 
honour,  leading  every  one  a  Knight,  with  a  chain 
of  gold,  passing  through  the  streets  of  London  into 
Smithfield,  on  Sunday  at  three  o’clock  in  the  after¬ 
noon,  being  the  first  Sunday  after  Michaelmas,  in 
the  fourteenth  year  of  King  Richard  the  Second. 
This  family  once  enjoyed  large  possessions,  but, 
like  others,  have  lost  them  in  the  progress  of  ages. 
Their  blood,  however,  remains  to  them  well  as¬ 
certained;  and  they  may  hope  in  the  revolution  of 
events,  to  recover  that  rank  in  society  for  which, 
in  modern  times,  fortune  seems  to  be  an  indispen¬ 
sable  requisite. 

3Son  of  Mr.  Samuel  Paterson. 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


53° 

To  the  Same 

Sir,  The  bearer  is  my  god-son,  whom  I  take 
the  liberty  of  recommending  to  your  kindness; 
which  I  hope  he  will  deserve  by  his  respect  to 
your  excellence,  and  his  gratitude  for  your  fa¬ 
vours.  I  am,  Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

April  io,  1784 

To  the  Same 

Sir,  I  am  very  much  obliged  by  your  civilities 
to  my  god-son,  but  must  beg  of  you  to  add  to 
them  the  favour  of  permitting  him  to  see  you 
paint,  that  he  may  know  how  a  picture  is  be¬ 
gun,  advanced  and  completed. 

If  he  may  attend  you  in  a  few  of  your  opera¬ 
tions,  I  hope  he  will  shew  that  the  benefit  has 
been  properly  conferred,  both  by  his  proficien¬ 
cy  and  his  gratitude.  At  least  I  shall  consider 
you  as  enlarging  your  kindness  to,  Sir,  your 
humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

May  31,  1784 

To  the  Reverend  Dr.  Taylor, 
Ashbourne,  Derbyshire 

Dear  Sir,  What  can  be  the  reason  that  I 
hear  nothing  from  you?  I  hope  nothing  disables 
you  from  writing.  What  I  have  seen,  and  what  I 
have  felt,  gives  me  reason  to  fear  every  thing. 
Do  not  omit  giving  me  the  comfort  of  know¬ 
ing,  that  after  all  my  losses  I  have  yet  a  friend 
left. 

I  want  every  comfort.  My  life  is  very  solitary 
and  very  cheerless.  Though  it  has  pleased  God 
wonderfully  to  deliver  me  from  the  dropsy,  I  am 
yet  very  weak,  and  have  not  passed  the  door 
since  the  13th  of  December.  I  hope  for  some 
help  from  warm  weather,  which  will  surely  come 
in  time. 

I  could  not  have  the  consent  of  the  physicians 
to  go  to  church  yesterday;  I  therefore  received 
the  holy  sacrament  at  home,  in  the  room  where 
I  communicated  with  dear  Mrs.  Williams,  a 
little  before  her  death.  O!  my  friend,  the  ap¬ 
proach  of  death  is  very  dreadful.  I  am  afraid  to 
think  on  that  which  I  know  I  cannot  avoid.  It 
is  vain  to  look  round  and  round  for  that  help 
which  cannot  be  had.  Yet  we  hope  and  hope, 
and  fancy  that  he  who  has  lived  to-day  may 
live  to-morrow.  But  let  us  learn  to  derive  our 
hope  only  from  God. 

In  the  mean  time,  let  us  be  kind  to  one  anoth¬ 
er.  I  have  no  friend  now  living  but  you  and  Mr. 
Hector,  that  was  the  friend  of  my  youth.  Do  not 
neglect,  dear  Sir,  yours  affectionately, 

Sam.  Johnson 

London,  Easter-Monday, 

April  12,  1784 

What  follows  is  a  beautiful  specimen  of  his 
gentleness  and  complacency  to  a  young  lady 


[  1784 

his  god-child,  one  of  the  daughters  of  his  friend 
Mr.  Langton,  then  I  think  in  her  seventh  year. 
He  took  the  trouble  to  write  it  in  a  large  round 
hand,  nearly  resembling  printed  characters,  that 
she  might  have  the  satisfaction  of  reading  it  her¬ 
self.  The  original  lies  before  me,  but  shall  be 
faithfully  restored  to  her;  and  I  dare  say  will  be 
preserved  by  her  as  a  jewel  as  long  as  she  lives. 

To  Miss  Jane  Langton, 
in  Rochester,  Kent 

My  Dearest  Miss  Jenny,  I  am  sorry  that 
your  pretty  letter  has  been  so  long  without  be¬ 
ing  answered;  but,  when  I  am  not  pretty  well,  I 
do  not  always  write  plain  enough  for  young  la¬ 
dies.  I  am  glad,  my  dear,  to  see  that  you  write  so 
well,  and  hope  that  you  mind  your  pen,  your 
book,  and  your  needle,  for  they  are  all  neces¬ 
sary.  Your  books  will  give  you  knowledge,  and 
make  you  respected;  and  your  needle  will  find 
you  useful  employment  when  you  do  not  care  to 
read.  When  you  are  a  little  older,  I  hope  you 
will  be  very  diligent  in  learning  arithmetick, 
and,  above  all,  that  through  your  whole  life  you 
will  carefully  say  your  prayers,  and  read  your 
Bible.  I  am,  my  dear,  your  most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

May  10,  1784 

On  Wednesday,  May  5,  I  arrived  in  London, 
and  next  morning  had  the  pleasure  to  find  Dr. 
Johnson  greatly  recovered.  I  but  just  saw  him; 
for  a  coach  was  waiting  to  carry  him  to  Isling¬ 
ton,  to  the  house  of  his  friend  the  Reverend  Mr. 
Strahan,  where  he  went  sometimes  for  the  ben¬ 
efit  of  good  air,  which,  notwithstanding  his  hav¬ 
ing  formerly  laughed  at  the  general  opinion  up¬ 
on  the  subject,  he  now  acknowledged  was  con¬ 
ducive  to  health. 

One  morning  afterwards,  when  I  found  him 
alone,  he  communicated  to  me,  with  solemn 
earnestness,  a  very  remarkable  circumstance 
which  had  happened  in  the  course  of  his  illness, 
when  he  was  much  distressed  by  the  dropsy.  He 
had  shut  himself  up,  and  employed  a  day  in 
particular  exercises  of  religion — fasting,  humil¬ 
iation,  and  prayer.  On  a  sudden  he  obtained 
extraordinary  relief,  for  which  he  looked  up  to 
Heaven  with  grateful  devotion.  He  made  no 
direct  inference  from  this  fact;  but  from  his  man¬ 
ner  of  telling  it,  I  could  perceive  that  it  appeared 
to  him  as  something  more  than  an  incident  in 
the  common  course  of  events.  For  my  own  part, 
I  have  no  difficulty  to  avow  that  cast  of  think¬ 
ing,  which  by  many  modern  pretenders  to  wis¬ 
dom  is  called  superstitious.  But  here  I  think 
even  men  of  dry  rationality  may  believe,  that 
there  was  an  intermediate  interposition  of  Di- 


BOSWELL 


1784] 

vine  Providence,  and  that  “the  fervent  prayer 
of  this  righteous  man”  availed.1 

On  Sunday,  May  9,  I  found  Colonel  Val¬ 
iancy,  the  celebrated  antiquarian  and  Engineer 
of  Ireland,  with  him.  On  Monday,  the  10th,  I 
dined  with  him  at  Mr.  Paradise’s,  where  was  a 
large  company;  Mr.  Bryant,  Mr.  Joddrel,  Mr. 
Hawkins  Browne,  &c.  On  Thursday,  the  13th,  I 
dined  with  him  at  Mr.  Joddrel’ s,  with  another 
large  company;  the  Bishop  of  Exeter,  Lord 
Monboddo,2  Mr.  Murphy,  &c. 

On  Saturday,  May  15,  I  dined  with  him  at 
Dr.  Brocklesby’s,  where  were  Colonel  Valiancy, 
Mr.  Murphy,  and  that  ever-cheerful  companion 
Mr.  Devaynes,  apothecary  to  his  Majesty.  Of 
these  days,  and  others  on  which  I  saw  him,  I 
have  no  memorials,  except  the  general  recollec¬ 
tion  of  his  being  able  and  animated  in  conversa¬ 
tion,  and  appearing  to  relish  society  as  much  as 
the  youngest  man.  I  find  only  these  three  small 
particulars: — When  a  person  was  mentioned, 
who  said,  “I  have  lived  fifty-one  years  in  this 
world  without  having  had  ten  minutes  of  uneas¬ 
iness”;  he  exclaimed,  “The  man  who  says  so, 
lies:  he  attempts  to  impose  on  human  credulity.” 
The  Bishop  of  Exeter  in  vain  observed,  that 
men  were  very  different.  His  Lordship’s  man- 

xUpon  this  subject  there  is  a  very  fair  and  judi¬ 
cious  remark  in  the  life  of  Dr.  Abernethy,  in  the 
first  edition  of  the  Biographia  Britannica ,  which  I 
should  have  been  glad  to  see  in  his  life  which  has 
been  written  for  the  second  edition  of  that  valuable 
work.  “To  deny  the  exercise  of  a  particular  provi¬ 
dence  in  the  Deity’s  government  of  the  world  is 
certainly  impious:  yet  nothing  serves  the  cause  of 
the  scorner  more  than  an  incautious  forward  zeal 
in  determining  the  particular  instances  of  it.” 

In  confirmation  of  my  sentiments,  I  am  also 
happy  to  quote  that  sensible  and  elegant  writer 
Mr.  Melmoth,  in  Letter  VIII  of  his  collection,  pub¬ 
lished  under  the  name  of  Fitzosborne .  “We  may  safe¬ 
ly  assert,  that  the  belief  of  a  particular  Providence 
is  founded  upon  such  probable  reasons  as  may  well 
justify  our  assent.  It  would  scarce,  therefore,  be 
wise  to  renounce  an  opinion  which  affords  so  firm 
a  support  to  the  soul,  in  those  seasons  wherein  she 
stands  in  most  need  of  assistance,  merely  because 
it  is  not  possible,  in  questions  of  this  kind,  to  solve 
every  difficulty  which  attends  them.” 

2I  was  sorry  to  observe  Lord  Monboddo  avoid 
any  communication  with  Dr.  Johnson.  I  flattered 
myself  that  I  had  made  them  very  good  friends  (see 
Journal  of  a  Tour  to  the  Hebrides ,  3rd  edit.,  p.  67),  but 
unhappily  his  Lordship  had  resumed  and  cherished 
a  violent  prejudice  against  my  illustrious  friend,  to 
whom  I  must  do  the  justice  to  say,  there  was  on  his 
part  not  the  least  anger,  but  a  good-humoured 
sportiveness.  Nay,  though  he  knew  of  his  Lord¬ 
ship’s  indisposition  towards  him,  he  was  even  kind¬ 
ly;  as  appeared  from  his  inquiring  of  me  after  him, 
by  an  abbreviation  of  his  name,  “Well,  how  does 
Monny?” 


531 

ner  was  not  impressive,  and  I  learnt  afterwards 
that  Johnson  did  not  find  out  that  the  person 
who  talked  to  him  was  a  Prelate;  if  he  had,  I 
doubt  not  that  he  would  have  treated  him  with 
more  respect;  for  once  talking  of  George  Psal- 
manazar,  whom  he  reverenced  for  his  piety,  he 
said,  “I  should  as  soon  think  of  contradicting  a 
Bishop.”  One  of  the  company  provoked  him 
greatly  by  doing  what  he  could  least  of  all  bear, 
which  was  quoting  something  of  his  own  writ¬ 
ing,  against  what  he  then  maintained.  “What* 
Sir,  (cried  the  gentleman,)  do  you  say  to 
The  busy  day ,  the  peaceful  night , 

Unfelt ,  uncounted ,  glided  by”?z 
Johnson  finding  himself  thus  presented  as  giv¬ 
ing  an  instance  of  a  man  who  had  lived  without 
uneasiness,  was  much  offended,  for  he  looked 
upon  such  a  quotation  as  unfair.  His  anger  burst 
out  in  an  unjustifiable  retort,  insinuating  that 
the  gentleman’s  remark  was  a  sally  of  ebriety; 
“Sir,  there  is  one  passion  I  would  advise  you  to 
command:  when  you  have  drunk  out  that  glass, 
don’t  drink  another.”  Here  was  exemplified 
what  Goldsmith  said  of  him,  with  the  aid  of  a 
very  witty  image  from  one  of  Cibber’s  Come¬ 
dies:  “There  is  no  arguing  with  Johnson;  for  if 
his  pistol  misses  fire,  he  knocks  you  down  with 
the  butt  end  of  it.”  Another  was  this:  when  a 
gentleman  of  eminence  in  the  literary  world  was 
violently  censured  for  attacking  people  by  anony¬ 
mous  paragraphs  in  news-papers;  he,  from  the 
spirit  of  contradiction  as  I  thought,  took  up  his 
defence,  and  said,  “Come,  come,  this  is  not  so 
terrible  a  crime;  he  means  only  to  vex  them  a 
little.  I  do  not  say  that  I  should  do  it;  but  there 
is  a  great  difference  between  him  and  me;  what 
is  fit  for  Hephaestion  is  not  fit  for  Alexander.” 
Another,  when  I  told  him  that  a  young  and 
handsome  Countess  had  said  to  me,  “I  should 
think  that  to  be  praised  by  Dr.  Johnson  would 
make  one  a  fool  all  one’s  life”;  and  that  I  an¬ 
swered,  “Madam,  I  shall  make  him  a  fool  to¬ 
day,  by  repeating  this  to  him,”  he  said,  “I  am 
too  old  to  be  made  a  fool;  but  if  you  say  I  am 
made  a  fool,  I  shall  not  deny  it.  I  am  much 
pleased  with  a  compliment,  especially  from  a 
pretty  woman.” 

On  the  evening  of  Saturday,  May  1 5,  he  was 
in  fine  spirits,  at  our  Essex-Head  Club.  He  told 
us,  “I  dined  yesterday  at  Mrs.  Garrick’s,  with 
Mrs.  Carter,  Miss  Hannah  More,  and  Miss 
Fanny  Burney.  Three  such  women  are  not  to  be 
found :  I  know  not  where  I  could  find  a  fourth, 
except  Mrs.  Lennox,  who  is  superiour  to  them 
all.”  Boswell.  “What!  had  you  them  all  to 

3Verses  on  the  death  of  Air.  Levett. 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


532 

yourself,  Sir?”  Johnson.  “I  had  them  all  as 
much  as  they  were  had;  but  it  might  have  been 
better  had  there  been  more  company  there.” 
Boswell.  “Might  not  Mrs.  Montagu  have  been 
a  fourth?”  Johnson.  “Sir,  Mrs.  Montagu  does 
not  make  a  trade  of  her  wit;  but  Mrs.  Montagu 
is  a  very  extraordinary  woman;  she  has  a  con¬ 
stant  stream  of  conversation,  and  it  is  always 
impregnated;  it  has  always  meaning.”  Boswell. 
“Mr.  Burke  has  a  constant  stream  of  conversa¬ 
tion.”  Johnson.  “Yes,  Sir;  if  a  man  were  to  go 
by  chance  at  the  same  time  with  Burke  under  a 
shed,  to  shun  a  shower,  he  would  say — ‘this  is 
an  extraordinary  man.5  If  Burke  should  go  into 
a  stable  to  see  his  horse  drest,  the  ostler  would 
say — ‘we  have  had  an  extraordinary  man  here.5  55 
Boswell.  “Foote  was  a  man  who  never  failed 
in  conversation.  If  he  had  gone  into  a  stable — 55 
Johnson.  “Sir,  if  he  had  gone  into  a  stable,  the 
ostler  would  have  said,  ‘here  has  been  a  comical 
fellow5;  but  he  would  not  have  respected  him.55 
Boswell.  “And,  Sir,  the  ostler  would  have  an¬ 
swered  him,  would  have  given  him  as  good  as 
he  brought,  as  the  common  saying  is.”  Johnson. 
“Yes,  Sir;  and  Foote  would  have  answered  the 
ostler. — When  Burke  does  not  descend  to  be 
merry,  his  conversation  is  very  superiour  indeed. 
There  is  no  proportion  between  the  powers  which 
he  shews  in  serious  talk  and  in  jocularity.  When 
he  lets  himself  down  to  that,  he  is  in  the  kennel.55 
I  have  in  another  place1  opposed,  and  I  hope 
with  success,  Dr.  Johnson’s  very  singular  and 
erroneous  notion  as  to  Mr.  Burke’s  pleasantry. 
Mr.  Windham  now  said  low  to  me,  that  he  dif¬ 
fered  from  our  great  friend  in  this  observation; 
for  that  Mr.  Burke  was  often  very  happy  in  his 
merriment.  It  would  not  have  been  right  for 
either  of  us  to  have  contradicted  Johnson  at  this 
time,  in  a  Society  all  of  whom  did  not  know  and 
value  Mr.  Burke  as  much  as  we  did.  It  might 
have  occasioned  something  more  rough,  and  at 
any  rate  would  probably  have  checked  the  flow 
of  Johnson’s  good-humour.  He  called  to  us  with 
a  sudden  air  of  exultation,  as  the  thought  start¬ 
ed  into  his  mind,  “O!  Gentlemen,  I  must  tell 
you  a  very  great  thing.  The  Empress  of  Russia 
has  ordered  th z  Rambler  to  be  translated  into  the 
Russian  language:2  so  I  shall  be  read  on  the 
banks  of  the  Wolga.  Horace  boasts  that  his  fame 
would  extend  as  far  as  the  banks  of  the  Rhone; 
now  the  Wolga  is  farther  from  me  than  the 

1 Journal  of  a  Tour  to  the  Hebrides ,  3rd  edit.,  p.  20 
[Aug.  15]. 

2I  have  since  heard  that  the  report  was  not  well 
founded;  but  the  elation  discovered  by  Johnson  in 
the  belief  that  it  was  true,  shewed  a  noble  ardour 
for  literary  fame. 


[  1784 

Rhone  was  from  Horace.”  Boswell.  “You  must 
certainly  be  pleased  with  this,  Sir.”  Johnson.  “I 
am  pleased,  Sir,  to  be  sure.  A  man  is  pleased  to 
find  he  has  succeeded  in  that  which  he  has  en¬ 
deavoured  to  do.” 

One  of  the  company  mentioned  his  having 
seen  a  noble  person  driving  in  his  carriage,  and 
looking  exceedingly  well,  notwithstanding  his 
great  age.  Johnson.  “Ah,  Sir;  that  is  nothing. 
Bacon  observes,  that  a  stout  healthy  old  man  is 
like  a  tower  undermined.” 

On  Sunday,  May  16,  I  found  him  alone;  he 
talked  of  Mrs.  Thrale  with  much  concern,  say¬ 
ing,  “Sir,  she  has  done  every  thing  wrong,  since 
Thrale’s  bridle  was  off  her  neck”;  and  was  pro¬ 
ceeding  to  mention  some  circumstances  which 
have  since  been  the  subject  of  publick  discus¬ 
sion,  when  he  was  interrupted  by  the  arrival  of 
Dr.  Douglas,  now  Bishop  of  Salisbury. 

Dr.  Douglas,  upon  this  occasion,  refuted  a 
mistaken  notion  which  is  very  common  in  Scot¬ 
land,  that  the  ecclesiastical  discipline  of  the 
Church  of  England,  though  duly  enforced,  is  in¬ 
sufficient  to  preserve  the  morals  of  the  clergy, 
inasmuch  as  all  delinquents  may  be  screened  by 
appealing  to  the  Convocation,  which  being  nev¬ 
er  authorized  by  the  King  to  sit  for  the  dispatch 
of  business,  the  appeal  never  can  be  heard.  Dr. 
Douglas  observed,  that  this  was  founded  upon 
ignorance;  for  that  the  Bishops  have  sufficient 
power  to  maintain  discipline,  and  that  the  sit¬ 
ting  of  the  Convocation  was  wholly  immaterial 
in  this  respect,  it  being  not  a  Court  of  judica¬ 
ture,  but  like  a  parliament,  to  make  Canons  and 
regulations  as  times  may  require. 

Johnson,  talking  of  the  fear  of  death,  said, 
“Some  people  are  not  afraid,  because  they  look 
upon  salvation  as  the  effect  of  an  absolute  de¬ 
cree,  and  think  they  feel  in  themselves  the  marks 
of  sanctification.  Others,  and  those  the  most  ra¬ 
tional  in  my  opinion,  look  upon  salvation  as 
conditional;  and  as  they  never  can  be  sure  that 
they  have  complied  with  the  conditions,  they 
are  afraid.” 

In  one  of  his  little  manuscript  diaries,  about 
this  time,  I  find  a  short  notice,  which  marks  his 
amiable  disposition  more  certainly  than  a  thou¬ 
sand  studied  declarations. — “Afternoon  spent 
cheerfully  and  elegantly,  I  hope  without  offence 
to  God  or  man ;  though  in  no  holy  duty,  yet  in  the 
general  exercise  and  cultivation  of  benevolence.” 

On  Monday,  May  17,  I  dined  with  him  at 
Mr.  Dilly’s,  where  were  Colonel  Valiancy,  the 
Reverend  Dr.  Gibbons,  and  Mr.  Capel  Lofft, 
who,  though  a  most  zealous  Whig,  has  a  mind 
so  full  of  learning  and  knowledge,  and  30  much 


BOSWELL 


1784]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  533 


exercised  in  various  departments,  and  withal  so 
much  liberality,  that  the  stupendous  powers  of 
the  literary  Goliath,  though  they  did  not  fright¬ 
en  this  little  David  of  popular  spirit,  could  not 
but  excite  his  admiration.  There  was  also  Mr. 
Braithwaite  of  the  Post-office,  that  amiable  and 
friendly  man,  who,  with  modest  and  unassum¬ 
ing  manners,  has  associated  with  many  of  the 
wits  of  the  age.  Johnson  was  very  quiescent  to¬ 
day.  Perhaps  too  I  was  indolent.  I  find  nothing 
more  of  him  in  my  notes,  but  that  when  I  men¬ 
tioned  that  I  had  seen  in  the  King’s  library  six¬ 
ty-three  editions  of  my  favourite  Thomas  a  Kem- 
pis,  amongst  which  it  was  in  eight  languages, 
Latin,  German,  French,  Italian,  Spanish,  Eng¬ 
lish,  Arabick,  and  Armenian,  he  said,  he  thought 
it  unnecessary  to  collect  many  editions  of  a  book, 
which  were  all  the  same,  except  as  to  the  paper 
and  print;  he  would  have  the  original,  and  all 
the  translations,  and  all  the  editions  which  had 
any  variations  in  the  text.  He  approved  of  the 
famous  collection  of  editions  of  Horace  by  Doug¬ 
las,  mentioned  by  Pope,  who  is  said  to  have  had 
a  closet  filled  with  them;  and  he  added,  “every 
man  should  try  to  collect  one  book  in  that  man¬ 
ner,  and  present  it  to  a  publick  library.” 

On  Tuesday,  May  18,  I  saw  him  for  a  short 
time  in  the  morning.  I  told  him  that  the  mob 
had  called  out,  as  the  King  passed,  “No  Fox — 
No  Fox,”  which  I  did  not  like.  He  said,  “They 
were  right,  Sir.”  I  said,  I  thought  not;  for  it 
seemed  to  be  making  Mr.  Fox  the  King’s  com¬ 
petitor.  There  being  no  audience,  so  that  there 
could  be  no  triumph  in  a  victory,  he  fairly 
agreed  with  me.  I  said  it  might  do  very  well,  if 
explained  thus: — “Let  us  have  no  Fox”;  under¬ 
standing  it  as  a  prayer  to  his  Majesty  not  to  ap¬ 
point  that  gentleman  minister. 

On  Wednesday,  May  19,  I  sat  a  part  of  the 
evening  with  him,  by  ourselves.  I  observed,  that 
the  death  of  our  friends  might  be  a  consolation 
against  the  fear  of  our  own  dissolution,  because 
we  might  have  more  friends  in  the  other  world 
than  in  this.  He  perhaps  felt  this  as  a  reflection 
upon  his  apprehension  as  to  death;  and  said, 
with  heat,  “How  can  a  man  know  where  his  de¬ 
parted  friends  are,  or  whether  they  will  be  his 
friends  in  the  other  world?  How  many  friend¬ 
ships  have  you  known  formed  upon  principles 
of  virtue?  Most  friendships  are  formed  by  ca¬ 
price  or  by  chance,  mere  confederacies  in  vice 
or  leagues  in  folly.” 

We  talked  of  our  worthy  friend  Mr.  Langton. 
He  said,  “I  know  not  who  will  go  to  Heaven  if 
Langton  does  not.  Sir,  I  could  almost  say,  Sit 
anima  mea  cum  Langtono .”  I  mentioned  a  very 


eminent  friend  as  a  virtuous  man.  Johnson. 

“Yes,  Sir;  but - has  not  the  evangelical 

virtue  of  Langton. - ,  I  am  afraid,  would 

not  scruple  to  pick  up  a  wench.” 

He  however  charged  Mr.  Langton  with  what 
he  thought  want  of  judgement  upon  an  inter¬ 
esting  occasion.  “When  I  was  ill,  (said  he,)  I 
desired  he  would  tell  me  sincerely  in  what  he 
thought  my  life  was  faulty.  Sir,  he  brought  me 
a  sheet  of  paper,  on  which  he  had  written  down 
several  texts  of  Scripture,  recommending  Chris¬ 
tian  charity.  And  when  I  questioned  him  what 
occasion  I  had  given  for  such  an  animadversion, 
all  that  he  could  say  amounted  to  this, — that  I 
sometimes  contradicted  people  in  conversation. 
Now  what  harm  does  it  do  to  any  man  to  be 
contradicted?”  Boswell.  “I  suppose  he  meant 
the  manner  of  doing  it;  roughly, — and  harshly.” 
Johnson.  “And  who  is  the  worse  for  that?”  Bos¬ 
well.  “It  hurts  people  of  weak  nerves.”  John¬ 
son.  “I  know  no  such  weak-nerved  people.”  Mr. 
Burke,  to  whom  I  related  this  conference,  said, 
“It  is  well,  if  when  a  man  comes  to  die,  he  has 
nothing  heavier  upon  his  conscience  than  hav¬ 
ing  been  a  little  rough  in  conversation.” 

Johnson,  at  the  time  when  the  paper  was  pre¬ 
sented  to  him,  though  at  first  pleased  with  the 
attention  of  his  friend,  whom  he  thanked  in  an 
earnest  manner,  soon  exclaimed,  in  a  loud  and 
angry  tone,  “What  is  your  drift,  Sir?”  Sir  Joshua 
Reynolds  pleasantly  observed,  that  it  was  a 
scene  for  a  comedy,  to  see  a  penitent  get  into  a 
violent  passion  and  belabour  his  confessor.1 

I  have  preserved  no  more  of  his  conversation 
at  the  times  when  I  saw  him  during  the  rest  of 
this  month,  till  Sunday,  the  30th  of  May,  when 
I  met  him  in  the  evening  at  Mr.  Hoole’s,  where 
there  was  a  large  company  both  of  ladies  and 
gentlemen;  Sir  James  Johnston  happened  to  say, 

1  After  all,  I  cannot  but  be  of  opinion,  that  as  Mr. 
Langton  was  seriously  requested  by  Dr.  Johnson 
to  mention  what  appeared  to  him  erroneous  in  the 
character  of  his  friend,  he  was  bound,  as  an  honest 
man,  to  intimate  what  he  really  thought,  which  he 
certainly  did  in  the  most  delicate  manner;  so  that 
Johnson  himself,  when  in  a  quiet  frame  of  mind, 
was  pleased  with  it.  The  texts  suggested  are  now 
before  me,  and  I  shall  quote  a  few  of  them.  “Bless¬ 
ed  are  the  meek,  for  they  shall  inherit  the  earth.5’ 
Matt.  5.  5. — “I  therefore,  the  prisoner  of  the  Lord, 
beseech  you,  that  ye  walk  worthy  of  the  vocation 
wherewith  ye  are  called;  with  all  lowliness  and 
meekness,  with  long-suffering,  forbearing  one  an¬ 
other  in  love.”  Ephes.  5.  [4.]  1,  2. — “And  above  all 
these  things  put  on  charity,  which  is  the  bond  of 
perfectness.”  Col.  3.  14. — “Charity  suffereth  long 
and  is  kind;  charity  envieth  not,  charity  vaunteth 
not  itself,  is  not  puffed  up:  doth  not  behave  itself 
unseemly,  is  not  easily  provoked.”  1  Cor.  13.  4,  5. 


BOSWELL 


534 

that  he  paid  no  regard  to  the  arguments  of  coun¬ 
sel  at  the  bar  of  the  House  of  Commons,  because 
they  were  paid  for  speaking.  Johnson.  “Nay, 
Sir.  argument  is  argument.  You  cannot  help 
paying  regard  to  their  arguments,  if  they  are 
good.  If  it  were  testimony,  you  might  disregard 
it,  if  you  knew  that  it  were  purchased.  There  is 
a  beautiful  image  in  Bacon  upon  this  subject: 
testimony  is  like  an  arrow  shot  from  a  long  bow; 
the  force  of  it  depends  on  the  strength  of  the 
hand  that  draws  it.  Argument  is  like  an  arrow 
from  a  cross-bow,  which  has  equal  force  though 
shot  by  a  child.” 

He  had  dined  that  day  at  Mr.  Hoole’s,  and 
Miss  Helen  Maria  Williams  being  expected  in 
the  evening,  Mr.  Iioole  put  into  his  hands  her 
beautiful  Ode  on  the  Peace:1  Johnson  read  it  over, 
and  when  this  elegant  and  accomplished  young 
lady2  was  presented  to  him,  he  took  her  by  the 
hand  in  the  most  courteous  manner,  and  repeat¬ 
ed  the  finest  stanza  of  her  poem;  this  was  the 
most  delicate  and  pleasing  compliment  he  could 
pay.  Her  respectable  friend,  Dr.  Kippis,  from 
whom  I  had  this  anecdote,  was  standing  by, 
and  was  not  a  little  gratified. 

Miss  Williams  told  me,  that  the  only  other 
time  she  was  fortunate  enough  to  be  in  Dr. 
Johnson’s  company,  he  asked  her  to  sit  down 
by  him,  which  she  did,  and  upon  her  inquiring 
how  he  was,  he  answered,  “I  am  very  ill  indeed, 
Madam.  I  am  very  ill  even  when  you  are  near 
me;  what  should  I  be  were  you  at  a  distance?” 

He  had  now  a  great  desire  to  go  to  Oxford,  as 
his  first  jaunt  after  his  illness;  we  talked  of  it  for 
some  days,  and  I  had  promised  to  accompany 
him.  He  was  impatient  and  fretful  to-night,  be¬ 
cause  I  did  not  at  once  agree  to  go  with  him  on 
Thursday.  When  I  considered  how  ill  he  had 
been,  and  what  allowance  should  be  made  for 
the  influence  of  sickness  upon  his  temper,  I  re¬ 
solved  to  indulge  him,  though  with  some  incon- 

JThe  Peace  made  by  that  very  able  statesman, 
the  Earl  of  Shelburne,  now  Marquis  of  Lansdown, 
which  may  fairly  be  considered  as  the  foundation  of 
all  the  prosperity  of  Great  Britain  since  that  time. 

2In  the  first  edition  of  my  Work,  the  epithet 
amiable  was  given.  I  was  sorry  to  be  obliged  to 
strike  it  out;  but  I  could  not  in  justice  suffer  it  to 
remain,  after  this  young  lady  had  not  only  written 
in  favour  of  the  savage  Anarchy  with  which  France 
has  been  visited,  but  had  (as  I  have  been  informed 
by  good  authority),  walked,  without  horrour,  over 
the  ground  at  the  Thuillieries,  when  it  was  strewed 
with  the  naked  bodies  of  the  faithful  Swiss  Guards, 
who  were  barbarously  massacred  for  having  brave¬ 
ly  defended,  against  a  crew  of  ruffians,  the  Mon¬ 
arch  whom  they  had  taken  an  oath  to  defend. 
From  Dr.  Johnson  she  could  now  expect  not  en¬ 
dearment  but  repulsion. 


[  1784 

venience  to  myself,  as  I  wished  to  attend  the 
musical  meeting  in  honour  of  Handel,  in  West- 
minster-Abbey,  on  the  following  Saturday. 

In  the  midst  of  his  own  diseases  and  pains,  he 
was  ever  compassionate  to  the  distresses  of  oth¬ 
ers,  and  actively  earnest  in  procuring  them  aid, 
as  appears  from  a  note  to  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds, 
of  June,  in  these  words: — “I  am  ashamed  to  ask 
for  some  relief  for  a  poor  man,  to  whom,  I  hope,  I 
have  given  what  I  can  be  expected  to  spare.  The 
man  importunes  me,  and  the  blow  goes  round. 
I  am  going  to  try  another  air  on  Thursday.” 

On  Thursday,  June  3,  the  Oxford  post-coach 
took  us  up  in  the  morning  at  Bolt-court.  The 
other  two  passengers  were  Mrs.  Beresford  and 
her  daughter,  two  very  agreeable  ladies  from 
America;  they  were  going  to  Worcestershire, 
where  they  then  resided.  Frank  had  been  sent 
by  his  master  the  day  before  to  take  places  for 
us;  and  I  found,  from  the  waybill,  that  Dr.  John¬ 
son  had  made  our  names  be  put  down.  Mrs. 
Beresford,  who  had  read  it,  whispered  me,  “Is 
this  the  great  Dr.  Johnson?”  I  told  her  it  was;  so 
she  was  then  prepared  to  listen.  As  she  soon  hap¬ 
pened  to  mention  in  a  voice  so  low  that  Johnson 
did  not  hear  it,  that  her  husband  had  been  a 
member  of  the  American  Congress,  I  cautioned 
her  to  beware  of  introducing  that  subject,  as  she 
must  know  how  very  violent  Johnson  was  against 
the  people  of  that  country.  He  talked  a  great 
deal,  but  I  am  sorry  I  have  preserved  little  of 
the  conversation.  Miss  Beresford  was  so  much 
charmed,  that  she  said  to  me  aside, “How  he  does 
talk!  Every  sentence  is  an  essay.”  She  amused 
herself  in  the  coach  with  knotting;  he  would 
scarcely  allow  this  species  of  employment  any 
merit.  “Next  to  mere  idleness  (said  he.)  I  think 
knotting  is  to  be  reckoned  in  the  scale  of  insig¬ 
nificance;  though  I  once  attempted  to  learn  knot¬ 
ting.  Dempster’s  sister  (looking  to  me,)  endeav¬ 
oured  to  teach  me  it;  but  I  made  no  progress.” 

I  was  surprised  at  his  talking  without  reserve 
in  the  publick  post-coach  of  the  state  of  his  af¬ 
fairs;  “I  have  (said  he,)  about  the  world  I  think 
above  a  thousand  pounds,  which  I  intend  shall 
afford  Frank  an  annuity  of  seventy  pounds  a 
year.”  Indeed  his  openness  with  people  at  a  first 
interview  was  remarkable.  He  said  once  to  Mr. 
Langton,  “I  think  I  am  like  Squire  Richard  in  The 
Journey  to  London ,  T’m  never  strange  in  a  strange 
place.’”  He  was  truly  social.  He  strongly  censured 
what  is  much  too  common  in  England  among 
persons  of  condition, — -maintaining  an  absolute 
silence,  when  unknown  to  each  other;  as  for  in¬ 
stance,  when  occasionally  brought  together  in  a 
room  before  the  master  or  mistress  of  the  house  has 


1784]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  535 


appeared.  “Sir,  that  is  being  so  uncivilised  as  not 
to  understand  the  common  rights  of  humanity.55 

At  the  inn  where  we  stopped  he  was  exceed¬ 
ingly  dissatisfied  with  some  roast  mutton  which 
we  had  for  dinner.  The  ladies  I  saw  wondered 
to  see  the  great  philosopher,  whose  wisdom  and 
wit  they  had  been  admiring  all  the  way,  get  in¬ 
to  ill-humour  from  such  a  cause.  He  scolded  the 
waiter,  saying,  “It  is  as  bad  as  bad  can  be:  it  is 
ill-fed,  ill-killed,  ill-kept,  and  ill-drest.55 

He  bore  the  journey  very  well,  and  seemed  to 
feel  himself  elevated  as  he  approached  Oxford, 
that  magnificent  and  venerable  seat  of  learning, 
Orthodoxy,  and  Toryism.  Frank  came  in  the 
heavy  coach,  in  readiness  to  attend  him;  and  we 
were  received  with  the  most  polite  hospitality  at 
the  house  of  his  old  friend  Dr.  Adams,  Master  of 
Pembroke  College,  who  had  given  us  a  kind  in¬ 
vitation.  Before  we  were  set  down,  I  communi¬ 
cated  to  Johnson,  my  having  engaged  to  return 
to  London  direcdy,  for  the  reason  I  have  men¬ 
tioned,  but  that  I  would  hasten  back  to  him 
again.  He  was  pleased  that  I  had  made  this 
journey  merely  to  keep  him  company.  He  was 
easy  and  placid,  with  Dr.  Adams,  Mrs.  and  Miss 
Adams,  and  Mrs.  Kennicot,  widow  of  the  learn¬ 
ed  Hebrsean,  who  was  here  on  a  visit.  He  soon 
dispatched  the  inquiries  which  were  made  about 
his  illness  and  recovery,  by  a  short  and  distinct 
narrative;  and  then  assuming  a  gay  air,  repeat¬ 
ed  from  Swift, — 

Nor  think  on  our  approaching  ills. 

And  talk  of  spectacles  and  pills. 

Dr.  Newton,  the  Bishop  of  Bristol,  having  been 
mentioned,  Johnson,  recollecting  the  manner  in 
which  he  had  been  censured  by  that  Prelate,1 
thus  retaliated: — “Tom  knew  he  should  be  dead 
before  what  he  has  said  of  me  would  appear.  He 
durst  not  have  printed  it  while  he  was  alive.55 
Dr.  Adams.  “I  believe  his  Dissertations  on  the 
Prophecies  is  his  great  work.55  Johnson.  “Why, 
Sir,  it  is  Tom’s  great  work;  but  how  far  it  is 
great,  or  how  much  of  it  is  Tom’s,  are  other 

T)r.  Newton,  in  his  Account  of  his  own  Life ,  after 
animadverting  upon  Mr.  Gibbon’s  History ,  says, 
“Dr.  Johnson’s  Lives  of  the  Poets  afforded  more 
amusement;  but  candour  was  much  hurt  and  of¬ 
fended  at  the  malevolence  that  predominates  in 
every  part.  Some  passages,  it  must  be  allowed,  are 
judicious  and  well  written,  but  make  not  sufficient 
compensation  for  so  much  spleen  and  ill  humour. 
Never  was  any  biographer  more  sparing  of  his 
praise,  or  more  abundant  in  his  censures.  He  seem¬ 
ingly  delights  more  in  exposing  blemishes,  than  in 
recommending  beauties;  slightly  passes  over  excel¬ 
lencies,  enlarges  upon  imperfections,  and  not  con¬ 
tent  with  his  own  severe  reflections,  revives  old 
scandal,  and  produces  large  quotations  from  the 
forgotten  works  of  former  criticks.  His  reputation 


questions.  I  fancy  a  considerable  part  of  it  was 
borrowed.55  Dr.  Adams.  “He  wasa  very  successful 
man.”  Johnson.  “I  don’t  think  so,  Sir.  He  did 
not  get  very  high.  He  was  late  in  getting  what 
he  did  get;  and  he  did  not  get  it  by  the  best 
means.  I  believe  he  was  a  gross  flatterer.” 

I  fulfilled  my  intention  by  going  to  London, 
and  returned  to  Oxford  on  Wednesday  the  9th 
of  June,  when  I  was  happy  to  find  myself  again 
in  the  same  agreeable  circle  at  Pembroke  Col¬ 
lege,  with  the  comfortable  prospect  of  making 
some  stay.  Johnson  welcomed  my  return  v/ith 
more  than  ordinary  glee. 

He  talked  with  great  regard  of  the  Honour¬ 
able  Archibald  Campbell,  whose  character  he 
had  given  at  the  Duke  of  Argyll’s  table,  when 
we  were  at  Inverary;2  and  at  this  time  wrote  out 
for  me,  in  his  own  hand,  a  fuller  account  of  that 
learned  and  venerable  writer,  which  I  have  pub¬ 
lished  in  its  proper  place.  Johnson  made  a  re¬ 
mark  this  evening  which  struck  me  a  good  deal. 
“I  never  (said  he,)  knew  a  non-juror  who  could 
reason.”3  Surely  he  did  not  mean  to  deny  that 
faculty  to  many  of  their  writers;  to  Hickes,  Brett, 
and  other  eminent  divines  of  that  persuasion; 

was  so  high  in  the  republick  of  letters,  that  it  want¬ 
ed  not  to  be  raised  upon  the  ruins  of  others.  But 
these  Essays ,  instead  of  raising  a  higher  idea  than 
was  before  entertained  of  his  understanding,  have 
certainly  given  the  world  a  worse  opinion  of  his 
temper. — The  Bishop  was  therefore  the  more  sur¬ 
prized  and  concerned  for  his  townsman,  for  he  re¬ 
spected  him  not  only  for  his  genius  and  learning ,  but  val¬ 
ued  him  much  more  for  the  more  amiable  part  of  his  char¬ 
acter ,  his  humanity  and  charity,  his  morality  and  relig- 
ionP  The  last  sentence  we  may  consider  as  the  gen¬ 
eral  and  permanent  opinion  of  Bishop  Newton;  the 
remarks  which  precede  it  must,  by  all  who  have 
read  Johnson’s  admirable  work,  be  imputed  to  the 
disgust  and  peevishness  of  old  age.  I  wish  they  had 
not  appeared,  and  that  Dr.  Johnson  had  not  been 
provoked  by  them  to  express  himself,  not  in  re¬ 
spectful  terms,  of  a  Prelate,  whose  labours  were 
certainly  of  considerable  advantage  both  to  liter¬ 
ature  and  religion. 

2 Journal  of  a  Tour  to  the  Hebrides ,  3rd  edit.,  p.  371 
[Oct.  25]. 

sThe  Rev.  Mr.  Agutter  has  favoured  me  with  a 
note  of  a  dialogue  between  Mr.  John  Henderson 
and  Dr.  Johnson  on  this  topick,  as  related  by  Mr. 
Henderson,  and  it  is  evidently  so  authentick  that  I 
shall  here  insert  it: — Henderson.  “What  do  you 
think,  Sir,  of  William  Law?”  Johnson.  “William 
Law,  Sir,  wrote  the  best  piece  of  Parenetick  Divin¬ 
ity:  but  William  Law  was  no  reasoner.”  Hender¬ 
son.  “Jeremy  Collier,  Sir?”  Johnson.  “Jeremy  Col¬ 
lier  fought  without  a  rival,  and  therefore  couid  not 
claim  the  victory.”  Mr.  Henderson  mentioned 
Kenn  and  Kettlewell;  but  some  objections  were 
made;  at  last  he  said,  “But,  Sir,  what  do  you  think 
of  Leslie?”  Johnson.  “Charles  Leslie  I  had  forgot¬ 
ten.  Leslie  was  a  reasoner,  and  a  reasoner  who  was 
not  to  be  reasoned  against .” 


536 

and  did  not  recollect  that  the  seven  Bishops,  so 
justly  celebrated  for  their  magnanimous  resist¬ 
ance  of  arbitrary  power,  were  yet  Non-jurors  to 
the  new  Government.  The  non-juring  clergy  of 
Scotland,  indeed,  who,  excepting  a  few,  have 
lately,  by  a  sudden  stroke,  cut  off  all  ties  of  al¬ 
legiance  to  the  house  of  Stuart,  and  resolved  to 
pray  for  our  present  lawful  Sovereign  by  name, 
may  be  thought  to  have  confirmed  this  remark; 
as  it  may  be  said,  that  the  divine  indefeasible 
hereditary  right  which  they  professed  to  believe, 
if  ever  true,  must  be  equally  true  still.  Many  of 
my  readers  will  be  surprized  when  I  mention, 
that  Johnson  assured  me  he  had  never  in  his 
life  been  in  a  nonjuring  meeting-house. 

Next  morning  at  breakfast,  he  pointed  out  a 
passage  in  Savage’s  Wanderer ,  saying,  “These 
are  fine  verses.”  “If  (said  he,)  I  had  written  with 
hostility  of  YVarburton  in  my  Shakspeare ,  I  should 
have  quoted  this  couplet: 

Here  Learnings  blinded  first  and  then  beguil'd. 

Looks  dark  as  Ignorance ,  as  Fancy  wild. 

You  see  they’d  have  fitted  him  to  a  T,”  (smil¬ 
ing.)  Dr.  Adams.  “But  you  did  not  write  against 
Warburton.”  Johnson.  “No,  Sir,  I  treated  him 
with  great  respect  both  in  my  Preface  and  in  my 
Notes.” 

Mrs.  Kennicot  spoke  of  her  brother,  the  Rever¬ 
end  Mr.  Chamberlayne,  who  had  given  up  great 
prospects  in  the  Church  of  England  on  his  con¬ 
version  to  the  Roman  Catholick  faith.  Johnson, 
who  warmly  admired  every  man  who  acted  from 
a  conscientious  regard  to  principle,  erroneous 
or  not,  exclaimed  fervently,  “God  bless  him.” 

Mrs.  Kennicot,  in  confirmation  of  Dr.  John¬ 
son’s  opinion,  that  the  present  was  not  worse 
than  former  ages,  mentioned  that  her  brother 
assured  her,  there  was  now  less  infidelity  on  the 
Continent  than  there  had  been;  Voltaire  and 
Rousseau  were  less  read.  I  asserted,  from  good 
authority,  that  Hume’s  infidelity  was  certainly 
less  read.  Johnson.  “All  infidel  writers  drop  into 
oblivion,  when  personal  connections  and  the 
floridness  of  novelty  are  gone;  though  now  and 
then  a  foolish  fellow,  who  thinks  he  can  be  witty 
upon  them,  may  bring  them  again  into  notice. 
There  will  sometimes  start  up  a  College  joker, 
who  does  not  consider  that  what  is  a  joke  in  a 
College  will  not  do  in  the  world.  To  such  de¬ 
fenders  of  Religion  I  would  apply  a  stanza  of  a 
poem  which  I  remember  to  have  seen  in  some 
old  collection: 

Henceforth  be  quiet  and  agree , 

Each  kiss  his  empty  brother ; 

Religion  scorns  a  foe  like  thee , 

But  dreads  a  friend  like  t'other. 


[  1784 

The  point  is  well,  though  the  expression  is  not 
correct;  one ,  and  not  thee ,  should  be  opposed  to 
Bother :n 

On  the  Roman  Catholick  religion  he  said,  “If 
you  join  the  Papists  externally,  they  will  not  in¬ 
terrogate  you  strictly  as  to  your  belief  in  their 
tenets.  No  reasoning  Papist  believes  every  ar¬ 
ticle  of  their  faith.  There  is  one  side  on  which  a 
good  man  might  be  persuaded  to  embrace  it.  A 
good  man  of  a  timorous  disposition,  in  great 
doubt  of  his  acceptance  with  God,  and  pretty 
credulous,  might  be  glad  to  be  of  a  church  where 
there  are  so  many  helps  to  get  to  Heaven.  I 
would  be  a  Papist  if  I  could.  I  have  fear  enough; 
but  an  obstinate  rationality  prevents  me.  I  shall 
never  be  a  Papist,  unless  on  the  near  approach 
of  death,  of  which  I  have  a  very  great  terrour. 
I  wonder  that  women  are  not  all  Papists.”  Bos¬ 
well.  “They  are  not  more  afraid  of  death  than 
men  are.”  Johnson.  “Because  they  are  less  wick¬ 
ed.”  Dr.  Adams.  “They  are  more  pious.”  John¬ 
son.  “No,  hang  ’em,  they  are  not  more  pious.  A 
wicked  fellow  is  the  most  pious  when  he  takes  to 
it.  He’ll  beat  you  all  at  piety.” 

He  argued  in  defence  of  some  of  the  peculiar 
tenets  of  the  Church  of  Rome.  As  to  the  giving 
the  bread  only  to  the  laity,  he  said,  “They  may 
think,  that  in  what  is  merely  ritual,  deviations 
from  the  primitive  mode  may  be  admitted  on 
the  ground  of  convenience,  and  I  think  they  are 
as  well  warranted  to  make  this  alteration,  as  we 
are  to  substitute  sprinkling  in  the  room  of  the 
ancient  baptism.”  As  to  the  invocation  of  saints, 
he  said,  “Though  I  do  not  think  it  authorized, 
it  appears  to  me,  that  ‘the  communion  of  saints’ 
in  the  Creed  means  the  communion  with  the 
saints  in  Heaven,  as  connected  with  ‘The  holy 
Catholick  Church.’  ”2  He  admitted  the  influence 

ll  have  inserted  the  stanza  as  Johnson  repeated 
it  from  memory;  but  I  have  since  found  the  poem 
itself,  in  The  Foundling  Hospital  for  Wit ,  printed  at 
London,  1749.  It  is  as  follows: 

Epigram,  occasioned  by  a  religious  dispute  at  Bath. 

On  Reason ,  Faith ,  and  Mystery  high , 

Two  wits  harangue  the  table; 

B - y  believes  he  knows  not  why. 

N - swears  ' tis  all  a  fable. 

Peace ,  coxcombs ,  peace  and  both  agree , 

N - ,  kiss  thy  empty  brother: 

Religion  laughs  at  foes  like  thee , 

And  dreads  a  friend  like  t'other. 

2Waller,  in  his  Divine  Poesie ,  canto  first,  has  the 
same  thought  finely  expressed: 

The  Church  triumphant ,  and  the  Church  below , 

In  songs  of  praise  their  present  union  show; 

Their  joys  are  full;  our  expectation  long , 

In  life  we  differ ,  but  we  join  in  song; 

Angels  and  we  assisted  by  this  art , 

May  sing  together ,  though  we  dwell  apart. 


BOSWELL 


1 784  ]  LIFE  OF 

of  evil  spirits  upon  our  minds,  and  said,  “No¬ 
body  who  believes  the  New  Testament  can  de¬ 
ny  it.” 

I  brought  a  volume  of  Dr.  Hurd  the  Bishop 
of  Worcester’s  Sermons ,  and  read  to  the  company 
some  passages  from  one  of  them,  upon  this  text, 
“ Resist  the  Devil ,  and  he  will  fly  from  you.”  James, 
iv.  7.  I  was  happy  to  produce  so  judicious  and 
elegant  a  supporter1  of  a  doctrine,  which,  I 
know  not  why,  should,  in  this  world  of  imper¬ 
fect  knowledge,  and,  therefore,  of  wonder  and 
mystery  in  a  thousand  instances,  be  contested 
by  some  with  an  unthinking  assurance  and  flip¬ 
pancy. 

After  dinner,  when  one  of  us  talked  of  there 
being  a  great  enmity  between  Whig  and  Tory; 
— Johnson.  “Why  not  so  much,  I  think,  unless 
when  they  come  into  competition  with  each  oth¬ 
er.  There  is  none  when  they  are  only  common 

Hhe  sermon  thus  opens: — “That  there  are  an¬ 
gels  and  spirits  good  and  bad;  that  at  the  head  of 
these  last  there  is  one  more  considerable  and  ma¬ 
lignant  than  the  rest,  who,  in  the  form,  or  under 
the  name  of  a  serpent ,  was  deeply  concerned  in  the 
fall  of  man,  and  whose  head ,  as  the  prophetick  lan¬ 
guage  is,  the  son  of  man  was  one  day  to  bruise;  that 
this  evil  spirit,  though  that  prophecy  be  in  part 
completed,  has  not  yet  received  his  death’s  wound, 
but  is  still  permitted,  for  ends  unsearchable  to  us, 
and  in  ways  which  we  cannot  particularly  explain, 
to  have  a  certain  degree  of  power  in  this  world  hos¬ 
tile  to  its  virtue  and  happiness,  and  sometimes  ex¬ 
erted  with  too  much  success;  all  this  is  so  clear  from 
Scripture,  that  no  believer,  unless  he  be  first  of  all 
spoiled  by  philosophy  and  vain  deceit  [Colossians,  2.  8], 
can  possibly  entertain  a  doubt  of  it.” 

Having  treated  of  possessions ,  his  Lordship  says, 
“As  I  have  no  authority  to  affirm  that  there  are 
now  any  such,  so  neither  may  I  presume  to  say 
with  confidence,  that  there  are  not  any.” 

“But  then  with  regard  to  the  influence  of  evil 
spirits  at  this  day  upon  the  souls  of  men,  I  shall 
take  leave  to  be  a  great  deal  more  peremptory. — 
(Then,  having  stated  the  various  proofs,  he  adds,) 
All  this,  I  say,  is  so  manifest  to  every  one  who  reads 
the  Scriptures,  that,  if  we  respect  their  authority, 
the  question  concerning  the  reality  of  the  demon- 
iack  influence  upon  the  minds  of  men  is  clearly  de¬ 
termined.” 

Let  it  be  remembered,  that  these  are  not  the  words 
of  an  antiquated  or  obscure  enthusiast,  but  of  a 
learned  and  polite  Prelate  now  alive;  and  were 
spoken,  not  to  a  vulgar  congregation,  but  to  the 
Honourable  Society  of  Lincoln’s- Inn.  His  Lord- 
ship  in  this  sermon  explains  the  words,  “deliver  us 
from  evil,”  in  the  Lord’s  Prayer,  as  signifying  a  re¬ 
quest  to  be  protected  from  “the  evil  one,”  that  is 
the  Devil.  This  is  well  illustrated  in  a  short  but  ex¬ 
cellent  Commentary  by  my  late  worthy  friend,  the 
Reverend  Dr.  Lort,  of  whom  it  may  truly  be  said, 
Multis  ille  bonis  flebilis  occidit.  It  is  remarkable  that 
Waller,  in  his  Reflections  on  the  several  Petitions ,  in  that 
sacred  form  of  devotion ,  has  understood  this  in  the 
same  sense: 

Guard  us  from  all  temptations  of  the  Foe. 


JOHNSON  537 

acquaintance,  none  when  they  are  of  different 
sexes.  A  Tory  will  marry  into  a  Whig  family, 
and  a  Whig  into  a  Tory  family,  without  any  re¬ 
luctance.  But  indeed,  in  a  matter  of  much  more 
concern  than  political  tenets,  and  that  is  relig¬ 
ion,  men  and  women  do  not  concern  themselves 
much  about  difference  of  opinion;  and  ladies  set 
no  value  on  the  moral  character  of  men  who 
pay  their  addresses  to  them;  the  greatest  profli¬ 
gate  will  be  as  well  received  as  the  man  of  the 
greatest  virtue,  and  this  by  a  very  good  woman, 
by  a  woman  who  says  her  prayers  three  times  a 
day.”  Our  ladies  endeavoured  to  defend  their 
sex  from  this  charge:  but  he  roared  them  down ! 
“No,  no,  a  lady  will  take  Jonathan  Wild  as 
readily  as  St.  Austin,  if  he  has  threepence  more; 
and,  what  is  worse,  her  parents  will  give  her  to 
him.  Women  have  a  perpetual  envy  of  our  vices; 
they  are  less  vicious  than  we,  not  from  choice, 
but  because  we  restrict  them;  they  are  the  slaves 
of  order  and  fashion;  their  virtue  is  of  more  con¬ 
sequence  to  us  than  our  own,  so  far  as  concerns 
this  world.” 

Miss  Adams  mentioned  a  gentleman  of  licen¬ 
tious  character,  and  said,  “Suppose  I  had  a 
mind  to  marry  that  gentleman,  would  my  par¬ 
ents  consent?”  Johnson.  “Yes,  they’d  consent, 
and  you’d  go.  You’d  go  though  they  did  not 
consent.”  Miss  Adams.  “Perhaps  their  opposing 
might  make  me  go.”  Johnson.  “O,  very  well; 
you’d  take  one  whom  you  think  a  bad  man,  to 
have  the  pleasure  of  vexing  your  parents.  You 
put  me  in  mind  of  Dr.  Barrowby,  the  physi¬ 
cian,  who  was  very  fond  of  swine’s  flesh.  One 
day,  when  he  was  eating  it.  he  said,  T  wish  I 
was  a  Jew.’  ‘Why  so?  (said  somebody;)  the 
Jews  are  not  allowed  to  eat  your  favourite 
meat.’  ‘Because,  (said  he,)  I  should  then 
have  the  gust  of  eating  it,  with  the  pleasure 
of  sinning.’  ”  Johnson  then  proceeded  in  his 
declamation. 

Miss  Adams  soon  afterwards  made  an  obser¬ 
vation  that  I  do  not  recollect,  which  pleased 
him  much:  he  said  with  a  good-humoured  smile, 
“That  there  should  be  so  much  excellence  united 
with  so  much  depravity ,  is  strange.” 

Indeed,  this  lady’s  good  qualities,  merit,  and 
accomplishments,  and  her  constant  attention  to 
Dr.  Johnson,  were  not  lost  upon  him.  She  hap¬ 
pened  to  tell  him  that  a  little  coffee-pot,  in 
which  she  had  made  his  coffee,  was  the  only 
thing  she  could  call  her  own.  He  turned  to  her 
with  a  complacent  gallantry,  “Don’t  say  so,  my 
dear;  I  hope  you  don’t  reckon  my  heart  as 
nothing.” 

I  asked  him  if  it  was  true  as  reported,  that  he 


BOSWELL 


538 

had  said  lately,  “I  am  for  the  King  against  Fox; 
but  I  am  for  Fox  against  Pitt.”  Johnson.  “Yes, 
Sir;  the  King  is  my  master;  but  I  do  not  know 
Pitt;  and  Fox  is  my  friend.” 

“Fox,  (added  he,)  is  a  most  extraordinary 
man;  here  is  a  man  (describing  him  in  strong 
terms  of  objection  in  some  respects  according  as 
he  apprehended,  but  which  exalted  his  abilities 
the  more)  who  has  divided  the  Kingdom  with 
Caesar;  so  that  it  was  a  doubt  whether  the  na¬ 
tion  should  be  ruled  by  the  sceptre  of  George 
the  Third,  or  the  tongue  of  Fox.” 

Dr.  Wall,  physician  at  Oxford,  drank  tea 
with  us.  Johnson  had  in  general  a  peculiar  pleas¬ 
ure  in  the  company  of  physicians,  which  was 
certainly  not  abated  by  the  conversation  of  this 
learned,  ingenious,  and  pleasing  gentleman. 
Johnson  said,  “It  is  wonderful  how  little  good 
Radcliffe’s  travelling  fellowships  have  done.  I 
know  nothing  that  has  been  imported  by  them; 
yet  many  additions  to  our  medical  knowledge 
might  be  got  in  foreign  countries.  Inoculation, 
for  instance,  has  saved  more  lives  than  war  de¬ 
stroys:  and  the  cures  performed  by  the  Peruvian- 
bark  are  innumerable.  But  it  is  in  vain  to  send 
our  travelling  physicians  to  France,  and  Italy, 
and  Germany,  for  all  that  is  known  there  is 
known  here;  I’d  send  them  out  of  Christendom; 
I’d  send  them  among  barbarous  nations.” 

On  Friday,  June  11,  we  talked  at  breakfast, 
of  forms  of  prayer.  Johnson.  “I  know  of  no  good 
prayers  but  those  in  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer 
Dr.  Adams,  (in  a  very  earnest  manner,)  “I  wish, 
Sir,  you  would  compose  some  family  prayers.” 
Johnson.  “I  will  not  compose  prayers  for  you, 
Sir,  because  you  can  do  it  for  yourself.  But  I 
have  thought  of  getting  together  all  the  books  of 
prayers  which  I  could,  selecting  those  which 
should  appear  to  me  the  best,  putting  out  some, 
inserting  others,  adding  some  prayers  of  my  own, 
and  prefixing  a  discourse  on  prayer.”  We  all 
now  gathered  about  him,  and  two  or  three  of  us 
at  a  time  joined  in  pressing  him  to  execute  this 
plan.  He  seemed  to  be  a  little  displeased  at  the 
manner  of  our  importunity,  and  in  great  agita¬ 
tion  called  out,  “Do  not  talk  thus  of  what  is  so 
aweful.  I  know  not  what  time  God  will  allow 
me  in  this  world.  There  are  many  things  which 
I  wish  to  do.”  Some  of  us  persisted,  and  Dr. 
Adams  said,  “I  never  was  more  serious  about 
any  thing  in  my  life.”  Johnson.  “Let  me  alone, 
let  me  alone;  I  am  overpowered.”  And  then  he 
put  his  hands  before  his  face,  and  reclined  for 
some  time  upon  the  table. 

I  mentioned  Jeremy  Taylor’s  using,  in  his 


[  1784 

forms  of  prayer,  “I  am  the  chief  of  sinners,”  and 
other  such  self-condeinning  expressions.  “Now, 
(said  I,)  this  cannot  be  said  with  truth  by  every 
man,  and  therefore  is  improper  for  ageneral  print¬ 
ed  form.  I  myself  cannot  say  that  I  am  the  worst 
of  men;  I  will  not  say  so.”  Johnson.  “A  man  may 
know,  that  physically,  that  is,  in  the  real  state  of 
things,  he  is  not  the  worst  man;  but  that  moral¬ 
ly  he  may  be  so.  Law  observes  that  ‘Every  man 
knows  something  worse  of  himself,  than  he  is 
sure  of  in  others.’  You  inay  not  have  committed 
such  crimes  as  some  men  have  done;  but  you  do 
not  know  against  what  degree  of  light  they  have 
sinned.  Besides,  Sir,  ‘the  chief  of  sinners’  is  a 
mode  of  expression  for  ‘I  am  a  great  sinner.’  So 
St.  Paul,  speaking  of  our  Saviour’s  having  died 
to  save  sinners,  says,  ‘of  whom  I  am  the  chief’; 
yet  he  certainly  did  not  think  himself  so  bad  as 
Judas  Iscariot.”  Boswell.  “But,  Sir,  Taylor 
means  it  literally,  for  he  founds  a  conceit  upon 
it.  When  praying  for  the  conversion  of  sinners, 
and  of  himself  in  particular,  he  says,  ‘Lord, 
thou  wilt  not  leave  thy  chief  work  undone.’  ” 
Johnson.  “I  do  not  approve  of  figurative  ex¬ 
pressions  in  addressing  the  Supreme  Being;  and 
I  never  use  them.  Taylor  gives  a  very  good  ad¬ 
vice:  ‘Never  lie  in  your  prayers;  never  confess 
more  than  you  really  believe;  never  promise 
more  than  you  mean  to  perform.’  I  recollected 
this  precept  in  his  Golden  Grove ;  but  his  example 
for  prayer  contradicts  his  precept .” 

Dr.  Johnson  and  I  went  in  Dr.  Adams’s  coach 
to  dine  with  Dr.  Nowell,  Principal  of  St.  Mary 
Hall,  at  his  beautiful  villa  at  Iffley,  on  the  banks 
of  the  Isis,  about  two  miles  from  Oxford.  While 
we  were  upon  the  road,  I  had  the  resolution  to 
ask  Johnson  whether  he  thought  that  the  rough¬ 
ness  of  his  manner  had  been  an  advantage  or 
not,  and  if  he  would  not  have  done  more  good 
if  he  had  been  more  gentle.  I  proceeded  to  an¬ 
swer  myself  thus:  “Perhaps  it  has  been  of  ad¬ 
vantage,  as  it  has  given  weight  to  what  you  said: 
you  could  not,  perhaps,  have  talked  with  such 
authority  without  it.”  Johnson.  No,  Sir;  I  have 
done  more  good  as  I  am.  Obscenity  and  Impi¬ 
ety  have  always  been  repressed  in  my  company.” 
Boswell.  “True,  Sir;  and  that  is  more  than  can 
be  said  of  every  Bishop.  Greater  liberties  have 
been  taken  in  the  presence  of  a  Bishop,  though 
a  very  good  man,  from  his  being  milder,  and 
therefore  not  commanding  such  awe.  Yet,  Sir, 
many  people  who  might  have  been  benefited  by 
your  conversation,  have  been  frightened  away. 
A  worthy  friend  of  ours  has  told  me,  that  he  has 
often  been  afraid  to  talk  to  you.”  Johnson.  “Sir, 


1784]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  539 


he  need  not  have  been  afraid,  if  he  had  any 
thing  rational  to  say.  If  he  had  not,  it  was  better 
he  did  not  talk.” 

Dr.  Nowell  is  celebrated  for  having  preached 
a  sermon  before  the  House  of  Commons,  on  the 
30th  of  January,  1772,  full  of  high  Tory  senti¬ 
ments,  for  which  he  was  thanked  as  usual,  and 
printed  it  at  their  request,  but,  in  the  midst  of 
that  turbulence  and  faction  which  disgraced  a 
part  of  the  present  reign,  the  thanks  were  after¬ 
wards  ordered  to  be  expunged.  This  strange  con¬ 
duct  sufficiently  exposes  itself;  and  Dr.  Nowell 
will  ever  have  the  honour  which  is  due  to  a  lofty 
friend  of  our  monarchical  constitution.  Dr.  John¬ 
son  said  to  me,  ‘Sir,  the  Court  will  be  very  much 
to  blame,  if  he  is  not  promoted.’  I  told  this  to 
Dr.  Nowell,  and  asserting  my  humbler,  though 
not  less  zealous  exertions  in  the  same  cause,  I 
suggested  that  whatever  return  we  might  receive, 
we  should  still  have  the  consolation  of  being  like 
Butler’s  steady  and  generous  Royalist, 

True  as  the  dial  to  the  sun , 

Although  it  be  not  shone  upon . 

We  were  well  entertained  and  very  happy  at 
Dr.  Nowell’s,  where  was  a  very  agreeable  com¬ 
pany,  and  we  drank  “Church  and  King”  after 
dinner,  with  true  Tory  cordiality. 

We  talked  of  a  certain  clergyman  of  extra¬ 
ordinary  character,  who  by  exerting  his  talents 
in  writing  on  temporary  topicks,  and  displaying 
uncommon  intrepidity,  had  raised  himself  to  af¬ 
fluence.  I  maintained  that  we  ought  not  to  be 
indignant  at  his  success;  for  merit  of  every  sort 
was  entitled  to  reward.  Johnson.  “Sir,  I  will 
not  allow  this  man  to  have  merit.  No,  Sir;  what 
he  has  is  rather  the  contrary;  I  will,  indeed,  al¬ 
low  him  courage,  and  on  this  account  we  so  far 
give  him  credit.  We  have  more  respect  for  a 
man  who  robs  boldly  on  the  highway,  than  for  a 
fellow  who  jumps  out  of  a  ditch,  and  knocks  you 
down  behind  your  back.  Courage  is  a  quality  so 
necessary  for  maintaining  virtue,  that  it  is  al¬ 
ways  respected,  even  when  it  is  associated  with 
vice.” 

I  censured  the  coarse  invectives  which  were 
become  fashionable  in  the  House  of  Commons, 
and  said  that  if  members  of  parliament  must  at¬ 
tack  each  other  personally  in  the  heat  of  debate, 
it  should  be  done  more  genteely.  Johnson.  “No, 
Sir;  that  would  be  much  worse.  Abuse  is  not  so 
dangerous  when  there  is  no  vehicle  of  wit  or  del¬ 
icacy,  no  subtle  conveyance.  The  difference  be¬ 
tween  coarse  and  refined  abuse  is  as  the  differ¬ 
ence  between  being  bruised  by  a  club,  and 


wounded  by  a  poisoned  arrow.”  I  have  since 
observed  his  position  elegantly  expressed  by  Dr. 
Young: 

As  the  soft  plume  gives  swiftness  to  the  dart , 

Good  breeding  sends  the  satire  to  the  heart . 

On  Saturday,  June  12,  there  drank  tea  with 
us  at  Dr.  Adams’s,  Mr.  John  Henderson,  stu¬ 
dent  at  Pembroke  College,  celebrated  for  his 
wonderful  acquirements  in  Alchymy,  Judicial 
Astrology,  and  other  abstruse  and  curious  learn¬ 
ing;1  and  the  Reverend  Herbert  Croft,  who,  I 
am  afraid,  was  somewhat  mortified  by  Dr.  John¬ 
son’s  not  being  highly  pleased  with  some  Family 
Discourses ,  which  he  had  printed;  they  were  in 
too  familiar  a  style  to  be  approved  of  by  so  man¬ 
ly  a  mind.  I  have  no  note  of  this  evening’s  con¬ 
versation,  except  a  single  fragment.  When  I 
mentioned  Thomas  Lord  Lyttelton’s  vision,  the 
prediction  of  the  time  of  his  death,  and  its  exact 
fulfilment; —Johnson.  “It  is  the  most  extraor¬ 
dinary  thing  that  has  happened  in  my  day.  I 
heard  it  with  my  own  ears,  from  his  uncle,  Lord 
Westcote.  I  am  so  glad  to  have  every  evidence 
of  the  spiritual  world,  that  I  am  willing  to  be¬ 
lieve  it.”  Dr.  Adams.  “You  have  evidence 
enough;  good  evidence,  which  needs  not  such 
support.”  Johnson.  “I  like  to  have  more.” 

Mr.  Henderson,  with  whom  I  had  sauntered 
in  the  venerable  walks  of  Merton  College,  and 
found  him  a  very  learned  and  pious  man,  supped 
with  us.  Dr.  Johnson  surprised  him  not  a  little, 
by  acknowledging  with  a  look  of  horrour,  that 
he  was  much  oppressed  by  the  fear  of  death.  The 
amiable  Dr.  Adams  suggested  that  God  was  in¬ 
finitely  good.  Johnson.  “That  he  is  infinitely 
good,  as  far  as  the  perfection  of  his  nature  will 
allow,  I  certainly  believe;  but  it  is  necessary  for 
good  upon  the  whole,  that  individuals  should  be 
punished.  As  to  an  individual ,  therefore,  he  is  not 
infinitely  good;  and  as  I  cannot  be  sure  that  I 
have  fulfilled  the  conditions  on  which  salvation 
is  granted,  I  am  afraid  I  may  be  one  of  those  who 
shall  be  damned,”  (looking  dismally).  Dr.  Ad¬ 
ams.  “What  do  you  mean  by  damned?”  John¬ 
son.  (passionately  and  loudly,)  “Sent  to  Hell, 
Sir,  and  punished  everlastingly!”  Dr.  Adams. 
“I  don’t  believe  that  doctrine.”  Johnson.  “Hold, 
Sir,  do  you  believe  that  some  will  be  punished 
at  all?”  Dr.  Adams.  “Being  excluded  from  Heav¬ 
en  will  be  a  punishment;  yet  there  may  be  no 
great  positive  suffering.”  Johnson.  “Well,  Sir; 
but,  if  you  admit  any  degree  of  punishment,  there 
is  an  end  of  your  argument  for  infinite  good- 

1See  an  account  of  him,  in  a  sermon  by  the  Re¬ 
verend  Mr.  Agutter. 


BOSWELL 


540 

ness  simply  considered;  for,  infinite  goodness 
would  inflict  no  punishment  whatever.  There 
is  not  infinite  goodness  physically  considered; 
morally  there  is.”  Boswell.  “But  may  not  a  man 
attain  to  such  a  degree  of  hope  as  not  to  be  un¬ 
easy  from  the  fear  of  death?”  Johnson.  “A  man 
may  have  such  a  degree  of  hope  as  to  keep  him 
quiet.  You  see  I  am  not  quiet,  from  the  vehe¬ 
mence  with  which  I  talk;  but  I  do  not  despair.” 
Mrs.  Adams.  “You  seem,  Sir,  to  forget  the  mer¬ 
its  of  our  Redeemer.”  Johnson.  “Madam,  I  do 
not  forget  the  merits  of  my  Redeemer;  but  my 
Redeemer  has  said  that  he  will  set  some  on  his 
right  hand  and  some  on  his  left.”  He  was  in 
gloomy  agitation,  and  said,  “I’ll  have  no  more 
on’t.”  If  what  has  now  been  stated  should  be 
urged  by  the  enemies  of  Christianity,  as  if  its  in¬ 
fluence  on  the  mind  were  not  benignant,  let  it  be 
remembered,  that  Johnson’s  temperament  was 
melancholy,  of  which  such  direful  apprehensions 
of  futurity  are  often  a  common  effect.  We  shall 
presently  see  that  when  he  approached  nearer 
to  his  aweful  change,  his  mind  became  tranquil, 
and  he  exhibited  as  much  fortitude  as  becomes 
a  thinking  man  in  that  situation. 

From  the  subject  of  death  we  passed  to  dis¬ 
course  of  life,  whether  it  was  upon  the  whole 
more  happy  or  miserable.  Johnson  was  decid¬ 
edly  for  the  balance  of  misery:* 1  in  confirmation 
of  which  I  maintained,  that  no  man  would  choose 

^he  Reverend  Mr.  Ralph  Churton,  Fellow  of 
Brazen-Nose  College,  Oxford,  has  favoured  me 
with  the  following  remarks  on  my  Work,  which  he 
is  pleased  to  say.  “I  have  hitherto  extolled,  and 
cordially  approve.” 

“The  chief  part  of  what  I  have  to  observe  is  con¬ 
tained  in  the  following  transcript  from  a  letter  to  a 
friend,  which,  with  his  concurrence,  I  copied  for 
this  purpose;  and,  whatever  may  be  the  merit  or 
justness  of  the  remarks,  you  may  be  sure  that  being 
written  to  a  most  intimate  friend,  without  any  in¬ 
tention  that  they  ever  should  go  further,  they  are 
the  genuine  and  undisguised  sentiments  of  the 
writer: 

cJan.  6,  1792. 

‘Last  week,  I  was  reading  the  second  volume  of 
Boswell’s  Johnson ,  with  increasing  esteem  for  the 
worthy  authour,  and  increasing  veneration  of  the 
wonderful  and  excellent  man  who  is  the  subject  of 
it.  The  writer  throws  in,  now  and  then,  very  prop¬ 
erly  some  serious  religious  reflections;  but  there  is 
one  remark,  in  my  mind  an  obvious  and  just  one, 
which  I  think  he  has  not  made,  that  Johnson’s 
“morbid  melancholy,”  and  constitutional  infirmi¬ 
ties,  were  intended  by  Providence,  like  St.  Paul’s 
thorn  in  the  flesh,  to  check  intellectual  conceit  and 
arrogance;  which  the  consciousness  of  his  extra¬ 
ordinary  talents,  awake  as  he  was  to  the  voice  of 
praise,  might  otherwise  have  generated  in  a  very 
culpable  degree.  Another  observation  strikes  me, 
that  in  consequence  of  the  same  natural  indisposi¬ 
tion,  and  habitual  sickliness,  (for  he  says  he  scarce- 


[  1784 

to  lead  over  again  the  life  which  he  had  exper¬ 
ienced.  Johnson  acceded  to  that  opinion  in  the 
strongest  terms.  This  is  an  inquiry  often  made; 
and  its  being  a  subject  of  disquisition  is  a  proof 
that  much  misery  presses  upon  human  feelings; 
for  those  who  are  conscious  of  a  felicity  of  exist¬ 
ence,  would  never  hesitate  to  accept  of  a  repe¬ 
tition  of  it.  I  have  met  with  very  few  who  would. 
I  have  heard  Mr.  Burke  make  use  of  a  very  in¬ 
genious  and  plausible  argument  on  this  subject; 
— “Every  man  (said  he,)  would  lead  his  life  over 
again;  for,  every  man  is  willing  to  go  on  and 
take  an  addition  to  his  life,  which,  as  he  grows 
older,  he  has  no  reason  to  think  will  be  better, 
or  even  so  good  as  what  has  preceded.”  I  imag¬ 
ine,  however,  the  truth  is,  that  there  is  a  deceit¬ 
ful  hope  that  the  next  part  of  life  will  be  free 
from  the  pains,  and  anxieties,  and  sorrows,  which 


ly  passed  one  day  without  pain  after  his  twentieth 
year,)  he  considered  and  represented  human  life, 
as  a  scene  of  much  greater  misery  than  is  generally 
experienced.  There  may  be  persons  bowed  down 
with  affliction  all  their  days;  and  there  are  those, 
no  doubt,  whose  iniquities  rob  them  of  rest;  but 
neither  calamities  nor  crimes,  I  hope  and  believe, 
do  so  much  and  so  generally  abound,  as  to  justify 
the  dark  picture  of  life  which  Johnson’s  imagina¬ 
tion  designed,  and  his  strong  pencil  delineated. 
This  I  am  sure,  the  colouring  is  far  too  gloomy  for 
what  I  have  experienced,  though  as  far  as  I  can  re¬ 
member,  I  have  had  more  sickness  (I  do  not  say 
more  severe,  but  only  more  in  quantity,)  than  falls 
to  the  lot  of  most  people.  But  then  daily  debility 
and  occasional  sickness  were  far  overbalanced  by 
intervenient  days,  and,  perhaps,  weeks  void  of 
pain,  and  overflowing  with  comfort.  So  that  in 
short,  to  return  to  the  subject,  human  life,  as  far  as 

I  can  perceive  from  experience  or  observation,  is 
not  that  state  of  constant  wretchedness  which  John¬ 
son  always  insisted  it  was;  which  misrepresenta¬ 
tion,  (for  such  it  surely  is,)  his  Biographer  has  not 
corrected,  I  suppose,  because,  unhappily,  he  has 
himself  a  large  portion  of  melancholy  in  his  con¬ 
stitution,  and  fancied  the  portrait  a  faithful  copy  of 
life.’  ” 

The  learned  writer  then  proceeds  thus  in  his  let¬ 
ter  to  me: 

“I  have  conversed  with  some  sensible  men  on 
this  subject,  who  all  seem  to  entertain  the  same 
sentiments  respecting  life  with  those  which  are  ex¬ 
pressed  or  implied  in  the  foregoing  paragraph.  It 
might  be  added  that  as  the  representation  here 
spoken  of,  appears  not  consistent  with  fact  and  ex¬ 
perience,  so  neither  does  it  seem  to  be  countenanced 
by  Scripture.  There  is,  perhaps,  no  part  of  the  sa¬ 
cred  volume  which  at  first  sight  promises  so  much 
to  lend  its  sanction  to  these  dark  and  desponding 
notions  as  the  book  of  Ecclesiastes,  which  so  often, 
and  so  emphatically,  proclaims  the  vanity  of  things 
sublunary.  But  the  design  of  this  whole  book,  (as 
it  has  been  justly  observed,)  is  not  to  put  us  out  of 
conceit  with  life,  but  to  cure  our  vain  expectations 
of  a  compleat  and  perfect  happiness  in  this  world; 
to  convince  us,  that  there  is  no  such  thing  to  be 


1784] 

we  have  already  felt.  We  are  for  wise  purposes 
“Condemn’d  to  Hope’s  delusive  mine”;  as  John¬ 
son  finely  says;  and  I  may  also  quote  the  cele¬ 
brated  lines  of  Dryden,  equally  philosophical 
and  poetical: 

When  I  consider  life ,  His  all  a  cheats 
Yet  fool’d  with  hope ,  men  favour  the  deceit: 

Trust  on ,  and  think  to-morrow  will  repay; 

To-morrow’s  falser  than  the  former  day; 

Lies  worse;  and  while  it  says  we  shall  be  blest 
With  some  new  joys,  cuts  off  what  we  possesst. 

Strange  cozenage!  none  would  live  past  years  again; 

Yet  all  hope  pleasure  in  what  yet  remain; 

And from  the  dregs  of  life  think  to  receive. 

What  the  first  sprightly  running  could  not  give  A 

It  was  observed  to  Dr.  Johnson,  that  it  seemed 
strange  that  he,  who  has  so  often  delighted  his 
1Aurengzebe,  act  iv,  sc.  i. 


541 

company  by  his  lively  and  brilliant  conversa¬ 
tion,  should  say  he  was  miserable.  Johnson.  “A- 
las!  it  is  all  outside;  I  may  be  cracking  my  joke, 
and  cursing  the  sun.  Sun,  how  I  hate  thy  beams!” 
I  knew  not  well  what  to  think  of  this  declara¬ 
tion;  whether  to  hold  it  as  a  genuine  picture  of 
his  mind,2  or  as  the  effect  of  his  persuading  him¬ 
self  contrary  to  fact,  that  the  position  which  he 
had  assumed  as  to  human  unhappiness,  was  true. 
We  may  apply  to  him  a  sentence  in  Mr.  Gre- 
ville’s  Maxims,  Characters ,  and  Reflections ;3  a  book 
which  is  entitled  to  much  more  praise  than  it 
has  received:  “Aristarchus  is  charming:  how 

2Yet  there  is  no  doubt  that  a  man  may  appear 
very  gay  in  company  who  is  sad  at  heart.  His  mer¬ 
riment  is  like  the  sound  of  drums  and  trumpets  in 
a  battle,  to  drown  the  groans  of  the  wounded  and 
dying. 

3Page  139. 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


found  in  mere  external  enjoyments; — and  to  teach 
us  to  seek  for  happiness  in  the  practice  of  virtue,  in 
the  knowledge  and  love  of  God  and  in  the  hopes  of 
a  better  life.  For  this  is  the  application  of  all;  Let  us 
hear,  & c.  12.  13.  Not  only  his  duty,  but  his  happi¬ 
ness  too;  For  God,  & c.  12.  14 — See  Sherlock  on 
Providence,  p.  299. 

“The  New  Testament  tells  us,  indeed,  and  most 
truly,  that  ‘sufficient  unto  the  day  is  the  evil  there¬ 
of5;  and,  therefore,  wisely  forbids  us  to  increase  our 
burden  by  forebodings  of  sorrows;  but  I  think  it  no 
where  says  that  even  our  ordinary  afflictions  are 
not  consistent  with  a  very  considerable  degree  of 
positive  comfort  and  satisfaction.  And,  according¬ 
ly,  one  whose  sufferings  as  well  as  merits  were  con¬ 
spicuous,  assures  us,  that  in  proportion  ‘as  the  suf¬ 
ferings  of  Christ  abounded  in  them,  so  their  con¬ 
solation  also  abounded  by  Christ.5  2  Cor.  1.  5.  It  is 
needless  to  cite,  as  indeed  it  would  be  endless  even 
to  refer  to,  the  multitude  of  passages  in  both  Testa¬ 
ments  holding  out,  in  the  strongest  language,  prom¬ 
ises  of  blessings,  even  in  this  world,  to  the  faithful 
servants  of  God.  I  will  only  refer  to  Luke,  18.  29, 
30,  and  1  Tim.  4.  8. 

“Upon  the  whole,  setting  aside  instances  of  great 
and  lasting  bodily  pain,  of  minds  peculiarly  op¬ 
pressed  by  melancholy,  and  of  severe  temporal  ca¬ 
lamities,  from  which  extraordinary  cases  we  surely 
should  not  form  our  estimate  of  the  general  tenour 
and  complexion  of  life;  excluding  these  from  the 
account,  I  am  convinced  that  as  well  the  gracious 
constitution  of  things  which  Providence  has  or¬ 
dained,  as  the  declarations  of  Scripture  and  the  ac¬ 
tual  experience  of  individuals,  authorize  the  sin¬ 
cere  Christian  to  hope  that  his  humble  and  con¬ 
stant  endeavours  to  perform  his  duty,  checquered 
as  the  best  life  is  with  many  failings,  will  be  crowned 
with  a  greater  degree  of  present  peace,  serenity, 
and  comfort,  than  he  could  reasonably  permit  him¬ 
self  to  expect,  if  he  measured  his  views  and  judged 
of  life  from  the  opinion  of  Dr.  Johnson,  often  and 
energetically  expressed  in  the  Memoirs  of  him, 
without  any  animadversion  or  censure  by  his  in¬ 
genious  Biographer.  If  he  himself,  upon  reviewing 
the  subject,  shall  see  the  matter  in  this  light,  he 
will,  in  an  octavo  edition,  which  is  eagerly  expect¬ 


ed,  make  such  additional  remarks  or  correction  as 
he  shall  judge  fit;  lest  the  impressions  which  these 
discouraging  passages  may  leave  on  the  reader’s 
mind,  should  in  any  degree  hinder  what  otherwise 
the  whole  spirit  and  energy  of  the  work  tends,  and, 
I  hope,  successfully,  to  promote, — pure  morality 
and  true  religion.” 

Though  I  have,  in  some  degree,  obviated  any 
reflections  against  my  illustrious  friend’s  dark  views 
of  life,  when  considering,  in  the  course  of  this  Work, 
his  Rambler  [ante,  p.  58]  and  his  Rasselas  [ante,  p.  95], 
I  am  obliged  to  Mr.  Churton  for  complying  with 
my  request  of  his  permission  to  insert  his  Re¬ 
marks,  being  conscious  of  the  weight  of  what  he 
judiciously  suggests  as  to  the  melancholy  in  my 
own  constitution.  His  more  pleasing  views  of  life, 
I  hope,  are  just.  Valeant  quantum  valere  possunt. 

Mr.  Ghurton  concludes  his  letter  to  me  in  these 
words: — “Once,  and  only  once,  I  had  the  satisfac¬ 
tion  of  seeing  your  illustrious  friend;  and  as  I  feel  a 
particular  regard  for  all  whom  he  distinguished 
with  his  esteem  and  friendship,  so  I  derive  much 
pleasure  from  reflecting  that  I  once  beheld,  though 
but  transiently  near  our  College  gate,  one  whose 
works  will  for  ever  delight  and  improve  the  world, 
who  was  a  sincere  and  zealous  son  of  the  Church 
of  England,  an  honour  to  his  country,  and  an  or¬ 
nament  to  human  nature.” 

His  letter  was  accompanied  with  a  present  from 
himself  of  his  Sermons  at  the  Bamptom  Lecture ,  and 
from  his  friend.  Dr.  Townson,  the  venerable  Rec¬ 
tor  of  Malpas,  in  Cheshire,  of  his  Discourses  on  the 
Gospels ,  together  with  the  following  extract  of  a  let¬ 
ter  from  that  excellent  person,  who  is  now  gone  to 
receive  the  reward  of  his  labours: — “Mr.  Boswell 
is  not  only  very  entertaining  in  his  works,  but  they 
are  so  replete  with  moral  and  religious  sentiments, 
without  an  instance,  as  far  as  I  know,  of  a  contrary 
tendency,  that  I  cannot  help  having  a  great  esteem 
for  him;  and  if  you  think  such  a  trifle  as  a  copy  of 
the  Discourses,  ex  dono  authoris,  would  be  acceptable 
to  him,  I  should  be  happy  to  give  him  this  small 
testimony  of  my  regard.” 

Such  spontaneous  testimonies  of  approbation 
from  such  men,  without  any  personal  acquaint¬ 
ance  with  me,  are  truly  valuable  and  encouraging. 


BOSWELL 


542 

full  of  knowledge,  of  sense,  of  sentiment.  You 
get  him  with  difficulty  to  your  supper;  and  after 
having  delighted  every  body  and  himself  for  a 
few  hours,  he  is  obliged  to  return  home; — he  is 
finishing  his  treatise,  to  prove  that  unhappiness 
is  the  portion  of  man.” 

On  Sunday,  June  13,  our  philosopher  was 
calm  at  breakfast.  There  was  something  exceed¬ 
ingly  pleasing  in  our  leading  a  College  life,  with¬ 
out  restraint,  and  with  superiour  elegance,  in 
consequence  of  our  living  in  the  Master’s  house, 
and  having  the  company  of  ladies.  Mrs.  Kenni- 
cot  related,  in  his  presence,  a  lively  saying  of 
Dr.  Johnson  to  Miss  Hannah  More,  who  had 
expressed  a  wonder  that  the  poet  who  had  writ¬ 
ten  Paradise  Lost  should  write  such  poor  Son¬ 
nets:  —  “Milton,  Madam,  was  a  genius  that  could 
cut  a  Colossus  from  a  rock;  but  could  not  carve 
heads  upon  cherry-stones.” 

We  talked  of  the  casuistical  question,  Wheth¬ 
er  it  was  allowable  at  any  time  to  depart  from 
Truth? Johnson.  “The  general  rule  is,  that  Truth 
should  never  be  violated,  because  it  is  of  the  ut¬ 
most  importance  to  the  comfort  of  life,  that  we 
should  have  a  full  security  by  mutual  faith;  and 
occasional  inconveniences  should  be  willingly 
suffered  that  we  may  preserve  it.  There  must, 
however,  be  some  exceptions.  If,  for  instance,  a 
murderer  should  ask  you  which  way  a  man  is 
gone,  you  may  tell  him  what  is  not  true,  because 
you  are  under  a  previous  obligation  not  to  be¬ 
tray  a  man  to  a  murderer.”  Boswell.  “Sup¬ 
posing  the  person  who  wrote  Junius  were  asked 
whether  he  was  the  authour,  might  he  deny  it?” 
Johnson.  “I  don’t  know  what  to  say  to  this.  If 
you  were  sure  that  he  wrote  Junius ,  would  you, 
if  he  denied  it,  think  as  well  of  him  afterwards? 
Yet  it  may  be  urged,  that  what  a  man  has  no 
right  to  ask,  you  may  refuse  to  communicate; 
and  there  is  no  other  effectual  mode  of  preserv¬ 
ing  a  secret  and  an  important  secret,  the  discov¬ 
ery  of  which  may  be  very  hurtful  to  you,  but  a 
flat  denial;  for  if  you  are  silent,  or  hesitate,  or 
evade,  it  will  be  held  equivalent  to  a  confession. 
But  stay,  Sir;  here  is  another  case.  Supposing 
the  authour  had  told  me  confidentially  that  he 
had  written  Junius ,  and  I  were  asked  if  he  had, 

I  should  hold  myself  at  liberty  to  deny  it,  as  be¬ 
ing  under  a  previous  promise,  express  or  im¬ 
plied,  to  conceal  it.  Now  what  I  ought  to  do  for 
the  authour,  may  I  not  do  for  myself?  But  I  de¬ 
ny  the  lawfulness  of  telling  a  lie  to  a  sick  man  for 
fear  of  alarming  him.  You  have  no  business  with 
consequences;  you  are  to  tell  the  truth.  Besides, 
you  are  not  sure  what  effect  your  telling  him 
that  he  is  in  danger  may  have.  It  may  bring  his 


[  1784 

distemper  to  a  crisis,  and  that  may  cure  him.  Of 
all  lying,  I  have  the  greatest  abhorrence  of  this, 
because  I  believe  it  has  been  frequently  prac¬ 
tised  on  myself.” 

I  cannot  help  thinking  that  there  is  much 
weight  in  the  opinion  of  those  who  have  held, 
that  Truth,  as  an  eternal  and  immutable  prin¬ 
ciple,  ought,  upon  no  account  whatever,  to  be 
violated,  from  supposed  previous  or  superiour 
obligations,  of  which  every  man  being  to  judge 
for  himself,  there  is  great  danger  that  we  too  of¬ 
ten,  from  partial  motives,  persuade  ourselves 
that  they  exist;  and  probably  whatever  extra¬ 
ordinary  instances  may  sometimes  occur,  where 
some  evil  may  be  prevented  by  violating  this 
noble  principle,  it  would  be  found  that  human 
happiness  would,  upon  the  whole,  be  more  per¬ 
fect  were  Truth  universally  preserved. 

In  the  notes  to  the  Dunciad ,  wre  find  the  fol¬ 
lowing  verses,  addressed  to  Pope:1 

While  malice ,  Pope,  denies  thy  page 
Its  own  celestial fire; 

While  criticks ,  and  while  bards  in  rage, 

Admiring ,  won’t  admire : 

While  wayward  pens  thy  worth  assail. 

And  envious  tongues  decry; 

These  times,  though  many  a  friend  bewail. 

These  times  bewail  not  I. 

But  when  the  world's  loud  praise  is  thine. 

And  spleen  no  more  shall  blame ; 

When  with  thy  Homer  thou  shalt  shine 
In  one  establish'd fame! 

When  none  shall  rail,  and  every  lay 
Devote  a  wreath  to  thee: 

That  day  (for  come  it  will)  that  day 
Shall  I  lament  to  see . 

It  is  surely  not  a  little  remarkable,  that  they 
should  appear  without  a  name.  Miss  Seward, 
knowing  Dr.  Johnson’s  almost  universal  and  mi¬ 
nute  literary  information,  signified  a  desire  that 
I  should  ask  him  who  w'as  the  authour.  He  was 
prompt  with  his  answer:  “Why,  Sir,  they  were 
written  by  one  Lewis,  who  was  either  under¬ 
master  or  an  usher  of  Westminster-school,  and 
published  a  Miscellany,  in  which  Grongar  Hill 
first  came  out.”2  Johnson  praised  them  highly, 

rrhe  annotator  calls  them  “amiable  verses.” 

2Lewis’s  Verses  addressed  to  Pope  were  first  pub¬ 
lished  in  a  Collection  of  Pieces  on  occasion  of  The 
Dunciad ,  8vo.,  1 732.  They  do  not  appear  in  Lewis’s 
own  Miscellany,  printed  in  1726. — Grongar  Hill  was 
first  printed  in  Savage’s  Miscellanies  as  an  Ode,  and 
was  reprinted  in  the  same  year  in  Lewis’s  Miscellany, 
in  the  form  it  now  bears. 

In  his  Miscellanies,  1726,  the  beautiful  poem, — 
“Away,  let  nought  to  love  displeasing,” — reprinted 
in  Percy’s  Reliques,  vol.  i,  book  iii,  No.  13,  first 
appeared.  [M.] 


1784]  LIFE  OF 

and  repeated  them  with  a  noble  animation.  In 
the  twelfth  line,  instead  of  “one  establish’d  fame,” 
he  repeated  “one  unclouded  flame,”  which  he 
thought  was  the  reading  in  former  editions: but 
I  believe  was  a  flash  of  his  own  genius.  It  is  much 
more  poetical  than  the  other. 

On  Monday,  June  14,  and  Tuesday,  15,  Dr. 
Johnson  and  I  dined,  on  one  of  them,  I  forget 
which,  with  Mr.  Mickle,  translator  of  the  Lu - 
siad,  at  Wheatley,  a  very  pretty  country  place  a 
few  miles  from  Oxford;  and  on  the  other  with 
Dr.  Wetherell,  Master  of  University  College. 
From  Dr.  WetherelPs  he  went  to  visit  Mr.  Sack- 
ville  Parker,  the  bookseller;  and  when  he  re¬ 
turned  to  us,  gave  the  following  account  of  his 
visit,  saying,  “I  have  been  to  see  my  old  friend, 
Sack.  Parker;  I  find  he  has  married  his  maid; 
he  has  done  right.  She  had  lived  with  him  many 
years  in  great  confidence,  and  they  had  mingled 
minds;  I  do  not  think  he  could  have  found  any 
wife  that  would  have  made  him  so  happy.  The 
woman  was  very  attentive  and  civil  to  me;  she 
pressed  me  to  fix  a  day  for  dining  with  them, 
and  to  say  what  I  liked,  and  she  would  be  sure 
to  get  it  for  me.  Poor  Sack!  He  is  very  ill,  in¬ 
deed.  We  parted  as  never  to  meet  again.  It  has 
quite  broke  me  down.”  This  pathetic  narrative 
was  strangely  diversified  with  the  grave  and 
earnest  defence  of  a  man’s  having  married  his 
maid.  I  could  not  but  feel  it  as  in  some  degree 
ludicrous. 

In  the  morning  of  Tuesday,  June  15,  while 
we  sat  at  Dr.  Adams’s,  we  talked  of  a  printed 
letter  from  the  Reverend  Herbert  Croft,  to  a 
young  gentleman  who  had  been  his  pupil,  in 
which  he  advised  him  to  read  to  the  end  of  what¬ 
ever  books  he  should  begin  to  read.  Johnson. 
“This  is  surely  a  strange  advice;  you  may  as 
well  resolve  that  whatever  men  you  happen  to 
get  acquainted  with,  you  are  to  keep  to  them  for 
life.  A  book  may  be  good  for  nothing;  or  there 
may  be  only  one  thing  in  it  worth  knowing;  are 
we  to  read  it  all  through?  These  Voyages,  (point¬ 
ing  to  the  three  large  volumes  of  Voyages  to  the 
South  Sea ,  which  were  just  come  out)  who  will 
read  them  through?  A  man  had  better  work  his 
way  before  the  mast,  than  read  them  through; 
they  will  be  eaten  by  rats  and  mice,  before  they 
are  read  through.  There  can  be  little  entertain¬ 
ment  in  such  books;  one  set  of  Savages  is  like 
another.”  Boswell.  I  do  not  think  the  people 
of  Otaheite  can  be  reckoned  Savages.”  John¬ 
son.  “Don’t  cant  in  defence  of  Savages.”  Bos¬ 
well.  “They  have  the  art  of  navigation.”  John¬ 
son.  “A  dog  or  a  cat  can  swim.”  Boswell. 
“They  carve  very  ingeniously.”  Johnson.  “A 


JOHNSON  543 

cat  can  scratch,  and  a  child  with  a  nail  can 
scratch.”  I  perceived  this  was  none  of  the  mollia 
tempora  fandi;  so  desisted. 

Upon  his  mentioning  that  when  he  came  to 
College  he  wrote  his  first  exercise  twice  over; 
but  never  did  so  afterwards;  Miss  Adams.  “I 
suppose,  Sir,  you  could  not  make  them  better?” 
Johnson.  “Yes,  Madam,  to  be  sure,  I  could 
make  them  better.  Thought  is  better  than  no 
thought.”  Miss  Adams.  “Do  you  think,  Sir,  you 
could  make  your  Ramblers  better?”  Johnson. 
“Certainly  I  could.”  Boswell.  “I’ll  lay  a  bet, 
Sir,  you  cannot.”  Johnson.  “But  I  will,  Sir,  if  I 
choose.  I  shall  make  the  best  of  them  you  shall 
pick  out,  better.”  Boswell.  “But  you  may  add 
to  them.  I  will  not  allow  of  that.”  Johnson. 
“Nay,  Sir,  there  are  three  ways  of  making  them 
better; — putting  out, — adding, — or  correcting.” 

During  our  visit  at  Oxford,  the  following  con¬ 
versation  passed  between  him  and  me  on  the 
subject  of  my  trying  my  fortune  at  the  English 
bar:  Having  asked  whether  a  very  extensive  ac¬ 
quaintance  in  London,  which  was  very  valu¬ 
able,  and  of  great  advantage  to  a  man  at  large, 
might  not  be  prejudicial  to  a  lawyer,  by  pre¬ 
venting  him  from  giving  sufficient  attention  to 
his  business;— Johnson.  “Sir,  you  will  attend  to 
business,  as  business  lays  hold  of  you.  When  not 
actually  employed,  you  may  see  your  friends  as 
much  as  you  do  now.  You  may  dine  at  a  Club 
every  day,  and  sup  with  one  of  the  members  ev¬ 
ery  night;  and  you  may  be  as  much  at  publick 
places  as  one  who  has  seen  them  all  would  wish 
to  be.  But  you  must  take  care  to  attend  constant¬ 
ly  in  Westminster-Hall;  both  to  mind  your  bus¬ 
iness,  as  it  is  almost  all  learnt  there,  (for  nobody 
reads  now;)  and  to  shew  that  you  want  to  have 
business.  And  you  must  not  be  too  often  seen  at 
publick  places,  that  competitors  may  not  have  it 
to  say,  cHe  is  always  at  the  Playhouse  or  at  Ran- 
elagh,  and  never  to  be  found  at  his  chambers.’ 
And,  Sir,  there  must  be  a  kind  of  solemnity  in 
the  manner  of  a  professional  man.  I  have  noth¬ 
ing  particular  to  say  to  you  on  the  subject.  All 
this  I  should  say  to  any  one;  I  should  have  said 
it  to  Lord  Thurlow  twenty  years  ago.” 

The  Profession  may  probably  think  this  rep¬ 
resentation  of  what  is  required  in  a  Barrister 
who  would  hope  for  success,  to  be  by  much  too 
indulgent;  but  certain  it  is,  that  as 

The  wits  of  Charles  found  easier  ways  to  fame> 
some  of  the  lawyers  of  this  age  who  have  risen 
high,  have  by  no  means  thought  it  absolutely  nec¬ 
essary  to  submit  to  that  long  and  painful  course 
of  study  which  a  Plowden,  a  Coke,  and  a  Hale 
considered  as  requisite.  My  respected  friend, 


BOSWELL 


544 

Mr.  Langton,  has  shewn  me  in  the  hand-writ¬ 
ing  of  his  grandfather,  a  curious  account  of  a 
conversation  which  he  had  with  Lord  Chief  Jus¬ 
tice  Hale,  in  which  that  great  man  tells  him, 
“That  for  two  years  after  he  came  to  the  inn  of 
court,  he  studied  sixteen  hours  a  day;  however 
(his  Lordship  added)  that  by  this  intense  appli¬ 
cation  he  almost  brought  himself  to  his  grave, 
though  he  were  of  a  very  strong  constitution, 
and  after  reduced  himself  to  eight  hours;  but 
that  he  would  not  advise  any  body  to  so  much; 
that  he  thought  six  hours  a  day,  with  attention 
and  constancy,  was  sufficient;  that  a  man  must 
use  his  body  as  he  would  his  horse,  and  his  stom¬ 
ach;  not  tire  him  at  once,  but  rise  with  an  ap¬ 
petite.5’ 

On  Wednesday,  June  19,  Dr.  Johnson  and  I 
returned  to  London;  he  was  not  well  to-day, 
and  said  very  little,  employing  himself  chiefly  in 
reading  Euripides.  He  expressed  some  displeas¬ 
ure  at  me,  for  not  observing  sufficiently  the  var¬ 
ious  objects  upon  the  road.  “If  I  had  your  eyes, 
Sir,  (said  he,)  I  should  count  the  passengers.”  It 
was  wonderful  how  accurate  his  observation  of 
visual  objects  was,  notwithstanding  his  imper¬ 
fect  eyesight,  owing  to  a  habit  of  attention.  That 
he  was  much  satisfied  with  the  respect  paid  to 
him  at  Dr.  Adams’s  is  thus  attested  by  himself: 
“I  returned  last  night  from  Oxford,  after  a  fort¬ 
night’s  abode  with  Dr.  Adams,  who  treated  me 
as  well  as  I  could  expect  or  wish;  and  he  that 
contents  a  sick  man,  a  man  whom  it  is  impos¬ 
sible  to  please,  has  surely  done  his  part  well.”1 

After  his  return  to  London  from  this  excur¬ 
sion,  I  saw  him  frequently,  but  have  few  memo¬ 
randums:  I  shall  therefore  here  insert  some  par¬ 
ticulars  which  I  collected  at  various  times. 

The  Reverend  Mr.  Astle,  of  Ashbourne,  in 
Derbyshire,  brother  to  the  learned  and  ingen¬ 
ious  Thomas  Astle,  Esq.,  was  from  his  early 
years  known  to  Dr.  Johnson,  who  obligingly  ad¬ 
vised  him  as  to  his  studies,  and  recommended  to 
him  the  following  books,  of  which  a  list  which 
he  has  been  pleased  to  communicate,  lies  before 
me  in  Johnson’s  own  hand-writing: — 

Universal  History  {ancient.)  — Rollings  Ancient  His¬ 
tory. — Puffendorf's  Introduction  to  History. —  Ver  tot's 
History  of  Knights  of  Malta. —  Vertot's  Revolution  of 
Portugal.  —  Vertovs  Revolutions  of  Sweden. — Carte's 
History  of  England. — Present  State  of  England. — 
Geographical  Grammar. — Prideaux's  Connection. — 
Nelson's  Feasts  and  Fasts. — Duty  of  Man. — Gentle¬ 
man's  Religion. — Clarendon's  History. —  Watts's  Im¬ 
provement  of  the  Mind. —  Watts's  Logick. — Nature 
Displayed. — Lowth's  English  Grammar. — Blackwall 

1  Letters  to  Mrs.  Thrale ,  vol.  ii,  p.  372. 


[  *784 

on  the  Classicks. — Sherlock's  Sermons. — Burnet's  Life 
of  Hale. — Dupin' s  History  of  the  Church. — Shuck- 
ford's  Connection. — Law's  Serious  Call. —  Walton's 
Compleat  Angler. — Sandys's  Travels. — Sprat's  His¬ 
tory  of  the  Royal  Society. — England's  Gazetteer. — 
Goldsmith's  Roman  History. — Some  Commentaries  on 
the  Bible. 

It  having  been  mentioned  to  Dr.  Johnson  that 
a  gentleman  who  had  a  son  whom  he  imagined 
to  have  an  extreme  degree  of  timidity,  resolved 
to  send  him  to  a  publick  school,  that  he  might 
acquire  confidence; — “Sir,  (said  Johnson,)  this 
is  a  preposterous  expedient  for  removing  his  in¬ 
firmity;  such  a  disposition  should  be  cultivated 
in  the  shade.  Placing  him  at  a  publick  school  is 
forcing  an  owl  upon  day.” 

Speaking  of  a  gentleman  whose  house  was 
much  frequented  by  low  company;  “Rags,  Sir, 
(said  he,)  will  always  make  their  appearance 
where  they  have  a  right  to  do  it.” 

Of  the  same  gentleman’s  mode  of  living,  he 
said,  “Sir,  the  servants,  instead  of  doing  what 
they  are  bid,  stand  round  the  table  in  idle  clus¬ 
ters,  gaping  upon  the  guests;  and  seem  as  unfit 
to  attend  a  company,  as  to  steer  a  man  of  war.” 

A  dull  country  magistrate  gave  Johnson  a  long 
tedious  account  of  his  exercising  his  criminal 
jurisdiction,  the  result  of  which  was  his  having 
sentenced  four  convicts  to  transportation.  John¬ 
son,  in  an  agony  of  impatience  to  get  rid  of  such 
a  companion,  exclaimed,  “I  heartily  wish,  Sir, 
that  I  were  a  fifth.” 

Johnson  was  present  when  a  tragedy  was  read, 
in  which  there  occurred  this  line: 

Who  rules  o'er  freemen  should  himself  be  free. 

The  company  having  admired  it  much,  “I 
cannot  agree  with  you  (said  Johnson).  It  might 
as  well  be  said, 

Who  drives fat  oxen  should  himself  be  fat." 

He  was  pleased  with  the  kindness  of  Mr.  Ca- 
tor,  who  was  joined  with  him  in  Mr.  Thrale’s 
important  trust,  and  thus  describes  him:2 — 
“There  is  much  good  in  his  character,  and  much 
usefulness  in  his  knowledge.”  He  found  a  cordial 
solace  at  that  gentleman’s  seat  at  Beckenham, 
in  Kent,  which  is  indeed  one  of  the  finest  places 
at  which  I  ever  was  a  guest;  and  where  I  find 
more  and  more  a  hospitable  welcome. 

Johnson  seldom  encouraged  general  censure 
of  any  profession;  but  he  was  willing  to  allow  a 
due  share  of  merit  to  the  various  departments 
necessary  in  civilised  life.  In  a  splenetick,  sar- 
castical,  or  jocular  frame,  however,  he  would 

2 Letters  to  Mrs.  Thrale,  vol.  ii,  p.  284. 


1784]  life  of 

sometimes  utter  a  pointed  saying  of  that  nature. 
One  instance  has  been  mentioned,1  where  he 
gave  a  sudden  satirical  stroke  to  the  character 
of  an  attorney.  The  too  indiscriminate  admission 
to  that  employment,  which  requires  both  abil¬ 
ities  and  integrity,  has  given  rise  to  injurious  re¬ 
flections,  which  are  totally  inapplicable  to  many 
very  respectable  men  who  exercise  it  with  rep¬ 
utation  and  honour. 

Johnson  having  argued  for  some  time  with  a 
pertinacious  gentleman;  his  opponent,  who  had 
talked  in  a  very  puzzling  manner,  happened  to 
say,  “I  don’t  understand  you,  Sir”:  upon  which 
Johnson  observed,  “Sir,  I  have  found  you  an 
argument;  but  I  am  not  obliged  to  find  you  an 
understanding.” 

Talking  to  me  of  Horry  Walpole,  (as  Horace 
late  Earl  of  Orford  was  often  called,)  Johnson 
allowed  that  he  got  together  a  great  many  cu¬ 
rious  little  things,  and  told  them  in  an  elegant 
manner.  Mr.  Walpole  thought  Johnson  a  more 
amiable  character  after  reading  his  Letters  to 
Mrs.  Thrale:  but  never  was  one  of  the  true  ad¬ 
mirers  of  that  great  man.  We  may  suppose  a 
prejudice  conceived,  if  he  ever  heard  Johnson’s 
account  to  Sir  George  Staunton,  that  when  he 
made  the  speeches  in  parliament  for  the  Gentle¬ 
man's  Magazine ,  “he  always  took  care  to  put  Sir 
Robert  Walpole  in  the  wrong,  and  to  say  every 
thing  he  could  against  the  electorate  of  Han¬ 
over.”  The  celebrated  Heroick  Epistle ,  in  which 
Johnson  is  satyrically  introduced,  has  been  as¬ 
cribed  both  to  Mr.  Walpole  and  Mr.  Mason. 
One  day  at  Mr.  Courtenay’s,  when  a  gentleman 
expressed  his  opinion  that  there  was  more  ener¬ 
gy  in  that  poem  than  could  be  expected  from 
Mr.  Walpole;  Mr.  War  ton,  the  late  Laureat, 
observed,  “It  may  have  been  written  by  Wal¬ 
pole,  and  buckram' d  by  Mason.” 

He  disapproved  of  Lord  Hailes,  for  having 
modernised  the  language  of  the  ever-memorable 
John  Hales  of  Eton,  in  an  edition  which  his  Lord- 
ship  published  of  that  writer’s  works.  “An  au- 
thour’s  language,  Sir,  (said  he,)  is  a  character- 
istical  part  of  his  composition,  and  is  also  char- 
acteristical  of  the  age  in  which  he  writes.  Be¬ 
sides,  Sir,  when  the  language  is  changed  we  are 
not  sure  that  the  sense  is  the  same.  No,  Sir;  I  am 
sorry  Lord  Hailes  has  done  this.” 

Here  it  may  be  observed,  that  his  frequent 
use  of  the  expression,  No ,  Sir ,  was  not  always  to 
intimate  contradiction;  for  he  would  say  so, 
when  he  was  about  to  enforce  an  affirmative 
proposition  which  had  not  been  denied,  as  in 
the  instance  last  mentioned.  I  used  to  consider 

xSee  p.  1 81* 


JOHNSON  545 

it  as  a  kind  of  flag  of  defiance;  as  if  he  had  said, 
“Any  argument  you  may  offer  against  this,  is 
not  just.  No,  Sir,  it  is  not.”  It  was  like  Falstaff’s 
“I  deny  your  Major.” 

Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  having  said  that  he  took 
the  altitude  of  a  man’s  taste  by  his  stories  and 
his  wit,  and  of  his  understanding  by  the  remarks 
which  he  repeated;  being  always  sure  that  he 
must  be  a  weak  man  who  quotes  common  things 
with  an  emphasis  as  if  they  were  oracles;  John¬ 
son  agreed  with  him;  and  Sir  Joshua  having 
also  observed  that  the  real  character  of  a  man 
was  found  out  by  his  amusements, — Johnson 
added,  “Yes,  Sir;  no  man  is  a  hypocrite  in  his 
pleasures.” 

I  have  mentioned  Johnson’s  general  aversion 
to  a  pun.  He  once,  however,  endured  one  of 
mine.  When  we  were  talking  of  a  numerous 
company  in  which  he  had  distinguished  himself 
highly,  I  said,  “Sir,  you  were  a  Cod  surrounded 
by  smelts.  Is  not  this  enough  for  you?  at  a  time 
too  when  you  were  not fishing  for  a  compliment?” 
He  laughed  at  this  with  a  complacent  approba¬ 
tion.  Old  Mr.  Sheridan  observed,  upon  my  men¬ 
tioning  it  to  him,  “He  liked  your  compliment  so 
well,  he  was  willing  to  take  it  with  pun  sauce." 
For  my  own  part,  I  think  no  innocent  species  of 
wit  or  pleasantry  should  be  suppressed;  and 
that  a  good  pun  may  be  admitted  among  the 
smaller  excellencies  of  lively  conversation. 

Had  Johnson  treated  at  large  De  Claris  Ora- 
toribus ,  he  might  have  given  us  an  admirable 
work.  When  the  Duke  of  Bedford  attacked  the 
ministry  as  vehemently  as  he  could,  for  having 
taken  upon  them  to  extend  the  time  for  the  im¬ 
portation  of  corn,  Lord  Chatham,  in  his  first 
speech  in  the  House  of  Lords,  boldly  avowed 
himself  to  be  an  adviser  of  that  measure.  “My 
colleagues,  (said  he,)  as  I  was  confined  by  in¬ 
disposition,  did  me  the  signal  honour  of  coming 
to  the  bedside  of  a  sick  man,  to  ask  his  opinion. 
But,  had  they  not  thus  condescended,  I  should 
have  taken  up  my  bed  and  walked ,  in  order  to  have 
delivered  that  opinion  at  the  Council-Board.” 
Mr.  Langton,  who  was  present,  mentioned  this 
to  Johnson,  who  observed,  “Now,  Sir,  we  see 
that  he  took  these  words  as  he  found  them;  with¬ 
out  considering,  that  though  the  expression  in 
Scripture,  take  up  thy  bed  and  walk ,  strictly  suited 
the  instance  of  the  sick  man  restored  to  health 
and  strength,  who  would  of  course  be  supposed 
to  carry  his  bed  with  him,  it  could  not  be  proper 
in  the  case  of  a  man  who  was  lying  in  a  state  of 
feebleness,  and  who  certainly  would  not  add  to 
the  difficulty  of  moving  at  all,  that  of  carrying 
his  bed.” 


546 

When  I  pointed  out  to  him  in  the  news-paper 
one  of  Mr.  Grattan’s  animated  and  glowing 
speeches,  in  favour  of  the  freedom  of  Ireland,  in 
which  this  expression  occurred  (I  know  not  if 
accurately  taken):  “We  will  persevere,  till  there 
is  not  one  link  of  the  English  chain  left  to  clank 
upon  the  rags  of  the  meanest  beggar  in  Ireland” ; 
“Nay,  Sir,  (said  Johnson,)  don’t  you  perceive 
that  one  link  cannot  clank?” 

Mrs.  Thrale  has  published,1  as  Johnson’s,  a 
kind  of  parody  or  counterpart  of  a  fine  poetical 
passage  in  one  of  Mr.  Burke’s  speeches  on  Amer¬ 
ican  Taxation.  It  is  vigorously  but  somewhat 
coarsely  executed;  and  I  am  inclined  to  suppose, 
is  not  quite  correctly  exhibited.  I  hope  he  did 
not  use  the  words  “vile  agents ”  for  the  Americans 
in  the  House  of  Parliament;  and  if  he  did  so,  in 
an  extempore  effusion,  I  wish  the  lady  had  not 
committed  it  to  writing. 

Mr.  Burke  uniformly  shewed  Johnson  the 
greatest  respect;  and  when  Mr.  Townshend, 
now  Lord  Sydney,  at  a  period  when  he  was  con¬ 
spicuous  in  opposition,  threw  out  some  reflec¬ 
tion  in  parliament  upon  the  grant  of  a  pension 
to  a  man  of  such  political  principles  as  Johnson; 
Mr.  Burke,  though  then  of  the  same  party  with 
Mr.  Townshend,  stood  warmly  forth  in  defence 
of  his  friend,  to  whom,  he  justly  observed,  the 
pension  was  granted  solely  on  account  of  his 
eminent  literary  merit.  I  am  well  assured,  that 
Mr.  Townshend’s  attack  upon  Johnson  was  the 
occasion  of  his  “hitching  in  a  rhyme”;  for,  that 
in  the  original  copy  of  Goldsmith’s  character  of 
Mr.  Burke,  in  his  Retaliation ,  another  person’s 
name  stood  in  the  couplet  where  Mr.  Town¬ 
shend  is  now  introduced: 

Though  fraught  with  all  learning  kept  straining  his  throat , 
To  persuade  Tommy  Townshend  to  lend  him  a  vote . 

It  may  be  worth  remarking,  among  the  minu¬ 
tiae  of  my  collection,  that  Johnson  was  once 
drawn  to  serve  in  the  militia,  the  Trained  Bands 
of  the  City  of  London,  and  that  Mr.  Rackstrow, 
of  the  Museum  in  Fleet-street,  was  his  Colonel. 
It  may  be  believed  he  did  not  serve  in  person; 
but  the  idea,  with  all  its  circumstances,  is  cer¬ 
tainly  laughable.  He  upon  that  occasion  provid¬ 
ed  himself  with  a  musket,  and  with  a  sword  and 
belt,  which  I  have  seen  hanging  in  his  closet. 

He  was  very  constant  to  those  whom  he  once 
employed,  if  they  gave  him  no  reason  to  be  dis¬ 
pleased.  When  somebody  talked  of  being  im¬ 
posed  on  in  the  purchase  of  tea  and  sugar,  and 
such  articles:  “That  will  not  be  the  case,  (said 
he,)  if  you  go  to  a  stately  shop ,  as  I  always  do.  In 

1  Anecdotes,  p.  43. 


L 1784 

such  a  shop  it  is  not  worth  their  while  to  take  a 
petty  advantage.” 

An  authour  of  most  anxious  and  restless  van¬ 
ity  being  mentioned,  “Sir,  (said  he,)  there  is  not 
a  young  sapling  upon  Parnassus  more  severely 
blown  about  by  every  wind  of  criticism  than 
that  poor  fellow.” 

The  difference,  he  observed,  between  a  well- 
bred  and  an  ill-bred  man  is  this:  “One  imme¬ 
diately  attracts  your  liking,  the  other  your  aver¬ 
sion.  You  love  the  one  till  you  find  reason  to 
hate  him;  you  hate  the  other  till  you  find  reason 
to  love  him.” 

The  wife  of  one  of  his  acquaintance  had  fraud¬ 
ulently  made  a  purse  for  herself  out  of  her  hus¬ 
band’s  fortune.  Feeling  a  proper  compunction 
in  her  last  moments,  she  confessed  how  much 
she  had  secreted;  but  before  she  could  tell  where 
it  was  placed,  she  was  seized  with  a  convulsive 
fit  and  expired.  Her  husband  said,  he  wTas  more 
hurt  by  her  want  of  confidence  in  him,  than  by 
the  loss  of  his  money.  “I  told  him,  (said  John¬ 
son,)  that  he  should  console  himself:  for  perhaps 
the  money  might  b z  found,  and  he  was  sure  that 
his  wife  was  gone.,y 

A  foppish  physician  once  reminded  Johnson 
of  his  having  been  in  company  with  him  on  a 
former  occasion;  “I  do  not  remember  it,  Sir.” 
The  physician  still  insisted;  adding  that  he  that 
day  wore  so  fine  a  coat  that  it  must  have  attract¬ 
ed  his  notice.  “Sir,  (said  Johnson,)  had  you  been 
dipt  in  Pactolus  I  should  not  have  noticed  you.” 

He  seemed  to  take  a  pleasure  in  speaking,  in 
his  own  style;  for  when  he  had  carelessly  missed 
it,  he  would  repeat  the  thought  translated  into 
it.  Talking  of  the  Comedy  of  The  Rehearsal ,  he 
said,  “It  has  not  wit  enough  to  keep  it  sweet.” 
This  was  easy;  he  therefore  caught  himself,  and 
pronounced  a  more  round  sentence;  “It  has  not 
vitality  enough  to  preserve  it  from  putrefaction.” 

He  censured  a  writer  of  entertaining  Travels 
for  assuming  a  feigned  character,  saying,  (in  his 
sense  of  the  word,)  “He  carries  out  one  lye;  we 
know  not  how  many  he  brings  back.”  At  anoth¬ 
er  time,  talking  of  the  same  person,  he  observed, 
“Sir,  your  assent  to  a  man  whom  you  have  nev¬ 
er  known  to  falsify,  is  a  debt:  but  after  you  have 
known  a  man  to  falsify,  your  assent  to  him  then 
is  a  favour.” 

Though  he  had  no  taste  for  painting,  he  ad¬ 
mired  much  the  manner  in  which  Sir  Joshua 
Reynolds  treated  of  his  art,  in  his  Discourses  to 
the  Royal  Academy.  He  observed  one  day  of  a  pas¬ 
sage  in  them,  “I  think  I  might  as  well  have  said 
this  myself”:  and  once  when  Mr.  Langton  was 
sitting  by  him,  he  read  one  of  them  very  eager- 


BOSWELL 


1784]  LIFE  OF 

ly,  and  expressed  himself  thus: — “Very  well, 
Master  Reynolds;  very  well,  indeed.  But  it  will 
not  be  understood.” 

When  I  observed  to  him  that  Painting  was  so 
far  inferiour  to  Poetry,  that  the  story  or  even 
emblem  which  it  communicates  must  be  pre¬ 
viously  known,  and  mentioned  as  a  natural  and 
laughable  instance  of  this,  that  a  little  Miss  on 
seeing  a  picture  of  Justice  with  the  scales,  had 
exclaimed  to  me,  “See,  there’s  a  woman  selling 
sweetmeats”;  he  said,  “Painting,  Sir,  can  illus¬ 
trate,  but  cannot  inform.” 

No  man  was  more  ready  to  make  an  apology 
when  he  had  censured  unjustly,  than  Johnson. 
When  a  proof-sheet  of  one  of  his  works  was 
brought  to  him,  he  found  fault  with  the  mode  in 
which  a  part  of  it  was  arranged,  refused  to  read 
it,  and  in  a  passion  desired  that  the  compositor1 
might  be  sent  to  him.  The  compositor  was  Mr. 
Manning,  a  decent  sensible  man,  who  had  com¬ 
posed  about  one  half  of  his  Dictionary ,  when  in 
Mr.  Strahan’s  printing-house;  and  a  great  part 
of  his  Lives  of  the  Poets ,  when  in  that  of  Mr.  Nich¬ 
ols;  and  who  (in  his  seventy-seventh  year),  when 
in  Mr.  Baldwin’s  printing-house,  composed  a 
part  of  the  first  edition  of  this  work  concerning 
him.  By  producing  the  manuscript,  he  at  once 
satisfied  Dr.  Johnson  that  he  was  not  to  blame. 
Upon  which  Johnson  candidly  and  earnestly 
said  to  him,  “Mr.  Compositor,  I  ask  your  par¬ 
don.  Mr.  Compositor,  I  ask  your  pardon,  again 
and  again.” 

His  generous  humanity  to  the  miserable  was 
almost  beyond  example.  The  following  instance 
is  well  attested: — Coming  home  late  one  night, 
he  found  a  poor  woman  lying  in  the  street,  so 
much  exhausted  that  she  could  not  walk;  he 
took  her  upon  his  back,  and  carried  her  to  his 
house,  where  he  discovered  that  she  was  one  of 
those  wretched  females  who  had  fallen  into  the 
lowest  state  of  vice,  poverty,  and  disease.  In¬ 
stead  of  harshly  upbraiding  her,  he  had  her  tak¬ 
en  care  of  with  all  tenderness  for  a  long  time,  at 
considerable  expence,  till  she  was  restored  to 
health,  and  endeavoured  to  put  her  into  a  virtu¬ 
ous  way  of  living.2 

He  thought  Mr.  Caleb  Whitefoord  singularly 
happy  in  hitting  on  the  signature  of  Papyrius 
Cursor ,  to  his  ingenious  and  diverting  cross-read- 

1Compositor  in  the  Printing-house  means,  the 
person  who  adjusts  the  types  in  the  order  in  which 
they  are  to  stand  for  printing;  and  arranges  what  is 
called  the  form,  from  which  an  impression  is  taken. 

2This  circumstance  therefore  alluded  to  in  Mr. 
Courtenay’s  Poetical  Character  of  him  is  strictly  true. 
My  informer  was  Mrs.  Desmoulins,  who  lived 
many  years  in  Dr.  Johnson’s  house. 


JOHNSON  547 

ings  of  the  news-papers;  it  being  a  real  name  of 
an  ancient  Roman,  and  clearly  expressive  of  the 
thing  done  in  this  lively  conceit. 

He  once  in  his  life  was  known  to  have  uttered 
what  is  called  a  bull:  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  when 
they  were  riding  together  in  Devonshire,  com¬ 
plained  that  he  had  a  very  bad  horse,  for  that 
even  when  going  down  hill  he  moved  slowly 
step  by  step.  “Ay  (said  Johnson,)  and  when  he 
goes  up  hill,  he  stands  still” 

He  had  a  great  aversion  to  gesticulating  in 
company.  He  called  once  to  a  gentleman  who 
offended  him  in  that  point,  “Don’t  attitudeniseP 
And  when  another  gentleman  thought  he  was 
giving  additional  force  to  what  he  uttered,  by 
expressive  movements  of  his  hands,  Johnson  fair¬ 
ly  seized  them,  and  held  them  down. 

An  authour  of  considerable  eminence  having 
engrossed  a  good  share  of  the  conversation  in  the 
company  of  Johnson,  and  having  said  nothing 
but  what  was  trifling  and  insignificant;  Johnson 
when  he  was  gone,  observed  to  us,  “It  is  won¬ 
derful  what  a  difference  there  sometimes  is  be¬ 
tween  a  man’s  powers  of  writing  and  of  talking. 
*******  wrjtes  with  great  spirit,  but  is  a  poor 
talker;  had  he  held  his  tongue  we  might  have 
supposed  him  to  have  been  restrained  by  mod¬ 
esty;  but  he  has  spoken  a  great  deal  to-day;  and 
you  have  heard  what  stuff  it  was.” 

A  gentleman  having  said  that  a  conge  d'elire 
has  not,  perhaps,  the  force  of  a  command,  but 
may  be  considered  only  as  a  strong  recommen¬ 
dation;  “Sir,  (replied  Johnson,  who  overheard 
him.)  it  is  such  a  recommendation,  as  if  I  should 
throw  you  out  of  a  two-pair  of  stairs  window, 
and  recommend  to  you  to  fall  soft.”3 

Mr.  Steevens,  who  passed  many  a  social  hour 
with  him  during  their  long  acquaintance,  which 
commenced  when  they  both  lived  in  the  Tem¬ 
ple,  has  preserved  a  good  number  of  particulars 
concerning  him,  most  of  which  are  to  be  found 
in  the  department  of  Apothegms,  &c.,  in  the 
Collection  of  Johnson's  Works.  But  he  has  been 
pleased  to  favour  me  with  the  following,  which 
are  original: — 

“One  evening,  previous  to  the  trial  of  Barret- 
ti,  a  consultation  of  his  friends  was  held  at  the 
house  of  Mr.  Cox,  the  Solicitor,  in  Southamp- 
ton-buildings,  Chancery-lane.  Among  others 
present  were,  Mr.  Burke  and  Dr.  Johnson,  who 
differed  in  sentiments  concerning  the  tendency 

3This  has  been  printed  in  other  publications, 
“fall  to  the  ground .”  But  Johnson  himself  gave  me 
the  true  expression  which  he  had  used  as  above; 
meaning  that  the  recommendation  left  as  little 
choice  in  the  one  case  as  the  other. 


BOSWELL 


548 

of  some  part  of  the  defence  the  prisoner  was  to 
make.  When  the  meeting  was  over,  Mr.  Steev- 
ens  observed,  that  the  question  between  him 
and  his  friend  had  been  agitated  with  rather  too 
much  warmth.  ‘It  may  be  so,  Sir,  (replied  the 
Doctor,)  for  Burke  and  I  should  have  been  of 
one  opinion,  if  we  had  had  no  audience.5 

“Dr.  Johnson  once  assumed  a  character  in 
which  perhaps  even  Mr.  Boswell  never  saw  him. 
His  curiosity  having  been  excited  by  the  praises 
bestowed  on  the  celebrated  Torre’s  fireworks  at 
Marybone-Gardens,  he  desired  Mr.  Steevens 
to  accompany  him  thither.  The  evening  had 
proved  showery;  and  soon  after  the  few  people 
present  were  assembled,  publick  notice  was  giv¬ 
en,  that  the  conductors  to  the  wheels,  suns,  stars, 
&c.,  were  so  thoroughly  water-soaked,  that  it 
was  impossible  any  part  of  the  exhibition  should 
be  made.  ‘This  is  a  mere  excuse,  (says  the  Doc¬ 
tor,)  to  save  their  crackers  for  a  more  profitable 
company.  Let  us  but  hold  up  our  sticks,  and 
threaten  to  break  those  coloured  lamps  that  sur¬ 
round  the  Orchestra,  and  we  shall  soon  have 
our  wishes  gratified.  The  core  of  the  fireworks 
cannot  be  injured;  let  the  different  pieces  be 
touched  in  their  respective  centers,  and  they  will 
do  their  offices  as  well  as  ever.’  Some  young  men 
who  overheard  him,  immediately  began  the  vi¬ 
olence  he  had  recommended,  and  an  attempt 
was  speedily  made  to  fire  some  of  the  wheels 
which  appeared  to  have  received  the  smallest 
damage;  but  to  little  purpose  were  they  lighted, 
for  most  of  them  completely  failed.  The  authour 
of  The  Rambler ,  however,  may  be  considered,  on 
this  occasion,  as  the  ringleader  of  a  successful 
riot,  though  not  as  a  skilful  pyrotechnist.” 

“It  has  been  supposed  that  Dr.  Johnson,  so 
far  as  fashion  was  concerned,  was  careless  of  his 
appearance  in  publick.  But  this  is  not  altogether 
true,  as  the  following  slight  instance  may  show: 
— Goldsmith’s  last  Comedy  was  to  be  represent¬ 
ed  during  some  court-mourning:  and  Mr.  Steev¬ 
ens  appointed  to  call  on  Dr.  Johnson,  and  carry 
him  to  the  tavern  where  he  was  to  dine  with 
others  of  the  Poet’s  friends.  The  Doctor  was 
ready  dressed,  but  in  coloured  cloaths;  yet  be¬ 
ing  told  that  he  would  find  every  one  else  in 
black,  received  the  intelligence  with  a  profusion 
of  thanks,  hastened  to  change  his  attire,  all  the 
while  repeating  his  gratitude  for  the  informa¬ 
tion  that  had  saved  him  from  an  appearance  so 
improper  in  the  front  row  of  a  front  box. 6  I  would 
not  (added  he,)  for  ten  pounds,  have  seemed  so 
retrograde  to  any  general  observance.5 

“He  would  sometimes  found  his  dislikes  on 
very  slender  circumstances.  Happening  one  day 


[  1784 

to  mention  Mr.  Flexman,  a  Dissenting  Minister, 
with  some  compliment  to  his  exact  memory  in 
chronological  matters;  the  Doctor  replied,  ‘Let 
me  hear  no  more  of  him,  Sir.  That  is  the  fellow 
who  made  the  Index  to  my  Ramblers ,  and  set 
down  the  name  of  Milton  thus:  Milton,  Mr. 
John.5  55 

Mr.  Steevens  adds  this  testimony: 

“It  is  unfortunate,  however,  for  Johnson,  that 
his  particularities  and  frailties  can  be  more  dis¬ 
tinctly  traced  than  his  good  and  amiable  exer¬ 
tions.  Could  the  many  bounties  he  studiously 
concealed,  the  many  acts  of  humanity  he  per¬ 
formed  in  private,  be  displayed  with  equal  cir¬ 
cumstantiality,  his  defects  would  be  so  far  lost  in 
the  blaze  of  his  virtues,  that  the  latter  only  would 
be  regarded.” 

Though  from  my  very  high  admiration  of 
Johnson,  I  have  wondered  that  he  was  not  court¬ 
ed  by  all  the  great  and  all  the  eminent  persons 
of  his  time,  it  ought  fairly  to  be  considered,  that 
no  man  of  humble  birth,  who  lived  entirely  by 
literature,  in  short  no  authour  by  profession,  ev¬ 
er  rose  in  this  country  into  that  personal  notice 
which  he  did.  In  the  course  of  this  work  a  num¬ 
erous  variety  of  names  has  been  mentioned,  to 
which  many  might  be  added.  I  cannot  omit 
Lord  and  Lady  Lucan,  at  whose  house  he  often 
enjoyed  all  that  an  elegant  table  and  the  best 
company  can  contribute  to  happiness;  he  found 
hospitality  united  with  extraordinary  accom¬ 
plishments,  and  embellished  with  charms  of 
which  no  man  could  be  insensible. 

On  Tuesday,  June  22,  I  dined  with  him  at 
The  Literary  Club,  the  last  time  of  his  being 
in  that  respectable  society.  The  other  members 
present  were  the  Bishop  of  St.  Asaph,  Lord  El¬ 
iot,  Lord  Palmerston,  Dr.  Fordyce,  and  Mr. 
Malone.  He  looked  ill;  but  had  such  a  manly 
fortitude,  that  he  did  not  trouble  the  company 
with  melancholy  complaints.  They  all  shewed 
evident  marks  of  kind  concern  about  him,  with 
which  he  was  much  pleased,  and  he  exerted 
himself  to  be  as  entertaining  as  his  indisposition 
allowed  him. 

The  anxiety  of  his  friends  to  preserve  so  es¬ 
timable  a  life,  as  long  as  human  means  might  be 
supposed  to  have  influence,  made  them  plan  for 
him  a  retreat  from  the  severity  of  a  British  win¬ 
ter,  to  the  mild  climate  of  Italy.  This  scheme 
was  at  last  brought  to  a  serious  resolution  at 
General  Paoli’s,  where  I  had  often  talked  of  it. 
One  essential  matter,  however,  I  understood  was 
necessary  to  be  previously  settled,  which  was 
obtaining  such  an  addition  to  his  income,  as 
would  be  sufficient  to  enable  him  to  defray  the 


1784] 

expence  in  a  manner  becoming  the  first  literary 
character  of  a  great  nation,  and,  independent 
of  all  his  other  merits,  the  Authour  of  The  Dic¬ 
tionary  of  the  English  Language.  The  per¬ 
son  to  whom  I  above  all  others  thought  I  should 
apply  to  negotiate  this  business,  was  the  Lord 
Chancellor,1  because  I  knew  that  he  highly  val¬ 
ued  Johnson,  and  that  Johnson  highly  valued 
his  Lordship;  so  that  it  was  no  degradation  of 
my  illustrious  friend  to  solicit  for  him  the  favour 
of  such  a  man.  I  have  mentioned  what  Johnson 
said  of  him  to  me  when  he  was  at  the  bar;  and 
after  his  Lordship  was  advanced  to  the  seals,  he 
said  of  him,  “I  would  prepare  myself  for  no  man 
in  England  but  Lord  Thurlow.  When  I  am  to 
meet  with  him  I  should  wish  to  know  a  day  be¬ 
fore.”  How  he  would  have  prepared  himself  I 
cannot  conjecture.  Would  he  have  selected  cer¬ 
tain  topicks,  and  considered  them  in  every  view 
so  as  to  be  in  readiness  to  argue  them  at  all 
points?  and  what  may  we  suppose  those  topicks 
to  have  been?  I  once  started  the  curious  inquiry 
to  the  great  man  who  was  the  subject  of  this  com¬ 
pliment:  he  smiled,  but  did  not  pursue  it. 

I  first  consulted  with  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds, 
who  perfectly  coincided  in  opinion  with  me; 
and  I  therefore,  though  personally  very  little 
known  to  his  Lordship,  wrote  to  him,2  stating 
the  case,  and  requesting  his  good  offices  for  Dr. 
Johnson.  I  mentioned  that  I  was  obliged  to  set 
out  for  Scotland  early  in  the  following  week,  so 
that  if  his  Lordship  should  have  any  commands 
for  me  as  to  this  pious  negotiation,  he  would  be 
pleased  to  send  them  before  that  time;  other¬ 
wise  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  would  give  all  atten¬ 
tion  to  it. 

This  application  was  made  not  only  without 
any  suggestion  on  the  part  of  Johnson  himself, 
but  was  utterly  unknown  to  him,  nor  had  he  the 
smallest  suspicion  of  it.  Any  insinuations,  there¬ 
fore,  which  since  his  death  have  been  thrown 
out,  as  if  he  had  stooped  to  ask  what  was  super¬ 
fluous,  are  without  any  foundation.  But,  had  he 
asked  it,  it  would  not  have  been  superfluous; 
for  though  the  money  he  had  saved  proved  to  be 
more  than  his  friends  imagined,  or  than  I  be¬ 
lieve  he  himself,  in  his  carelessness  concerning 
worldly  matters,  knew  it  to  be,  had  he  travelled 
upon  the  Continent,  an  augmentation  of  his  in¬ 
come  would  by  no  means  have  been  unnecessary. 

xEdward  Lord  Thurlow. 

2It  is  strange  that  Sir  John  Hawkins  should  have 
related  that  the  application  was  made  by  Sir  Josh¬ 
ua  Reynolds,  when  he  could  so  easily  have  been 
informed  of  the  truth  by  inquiring  of  Sir  Joshua. 
Sir  John’s  carelessness  to  ascertain  facts  is  very  re¬ 
markable. 


549 

On  Wednesday,  June  23,  I  visited  him  in  the 
morning,  after  having  been  present  at  the  shock¬ 
ing  sight  of  fifteen  men  executed  before  New¬ 
gate.  I  said  to  him,  I  was  sure  that  human  life 
was  not  machinery,  that  is  to  say,  a  chain  of 
fatality  planned  and  directed  by  the  Supreme 
Being,  as  it  had  in  it  so  much  wickedness  and 
misery,  so  many  instances  of  both,  as  that  by 
which  my  mind  was  now  clouded.  Were  it  ma¬ 
chinery  it  would  be  better  than  it  is  in  these 
respects,  though  less  noble,  as  not  being  a  sys¬ 
tem  of  moral  government.  He  agreed  with  me 
now,  as  he  always  did,  upon  the  great  question 
of  the  liberty  of  the  human  will,  which  has  been 
in  all  ages  perplexed  with  so  much  sophistry. 
“But,  Sir,  as  to  the  doctrine  of  Necessity,  no 
man  believes  it.  If  a  man  should  give  me  argu¬ 
ments  that  I  do  not  see,  though  I  could  not 
answer  them,  should  I  believe  that  I  do  not 
see?”  It  will  be  observed,  that  Johnson  at  all 
times  made  the  just  distinction  between  doc¬ 
trines  contrary  to  reason,  and  doctrines  above 
reason. 

Talking  of  the  religious  discipline  proper  for 
unhappy  convicts,  he  said,  “Sir,  one  of  our  reg¬ 
ular  clergy  will  probably  not  impress  their  minds 
sufficiently:  they  should  be  attended  by  a  Meth¬ 
odist  preacher;3  or  a  Popish  priest.”  Let  me 
however  observe,  injustice  to  the  Reverend  Mr. 
Vilette,  who  has  been  Ordinary  of  Newgate  for 
no  less  than  eighteen  years,  in  the  course  of 
which  he  has  attended  many  hundreds  of 
wretched  criminals,  that  his  earnest  and  hu¬ 
mane  exhortations  have  been  very  effectual. 
His  extraordinary  diligence  is  highly  praise¬ 
worthy,  and  merits  a  distinguished  reward.4 

On  Thursday,  June  24,  I  dined  with  him  at 
Mr.  Dilly’s,  where  were  the  Rev.  Mr.  (now  Dr.) 
Knox,  master  of  Tunbridge-school,  Mr.  Smith, 
Vicar  of  Southill,  Dr.  Beattie,  Mr.  Pinkerton, 
authour  of  various  literary  performances,  and 
the  Rev.  Dr.  Mayo.  At  my  desire  old  Mr.  Sher¬ 
idan  was  invited,  as  I  was  earnest  to  have  John¬ 
son  and  him  brought  together  again  by  chance, 
that  a  reconciliation  might  be  effected.  Mr. 
Sheridan  happened  to  come  early,  and  having 
learned  that  Dr.  Johnson  was  to  be  there,  went 
away;  so  I  found,  with  sincere  regret,  that  my 

3A  friend  of  mine  happened  to  be  passing  by  a 
field  congregation  in  the  environs  of  London,  when  a 
Methodist  preacher  quoted  this  passage  with  tri¬ 
umph. 

4I  trust  that  The  City  of  London,  now  happily 
in  unison  with  The  Court,  will  have  the  justice 
and  generosity  to  obtain  preferment  for  this  Rev¬ 
erend  Gentleman,  now  a  worthy  old  servant  of  that 
magnificent  Corporation. 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


BOSWELL 


55° 

friendly  intentions  were  hopeless.  I  recollect 
nothing  that  passed  this  day,  except  Johnson’s 
quickness,  who,  when  Dr.  Beattie  observed,  as 
something  remarkable  which  had  happened  to 
him,  that  he  had  chanced  to  see  both  No.  i,  and 
No.  1000,  of  the  hackney  coaches,  the  first  and 
the  last;  “Why,  Sir,  (said  Johnson,)  there  is  an 
equal  chance  for  one’s  seeing  those  two  num¬ 
bers  as  any  other  two.”  He  was  clearly  right; 
yet  the  seeing  of  the  two  extremes,  each  of  which 
is  in  some  degree  more  conspicuous  than  the 
rest,  could  not  but  strike  one  in  a  stronger  man¬ 
ner  than  the  sight  of  any  other  two  numbers. 
Though  I  have  neglected  to  preserve  his  con¬ 
versation,  it  was  perhaps  at  this  interview  that 
Dr.  Knox  formed  the  notion  of  it  which  he  has 
exhibited  in  his  Winter  Evenings . 

On  Friday,  June  25,  I  dined  with  him  at 
General  Paoli’s,  where,  he  says  in  one  of  his  let¬ 
ters  to  Mrs.  Thrale,  “I  love  to  dine.”  There  was 
a  variety  of  dishes  much  to  his  taste,  of  all  which 
he  seemed  to  me  to  eat  so  much,  that  I  was 
afraid  he  might  be  hurt  by  it;  and  I  whispered 
to  the  General  my  fear,  and  begged  he  might 
not  press  him.  “Alas!  (said  the  General,)  see 
how  very  ill  he  looks;  he  can  live  but  a  very 
short  time.  Would  you  refuse  any  slight  gratifi¬ 
cations  to  a  man  under  sentence  of  death?  There 
is  a  humane  custom  in  Italy,  by  which  persons 
in  that  melancholy  situation  are  indulged  with 
having  whatever  they  like  best  to  eat  and  drink, 
even  with  expensive  delicacies.” 

I  shewed  him  some  verses  on  Lichfield  by 
Miss  Seward,  which  I  had  that  day  received 
from  her,  and  had  the  pleasure  to  hear  him  ap¬ 
prove  of  them.  He  confirmed  to  me  the  truth  of 
a  high  compliment  which  I  had  been  told  he 
had  paid  to  that  lady,  when  she  mentioned  to 
him  The  Colombiadey  an  epick  poem,  by  Madame 
du  Boccage: — “Madam,  there  is  not  any  thing 
equal  to  your  description  of  the  sea  round  the 
North  Pole,  in*your  Ode  on  the  death  of  Cap¬ 
tain  Cook.” 

On  Sunday,  June  27,  I  found  him  rather  bet¬ 
ter.  I  mentioned  to  him  a  young  man  who  was 
going  to  Jamaica  with  his  wife  and  children,  in 
expectation  of  being  provided  for  by  two  of  her 
brothers  settled  in  that  island,  one  a  clergyman, 
and  the  other  a  physician.  Johnson.  “It  is  a 
wild  scheme,  Sir,  unless  he  has  a  positive  and 
deliberate  invitation.  There  was  a  poor  girl,  who 
used  to  come  about  me,  who  had  a  cousin  in 
Barbadoes,  that,  in  a  letter  to  her,  expressed  a 
wish  she  should  come  out  to  that  Island,  and 
expatiated  on  the  comforts  and  happiness  of  her 
situation.  The  poor  girl  went  out:  her  cousin 


[  1784 

was  much  surprised,  and  asked  her  how  she 
could  think  of  coming.  ‘Because,  (said  she,)  you 
invited  me.’  ‘Not  I,’  answered  the  cousin.  The 
letter  was  then  produced.  ‘I  see  it  is  true,  (said 
she,)  that  I  did  invite  you:  but  I  did  not  think 
you  would  come.’  They  lodged  her  in  an  out¬ 
house,  where  she  passed  her  time  miserably; 
and  as  soon  as  she  had  an  opportunity  she  re¬ 
turned  to  England.  Always  tell  this,  when  you 
hear  of  people  going  abroad  to  relations,  upon 
a  notion  of  being  well  received.  In  the  case 
which  you  mention,  it  is  probable  the  clergy¬ 
man  spends  all  he  gets,  and  the  physician  does 
not  know  how  much  he  is  to  get.” 

We  this  day  dined  at  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds’s, 
with  General  Paoli,  Lord  Eliot,  (formerly  Mr. 
Eliot,  of  Port  Eliot,)  Dr.  Beattie,  and  some  other 
company.  Talking  of  Lord  Chesterfield; — John¬ 
son.  “His  manner  was  exquisitely  elegant,  and 
he  had  more  knowledge  than  I  expected.”  Bos¬ 
well.  “Did  you  find,  Sir,  his  conversation  to  be 
of  a  superiour  style?”  Johnson.  “Sir,  in  the  con¬ 
versation  which  I  had  with  him  I  had  the  best 
right  to  superiority,  for  it  was  upon  philology 
and  literature.”  Lord  Eliot,  who  had  travelled 
at  the  same  time  with  Mr.  Stanhope,  Lord 
Chesterfield’s  natural  son,  justly  observed,  that 
it  was  strange  that  a  man  who  shewed  he  had  so 
much  affection  for  his  son  as  Lord  Chesterfield 
did,  by  writing  so  many  long  and  anxious  letters 
to  him,  almost  all  of  them  when  he  was  Secre¬ 
tary  of  State,  which  certainly  was  a  proof  of  great 
goodness  of  disposition,  should  endeavour  to 
make  his  son  a  rascal.  His  Lordship  told  us,  that 
Foote  had  intended  to  bring  on  the  stage  a 
father  who  had  thus  tutored  his  son,  and  to 
shew  the  son  an  honest  man  to  every  one  else, 
but  practising  his  father’s  maxims  upon  him, 
and  cheating  him.  Johnson.  “I  am  much  pleased 
with  this  design;  but  I  think  there  was  no  occa¬ 
sion  to  make  the  son  honest  at  all.  No;  he  should 
be  a  consummate  rogue:  the  contrast  between 
honesty  and  knavery  would  be  the  stronger.  It 
should  be  contrived  so  that  the  father  should  be 
the  only  sufferer  by  the  son’s  villainy,  and  thus 
there  would  be  poetical  justice.” 

He  put  Lord  Eliot  in  mind  of  Dr.  Walter 
Harte.  “I  know  (said  he,)  Harte  was  your  Lord¬ 
ship’s  tutor,  and  he  was  also  tutor  to  the  Peter¬ 
borough  family.  Pray,  my  Lord,  do  you  recollect 
any  particulars  that  he  told  you  of  Lord  Peter¬ 
borough?  He  is  a  favourite  of  mine,  and  is  not 
enough  known;  his  chai  acter  has  been  only  ven¬ 
tilated  in  party  pamphlets.”  Lord  Eliot  said,  if 
Dr.  Johnson  would  be  so  good  as  to  ask  him  any 
questions,  he  would  tell  what  he  could  recollect. 


1784]  LIFE  OF 

Accordingly  some  things  were  mentioned.  “But, 
(said  his  Lordship,)  the  best  account  of  Lord 
Peterborough  that  I  have  happened  to  meet 
with,  is  in  Captain  Carleton's  Memoirs.  Carleton 
was  descended  of  an  ancestor  who  had  distin¬ 
guished  himself  at  the  siege  of  Derry.  He  was  an 
officer;  and,  what  was  rare  at  that  time,  had 
some  knowledge  of  engineering.”  Johnson  said, 
he  had  never  heard  of  the  book.  Lord  Eliot  had 
it  at  Port  Eliot;  but,  after  a  good  deal  of  in¬ 
quiry,  procured  a  copy  in  London,  and  sent  it 
to  Johnson,  who  told  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  that 
he  was  going  to  bed  when  it  came,  but  was  so 
much  pleased  with  it,  that  he  sat  up  till  he  had 
read  it  through,  and  found  in  it  such  an  air  of 
truth,  that  he  could  not  doubt  of  its  authentic¬ 
ity;  adding,  with  a  smile,  (in  allusion  to  Lord 
Eliot’s  having  recently  been  raised  to  the  peer¬ 
age,)  “I  did  not  think  a  young  Lord  could  have 
mentioned  to  me  a  book  in  the  English  history 
that  was  not  known  to  me.” 

An  addition  to  our  company  came  after  we 
went  up  to  the  drawing-room;  Dr.  Johnson 
seemed  to  rise  in  spirits  as  his  audience  increased. 
He  said,  “He  wished  Lord  Orford’s  pictures, 
and  Sir  Ashton  Lever’s  Museum,  might  be  pur¬ 
chased  by  the  publick,  because  both  the  money, 
and  the  pictures,  and  the  curiosities,  would  re¬ 
main  in  the  country;  whereas,  if  they  were  sold 
into  another  kingdom,  the  nation  would  indeed 
get  some  money,  but  would  lose  the  pictures 
and  curiosities,  which  it  would  be  desirable  we 
should  have,  for  improvement  in  taste  and  nat¬ 
ural  history.  The  only  question  was,  as  the  na¬ 
tion  was  much  in  want  of  money,  whether  it 
would  not  be  better  to  take  a  large  price  from  a 
foreign  State?” 

He  entered  upon  a  curious  discussion  of  the 
difference  between  intuition  and  sagacity;  one 
being  immediate  in  its  effect,  the  other  requir¬ 
ing  a  circuitous  process;  one  he  observed  was 
the  eye  of  the  mind,  the  other  the  nose  of  the  mind. 

A  young  gentleman  present  took  up  the  argu¬ 
ment  against  him,  and  maintained  that  no  man 
ever  thinks  of  the  nose  of  the  mind ,  not  adverting 
that  though  that  figurative  sense  seems  strange 
to  us,  as  very  unusual,  it  is  truly  not  more  forced 
than  Hamlet’s  “In  my  mind's  eye,  Horatio,”  He 
persisted  much  too  long,  and  appeared  to  John¬ 
son  as  putting  himself  forward  as  his  antagonist 
with  too  much  presumption;  upon  which  he 
called  to  him  in  a  loud  tone,  “What  is  it  you  are 
contending  for,  if  you  be  contending?”  And  af¬ 
terwards  imagining  that  the  gentleman  retorted 
upon  him  with  a  kind  of  smart  drollery,  he  said, 
“Mr.  *****,  it  does  not  become  you  to  talk  so 


JOHNSON  551 

to  me.  Besides,  ridicule  is  not  your  talent;  you 
have  there  neither  intuition  nor  sagacity.”  The 
gentleman  protested  that  he  had  intended  no 
improper  freedom,  but  had  the  greatest  respect 
for  Dr.  Johnson.  After  a  short  pause,  during 
which  we  were  somewhat  uneasy, — Johnson. 
“Give  me  your  hand,  Sir.  You  were  too  tedious, 
and  I  was  too  short.”  Mr.  *****.  “Sir,  I  am 
honoured  by  your  attention  in  any  way.”  John¬ 
son.  “Come,  Sir,  let’s  have  no  more  of  it.  We 
offended  one  another  by  our  contention;  let  us 
not  offend  the  company  by  our  compliments.” 

He  now  said,  “He  wished  much  to  go  to 
Italy,  and  that  he  dreaded  passing  the  winter  in 
England.”  I  said  nothing;  but  enjoyed  a  secret 
satisfaction  in  thinking  that  I  had  taken  the 
most  effectual  measures  to  make  such  a  scheme 
practicable. 

On  Monday,  June  28,  I  had  the  honour  to 
receive  from  the  Lord  Chancellor  the  following 
letter: 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Sir,  I  should  have  answered  your  letter  im¬ 
mediately,  if  (being  much  engaged  when  I  re¬ 
ceived  it)  I  had  not  put  it  in  my  pocket,  and 
forgot  to  open  it  till  this  morning. 

I  am  much  obliged  to  you  for  the  suggestion; 
and  I  will  adopt  and  press  it  as  far  as  I  can.  The 
best  argument,  I  am  sure,  and  I  hope  it  is  not 
likely  to  fail,  is  Dr.  Johnson’s  merit.  But  it  will 
be  necessary,  if  I  should  be  so  unfortunate  as  to 
miss  seeing  you,  to  converse  with  Sir  Joshua  on 
the  sum  it  will  be  proper  to  ask,  in  short,  upon 
the  means  of  setting  him  out.  It  would  be  a  re¬ 
flection  on  us  all,  if  such  a  man  should  perish  for 
want  of  the  means  to  take  care  of  his  health. 
Yours,  &c. 

Thurlow 

This  letter  gave  me  a  very  high  satisfaction; 
I  next  day  went  and  shewed  it  to  Sir  Joshua 
Reynolds,  who  was  exceedingly  pleased  with  it. 
He  thought  that  I  should  now  communicate  the 
negotiation  to  Dr.  Johnson,  who  might  after¬ 
wards  complain  if  the  attention  with  which  he 
had  been  honoured,  should  be  too  long  con¬ 
cealed  from  him.  I  intended  to  set  out  for  Scot¬ 
land  next  morning;  but  Sir  Joshua  cordially  in¬ 
sisted  that  I  should  stay  another  day,  that  John¬ 
son  and  I  might  dine  with  him,  that  we  three 
might  talk  of  his  Italian  Tour,  and,  as  Sir  Josh¬ 
ua  expressed  himself,  “have  it  all  out.”  I  has¬ 
tened  to  Johnson,  and  was  told  by  him  that  he 
was  rather  better  to-day.  Boswell.  “I  am  very 
anxious  about  you,  Sir,  and  particularly  that 
you  should  go  to  Italy  for  the  winter,  which  I 
believe  is  your  own  wish.”  Johnson.  “It  is,  Sir.” 
Boswell.  “You  have  no  objection,  I  presume, 


552  BOSWELL  [  1784 


but  the  money  it  would  require.”  Johnson. 
“Why,  no,  Sir.”  Upon  which  I  gave  him  a  par¬ 
ticular  account  of  what  had  been  done,  and  read 
to  him  the  Lord  Chancellor’s  letter.  He  listened 
with  much  attention;  then  warmly  said,  “This 
is  taking  prodigious  pains  about  a  man.”  “O! 
Sir,  (said  I,  with  most  sincere  affection,)  your 
friends  would  do  every  thing  for  you.”  He 
paused,  grew  more  and  more  agitated,  till  tears 
started  into  his  eyes,  and  he  exclaimed  with  fer¬ 
vent  emotion,  “God  bless  you  all.”  I  was  so 
affected  that  I  also  shed  tears.  After  a  short  si¬ 
lence,  he  renewed  and  extended  his  grateful  ben¬ 
ediction,  “God  bless  you  all,  for  Jesus  Christ’s 
sake.”  We  both  remained  for  some  time  unable 
to  speak.  He  rose  suddenly  and  quitted  the 
room,  quite  melted  in  tenderness.  He  staid  but 
a  short  time,  till  he  had  recovered  his  firmness; 
soon  after  he  returned  I  left  him,  having  first 
engaged  him  to  dine  at  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds’s, 
next  day.  I  never  was  again  under  that  roof 
which  I  had  so  long  reverenced. 

On  Wednesday,  June  30,  the  friendly  con¬ 
fidential  dinner  with  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  took 
place,  no  other  company  being  present.  Had  I 
known  that  this  was  the  last  time  that  I  should 
enjoy  in  this  world,  the  conversation  of  a  friend 
whom  I  so  much  respected,  and  from  whom  I 
derived  so  much  instruction  and  entertainment, 
I  should  have  been  deeply  affected.  When  I 
now  look  back  to  it,  I  am  vexed  that  a  single 
word  should  have  been  forgotten. 

Both  Sir  Joshua  and  I  were  so  sanguine  in  our 
expectations,  that  we  expatiated  with  confidence 
on  the  liberal  provision  which  we  were  sure 
would  be  made  for  him,  conjecturing  whether 
munificence  would  be  displayed  in  one  large 
donation,  or  in  an  ample  increase  of  his  pen¬ 
sion.  He  himself  catched  so  much  of  our  enthu¬ 
siasm,  as  to  allow  himself  to  suppose  it  not  im¬ 
possible  that  our  hopes  might  in  one  way  or 
other  be  realised.  He  said  that  he  would  rather 
have  his  pension  doubled  than  a  grant  of  a 
thousand  pounds;  “For,  (said  he,)  though  prob¬ 
ably  I  may  not  live  to  receive  as  much  as  a 
thousand  pounds,  a  man  would  have  the  con¬ 
sciousness  that  he  should  pass  the  remainder  of 
his  life  in  splendour,  how  long  soever  it  might 
be.”  Considering  what  a  moderate  proportion 
an  income  of  six  hundred  pounds  a  year  bears 
to  innumerable  fortunes  in  this  country,  it  is 
worthy  of  remark,  that  a  man  so  truly  great 
should  think  it  splendour. 

As  an  instance  of  extraordinary  liberality  of 
friendship,  he  told  us,  that  Dr.  Brocklesby  had 
upon  this  occasion  offered  him  a  hundred  a 


year  for  his  life.  A  grateful  tear  started  into  his 
eye,  as  he  spoke  this  in  a  faultering  tone. 

Sir  Joshua  and  I  endeavoured  to  flatter  his 
imagination  with  agreeable  prospects  of  happi¬ 
ness  in  Italy.  “Nay,  (said  he,)  1  must  not  ex¬ 
pect  much  of  that;  when  a  man  goes  to  Italy 
merely  to  feel  how  he  breathes  the  air,  he  can 
enjoy  very  little.” 

Our  conversation  turned  upon  living  in  the 
country,  which  Johnson,  whose  melancholy 
mind  required  the  dissipation  of  quick  succes¬ 
sive  variety,  had  habituated  himself  to  consider 
as  a  kind  of  mental  imprisonment.  “Yet,  Sir, 
(said  I,)  there  are  many  people  who  are  content 
to  live  in  the  country.”  Johnson.  “Sir,  it  is  in 
the  intellectual  world  as  in  the  physical  world; 
we  are  told  by  natural  philosophers  that  a  body 
is  at  rest  in  the  place  that  is  fit  for  it;  they  who 
are  content  to  live  in  the  country,  are  Jit  for  the 
country.” 

Talking  of  various  enjoyments,  I  argued  that 
a  refinement  of  taste  was  a  disadvantage,  as  they 
who  have  attained  to  it  must  be  seldomer  pleased 
than  those  who  have  no  nice  discrimination,  and 
are  therefore  satisfied  with  every  thing  that  comes 
in  their  way.  Johnson.  “Nay,  Sir;  that  is  a  pal¬ 
try  notion.  Endeavour  to  be  as  perfect  as  you 
can  in  every  respect.” 

I  accompanied  him  in  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds’s 
coach,  to  the  entry  of  Bolt-court.  He  asked  me 
whether  I  would  not  go  with  him  to  his  house;  I 
declined  it,  from  an  apprehension  that  my  spir¬ 
its  would  sink.  We  bade  adieu  to  each  other 
affectionately  in  the  carriage.  When  he  had  got 
down  upon  the  foot-pavement,  he  called  out, 
“Fare  you  well”;  and  without  looking  back, 
sprung  away  with  a  kind  of  pathetick  briskness, 
if  I  may  use  that  expression,  which  seemed  to 
indicate  a  struggle  to  conceal  uneasiness,  and 
impressed  me  with  a  foreboding  of  our  long, 
long  separation. 

I  remained  one  day  more  in  town,  to  have 
the  chance  of  talking  over  my  negotiation  with 
the  Lord  Chancellor;  but  the  multiplicity  of  his 
Lordship’s  important  engagements  did  not  al¬ 
low  of  it;  so  I  left  the  management  of  the  busi¬ 
ness  in  the  hands  of  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds. 

Soon  after  this  time  Dr.  Johnson  had  the 
mortification  of  being  informed  by  Mrs.  Thrale, 
that,  “what  she  supposed  he  never  believed,”1 
was  true;  namely,  that  she  was  actually  going 
to  marry  Signor  Piozzi,  an  Italian  musick-mas- 
ter.  He  endeavoured  to  prevent  it;  but  in  vain. 
If  she  would  publish  the  whole  of  the  corres¬ 
pondence  that  passed  between  Dr.  Johnson  and 

1 Letters  to  Mrs .  Thrale ,  vol.  ii,  p.  375. 


1784]  LIFE  OF 

her  on  the  subject,  we  should  have  a  full  view  of 
his  real  sentiments.  As  it  is,  our  judgement  must 
be  biassed  by  that  characteristick  specimen 
which  Sir  John  Hawkins  has  given  us:  “Poor 
Thrale !  I  thought  that  either  her  virtue  or  her 
vice  would  have  restrained  her  from  such  a 
marriage.  She  is  now  become  a  subject  for  her 
enemies  to  exult  over;  and  for  her  friends,  if  she 
has  any  left,  to  forget,  or  pity.”1 

It  must  be  admitted  that  Johnson  derived  a 
considerable  portion  of  happiness  from  the  com¬ 
forts  and  elegancies  which  he  enjoyed  in  Mr. 
Thrale’s  family;  but  Mrs.  Thrale  assures  us  he 
was  indebted  for  these  to  her  husband  alone, 
who  certainly  respected  him  sincerely.  Her 
words  are, — “Veneration  for  his  virtue ,  reverence  for 
his  talents ,  delight  in  his  conversation ,  and  habitual 
endurance  of  a  yoke  my  husband  first  put  upon 
me,  and  of  which  he  contentedly  bore  his  share  for  six¬ 
teen  or  seventeen  years,  made  me  go  on  so  long  with  Mr. 
Johnson;  but  the  perpetual  confinement  I  will  own  to 
have  been  terrifying  in  the  first  years  of  our  friendship 
and  irksome  in  the  last;  nor  could  I  pretend  to  sup¬ 
port  it  without  help ,  when  my  coadjutor  was  no 
more”2 

Alas !  how  different  is  this  from  the  declara¬ 
tions  which  I  have  heard  Mrs.  Thrale  make  in 
his  life-time,  without  a  single  murmur  against 
any  peculiarities,  or  against  any  one  circum¬ 
stance  which  attended  their  intimacy. 

As  a  sincere  friend  of  the  great  man  whose 
Life  I  am  writing,  I  think  it  necessary  to  guard 
my  readers  against  the  mistaken  notion  of  Dr. 
Johnson’s  character,  which  this  lady’s  Anecdotes 
of  him  suggest;  for  from  the  very  nature  and 
form  of  her  book,  “it  lends  deception  lighter 
wings  to  fly.” 

“Let  it  be  remembered,  (says  an  eminent  crit- 
ick,)3  that  she  has  comprised  in  a  small  volume 
all  that  she  could  recollect  of  Dr.  Johnson  in 
twenty  years,  during  which  period,  doubtless,  some 
severe  things  were  said  by  him;  and  they  who 
read  the  book  in  two  hours ,  naturally  enough  sup¬ 
pose  that  his  whole  conversation  was  of  this 
complexion.  But  the  fact  is,  I  have  been  often  in 
his  company,  and  never  once  heard  him  say  a 
severe  thing  to  any  one;  and  many  others  can 
attest  the  same.  When  he  did  say  a  severe  thing, 
it  was  generally  extorted  by  ignorance  pretend¬ 
ing  to  knowledge,  or  by  extreme  vanity  or  affec¬ 
tation. 

*Dr.  Johnson’s  letter  to  Sir  John  Hawkins,  Life , 
P-  570- 

2 Anecdotes,  p.  293. 

3Who  has  been  pleased  to  furnish  me  with  his 
remarks. 


JOHNSON  553 

“Two  instances  of  inaccuracy,  (adds  he,)  are 
peculiarly  worthy  of  notice: 

“It  is  said,  cThat  natural 4  roughness  of  his  man¬ 
ner  so  often  mentioned ,  would ,  notwithstanding  the 
regularity  of  his  notions ,  burst  through  them  all  from 
time  to  time ;  and  he  once  bade  a  very  celebrated  lady , 
who  praised  him  with  too  much  zeal  perhaps ,  or  per¬ 
haps  too  strong  an  emphasis ,  ( which  always  of  ended 
him,)  consider  what  her  flattery  was  worth ,  before  she 
choaked  him  with  it.* 

“Now  let  the  genuine  anecdote  be  contrasted 
with  this.  The  person  thus  represented  as  being 
harshly  treated,  though  a  very  celebrated  lady, 
was  then  just  come  to  London  from  an  obscure 
situation  in  the  country.  At  Sir  Joshua  Rey¬ 
nolds’s  one  evening,  she  met  Dr.  Johnson.  She 
very  soon  began  to  pay  her  court  to  him  in  the 
most  fulsome  strain.  ‘Spare  me,  I  beseech  you, 
dear  Madam,’  was  his  reply.  She  still  laid  it  on. 
‘Pray,  Madam,  let  us  have  no  more  of  this’;  he 
rejoined.  Not  paying  any  attention  to  these  warn¬ 
ings,  she  continued  still  her  eulogy.  At  length, 
provoked  by  this  indelicate  and  vain  obtrusion 
of  compliment,  he  exclaimed,  ‘Dearest  lady, 
consider  with  yourself  what  your  flattery  is  worth, 
before  you  bestow  it  so  freely.’ 

“How  different  does  this  story  appear,  when 
accompanied  with  all  these  circumstances  which 
really  belong  to  it,  but  which  Mrs.  Thrale  either 
did  not  know,  or  has  suppressed. 

“She  says,  in  another  place,5  ‘ One  gentleman , 
however,  who  dined  at  a  nobleman* s  house  in  his  com¬ 
pany,  and  that  of  Mr.  Thrale,  to  whom  I  was  obliged 
for  the  anecdote ,  was  willing  to  enter  the  lists  in  de¬ 
fence  of  King  William’s  character;  and  having  op¬ 
posed  and  contradicted  Johnson  two  or  three  times, 
petulantly  enough,  the  master  of  the  house  began  to  feel 
uneasy,  and  expect  disagreeable  consequences;  to  avoid 
which,  he  said,  loud  enough  for  the  Doctor  to  hear, — 
“Our  friend  here  has  no  meaning  now  in  all  this,  ex¬ 
cept  just  to  relate  at  club  to-morrow  how  he  teized 
Johnson  at  dinner  to-day ;  this  is  all  to  do  himself 
honour.”  “No,  upon  my  word,  {replied  the  other,)  I 
see  no  honour  in  it,  whatever  you  may  do.**  “Well, 
Sir,  {returned  Mr.  Johnson,  sternly ,)  if  you  do  not 
see  the  honour,  I  am  sure  /  feel  the  disgrace.**  * 

“This  is  all  sophisticated.  Mr.  Thrale  was  not 
in  the  company,  though  he  might  have  related 
the  story  to  Mrs.  Thrale.  A  friend,  from  whom  I 
had  the  story,  was  present;  and  it  was  not  at  the 
house  of  a  nobleman.  On  the  observation  being 
made  by  the  master  of  the  house  on  a  gentle¬ 
man’s  contradicting  Johnson,  that  he  had  talked 
for  the  honour,  &c.,  the  gentleman  muttered  in 

4 Anecdotes,  p.  183. 

Hbid.,  p.  202. 


554 

a  low  voice,  4 1  see  no  honour  in  it’;  and  Dr. 
Johnson  said  nothing:  so  all  the  rest,  (though 
bien  trouvee)  is  mere  garnish.” 

I  have  had  occasion  several  times,  in  the  course 
of  this  work,  to  point  out  the  incorrectness  of 
Mrs.  Thrale,  as  to  particulars  which  consisted 
with  my  own  knowledge.  But  indeed  she  has,  in 
flippant  terms  enough,  expressed  her  disappro¬ 
bation  of  that  anxious  desire  of  authenticity 
which  prompts  a  person  who  is  to  record  con¬ 
versations,  to  write  them  down  at  the  moment .l 
Unquestionably,  if  they  are  to  be  recorded  at 
all,  the  sooner  it  is  done  the  better.  This  lady 
herself  says,2 — “To  recollect ,  however ,  and  to  repeat 
the  sayings  of  Dr.  Johnson,  is  almost  all  that  can  be 
done  by  the  writers  of  his  Life;  as  his  life ,  at  least  since 
my  acquaintance  with  him ,  consisted  in  little  else  than 
talking ,  when  he  was  not  [ absolutely ]  employed  in  some 
serious  piece  of  work.” 

She  boasts  of  her  having  kept  a  common-place 
book;  and  we  find  she  noted,  at  one  time  or  oth¬ 
er,  in  a  very  lively  manner,  specimens  of  the 
conversation  of  Dr.  Johnson,  and  of  those  who 
talked  with  him;  but  had  she  done  it  recently, 
they  probably  would  have  been  less  erroneous; 
and  we  should  have  been  relieved  from  those 
disagreeable  doubts  of  their  authenticity,  with 
which  we  must  now  peruse  them. 

She  says  of  him,3 — “He  was  the  most  charitable 
of  mortals ,  without  being  what  we  call  an  active 
friend.  Admirable  at  giving  counsel ;  no  man  saw  his 
way  so  clearly ;  but  he  would  not  stir  a  finger  for  the 
assistance  of  those  to  whom  he  was  willing  enough  to 
give  advice .”  And  again  on  the  same  page,  “If 
you  wanted  a  slight  favour,  you  must  apply  to  people 
of  other  dispositions;  for  not  a  step  would  Johnson 
move  to  obtain  a  man  a  vote  in  a  society ,  to  repay  a 
compliment  which  might  be  useful  or  pleasing ,  to  write 
a  letter  of  request,  &c .,  or  to  obtain  a  hundred  pounds 
a  year  more  for  a  friend  who ,  perhaps ,  had  already  two 
or  three.  No  force  could  urge  him  to  diligence ,  no  im¬ 
portunity  could  conquer  his  resolution  to  stand  still.” 

It  is  amazing  that  one  who  had  such  oppor¬ 
tunities  of  knowing  Dr.  Johnson,  should  appear 
so  little  acquainted  with  his  real  character.  I  am 
sorry  this  lady  does  not  advert,  that  she  herself 
contradicts  the  assertion  of  his  being  obstinate¬ 
ly  defective  in  the  petites  morales ,  in  the  little  en¬ 
dearing  charities  of  social  life,  in  conferring  small¬ 
er  favours;  for  she  says,4 — “Dr.  Johnson  was  lib¬ 
eral  enough  in  granting  literary  assistance  to  others ,  I 
think;  and  innumerable  are  the  Prefaces ,  Sermons , 

1  Anecdotes,  p.  44. 

2Ibid.,  p.  23. 

mid.,  p.  51  [192]. 

mid.,  p.  193  [51]. 


[  1784 

Lectures ,  and  Dedications  which  he  used  to  make  for 
people  who  begged  of  him.” 

I  am  certain  that  a  more  active  friend  has  rarely 
been  found  in  any  age.  This  work,  which  I  fond¬ 
ly  hope  will  rescue  his  memory  from  obloquy, 
contains  a  thousand  instances  of  his  benevolent 
exertions  in  almost  every  way  that  can  be  con¬ 
ceived;  and  particularly  in  employing  his  pen 
with  a  generous  readiness  for  those  to  whom  its 
aid  could  be  useful.  Indeed  his  obliging  activity 
in  doing  little  offices  of  kindness,  both  by  letters 
and  personal  application,  was  one  of  the  most 
remarkable  features  in  his  character;  and  for 
the  truth  of  this  I  can  appeal  to  a  number  of  his 
respectable  friends:  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  Mr. 
Langton,  Mr.  Plamilton,  Mr.  Burke,  Mr.  Wind¬ 
ham,  Mr.  Malone,  the  Bishop  of  Dromore,  Sir 
William  Scott,  Sir  Robert  Chambers.  And  can 
Mrs. Thrale  forget  the  advertisements  which  he 
wrote  for  her  husband  at  the  time  of  his  election 
contest;  the  epitaphs  on  him  and  her  mother; 
the  playful  and  even  trifling  verses,  for  the  amuse¬ 
ment  of  her  and  her  daughters;  his  correspond¬ 
ing  with  her  children,  and  entering  into  their 
minute  concerns,  which  shews  him  in  the  most 
amiable  light? 

She  relates,5 — “That  Mr.  Ch — lm — ley  un¬ 
expectedly  rode  up  to  Mr.  Thrale’s  carriage,  in 
which  Mr.  Thrale  and  she,  and  Dr.  Johnson 
were  travelling;  that  he  paid  them  all  his  prop¬ 
er  compliments,  but  observing  that  Dr.  John¬ 
son,  who  was  reading,  did  not  see  him,  tapt  him 
gently  on  the  shoulder.  l’Tis  Mr.  Ch — lm — ley’; 
says  my  husband.  4  Well,  Sir — and  what  if  it  is  Mr. 
Ch — lm — ley’;  says  the  other,  sternly,  just  lifting  his 
eyes  a  moment  from  his  book ,  and  returning  to  it  again, 
with  renewed  avidity .” 

This  surely  conveys  a  notion  of  Johnson,  as  if 
he  had  been  grossly  rude  to  Mr.  Cholmondeley,6 
a  gentleman  whom  he  always  loved  and  es¬ 
teemed.  If,  therefore,  there  was  an  absolute  ne¬ 
cessity  for  mentioning  the  story  at  all,  it  might 
have  been  thought  that  her  tenderness  for  Dr. 
Johnson’s  character  would  have  disposed  her  to 
state  any  thing  that  could  soften  it.  Why  then  is 
there  a  total  silence  as  to  what  Mr.  Cholmon¬ 
deley  told  her? — that  Johnson,  who  had  known 
him  from  his  earliest  years,  having  been  made 
sensible  of  what  had  doubtless  a  strange  appear¬ 
ance,  took  occasion,  when  he  afterwards  met 
him,  to  make  a  very  courteous  and  kind  apol- 

Hbid.,  p.  258. 

6George  James  Cholmondeley,  Esq.,  grandson 
of  George,  third  Earl  of  Cholmondeley,  and  one  of 
the  Commissioners  of  Excise;  a  gentleman  respect¬ 
ed  for  his  abilities,  and  elegance  of  manners. 


BOSWELL 


1784] 

ogy.  There  is  another  little  circumstance  which 
I  cannot  but  remark.  Her  book  was  published 
in  1 765,  she  had  then  in  her  possession  a  letter 
from  Dr.  Johnson,  dated  in  1777,1  which  begins 
thus: — “Cholmondeley’s  story  shocks  me,  if  it 
be  true,  which  I  can  hardly  think,  for  I  am  ut¬ 
terly  unconscious  of  it:  I  am  very  sorry,  and 
very  much  ashamed.5’  Why  then  publish  the 
anecdote?  Or  if  she  did,  why  not  add  the  cir¬ 
cumstances,  with  which  she  was  well  acquainted ! 

In  his  social  intercourse  she  thus  describes 
him:2 — ee Ever  musing  till  he  was  called  out  to  Con¬ 
ner  se,  and  conversing  till  the  fatigue  of  his  friends,  or 
the  promptitude  of  his  own  temper  to  take  offence ,  con¬ 
signed  him  back  again  to  silent  meditation” 

Yet,  in  the  same  book, 3  she  tells  us, — “He  was , 
however ,  seldom  inclined  to  be  silent ,  when  any  moral 
or  literary  question  was  started;  and  it  was  on  such  oc¬ 
casions  that ,  like  the  Sage  in  cRasselas,5  he  spoke ,  and 
attention  watched  his  lips;  he  reasoned ,  and  conviction 
closed  his  periods” 

His  conversation,  indeed,  was  so  far  from  ever 
fatiguing  his  friends,  that  they  regretted  when  it 
was  interrupted,  or  ceased,  and  could  exclaim 
in  Milton’s  language, 

With  thee  conversing,  I forget  all  time. 

I  certainly,  then,  do  not  claim  too  much  in 
behalf  of  my  illustrious  friend  in  saying,  that 
however  smart  and  entertaining  Mrs.  Thrale’s 
Anecdotes  are,  they  must  not  be  held  as  good  evi¬ 
dence  against  him;  for  wherever  an  instance  of 
harshness  and  severity  is  told,  I  beg  leave  to 
doubt  its  perfect  authenticity;  for  though  there 
may  have  been  some  foundation  for  it,  yet,  like 
that  of  his  reproof  to  the  “very  celebrated  lady,” 
it  may  be  so  exhibited  in  the  narration  as  to  be 
very  unlike  the  real  fact. 

The  evident  tendency  of  the  following  anec¬ 
dote4  is  to  represent  Dr.  Johnson  as  extremely 
deficient  in  affection,  tenderness,  or  even  com¬ 
mon  civility: — ee  When  I  one  day  lamented  the  loss  of 
a  first  cousin  killed  in  America, — c  Prithee ,  my  dear, 
{said  he,)  have  done  with  canting;  how  would  the 
world  be  the  worse  for  it,  I  may  ask,  if  all  your  rela¬ 
tions  were  at  once  spitted  like  larks,  and  roasted  for 
Presto’s  supper ?’ — Presto  was  the  dog  that  lay  under 
the  table  while  we  talked I  suspect  this  too  of  ex¬ 
aggeration  and  distortion.  I  allow  that  he  made 
her  an  angry  speech;  but  let  the  circumstances 
fairly  appear,  as  told  by  Mr.  Baretti,  who  was 
present: — 

1  Letters  to  Airs.  Thrale,  vol.  ii,  p.  12. 

2 Anecdotes ,  p.  23. 

zlbid.,  p.  302. 

Hbid p.  63. 


555 

Mrs.  Thrale,  while  supping  very  heartily  up¬ 
on  larks,  laid  down  her  knife  and  fork,  and 
abruptly  exclaimed,  cO,  my  dear  Mr.  Johnson, 
do  you  know  what  has  happened?  The  last  let¬ 
ters  from  abroad  have  brought  us  an  account 
that  our  poor  cousin’s  head  was  taken  off  by  a 
cannon-ball.’  Johnson,  who  was  shocked  both 
at  the  fact,  and  her  light  unfeeling  manner  of 
mentioning  it,  replied,  ‘Madam,  it  would  give 
you  very  little  concern  if  all  your  relations  were 
spitted  like  those  larks,  and  drest  for  Presto’s 
supper.’  ”6 

It  is  with  concern  that  I  find  myself  obliged 
to  animadvert  on  the  inaccuracies  of  Mrs.  Pi- 
ozzi’s  Anecdotes ,  and  perhaps  I  may  be  thought 
to  have  dwelt  too  long  upon  her  little  collection. 
But  as  from  Johnson’s  long  residence  under  Mr. 
Thrale’s  roof,  and  his  intimacy  with  her,  the  ac¬ 
count  which  she  has  given  of  him  may  have 
made  an  unfavourable  and  unjust  impression, 
my  duty,  as  a  faithful  biographer,  has  obliged 
me  reluctantly  to  perform  this  unpleasing  task. 

Having  left  the  pious  negotiation,  as  I  called  it, 
in  the  best  hands,  I  shall  here  insert  what  relates 
to  it.  Johnson  wrote  to  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  on 
July  6,  as  follows: 

“l  am  going,  I  hope,  in  a  few  days,  to  try  the 
air  of  Derbyshire,  but  hope  to  see  you  before  I 
go.  Let  me,  however,  mention  to  you  what  I 
have  much  at  heart.  If  the  Chancellor  should 
continue  his  attention  to  Mr.  Boswell’s  request, 
and  confer  with  you  on  the  means  of  relieving 
my  languid  state,  I  am  very  desirous  to  avoid 
the  appearance  of  asking  money  upon  false  pre¬ 
tences.  I  desire  you  to  represent  to  his  Lordship, 
what,  as  soon  as  it  is  suggested,  he  will  perceive 
to  be  reasonable, — That,  if  I  grow  much  worse, 
I  shall  be  afraid  to  leave  my  physicians,  to  suffer 
the  inconveniences  of  travel,  and  pine  in  the  sol¬ 
itude  of  a  foreign  country;  That,  if  I  grow  much 

6Upon  mentioning  this  to  my  friend  Mr.  Wilkes, 
he,  with  his  usual  readiness,  pleasantly  matched  it 
with  the  following  sentimental  anecdote.  He  was  in¬ 
vited  by  a  young  man  of  fashion  at  Paris,  to  sup 
with  him  and  a  lady,  who  had  been  for  some  time 
his  mistress,  but  with  whom  he  was  going  to  part. 
He  said  to  Mr.  Wilkes  that  he  really  felt  very  much 
for  her,  she  was  in  such  distress;  and  that  he  meant 
to  make  her  a  present  of  two  hundred  louis-d’ors. 
Mr.  Wilkes  observed  the  behaviour  of  Mademoi¬ 
selle,  who  sighed  indeed  very  piteously,  and  as¬ 
sumed  every  pathetick  air  of  grief;  but  eat  no  less 
than  three  French  pigeons,  which  are  as  large  as 
English  partridges,  besides  other  things.  Mr.  Wil¬ 
kes  whispered  the  gentleman,  “We  often  say  in 
England,  Excessive  sorrow  is  exceeding  dry,  but  I  never 
heard  Excessive  sorrow  is  exceeding  hungry.  Perhaps 
one  hundred  will  do.”  The  gentleman  took  the 
hint. 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 

cc 


556 

better,  of  which  indeed  there  is  now  little  ap¬ 
pearance,  I  shall  not  wish  to  leave  my  friends 
and  my  domestick  comforts;  for  I  do  not  travel 
for  pleasure  or  curiosity;  yet  if  I  should  recover, 
curiosity  would  revive.  In  my  present  state,  I 
am  desirous  to  make  a  struggle  for  a  little  longer 
life,  and  hope  to  obtain  some  help  from  a  softer 
climate.  Do  for  me  what  you  can.” 

He  wrote  to  me  July  26: — “I  wish  your  affairs 
could  have  permitted  a  longer  and  continued 
exertion  of  your  zeal  and  kindness.  They  that 
have  your  kindness  may  want  your  ardour.  In 
the  mean  time  I  am  very  feeble  and  very  de¬ 
jected.” 

By  a  letter  from  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds  I  was 
informed,  that  the  Lord  Chancellor  had  called 
on  him,  and  acquainted  him  that  the  applica¬ 
tion  had  not  been  successful;  but  that  his  Lord- 
ship,  after  speaking  highly  in  praise  of  Johnson, 
as  a  man  who  was  an  honour  to  his  country,  de¬ 
sired  Sir  Joshua  to  let  him  know,  that  on  grant¬ 
ing  a  mortgage  of  his  pension,  he  should  draw 
on  his  Lordship  to  the  amount  of  five  or  six  hun¬ 
dred  pounds;  and  that  his  Lordship  explained 
the  meaning  of  the  mortgage  to  be,  that  he 
wished  the  business  to  be  conducted  in  such  a 
manner,  that  Dr.  Johnson  should  appear  to  be 
under  the  least  possible  obligation.  Sir  Joshua 
mentioned,  that  he  had  by  the  same  post  com¬ 
municated  all  this  to  Dr.  Johnson. 

How  Johnson  was  affected  upon  the  occasion 
will  appear  from  what  he  wrote  to  Sir  Joshua 
Reynolds :  — 

“Ashbourne,  Sept.  9.  Many  words  I  hope  are 
not  necessary  between  you  and  me,  to  convince 
you  what  gratitude  is  excited  in  my  heart  by  the 
Chancellor’s  liberality,  and  your  kind  of¬ 
fices.  .  .  . 

“I  have  enclosed  a  letter  to  the  Chancellor, 
which,  when  you  have  read  it,  you  will  be  pleased 
to  seal  with  a  head,  or  any  other  general  seal, 
and  convey  it  to  him:  had  I  sent  it  directly  to 
him,  I  should  have  seemed  to  overlook  the  fa¬ 
vour  of  your  intervention.” 

To  the  Lord  High  Chancellor1 

My  Lord.  After  a  long  and  not  inattentive 
observation  of  mankind,  the  generosity  of  your 
Lordship’s  offer  raises  in  me  not  less  wonder 

^ir  Joshua  Reynolds,  on  account  of  the  excel¬ 
lence  both  of  the  sentiment  and  expression  of  this 
letter,  took  a  copy  of  it  which  he  shewed  to  some 
of  his  friends;  one  of  whom,  who  admired  it,  being 
allowed  to  peruse  it  leisurely  at  home,  a  copy  was 
made,  and  found  its  way  into  the  news-papers  and 
magazines.  It  was  transcribed  with  some  inaccura¬ 
cies.  I  print  it  from  the  original  draft  in  Johnson’s 
own  hand-writing. 


[  1784 

than  gratitude.  Bounty,  so  liberally  bestowed,  I 
should  gladly  receive,  if  my  condition  made  it 
necessary;  for,  to  such  a  mind,  who  would  not 
be  proud  to  own  his  obligations?  But  it  has 
pleased  God  to  restore  me  to  so  great  a  measure 
of  health,  that  if  I  should  now  appropriate  so 
much  of  a  fortune  destined  to  do  good,  I  could 
not  escape  from  myself  the  charge  of  advancing 
a  false  claim.  My  journey  to  the  continent, 
though  I  once  thought  it  necessary,  was  never 
much  encouraged  by  my  physicians;  and  I  was 
very  desirous  that  your  Lordship  should  be  told 
of  it  by  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  as  an  event  very 
uncertain;  for  if  I  grew  much  better,  I  should 
not  be  willing,  if  much  worse,  not  able,  to  mi¬ 
grate.  Your  Lordship  was  first  solicited  without 
my  knowledge;  but,  when  I  was  told  that  you 
were  pleased  to  honour  me  with  your  patron¬ 
age,  I  did  not  expect  to  hear  of  a  refusal;  yet,  as 
I  have  had  no  long  time  to  brood  hope,  and 
have  not  rioted  in  imaginary  opulence,  this  cold 
reception  has  been  scarce  a  disappointment; 
and,  from  your  Lordship’s  kindness,  I  have  re¬ 
ceived  a  benefit,  which  only  men  like  you  are 
able  to  bestow.  I  shall  now  live  mihi  carior ,  with 
a  higher  opinion  of  my  own  merit.  I  am,  my 
Lord,  your  Lordship’s  most  obliged,  most  grate¬ 
ful,  and  most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

September ,  1784 

Upon  this  unexpected  failure  I  abstain  from 
presuming  to  make  any  remarks,  or  to  offer  any 
conjectures. 

Having  after  repeated  reasonings,  brought 
Dr.  Johnson  to  agree  to  my  removing  to  Lon¬ 
don,  and  even  to  furnish  me  with  arguments  in 
favour  of  what  he  had  opposed;  I  wrote  to  him 
requesting  he  would  write  them  for  me;  he  was 
so  good  as  to  comply,  and  I  shall  extract  that 
part  of  his  letter  to  me  of  June  1 1,  as  a  proof 
how  well  he  could  exhibit  a  cautious  yet  en¬ 
couraging  view  of  it: 

“I  remember,  and  intreat  you  to  remember, 
that  virtus  est  vitium  fugere ;  the  first  approach  to 
riches  is  security  from  poverty.  The  condition 
on  which  you  have  my  consent  to  settle  in  Lon¬ 
don  is,  that  your  expence  never  exceeds  your 
annual  income.  Fixing  this  basis  of  security,  you 
cannot  be  hurt,  and  you  may  be  very  much  ad¬ 
vanced.  The  loss  of  your  Scottish  business,  which 
is  all  that  you  can  lose,  is  not  to  be  reckoned  as 
any  equivalent  to  the  hopes  and  possibilities 
that  open  here  upon  you.  If  you  succeed,  the 
question  of  prudence  is  at  an  end;  every  body 
will  think  that  done  right  which  ends  happily; 
and  though  your  expectations,  of  which  I  would 
not  advise  you  to  talk  too  much,  should  not  be 
totally  answered,  you  can  hardly  fail  to  get 


BOSWELL 


1784] 

friends  who  will  do  for  you  all  that  your  present 
situation  allows  you  to  hope;  and  if,  after  a  few 
years,  you  should  return  to  Scotland,  you  will 
return  with  a  mind  supplied  by  various  conver¬ 
sation,  and  many  opportunities  of  inquiry,  with 
much  knowledge,  and  materials  for  reflection 
and  instruction.” 

Let  us  now  contemplate  Johnson  thirty  years 
after  the  death  of  his  wife,  still  retaining  for  her 
all  the  tenderness  of  affection. 

To  the  Reverend  Mr.  Bagshaw, 
at  Bromley1 

Sir,  Perhaps  you  may  remember,  that  in  the 
year  1753,  you  committed  to  the  ground  my 
dear  wife.  I  now  entreat  your  permission  to  lay 
a  stone  upon  her;  and  have  sent  the  inscription, 
that,  if  you  find  it  proper,  you  may  signify  your 
allowance. 

You  will  do  me  a  great  favour  by  shewing  the 
place  where  she  lies,  that  the  stone  may  protect 
her  remains. 

Mr.  Ryland  will  wait  on  you  for  the  inscrip¬ 
tion,2  and  procure  it  to  be  engraved.  You  will 
easily  believe  that  I  shrink  from  this  mournful 
office.  When  it  is  done,  if  I  have  strength  re¬ 
maining,  I  will  visit  Bromley  once  again,  and 
pay  you  part  of  the  respect  to  which  you  have  a 
right  from.  Reverend  Sir,  your  most  humble 
servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

July  12,  1784 

On  the  same  day  he  wrote  to  Mr.  Langton: 

“I  cannot  but  think  that  in  my  languid  and 
anxious  state,  I  have  some  reason  to  complain 
that  I  receive  from  you  neither  inquiry  nor  con¬ 
solation.  You  know  how  much  I  value  your 
friendship,  and  with  what  confidence  I  expect 
your  kindness,  if  I  wanted  any  act  of  tenderness 
that  you  could  perform;  at  least,  if  you  do  not 
know  it,  I  think  your  ignorance  is  your  own 
fault.  Yet  how  long  is  it  that  I  have  lived  almost 
in  your  neighbourhood  without  the  least  notice. 
I  do  not,  however,  consider  this  neglect  as  par¬ 
ticularly  shewn  to  me;  I  hear  two  of  your  most 
valuable  friends  make  the  same  complaint.  But 
why  are  all  thus  overlooked?  You  are  not  op¬ 
pressed  by  sickness,  you  are  not  distracted  by 
business;  if  you  are  sick,  you  are  sick  of  leisure: 
— And  allow  yourself  to  be  told,  that  no  dis¬ 
ease  is  more  to  be  dreaded  or  avoided.  Rather 
to  do  nothing  than  to  do  good,  is  the  lowest 
state  of  a  degraded  mind.  Boileau  says  to  his 
pupil, 

Que  les  vers  ne  soient  pas  votre  kernel  emploi , 
Cultivez  vos  amis. - 

^ee  p.  225. 

2Printed  in  his  Works  [i.  150]. 


557 

That  voluntary  debility,  which  modern  lan- 
gauge  is  content  to  term  indolence,  will,  if  it  is 
not  counteracted  by  resolution,  render  in  time 
the  strongest  faculties  lifeless,  and  turn  the  flame 
to  the  smoke  of  virtue.  I  do  not  expect  nor  de¬ 
sire  to  see  you,  because  I  am  much  pleased  to 
find  that  your  mother  stays  so  long  with  you, 
and  I  should  think  you  neither  elegant  nor  grate¬ 
ful,  if  you  did  not  study  her  gratification.  You 
will  pay  my  respects  to  both  the  ladies,  and  to 
all  the  young  people.  I  am  going  Northward 
for  a  while,  to  try  what  help  the  country  can 
give  me;  but,  if  you  will  write  the  letter  will 
come  after  me.” 

Next  day  he  set  out  on  a  jaunt  to  Stafford¬ 
shire  and  Derbyshire,  flattering  himself  that  he 
might  be  in  some  degree  relieved. 

During  his  absence  from  London  he  kept  up 
a  correspondence  with  several  of  his  friends, 
from  which  I  shall  select  what  appears  to  me 
proper  for  publication,  without  attending  nice¬ 
ly  to  chronological  order. 

To  Dr.  Brocklesby,  he  writes,  Ashbourne, 
July  20: 

“The  kind  attention  which  you  have  so  long 
shewn  to  my  health  and  happiness,  makes  it  as 
much  a  debt  of  gratitude  as  a  call  of  interest,  to 
give  you  an  account  of  what  befals  me,  when 
accident  recovers3  me  from  your  immediate  care. 
The  journey  of  the  first  day  was  performed  with 
very  little  sense  of  fatigue ;  the  second  day  brought 
me  to  Lichfield,  without  much  lassitude;  but  I 
am  afraid  that  I  could  not  have  borne  such  vio¬ 
lent  agitation  for  many  days  together.  Tell  Dr. 
Heberden,  that  in  the  coach  I  read  Ciceronianus 
which  I  concluded  as  I  entered  Lichfield.  My 
affection  and  understanding  went  along  with 
Erasmus,  except  that  once  or  twice  he  somewhat 
unskilfully  entangles  Cicero’s  civil  or  moral, 
with  his  rhetorical,  character.  I  staid  five  days 
at  Lichfield,  but,  being  unable  to  walk,  had  no 
great  pleasure,  and  yesterday  (19th)  I  came 
hither,  where  I  am  to  try  what  air  and  attention 
can  perform.  Of  any  improvement  in  my  health 
I  cannot  yet  please  myself  with  the  perception. 
.  .  .  The  asthma  has  no  abatement.  Opiates  stop 
the  fit,  so  as  that  I  can  sit  and  sometimes  lie 
easy,  but  they  do  not  now  procure  me  the  pow¬ 
er  of  motion;  and  I  am  afraid  that  my  general 
strength  of  body  does  not  encrease.  The  weather 
indeed  is  not  benign;  but  how  low  is  he  sunk 
whose  strength  depends  upon  the  weather !  I  am 

3This  is  probably  an  errour  either  of  the  tran¬ 
script  or  the  press.  Removes  seems  to  be  the  word 
intended.  [M.] 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


BOSWELL 


558 

now  looking  into  Floyer  who  lived  with  his  asth¬ 
ma  to  almost  his  ninetieth  year.  His  book  by 
want  of  order  is  obscure,  and  his  asthma,  I 
think,  not  of  the  same  kind  with  mine.  Some¬ 
thing  however  I  may  perhaps  learn.  My  appe¬ 
tite  still  continues  keen  enough;  and  what  I 
consider  as  a  symptom  of  radical  health,  I  have 
a  voracious  delight  in  raw  summer  fruit,  of  which 
I  was  less  eager  a  few  years  ago.  You  will  be 
pleased  to  communicate  this  account  to  Dr. 
Heberden,  and  if  any  thing  is  to  be  done,  let  me 
have  your  joint  opinion.  Now — abite  cum; — let 
me  inquire  after  the  Club.5’1 

July  31.  “Not  recollecting  that  Dr.  Heberden 
might  be  at  Windsor,  I  thought  your  letter  long 
in  coming.  But,  you  know,  nocitura  petuntur ,  the 
letter  which  I  so  much  desired,  tells  me  that  I 
have  lost  one  of  my  best  and  tenderest  friends.2 
My  comfort  is,  that  he  appeared  to  live  like  a 
man  that  had  always  before  his  eyes  the  fragility 
of  our  present  existence,  and  was  therefore,  I 
hope,  not  unprepared  to  meet  his  judge.  Your 
attention,  dear  Sir,  and  that  of  Dr.  Heberden, 
to  my  health,  is  extremely  kind.  I  am  loth  to 
think  that  I  grow  worse;  and  cannot  fairly  prove 
even  to  my  own  partiality,  that  I  grow  much 
better.55 

August  5.  “I  return  you  thanks,  dear  Sir,  for 
your  unwearied  attention,  both  medicinal  and 
friendly,  and  hope  to  prove  the  effect  of  your 
care  by  living  to  acknowledge  it.55 

August  12.  “Pray  be  so  kind  as  to  have  me  in 
your  thoughts,  and  mention  my  case  to  others 
as  you  have  opportunity.  I  seem  to  myself  nei¬ 
ther  to  gain  nor  lose  strength.  I  have  lately  tried 
milk,  but  have  yet  found  no  advantage,  and  am 
afraid  oflit  merely  as  a  liquid.  My  appetite  is  still 
good,  which  I  know  is  dear  Dr.  Heberden’s  cri¬ 
terion  of  the  vis  vita.  As  we  cannot  now  see  each 
other,  do  not  omit  to  write,  for  you  cannot  think 
with  what  warmth  of  expectation  I  reckon  the 
hours  of  a  post-day.55 

August  14.  “I  have  hitherto  sent  you  only 
melancholy  letters,  you  will  be  glad  to  hear  some 
better  account.  Yesterday  the  asthma  remitted, 
perceptibly  remitted,  and  I  moved  with  more 
ease  than  I  have  enjoyed  for  many  weeks.  May 
God  continue  his  mercy.  This  account  I  would 
not  delay,  because  I  am  not  a  lover  of  complaints, 
or  complainers,  and  yet  I  have  since  we  parted 
uttered  nothing  till  now  but  terrour  and  sorrow. 
Write  to  me,  dear  Sir.55 

August  16.  “Better  I  hope,  and  better.  My 
respiration  gets  more  and  more  ease  and  liberty. 

*At  the  Essex  Head,  Essex-street. 

2Mr.  Allen,  the  printer. 


[  ^84 

I  went  to  church  yesterday,  after  a  very  liberal 
dinner,  without  any  inconvenience;  it  is  indeed 
no  long  walk,  but  I  never  walked  it  without  dif¬ 
ficulty,  since  I  came,  before.  ******  the  inten¬ 
tion  was  only  to  overpower  the  seeming  vis  iner¬ 
tia  of  the  pectoral  and  pulmonary  muscles.  I  am 
favoured  with  a  degree  of  ease  that  very  much 
delights  me,  and  do  not  despair  of  another  race 
upon  the  stairs  of  the  Academy.  If  I  were,  how¬ 
ever,  of  a  humour  to  sec,  or  to  shew  the  state  of 
my  body,  on  the  dark  side,  I  might  say, 

Quid  te  exempta  juvat  spinis  de  pluribus  una? 

The  nights  are  still  sleepless,  and  the  water  rises, 
though  it  does  not  rise  very  fast.  Let  us,  however, 
rejoice  in  all  the  good  that  we  have.  The  remis¬ 
sion  of  one  disease  will  enable  nature  to  combat 
the  rest.  The  squills  I  have  not  neglected;  for 
I  have  taken  more  than  a  hundred  drops  a 
day,  and  one  day  took  two  hundred  and  fifty, 
which,  according  to  the  popular  equivalence  of 
a  drop  to  a  grain,  is  more  than  half  an  ounce.  I 
thank  you,  dear  Sir,  for  your  attention  in  order¬ 
ing  the  medicines;  your  attention  to  me  has  never 
failed.  If  the  virtue  of  medicines  could  be  en¬ 
forced  by  the  benevolence  of  the  prescriber,  how 
soon  should  I  be  well.55 

August  19.  “The  relaxation  of  the  asthma  still 
continues,  yet  I  do  not  trust  it  wholly  to  itself, 
but  soothe  it  now  and  then  with  an  opiate.  I  not 
only  perform  the  perpetual  act  of  respiration 
with  less  labour,  but  I  can  walk  with  fewer  in¬ 
tervals  of  rest,  and  with  greater  freedom  of  mo¬ 
tion.  I  never  thought  well  of  Dr.  James’s  com¬ 
pounded  medicines;  his  ingredients  appeared  to 
me  sometimes  inefficacious  and  trifling,  and 
sometimes  heterogeneous  and  destructive  of  each 
other.  This  prescription  exhibits  a  composition 
of  about  three  hundred  and  thirty  grains,  in 
which  there  are  four  grains  of  emetick  tartar, 
and  six  drops  [of]  thebaick  tincture.  He  that 
writes  thus,  surely  writes  for  show.  The  basis  of 
his  medicine  is  the  gum  ammoniacum,  which 
dear  Dr.  Lawrence  used  to  give,  but  of  which  I 
never  saw  any  effect.  We  will,  if  you  please,  let 
this  medicine  alone.  The  squills  have  every  suf¬ 
frage,  and  in  the  squills  we  will  rest  for  the  pres¬ 
ent.55 

August  21.  “The  kindness  which  you  shew  by 
having  me  in  your  thoughts  upon  all  occasions, 
will,  I  hope,  always  fill  my  heart  with  gratitude. 
Be  pleased  to  return  my  thanks  to  Sir  George 
Baker,  for  the  consideration  which  he  has  be¬ 
stowed  upon  me.  Is  this  the  balloon  that  has  been 
so  long  expected,  this  balloon  to  which  I  sub¬ 
scribed,  but  without  payment?  It  is  a  pity  that 


1784] 

philosophers  have  been  disappointed,  and  shame 
that  they  have  been  cheated;  but  I  know  not 
well  how  to  prevent  either.  Of  this  experiment 
I  have  read  nothing;  where  was  it  exhibited?  and 
who  was  the  man  that  ran  away  with  so  much 
money?  Continue,  dear  Sir,  to  write  often  and 
more  at  a  time;  for  none  of  your  prescriptions 
operate  to  their  proper  uses  more  certainly  than 
your  letters  operate  as  cordials.55 

August  26.  “I  suffered  you  to  escape  last  post 
without  a  letter,  but  you  are  not  to  expect  such 
indulgence  very  often;  for  I  write  not  so  much 
because  I  have  any  thing  to  say,  as  because  I 
hope  for  an  answer;  and  the  vacancy  of  my  life 
here  makes  a  letter  of  great  value.  I  have  here 
little  company  and  little  amusement,  and  thus 
abandoned  to  the  contemplation  of  my  own  mis¬ 
eries,  I  am  sometimes  gloomy  and  depressed; 
this  too  I  resist  as  I  can,  and  find  opium,  I  think, 
useful,  but  I  seldom  take  more  than  one  grain. 
Is  not  this  strange  weather?  Winter  absorbed 
the  spring,  and  now  autumn  is  come  before  we 
have  had  summer.  But  let  not  our  kindness  for 
each  other  imitate  the  inconstancy  of  the  sea¬ 
sons.55 

Sept.  2.  “Mr.  Windham  has  been  here  to  see 
me;  he  came,  I  think,  forty  miles  out  of  his  way, 
and  staid  about  a  day  and  a  half;  perhaps  I  make 
the  time  shorter  than  it  was.  Such  conversation 
I  shall  not  have  again  till  I  come  back  to  the  re¬ 
gions  of  literature;  and  there  Windham  is,  inter 
Stellas 1  Luna  minor es”  He  then  mentions  the  effects 
of  certain  medicines,  as  taken;  that  “Nature  is 
recovering  its  original  powers,  and  the  functions 
returning  to  their  proper  state.  God  continue  his 
mercies,  and  grant  me  to  use  them  rightly.55 

Sept.  9.  “Do  you  know  the  Duke  and  Duchess 
of  Devonshire?  And  have  you  ever  seen  Chats- 
worth?  I  was  at  Chatsworth  on  Monday;  I  had 
indeed  seen  it  before,  but  never  when  its  owners 
were  at  home;  I  was  very  kindly  received,  and 
honestly  pressed  to  stay:  but  I  told  them  that  a 
sick  man  is  not  a  fit  inmate  of  a  great  house.  But 
I  hope  to  go  again  some  time.55 

Sept.  11.  “I  think  nothing  grows  worse,  but 
all  rather  better,  except  sleep,  and  that  of  late 
has  been  at  its  old  pranks.  Last  evening,  I  felt 
what  I  had  not  known  for  a  long  time,  an  in¬ 
clination  to  walk  for  amusement;  I  took  a  short 
walk,  and  came  back  again  neither  breathless 
nor  fatigued.  This  has  been  a  gloomy,  frigid,  un- 
genial  summer,  but  of  late  it  seems  to  mend;  I 

Tt  is  remarkable  that  so  good  a  Latin  scholar  as 
Johnson,  should  have  been  so  inattentive  to  the 
metre,  as  by  mistake  to  have  written  Stellas  instead 
of  ignes. 


559 

hear  the  heat  sometimes  mentioned,  but  I  do 
not  feel  it: 

Prater  ea  minimus  gelido  jam  in  cor  pore  sanguis 

Febre  calet  sold. - 

I  hope,  however,  with  good  help,  to  find  means 
of  supporting  a  winter  at  home,  and  to  hear  and 
tell  at  the  Club  what  is  doing,  and  what  ought 
to  be  doing  in  the  world.  I  have  no  company 
here,  and  shall  naturally  come  home  hungry  for 
conversation.  To  wish  you,  dear  Sir,  more  lei¬ 
sure,  would  not  be  kind;  but  what  leisure  you 
have,  you  must  bestow  upon  me.55 

Sept.  16.  “I  have  now  let  you  alone  for  a  long 
time,  having  indeed  little  to  say.  You  charge  me 
somewhat  unjustly  with  luxury.  At  Chatsworth, 
you  should  remember,  that  I  have  eaten  but 
once;  and  the  Doctor,  with  whom  I  live,  follows 
a  milk  diet.  I  grow  no  fatter,  though  my  stomach, 
if  it  be  not  disturbed  by  physick,  never  fails  me. 
I  now  grow  weary  of  solitude,  and  think  of  re¬ 
moving  next  week  to  Lichfield,  a  place  of  more 
society,  but  otherwise  of  less  convenience.  When 
I  am  settled,  I  shall  write  again.  Of  the  hot  weath¬ 
er  that  you  mention,  we  have  [not]  had  in  Der¬ 
byshire  very  much,  and  for  myself  I  seldom  feel 
heat,  and  suppose  that  my  frigidity  is  the  effect 
of  my  distemper;  a  supposition  which  naturally 
leads  me  to  hope  that  a  hotter  climate  may  be 
useful.  But  I  hope  to  stand  another  English  win¬ 
ter.55 

Lichfield,  Sept.  29.  “On  one  day  I  had  three 
letters  about  the  air-balloon:  yours  was  far  the 
best,  and  has  enabled  me  to  impart  to  my  friends 
in  the  country  an  idea  of  this  species  of  amuse¬ 
ment.  In  amusement,  mere  amusement,  I  am 
afraid  it  must  end,  for  I  do  not  find  that  its  course 
can  be  directed  so  as  that  it  should  serve  any 
purposes  of  communication;  and  it  can  give  no 
new  intelligence  of  the  state  of  the  air  at  differ¬ 
ent  heights,  till  they  have  ascended  above  the 
height  of  mountains,  which  they  seem  never  like¬ 
ly  to  do.  I  came  hither  on  the  27th.  How  long  I 
shall  stay  I  have  not  determined.  My  dropsy  is 
gone,  and  my  asthma  much  remitted,  but  I  have 
felt  myself  a  little  declining  these  two  days,  or  at 
least  to-day;  but  such  vicissitudes  must  be  ex¬ 
pected.  One  day  may  be  worse  than  another; 
but  this  last  month  is  far  better  than  the  former; 
if  the  next  should  be  as  much  better  than  this, 
I  shall  run  about  the  town  on  my  own  legs.55 

October  6.  “The  fate  of  the  balloon  I  do  not 
much  lament:  to  make  new  balloons,  is  to  re¬ 
peat  the  jest  again.  We  now  know  a  method  of 
mounting  into  the  air,  and,  I  think,  are  not  like¬ 
ly  to  know  more.  The  vehicles  can  serve  no  use 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


BOSWELL 


560 

till  we  can  guide  them;  and  they  can  gratify  no 
curiosity  till  we  mount  with  them  to  greater 
heights  than  we  can  reach  without;  till  we  rise 
above  the  tops  of  the  highest  mountains,  which 
we  have  yet  not  done.  We  know  the  state  of  the 
air  in  all  its  regions,  to  the  top  of  Teneriffe,  and 
therefore,  learn  nothing  from  those  who  navi¬ 
gate  a  balloon  below  the  clouds.  The  first  experi¬ 
ment,  however,  was  bold,  and  deserved  applause 
and  reward.  But  since  it  has  been  performed, 
and  its  event  is  known,  I  had  rather  now  find  a 
medicine  that  can  ease  an  asthma.” 

October  25.  “You  write  to  me  with  a  zeal  that 
animates,  and  a  tenderness  that  melts  me.  I  am 
not  afraid  either  of  a  journey  to  London,  or  a 
residence  in  it.  I  came  down  with  little  fatigue, 
and  am  now  not  weaker.  In  the  smoky  atmos¬ 
phere  I  was  delivered  from  the  dropsy,  which  I 
consider  as  the  original  and  radical  disease.  The 
town  is  my  element;1  there  are  my  friends,  there 
are  my  books,  to  which  I  have  not  yet  bid  fare¬ 
well,  and  there  are  my  amusements.  Sir  Joshua 
told  me  long  ago  that  my  vocation  was  to  pub- 
lick  life,  and  I  hope  still  to  keep  my  station,  till 
God  shall  bid  me  Go  in  peace.” 

To  Mr.  Hoole: 

Ashbourne,  Aug.  7.  “Since  I  was  here  I  have 
two  little  letters  from  you,  and  have  not  had  the 
gratitude  to  write.  But  every  man  is  most  free 
with  his  best  friends,  because  he  does  not  sup¬ 
pose  that  they  can  suspect  him  of  intentional  in¬ 
civility.  One  reason  for  my  omission  is,  that  be¬ 
ing  in  a  place  to  which  you  are  wholly  a  stranger, 
I  have  no  topicks  of  correspondence.  If  you  had 
any  knowledge  of  Ashbourne,  I  could  tell  you 
of  two  Ashbourne  men,  who,  being  last  week 
condemned  at  Derby  to  be  hanged  for  a  rob¬ 
bery,  went  and  hanged  themselves  in  their  cell. 
But  this,  however  it  may  supply  us  with  talk,  is 
nothing  to  you.  Your  kindness,  I  know,  would 
make  you  glad  to  hear  some  good  of  me,  but  I 
have  not  much  good  to  tell;  if  I  grow  not  worse, 
it  is  all  that  I  can  say.  I  hope  Mrs.  Hoole  re- 

*His  love  of  London  continually  appears.  In  a 
letter  from  him  to  Mrs.  Smart,  wife  of  his  friend 
the  Poet,  which  is  published  in  a  well-written  life 
of  him,  prefixed  to  an  edition  of  his  Poems,  in  1791, 
there  is  the  following  sentence: — “To  one  that  has 
passed  so  many  years  in  the  pleasures  and  opulence 
of  London,  there  are  few  places  that  can  give  much 
delight.” 

Once,  upon  reading  that  line  in  the  curious  epi¬ 
taph  quoted  in  The  Spectator , 

Born  in  New- England,  did  in  London  die; 
he  laughed  and  said,  “I  do  not  wonder  at  this.  It 
would  have  been  strange,  if  born  in  London,  he 
had  died  in  New-England.” 


[  1784 

ceives  more  help  from  her  migration.  Make  her 
my  compliments,  and  write  again  to,  dear  Sir, 
your  affectionate  servant.” 

Aug.  13.  “I  thank  you  for  your  affectionate 
letter.  I  hope  we  shall  both  be  the  better  for  each 
other’s  friendship,  and  I  hope  we  shall  not  very 
quickly  be  parted.  Tell  Mr.  Nicholls  that  I  shall 
be  glad  of  his  correspondence,  when  his  business 
allows  him  a  little  remission;  though  to  wish  him 
less  business,  that  I  may  have  more  pleasure, 
would  be  too  selfish.  To  pay  for  seats  at  the  bal¬ 
loon  is  not  very  necessary,  because  in  less  than 
a  minute,  they  who  gaze  at  a  mile’s  distance  will 
see  all  that  can  be  seen.  About  the  wings  I  am 
of  your  mind;  they  cannot  at  all  assist  it,  nor  I 
think  regulate  its  motion.  I  am  now  grown  some¬ 
what  easier  in  my  body,  but  my  mind  is  some¬ 
times  depressed.  About  the  Club  I  am  in  no 
great  pain.  The  forfeitures  go  on,  and  the  house, 
I  hear,  is  improved  for  future  meetings.  I  hope 
we  shall  meet  often  and  sit  long.” 

Sept.  4.  “Your  letter  was,  indeed,  long  in  com¬ 
ing,  but  it  was  very  welcome.  Our  acquaintance 
has  now  subsisted  long,  and  our  recollection  of 
each  other  involves  a  great  space,  and  many  little 
occurrences,  which  melt  the  thoughts  to  tender¬ 
ness.  Write  to  me,  therefore,  as  frequently  as  you 
can.  I  hear  from  Dr.  Brocklesby  and  Mr.  Ry- 
land,  that  the  club  is  not  crouded.  I  hope  we 
shall  enliven  it  when  winter  brings  us  together.” 

To  Dr.  Burney: 

August  2.  “The  weather,  you  know,  has  not 
been  balmy;  I  am  now  reduced  to  think,  and 
am  at  last  content  to  talk  of  the  weather.  Pride 
must  have  a  fall.  I  have  lost  dear  Mr.  Allen,  and 
wherever  I  turn,  the  dead  or  the  dying  meet  my 
notice,  and  force  my  attention  upon  misery  and 
mortality.  Mrs.  Burney’s  escape  from  so  much 
danger,  ancTher  ease  after  so  much  pain,  throws, 
however,  some  radiance  of  hope  upon  the  gloomy 
prospect.  May  her  recovery  be  perfect,  and  her 
continuance  long.  I  struggle  hard  for  life.  I  take 
physick,  and  take  air;  my  friend’s  chariot  is  al¬ 
ways  ready.  We  have  run  this  morning  twenty- 
four  miles,  and  could  run  forty-eight  more.  But 
who  can  run  the  race  with  death?” 

Sept.  4.  [Concerning  a  private  transaction,  in 
which  his  opinion  was  asked,  and  after  giving  it 
he  makes  the  following  reflections,  which  are  ap¬ 
plicable  on  other  occasions.]  “Nothing  deserves 
more  compassion  than  wrong  conduct  with  good 
meaning;  than  loss  or  obloquy  suffered  by  one 
who,  as  he  is  conscious  only  of  good  intentions, 
wonders  why  he  loses  that  kindness  which  he 
wishes  to  preserve;  and  not  knowing  his  own 


1784]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  561 


fault,  if,  as  may  sometimes  happen,  nobody  will 
tell  him,  goes  on  to  offend  by  his  endeavours  to 
please.  I  am  delighted  by  finding  that  our  opin¬ 
ions  are  the  same.  You  will  do  me  a  real  kindness 
by  continuing  to  write.  A  post-day  has  now  been 
long  a  day  of  recreation.” 

Nov.  1.  “Our  correspondence  paused  for  want 
of  topicks.  I  had  said  what  I  had  to  say  on  the 
matter  proposed  to  my  consideration;  and  noth¬ 
ing  remained  but  to  tell  you,  that  I  waked  or 
slept;  that  I  was  more  or  less  sick.  I  drew  my 
thoughts  in  upon  myself,  and  supposed  yours  em¬ 
ployed  upon  your  book.  That  your  book  has  been 
delayed  I  am  glad,  since  you  have  gained  an  op¬ 
portunity  of  being  more  exact.  Of  the  caution 
necessary  in  adjusting  narratives  there  is  no  end. 
Some  tell  what  they  do  not  know,  that  they  may 
not  seem  ignorant,  and  others  from  mere  indif¬ 
ference  about  truth.  All  truth  is  not,  indeed,  of 
equal  importance;  but,  if  little  violations  are  al¬ 
lowed,  every  violation  will  in  time  be  thought 
little;  and  a  writer  should  keep  himself  vigilant¬ 
ly  on  his  guard  against  the  first  temptations  to 
negligence  or  supineness.  I  had  ceased  to  write, 
because  respecting  you  I  had  no  more  to  say, 
and  respecting  myself  could  say  little  good.  I  can¬ 
not  boast  of  advancement,  and  in  cases  of  con¬ 
valescence  it  may  be  said,  with  few  exceptions, 
non progredi ,  est  regredi .  I  hope  I  may  be  excepted. 
My  great  difficulty  was  with  my  sweet  Fanny,1 
who,  by  her  artifice  of  inserting  her  letter  in  yours, 
had  given  me  a  precept  of  frugality  which  I  was 
not  at  liberty  to  neglect;  and  I  know  not  who 
were  in  town  under  whose  cover  I  could  send 
my  letter.  I  rejoice  to  hear  that  you  are  all  so 
well,  and  have  a  delight  particularlysympathet- 
ick  in  the  recovery  of  Mrs.  Burney.” 

To  Mr.  Langton: 

Aug.  25.  “The  kindness  of  your  last  letter,  and 
my  omission  to  answer  it,  begins  to  give  you, 
even  in  my  opinion,  a  right  to  recriminate,  and 
to  charge  me  with  forgetfulness  for  the  absent. 
I  will,  therefore,  delay  no  longer  to  give  an  ac¬ 
count  of  myself,  and  wish  I  could  relate  what 
would  please  either  myself  or  my  friend.  On  July 
13,  I  left  London,  partly  in  hope  of  help  from 
new  air  and  change  of  place,  and  partly  excited 
by  the  sick  man’s  impatience  of  the  present.  I 
got  to  Lichfield  in  a  stage  vehicle,  with  very  little 
fatigue,  in  two  days,  and  had  the  consolation  to 
find,  that  since  my  last  visit  my  three  old  ac¬ 
quaintance  are  all  dead.  July  20,  I  went  to  Ash¬ 
bourne,  where  I  have  been  till  now;  the  house 
in  which  we  live  is  repairing.  I  live  in  too  much 

xThe  celebrated  Miss  Fanny  Burney. 


solitude,  and  am  often  deeply  dejected:  I  wish 
we  were  nearer,  and  rejoice  in  your  removal  to 
London.  A  friend,  at  once  cheerful  and  serious, 
is  a  great  acquisition.  Let  us  not  neglect  one  an¬ 
other  for  the  little  time  which  Providence  allows 
us  to  hope.  Of  my  health  I  cannot  tell  you,  what 
my  wishes  persuaded  me  to  expect,  that  it  is  much 
improved  by  the  season  or  by  remedies.  I  am 
sleepless;  my  legs  grow  weary  with  a  very  few 
steps,  and  the  water  breaks  its  boundaries  in 
some  degree.  The  asthma,  however,  has  remit¬ 
ted;  my  breath  is  still  much  obstructed,  but  is 
more  free  than  it  was.  Nights  of  watchfulness  pro¬ 
duce  torpid  days;  I  read  very  little,  though  I  am 
alone;  for  I  am  tempted  to  supply  in  the  day 
what  I  lost  in  bed.  This  is  my  history;  like  all 
other  histories,  a  narrative  of  misery.  Yet  am  I 
so  much  better  than  in  the  beginning  of  the  year, 
that  I  ought  to  be  ashamed  of  complaining.  I 
now  sit  and  write  with  very  little  sensibility  of 
pain  or  weakness;  but  when  I  rise,  I  shall  find 
my  legs  betraying  me.  Of  the  money  which  you 
mentioned,  I  have  no  immediate  need;  keep  it, 
however,  for  me,  unless  some  exigence  requires 
it.  Your  papers  I  will  shew  you  certainly  when 
you  would  see  them,  but  I  am  a  little  angry  at 
you  for  not  keeping  minutes  of  your  own  acceptum 
et  expensurn ,  and  think  a  litde  time  might  be  spared 
from  Aristophanes,  for  the  res  familiares.  Forgive 
me  for  I  mean  well.  I  hope,  dear  Sir,  that  you 
and  Lady  Rothes,  and  all  the  young  people,  too 
many  to  enumerate,  are  well  and  happy.  God 
bless  you  all.” 

To  Mr.  Windham: 

August.  “The  tenderness  with  which  you  have 
been  pleased  to  treat  me,  through  my  long  ill¬ 
ness,  neither  health  nor  sickness  can,  I  hope, 
make  me  forget;  and  you  are  not  to  suppose, 
that  after  we  parted  you  were  no  longer  in  my 
mind.  But  what  can  a  sick  man  say,  but  that  he 
is  sick?  His  thoughts  are  necessarily  concentered 
in  himself;  he  neither  receives  nor  can  give  de¬ 
light;  his  inquiries  are  after  alleviations  of  pain, 
and  his  efforts  are  to  catch  some  momentary  com¬ 
fort.  Though  I  am  now  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
the  Peak,  you  must  expect  no  account  of  its  won¬ 
ders,  of  its  hills,  its  waters,  its  caverns,  or  its  mines ; 
but  I  will  tell  you,  dear  Sir,  what  I  hope  you  will 
not  hear  with  less  satisfaction,  that,  for  about  a 
week  past,  my  asthma  has  been  less  afflictive.” 

Lichfield.  October  2.  “I  believe  you  have  been 
long  enough  acquainted  with  the  phenomena  of 
sickness,  not  to  be  surprised  that  a  sick  man  wish¬ 
es  to  be  where  he  is  not,  and  where  it  appears  to 
every  body  but  himself  that  he  might  easily  be, 


562 

without  having  the  resolution  to  remove.  I 
thought  Ashbourne  a  solitary  place,  but  did  not 
come  hither  till  last  Monday.  1  have  here  more 
company,  but  my  health  has  for  this  last  week 
not  advanced;  and  in  the  languor  of  disease  how 
little  can  be  done?  Whither  or  when  I  shall  make 
my  next  remove  I  cannot  tell;  but  I  entreat  you, 
dear  Sir,  to  let  me  know,  from  time  to  time,  where 
you  may  be  found,  for  your  residence  is  a  very 
powerful  attractive  to,  Sir,  your  most  humble 
servant.” 

To  Mr.  Perkins 

Dear  Sir,  I  cannot  but  flatter  myself  that 
youi  kindness  for  me  will  make  you  glad  to 
know  where  I  am,  and  in  what  state. 

I  have  been  struggling  very  hard  with  my 
diseases.  My  breath  has  been  very  much  ob¬ 
structed,  and  the  water  has  attempted  to  en¬ 
croach  upon  me  again.  I  past  the  first  part  of 
the  summer  at  Oxford,  afterwards  I  went  to 
Lichfield,  thence  to  Ashbourne,  in  Derbyshire, 
and  a  week  ago  I  returned  to  Lichfield. 

My  breath  is  now  much  easier,  and  the  water 
is  in  a  great  measure  run  away,  so  that  I  hope  to 
see  you  again  before  winter. 

Please  to  make  my  compliments  to  Mrs.  Per¬ 
kins,  and  to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Barclay.  I  am,  dear 
Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

Lichfield,  Oct .  4,  1784 

To  the  Right  Hon. 

William  Gerard  Hamilton 

Dear  Sir,  Considering  what  reason  you  gave 
me  in  the  spring  to  conclude  that  you  took  part 
in  whatever  good  or  evil  might  befal  me,  I 
ought  not  to  have  omitted  so  long  the  account 
which  I  am  now  about  to  give  you.  My  diseases 
are  an  asthma  and  a  dropsy,  and,  what  is  less 
curable,  seventy-five.  Of  the  dropsy,  in  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  the  summer,  or  in  the  spring,  I  recov¬ 
ered  to  a  degree  which  struck  with  wonder  both 
me  and  my  physicians:  the  asthma  now  is  like¬ 
wise,  for  a  time,  very  much  relieved.  I  went  to 
Oxford,  where  the  asthma  was  very  tyrannical, 
and  the  dropsy  began  again  to  threaten  me;  but 
seasonable  physick  stopped  the  inundation:  I 
then  returned  to  London,  and  in  July  took  a 
resolution  to  visit  Staffordshire  and  Derbyshire, 
where  I  am  yet  struggling  with  my  diseases.  The 
dropsy  made  another  attack,  and  was  not  easily 
ejected,  but  at  last  gave  way.  The  asthma  sud¬ 
denly  remitted  in  bed,  on  the  13th  of  August, 
and,  though  now  very  oppressive,  is,  I  think, 
still  something  gentler  than  it  was  before  the  re¬ 
mission.  My  limbs  are  miserably  debilitated, 
and  my  nights  are  sleepless  and  tedious.  When 
you  read  this,  dear  Sir,  you  are  not  sorry  that  I 
wrote  no  sooner.  I  will  not  prolong  my  com¬ 
plaints.  I  hope  still  to  see  you  in  a  happier  hour ,  to 
talk  over  what  we  have  often  talked,  and  per- 


[  1784 

haps  to  find  new  topicks  of  merriment,  or  new 
incitements  to  curiosity.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  &c. 

Sam.  Johnson 

Lichfield,  Oct.  20,  1784 

To  John  Paradise,  Esq.1 

Dear  Sir,  Though  in  all  my  summer’s  excur¬ 
sion  1  have  given  you  no  account  of  myself,  I 
hope  you  think  better  of  me  than  to  imagine  it 
possible  for  me  to  forget  you,  whose  kindness  to 
me  has  been  too  great  and  too  constant  not  to 
have  made  its  impression  on  a  harder  breast 
than  mine.  Silence  is  not  very  culpable  when 
nothing  pleasing  is  suppressed.  It  would  have 
alleviated  none  of  your  complaints  to  have  read 
my  vicissitudes  of  evil.  I  have  struggled  hard 
with  very  formidable  and  obstinate  maladies; 
and  though  I  cannot  talk  of  health,  think  all 
praise  due  to  my  Creator  and  Preserver  for  the 
continuance  of  my  life.  The  dropsy  has  made 
two  attacks,  and  has  given  way  to  medicine;  the 
asthma  is  very  oppressive,  but  that  has  likewise 
once  remitted.  I  am  very  weak,  and  very  sleep¬ 
less;  but  it  is  time  to  conclude  the  tale  of  misery. 
I  hope,  dear  Sir,  that  you  grow  better,  for  you 
have  likewise  your  share  of  human  evil,  and 
that  your  lady  and  the  young  charmers  are 
well.  I  am,  dear  Sir,  &c. 

Sam.  Johnson 

Lichfield,  Oct.  20,  1784 

To  Mr.  George  Nicol2 

Dear  Sir,  Since  we  parted,  I  have  been  much 
oppressed  by  my  asthma,  but  it  has  lately  been 
less  laborious.  When  I  sit  I  am  almost  at  ease, 
and  I  can  walk,  though  yet  very  little,  with  less 
difficulty  for  this  week  past,  than  before.  I  hope 
I  shall  again  enjoy  my  friends,  and  that  you  and 
I  shall  have  a  little  more  literary  conversation. 
Where  I  now  am,  every  thing  is  very  liberally 
provided  for  me  but  conversation.  My  friend  is 
sick  himself,  and  the  reciprocation  of  complaints 
and  groans  affords  not  much  of  either  pleasure 
or  instruction.  What  we  have  not  at  home  this 
town  does  not  supply,  and  I  shall  be  glad  of  a 
little  imported  intelligence,  and  hope  that  you 
will  bestow,  now  and  then,  a  little  time  on  the 
relief  and  entertainment  of,  Sir,  yours,  &c. 

Sam.  Johnson 

Ashbourne,  Aug.  19,  1784 

To  Mr.  Cruikshank 

Dear  Sir.  Do  not  suppose  that  I  forget  you;  1 
hope  I  shall  never  be  accused  of  forgetting  my 

*Son  of  the  late  Peter  Paradise,  Esq.,  his  Britan- 
nick  Majesty’s  Counsul  at  Salonica,  in  Macedonia, 
by  his  lady,  a  native  of  that  country.  He  studied  at 
Oxford,  and  has  been  honoured  by  that  Univer¬ 
sity  with  the  degree  of  LL.D.  He  is  distinguished 
not  only  by  his  learning  and  talents,  but  by  an 
amiable  disposition,  gentleness  of  manners,  and  a 
very  general  acquaintance  with  well-informed  and 
accomplished  persons  of  almost  all  nations. 

2Bookseller  to  his  Majesty. 


BOSWELL 


1784]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  563 


benefactors.  I  had,  till  lately,  nothing  to  write 
but  complaints  upon  complaints,  of  miseries 
upon  miseries;  but  within  this  fortnight  I  have 
received  great  relief.  Have  your  Lectures  any 
vacation?  If  you  are  released  from  the  necessity 
of  daily  study,  you  may  find  time  for  a  letter  to 
me.  [In  this  letter  he  states  the  particulars  of  his 
case.]  In  return  for  this  account  of  my  health, 
let  me  have  a  good  account  of  yours,  and  of 
your  prosperity  in  all  your  undertakings.  I  am, 
dear  Sir,  yours,  &c. 

Sam.  Johnson 

Ashbourne,  Sept.  4,  1784 

To  Mr.  Thomas  Davies: 

August  14.  “The  tenderness  with  which  you 
always  treat  me,  makes  me  culpable  in  my  own 
eyes  for  having  omitted  to  write  in  so  long  a 
separation;  I  had,  indeed,  nothing  to  say  that 
you  could  wish  to  hear.  All  has  been  hitherto 
misery  accumulated  upon  misery,  disease  cor¬ 
roborating  disease,  till  yesterday  my  asthma  was 
perceptibly  and  unexpectedly  mitigated.  I  am 
much  comforted  with  this  short  relief,  and  am 
willing  to  flatter  myself  that  it  may  continue  and 
improve.  I  have  at  present,  such  a  degree  of  ease, 
as  not  only  may  admit  the  comforts,  but  the 
duties  of  life.  Make  my  compliments  to  Mrs.  Da¬ 
vies.  Poor  dear  Allen,  he  was  a  good  man.55 

To  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds: 

Ashbourne,  July  21.  “The  tenderness  with 
which  I  am  treated  by  my  friends,  makes  it  rea¬ 
sonable  to  suppose  that  they  are  desirous  to  know 
the  state  of  my  health,  and  a  desire  so  benevolent 
ought  to  be  gratified.  I  came  to  Lichfield  in  two 
days  without  any  painful  fatigue,  and  on  Mon¬ 
day  came  hither,  where  I  purpose  to  stay  and 
try  what  air  and  regularity  will  effect.  I  cannot 
yet  persuade  myself  that  I  have  made  much 
progress  in  recovery.  My  sleep  is  little,  my  breath 
is  very  much  encumbered,  and  my  legs  are  very 
weak.  The  water  has  encreased  a  little,  but  has 
again  run  off.  The  most  distressing  symptom  is 
want  of  sleep.55 

August  19.  “Having  had  since  our  separation, 
little  to  say  that  could  please  you  or  myself  by 
saying,  I  have  not  been  lavish  of  useless  letters; 
but  I  flatter  myself  that  you  will  partake  of  the 
pleasure  with  which  I  can  now  tell  you  that  about 
a  week  ago,  I  felt  suddenly  a  sensible  remission 
of  my  asthma,  and  consequently  a  greater  light¬ 
ness  of  action  and  motion.  Of  this  grateful  alle¬ 
viation  I  know  not  the  cause,  nor  dare  depend 
upon  its  continuance,  but  while  it  lasts  I  en¬ 
deavour  to  enjoy  it,  and  am  desirous  of  com¬ 
municating,  while  it  lasts,  my  pleasure  to  my 


friends.  Hitherto,  dear  Sir,  I  had  written  before 
the  post,  which  stays  in  this  town  but  a  little 
while,  brought  me  your  letter.  Mr.  Davies  seems 
to  have  represented  my  little  tendency  to  re¬ 
covery  in  terms  too  splendid.  I  am  still  restless, 
still  weak,  still  watery,  but  the  asthma  is  less  op¬ 
pressive.  Poor  Ramsay  \l  On  which  side  soever 
I  turn,  mortality  presents  its  formidable  frown. 
I  left  three  old  friends  at  Lichfield  when  1  was 
last  there,  and  now  found  them  all  dead.  I  no 
sooner  lose  sight  of  dear  Allen,  than  I  am  told 
that  I  shall  see  him  no  more.  That  we  must  all 
die,  we  always  knew;  I  wish  I  had  sooner  re¬ 
membered  it.  Do  not  think  me  intrusive  or  im¬ 
portunate,  if  I  now  call,  dear  Sir,  on  you  to  re¬ 
member  it.55 

Sept.  2.  “I  am  glad  that  a  little  favour  from 
the  court  has  intercepted  your  furious  purposes. 
I  could  not  in  any  case  have  approved  such  pub- 
lick  violence  of  resentment,  and  should  have  con¬ 
sidered  any  who  encouraged  it,  as  rather  seeking 
sport  for  themselves,  than  honour  for  you.  Re¬ 
sentment  gratifies  him  who  intended  an  injury, 
and  pains  him  unjustly  who  did  not  intend  it. 
But  all  this  is  now  superfluous.  I  still  continue 
by  God’s  mercy  to  mend.  My  breath  is  easier, 
my  nights  are  quieter,  and  my  legs  are  less  in 
bulk,  and  stronger  in  use.  I  have,  however,  yet 
a  great  deal  to  overcome,  before  I  can  yet  attain 
even  an  old  man’s  health.  Write,  do  write  to  me 
now  and  then ;  we  are  now  old  acquaintance,  and 
perhaps  few  people  have  lived  so  much  and  so 
long  together,  with  less  cause  of  complaint  on 
either  side.  The  retrospection  of  this  is  very  pleas¬ 
ant,  and  I  hope  we  shall  never  think  on  each 
other  with  less  kindness.55 

Sept.  9.  “I  could  not  answer  your  letter  be¬ 
fore  this  day,  because  I  went  on  the  sixth  to  Chats- 
worth,  and  did  not  come  back  till  the  post  was 
gone.  Many  words,  I  hope,  are  not  necessary  be¬ 
tween  you  and  me,  to  convince  you  what  grati¬ 
tude  is  excited  in  my  heart,  by  the  Chancellor’s 
liberality  and  your  kind  offices.  I  did  not  indeed 
expect  that  what  was  asked  by  the  Chancellor 
would  have  been  refused,  but  since  it  has,  we 
will  not  tell  that  any  thing  has  been  asked.  I  have 
enclosed  a  letter  to  the  Chancellor  which,  when 
you  have  read  it,  you  will  be  pleased  to  seal  with 
a  head,  or  other  general  seal,  and  convey  it  to 
him;  had  I  sent  it  directly  to  him,  I  should  have 
seemed  to  overlook  the  favour  of  your  interven¬ 
tion.  My  last  letter  told  you  of  my  advance  in 
health,  which,  I  think,  in  the  whole  still  contin- 

1Allan  Ramsay,  Esq.,  painter  to  his  Majesty, 
who  died  Aug.  1  o,  1 784,  in  the  71st  year  of  his  age, 
much  regretted  by  his  friends. 


BOSWELL 


564 

ues.  Of  the  hydropick  tumour  there  is  now  very 
little  appearance;  the  asthma  is  much  less  trou¬ 
blesome,  and  seems  to  remit  something  day  after 
day.  I  do  not  despair  of  supporting  an  English 
winter.  At  Chatsworth,  I  met  young  Mr.  Burke, 
who  led  me  very  commodiously  into  conversa¬ 
tion  with  the  Duke  and  Duchess.  We  had  a  very 
good  morning.  The  dinner  was  publick.” 

Sept.  18.  “I  flattered  myself  that  this  week 
would  have  given  me  a  letter  from  you,  but  none 
has  come.  Write  to  me  now  and  then,  but  direct 
your  next  to  Lichfield.  I  think,  and  I  hope,  am 
sure,  that  I  still  grow  better;  I  have  sometimes 
good  nights;  but  am  still  in  my  legs  weak,  but  so 
much  mended,  that  I  go  to  Lichfield  in  hope  of 
being  able  to  pay  my  visits  on  foot,  for  there  are 
no  coaches.  I  have  three  letters  this  day,  all  about 
the  balloon,  I  could  have  been  content  with  one. 
Do  not  write  about  the  balloon,  whatever  else 
you  may  think  proper  to  say.” 

October  2.  “I  am  always  proud  of  your  ap¬ 
probation,  and  therefore  was  much  pleased  that 
you  liked  my  letter.  When  you  copied  it,  you  in¬ 
vaded  the  Chancellor’s  right  rather  than  mine. 
The  refusal  I  did  not  expect,  but  I  had  never 
thought  much  about  it,  for  I  doubted  whether 
the  Chancellor  had  so  much  tenderness  for  me 
as  to  ask.  He,  being  keeper  of  the  King’s  con¬ 
science,  ought  not  to  be  supposed  capable  of  an 
improper  petition.  All  is  not  gold  that  glitters, 
as  we  have  often  been  told;  and  the  adage  is  veri¬ 
fied  in  your  place  and  my  favour;  but  if  what 
happens  does  not  make  us  richer,  we  must  bid 
it  welcome,  if  it  makes  us  wiser.  I  do  not  at  pres¬ 
ent  grow  better,  nor  much  worse;  my  hopes,  how¬ 
ever,  are  somewhat  abated,  and  a  very  great  loss 
is  the  loss  of  hope,  but  I  struggle  on  as  I  can.” 

To  Mr.  John  Nichols: 

Lichfield,  Oct.  20.  “When  you  were  here,  you 
were  pleased,  as  I  am  told,  to  think  my  absence 
an  inconvenience.  I  should  certainly  have  been 
very  glad  to  give  so  skilful  a  lover  of  antiquities 
any  information  about  my  native  place,  of  which, 
however,  I  know  not  much,  and  have  reason  to 
believe  that  not  much  is  known.  Though  I  have 
not  given  you  any  amusement,  I  have  received 
amusement  from  you.  At  Ashbourne,  where  1 
had  very  little  company,  I  had  the  luck  to  bor¬ 
row  Mr.  Bowyefs  Life ;  a  book  so  full  of  contem¬ 
porary  history,  that  a  literary  man  must  find  some 
of  his  old  friends.  I  thought  that  I  could,  now 
and  then,  have  told  you  some  hints  worth  your 
notice;  and  perhaps  we  may  talk  a  life  over.  I 
hope  we  shall  be  much  together;  you  must  now 
be  to  me  what  you  were  before,  and  what  dear 


[  1784 

Mr.  Allan  was,  besides.  He  was  taken  unexpect¬ 
edly  away,  but  I  think  he  was  a  very  good  man. 
I  have  made  little  progress  in  recovery.  I  am 
very  weak,  and  very  sleepless;  but  I  live  on  and 
hope.” 

This  various  mass  of  correspondence,  which  I 
have  thus  brought  together,  is  valuable,  both  as 
an  addition  to  the  store  which  the  publick  al¬ 
ready  has  of  Johnson’s  writings,  and  as  exhibit¬ 
ing  a  genuine  and  noble  specimen  of  vigour  and 
vivacity  of  mind,  which  neither  age  nor  sickness 
could  impair  or  diminish. 

It  may  be  observed,  that  his  writing  in  every 
way,  whether  for  the  publick,  or  privately  to  his 
friends,  was  by  fits  and  starts;  for  we  see  frequent¬ 
ly,  that  many  letters  are  written  on  the  same 
day.  When  he  had  once  overcome  his  aversion 
to  begin,  he  was,  I  suppose,  desirous  to  go  on,  in 
order  to  relieve  his  mind  from  the  uneasy  re¬ 
flection  of  delaying  what  he  ought  to  do. 

While  in  the  country,  notwithstanding  the  ac¬ 
cumulation  of  illness  which  he  endured,  his  mind 
did  not  lose  its  powers.  He  translated  an  Ode  of 
Horace,  which  is  printed  in  his  Works ,  and  com¬ 
posed  several  prayers.  I  shall  insert  one  of  them, 
which  is  so  wise  and  energetick,  so  philosophical 
and  so  pious,  that  I  doubt  not  of  its  affording 
consolation  to  many  a  sincere  Christian,  when 
in  a  state  of  mind  to  which  I  believe  the  best  are 
sometimes  liable.1 

And  here  I  am  enabled  fully  to  refute  a  very 
unjust  reflection,  by  Sir  John  Hawkins,  both 
against  Dr.  Johnson,  and  his  faithful  servant,  Mr. 
Francis  Barber;  as  if  both  of  them  had  been 
guilty  of  culpable  neglect  towards  a  person  of 
the  name  of  Heely,  whom  Sir  John  chooses  to 
call  a  relation  of  Dr.  Johnson’s.  The  fact  is,  that 
Mr.  Heely  was  not  his  relation;  he  had  indeed 
been  married  to  one  of  his  cousins,  but  she  had 

1  Against  inquisitive  and  perplexing  thoughts.  “O  Lord, 
my  Maker  and  Protector,  who  hast  graciously  sent 
me  into  this  world  to  work  out  my  salvation,  en¬ 
able  me  to  drive  from  me  all  such  unquiet  and  per¬ 
plexing  thoughts  as  may  mislead  or  hinder  me  in 
the  practice  of  those  duties  which  Thou  hast  re¬ 
quired.  When  I  behold  the  works  of  thy  hands, 
and  consider  the  course  of  thy  providence,  give  me 
grace  always  to  remember  that  thy  thoughts  are 
not  my  thoughts,  nor  thy  ways  my  ways.  And  while 
it  shall  please  Thee  to  continue  me  in  this  world, 
where  much  is  to  be  done,  and  little  to  be  known, 
teach  me  by  thy  Holy  Spirit,  to  withdraw  my  mind 
from  unprofitable  and  dangerous  inquiries,  from 
difficulties  vainly  curious,  and  doubts  impossible 
to  be  solved.  Let  me  rejoice  in  the  light  which 
Thou  hast  imparted,  let  me  serve  Thee  with  active 
zeal  and  humble  confidence,  and  wait  with  patient 
expectation  for  the  time  in  which  the  soul  which 
Thou  receivest  shall  be  satisfied  with  knowledge. 
Grant  this,  O  Lord,  for  Jesus  Christ’s  sake.  Amen.” 


1784] 

died  without  having  children,  and  he  had  mar¬ 
ried  another  woman;  so  that  even  the  slight  con¬ 
nection  which  there  once  had  been  by  alliance 
was  dissolved.  Dr.  Johnson,  who  had  shewn  very 
great  liberality  to  this  man  while  his  first  wife 
was  alive,  as  has  appeared  in  a  former  part  of 
this  work,1  was  humane  and  charitable  enough 
to  continue  his  bounty  to  him  occasionally;  but 
surely  there  was  no  strong  call  of  duty  upon  him 
or  upon  his  legatee,  to  do  more.  The  following 
letter,  obligingly  communicated  to  me  by  Mr. 
Andrew  Strahan,  will  confirm  what  I  have 
stated : 

To  Mr.  Heely,  No.  5,  in  Pye-street, 
Westminster 

Sir,  As  necessity  obliges  you  to  call  so  soon 
again  upon  me,  you  should  at  least  have  told 
the  smallest  sum  that  will  supply  your  present 
want;  you  cannot  suppose  that  I  have  much  to 
spare.  Two  guineas  is  as  much  as  you  ought  to 
be  behind  with  your  creditor.  If  you  wait  on 
Mr.  Strahan,  in  New-street,  Fetter -lane,  or  in 
his  absence,  on  Mr.  Andrew  Strahan,  shew  this, 
by  which  they  are  entreated  to  advance  you 
two  guineas,  and  to  keep  this  as  a  voucher.  I 
am,  Sir,  your  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

Ashbourne,  Aug .  12,  1784 

Indeed  it  is  very  necessary  to  keep  in  mind  that 
Sir  John  Hawkins  has  unaccountably  viewed 
Johnson’s  character  and  conduct  in  almost  every 
particular,  with  an  unhappy  prejudice.2 

JSee  p.  152. 

2I  shall  add  one  instance  only  to  those  which  I 
have  thought  it  incumbent  on  me  to  point  out. 
Talking  of  Mr.  Garrick’s  having  signified  his  will¬ 
ingness  to  let  Johnson  have  the  loan  of  any  of  his 
books  to  assist  him  in  his  edition  of  Shakspeare; 
Sir  John  says,  (p.  444,)  “Mr.  Garrick  knew  not 
what  risque  he  ran  by  this  offer.  Johnson  had  so 
strange  a  forgetfulness  of  obligations  of  this  sort, 
that  few  who  lent  him  books  ever  saw  them  again.” 
This  surely  conveys  a  most  unfavourable  insinua¬ 
tion,  and  has  been  so  understood.  Sir  John  men¬ 
tions  the  single  case  of  a  curious  edition  of  Politian 
[ante,  p.  20],  which  he  tells  us,  “appeared  to  belong 
to  Pembroke  College,  and  which,  probably,  had 
been  considered  by  Johnson  as  his  own,  for  up¬ 
wards  of  fifty  years.”  Would  it  not  be  fairer  to  con¬ 
sider  this  as  an  inadvertence,  and  draw  no  general 
inference?  The  truth  is,  that  Johnson  was  so  atten¬ 
tive,  that  in  one  of  his  manuscripts  in  my  posses¬ 
sion,  he  has  marked  in  two  columns,  books  bor¬ 
rowed,  and  books  lent. 

In  Sir  John  Hawkins’s  compilation,  there  are, 
however,  some  passages  concerning  Johnson  which 
have  unquestionable  merit.  One  of  them  I  shall 
transcribe,  in  justice  to  a  writer  whom  I  have  had 
too  much  occasion  to  censure,  and  to  shew  my  fair¬ 
ness  as  the  biographer  of  my  illustrious  friend: 
“There  was  wanting  in  his  conduct  and  behaviour. 


565 

We  now  behold  Johnson  for  the  last  time,  in 
his  native  city,  for  which  he  ever  retained  a  warm 
affection,  and  which,  by  a  sudden  apostrophe, 
under  the  word  Lich ,  he  introduces  with  rever¬ 
ence,  into  his  immortal  Work,  The  English  Dic¬ 
tionary: — Salve ,  magna  parens'?  While  here,  he 
felt  a  revival  of  all  the  tenderness  of  filial  affec¬ 
tion,  an  instance  of  which  appeared  in  his  order¬ 
ing  the  grave-stone  and  inscription  over  Eliza¬ 
beth  Blaney4  to  be  substantially  and  carefully 
renewed. 

To  Mr.  Henry  White,  a  young  clergyman, 
with  whom  he  now  formed  an  intimacy,  so  as  to 
talk  to  him  with  great  freedom,  he  mentioned 
that  he  could  not  in  general  accuse  himself  of 
having  been  an  undutiful  son.  “Once,  indeed, 
(said  he,)  I  was  disobedient;  I  refused  to  attend 
my  father  to  Uttoxeter-market.  Pride  was  the 
source  of  that  refusal,  and  the  remembrance  of 
it  was  painful.  A  few  years  ago,  I  desired  to  atone 
for  this  fault;  I  went  to  Uttoxeter  in  very  bad 
weather,  and  stood  for  a  considerable  time  bare¬ 
headed  in  the  rain,  on  the  spot  where  my  father’s 
stall  used  to  stand.  In  contrition  I  stood,  and  I 
hope  the  penance  was  expiatory.” 

that  dignity  which  results  from  a  regular  and  or¬ 
derly  course  of  action,  and  by  an  irresistible  power 
commands  esteem.  He  could  not  be  said  to  be  a 
stayed  man,  nor  so  to  have  adjusted  in  his  mind  the 
balance  of  reason  and  passion,  as  to  give  occasion 
to  say  what  may  be  observed  of  some  men,  that  all 
they  do  is  just,  fit,  and  right.”  [Hawkins’s  Johnson , 
p.  409.]  Yet  a  judicious  friend  well  suggests,  “It 
might,  however,  have  been  added,  that  such  men 
are  often  merely  just,  and  rigidly  correct,  while 
their  hearts  are  cold  and  unfeeling;  and  that  John¬ 
son’s  virtues  were  of  a  much  higher  tone  than  those 
of  the  stayed ,  orderly  man,  here  described.” 

3The  following  circumstance,  mutually  to  the 
honour  of  Johnson,  and  the  corporation  of  his  na¬ 
tive  city,  has  been  communicated  to  me  by  the 
Reverend  Dr.  Vyse,  from  the  Town-Clerk: — “Mr. 
Simpson  has  now  before  him,  a  record  of  the  re¬ 
spect  and  veneration  which  the  Corporation  of 
Lichfield,  in  the  year  1 767,  had  for  the  merits  and 
learning  of  Dr.  Johnson.  His  father  built  the  cor¬ 
ner-house  in  the  Market-place,  the  two  fronts  of 
which,  towards  Market  and  Broad-market-street, 
stood  upon  waste  land  of  the  Corporation,  under  a 
forty  years’  lease,  which  was  then  expired.  On  the 
1 5th  of  August,  1 767,  at  a  common-hall  of  the  bail¬ 
iffs  and  citizens,  it  was  ordered  (and  that  without 
any  solicitation,)  that  a  lease  should  be  granted  to 
Samuel  Johnson,  Doctor  of  Laws,  of  the  encroach¬ 
ments  at  his  house,  for  the  term  of  ninety-nine 
years,  at  the  old  rent,  which  was  five  shillings.  Of 
which,  as  Town-Clerk,  Mr.  Simpson  had  the  hon¬ 
our  and  pleasure  of  informing  him,  and  that  he 
was  desired  to  accept  it,  without  paying  any  fine 
on  the  occasion,  which  lease  was  afterwards  grant¬ 
ed,  and  the  Doctor  died  possessed  of  this  property.” 

4See  p.  5. 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


BOSWELL 


566 

“I  told  him  (says  Miss  Seward)  in  one  of  my 
latest  visits  to  him,  of  a  wonderful  learned  pig, 
which  I  had  seen  at  Nottingham;  and  which  did 
all  that  we  have  observed  exhibited  by  dogs  and 
horses.  The  subject  amused  him.  ‘Then,  (said 
he,)  the  pigs  are  a  race  unjustly  calumniated. 
Pig  has,  it  seems,  not  been  wanting  to  man ,  but 
man  to  pig.  We  do  not  allow  time  for  his  educa¬ 
tion,  we  kill  him  at  a  year  old .  ’  Mr.  Henry  White, 
who  was  present,  observed  that  if  this  instance 
had  happened  in  or  before  Pope’s  time,  he  would 
not  have  been  justified  in  instancing  the  swine 
as  the  lowest  degree  of  groveling  instinct.  Dr. 
Johnson  seemed  pleased  with  the  observation, 
while  the  person  who  made  it  proceeded  to  re¬ 
mark,  that  great  torture  must  have  been  em¬ 
ployed,  ere  the  indocility  of  the  animal  could 
have  been  subdued.  ‘Certainly,  (said  the  Doc¬ 
tor;)  but,  (turning  to  me,)  how  old  is  your  pig?’ 
f  told  him,  three  years  old.  ‘Then,  (said  he,)  the 
pig  has  no  cause  to  complain;  he  would  have 
been  killed  the  first  year  if  he  had  not  been  edu¬ 
cated,  and  protracted  existence  is  a  good  recom- 
pence  for  very  considerable  degrees  of  torture.5  55 

As  Johnson  had  now  very  faint  hopes  of  re¬ 
covery,  and  as  Mrs.  Thrale  was  no  longer  de¬ 
voted  to  him,  it  might  have  been  supposed  that 
he  would  naturally  have  chosen  to  remain  in  the 
comfortable  house  of  his  beloved  wife’s  daughter, 
and  end  his  life  where  he  began  it.  But  there  was 
in  him  an  animated  and  lofty  spirit,1  and  how¬ 
ever  complicated  diseases  might  depress  ordina- 
nary  mortals,  all  who  saw  him,  beheld  and  ac¬ 
knowledged  the  invictum  animum  Catonis.  Such  was 
his  intellectual  ardour  even  at  this  time,  that  he 
said  to  one  friend,  “Sir,  I  look  upon  every  day 
to  be  lost,  in  which  I  do  not  make  a  new  ac¬ 
quaintance”;  and  to  another,  when  talking  of 
his  illness,  “I  will  be  conquered;  I  will  not  ca¬ 
pitulate.”  And  such  was  his  love  of  London,  so 
high  a  relish  had  he  of  its  magnificent  extent, 
and  variety  of  intellectual  entertainment,  that  he 
languished  when  absent  from  it,  his  mind  hav¬ 
ing  become  quite  luxurious  from  the  long  habit 
of  enjoying  the  metropolis;  and,  therefore,  al¬ 
though  at  Lichfield,  surrounded  with  friends, 
who  loved  and  revered  him,  and  for  whom  he 
had  a  very  sincere  affection,  he  still  found  that 
such  conversation  as  London  affords,  could  be 

*Mr.  Burke  suggested  to  me  as  applicable  to 
Johnson,  what  Cicero,  in  his  Cato  Major,  says  of 
Appius: — “In  ten  turn  enim  animum  tanquam  arcum  ha- 
bebat ,  nec  longuescens  succumbebat  senectuti” ;  repeating, 
at  the  same  time,  the  following  noble  words  in  the 
same  passage: — “ Ita  enim  senectus  honesta  est ,  si  se 
ipsa  defendit ,  si  jus  suum  retinet ,  si  nemini  emancipata  est , 
si  usque  ad  extremum  vitce  spiritum  vindicet  jus  suum.” 


[  1784 

found  no  where  else.  These  feelings,  joined,  prob¬ 
ably,  to  some  flattering  hopes  of  aid  from  the 
eminent  physicians  and  surgeons  in  London,  who 
kindly  and  generously  attended  him  without  ac¬ 
cepting  fees,  made  him  resolve  to  return  to  the 
capital. 

F rom  Lichfield  he  came  to  Birmingham,  where 
he  passed  a  few  days  with  his  worthy  old  school¬ 
fellow,  Mr.  Hector,  who  thus  writes  to  me: — 

‘ c  He  was  very  solicitous  with  me  to  recollect  some 
of  our  most  early  transactions,  and  transmit  them 
to  him,  for  I  perceive  nothing  gave  him  greater 
pleasure  than  calling  to  mind  those  days  of  our 
innocence.  I  complied  with  his  request,  and  he 
only  received  them  a  few  days  before  his  death. 
I  have  transcribed  for  your  inspection,  exactly 
the  minutes  I  wrote  to  him.”  This  paper  having 
been  found  in  his  repositories  after  his  death,  Sir 
John  Hawkins  has  inserted  it  entire,  and  I  have 
made  occasional  use  of  it  and  other  communi¬ 
cations  from  Mr.  Hector,2  in  the  course  of  this 
Work.  I  have  both  visited  and  corresponded  with 
him  since  Dr.  Johnson’s  death,  and  by  my  in¬ 
quiries  concerning  a  great  variety  of  particulars 
have  obtained  additional  information.  I  followed 
the  same  mode  with  the  Reverend  Dr.  Taylor, 
in  whose  presence  I  wrote  down  a  good  deal  of 
what  he  could  tell;  and  he,  at  my  request,  signed 
his  name,  to  give  it  authenticity.  It  is  very  rare 
to  find  any  person  who  is  able  to  give  a  distinct 
account  of  the  life  even  of  one  whom  he  has 
known  intimately,  without  questions  being  put 
to  them.  My  friend  Dr.  Kippis  has  told  me,  that 
on  this  account  it  is  a  practice  with  him  to  draw 
out  a  biographical  catechism. 

Johnson  then  proceeded  to  Oxford,  where  he 
was  again  kindly  received  by  Dr.  Adams,  who 
was  pleased  to  give  me  the  following  account  in 
one  of  his  letters  (Feb.  17th,  1785): — 

“His  last  visit  was,  I  believe,  to  my  house, 
which  he  left,  after  a  stay  of  four  or  five  days. 
We  had  much  serious  talk  together,  for  Which  I 
ought  to  be  the  better  as  long  as  I  live.  You  will 
remember  some  discourse  which  we  had  in  the 

2It  is  a  most  agreeable  circumstance  attending 
the  publication  of  this  Work,  that  Mr.  Hector  has 
survived  his  illustrious  schoolfellow  so  many  years; 
that  he  still  retains  his  health  and  spirits;  and  has 
gratified  me  with  the  following  acknowledgement: 
“I  thank  you,  most  sincerely  thank  you,  for  the 
great  and  long  continued  entertainment  your  Life 
of  Dr.  Johnson  has  afforded  me,  and  others,  of  my 
particular  friends.”  Mr.  Hector,  besides  setting  me 
right  as  to  the  verses  on  a  sprig  of  Myrtle,  (see 
p.  21  note,)  has  favoured  me  with  two  English 
odes,  written  by  Dr.  Johnson,  at  an  early  period  of 
his  life,  which  will  appear  in  my  edition  of  his 
poems. 


1784]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  567 


summer  upon  the  subject  of  prayer,  and  the  dif¬ 
ficulty  of  this  sort  of  composition.  He  reminded 
me  of  this,  and  of  my  having  wished  him  to  try 
his  hand,  and  to  give  us  a  specimen  of  the  style 
and  manner  that  he  approved.  He  added,  that 
he  was  now  in  a  right  frame  of  mind,  and  as  he 
could  not  possibly  employ  his  time  better,  he 
would  in  earnest  set  about  it.  But  I  find  upon 
inquiry,  that  no  papers  of  this  sort  were  left  be¬ 
hind  him,  except  a  few  short  ejaculatory  forms 
suitable  to  his  present  situation.55 

Dr.  Adams  had  not  then  received  accurate  in¬ 
formation  on  this  subject;  for  it  has  since  ap¬ 
peared  that  various  prayers  had  been  composed 
by  him  at  different  periods,  which,  intermingled 
with  pious  resolutions,  and  some  short  notes  of 
his  life,  were  entitled  by  him  Prayers  and  Medita¬ 
tions ,  and  have,  in  pursuance  of  his  earnest  req¬ 
uisition,  in  the  hopes  of  doing  good,  been  pub¬ 
lished,  with  a  judicious  well-written  Preface,  by 
the  Reverend  Mr.  Strahan,  to  whom  he  deliv¬ 
ered  them.  This  admirable  collection,  to  which 
I  have  frequently  referred  in  the  course  of  this 
Work,  evinces,  beyond  all  his  compositions  for 
the  publick,  and  all  the  eulogies  of  his  friends 
and  admirers,  the  sincere  virtue  and  piety  of 
Johnson.  It  proves  with  unquestionable  authen¬ 
ticity,  that  amidst  all  his  constitutional  infirmi¬ 
ties,  his  earnestness  to  conform  his  practice  to  the 
precepts  of  Christianity  was  unceasing,  and  that 
he  habitually  endeavoured  to  refer  every  trans¬ 
action  of  his  life  to  the  will  of  the  Supreme  Being. 

He  arrived  in  London  on  the  16th  of  Novem¬ 
ber,  and  next  day  sent  to  Dr.  Burney  the  follow¬ 
ing  note,  which  I  insert  as  the  last  token  of  his 
remembrance  of  that  ingenious  and  amiable 
man,  and  as  another  of  the  many  proofs  of  the 
tenderness  and  benignity  of  his  heart: 

“Mr.  Johnson,  who  came  home  last  night, 
sends  his  respects  to  dear  Dr.  Burney,  and  all 
the  dear  Burneys,  little  and  great.55 

To  Mr.  Hector,  in  Birmingham 

Dear  Sir,  I  did  not  reach  Oxford  until  Fri¬ 
day  morning,  and  then  I  sent  Francis  to  see  the 
balloon  fly,  but  could  not  go  myself.  I  staid  at 
Oxford  till  Tuesday,  and  then  came  in  the 
common  vehicle  easily  to  London.  I  am  as  I 
was,  and  having  seen  Dr.  Brocklesby,  am  to  ply 
the  squills;  but,  whatever  be  their  efficacy,  this 
world  must  soon  pass  away.  Let  us  think  seriously 
on  our  duty.  I  send  my  kindest  respects  to  dear 
Mrs.  Careless:  let  me  have  the  prayers  of  both. 
We  have  all  lived  long,  and  must  soon  part. 
God  have  mercy  on  us,  for  the  sake  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  Amen.  I  am,  &c. 

Sam.  Johnson 


His  correspondence  with  me,  after  his  letter 
on  the  subject  of  my  settling  in  London,  shall 
now,  so  far  as  is  proper,  be  produced  in  one 
series: 

July  26,  he  wrote  to  me  from  Ashbourne: 

“On  the  14th  I  came  to  Lichfield,  and  found 
every  body  glad  enough  to  see  me.  On  the  20th, 
I  came  hither,  and  found  a  house  half-built,  of 
very  uncomfortable  appearance;  but  my  own 
room  has  not  been  altered.  That  a  man  worn 
with  diseases,  in  his  seventy -second  or  third  year, 
should  condemn  part  of  his  remaining  life  to  pass 
among  ruins  and  rubbish,  and  that  no  incon¬ 
siderable  part,  appears  to  me  very  strange.  I 
know  that  your  kindness  makes  you  impatient 
to  know  the  state  of  my  health,  in  which  I  can¬ 
not  boast  of  much  improvement.  I  came  through 
the  journey  without  much  inconvenience,  but 
when  I  attempt  self-motion  I  find  my  legs  weak, 
and  my  breath  very  short;  this  day  I  have  been 
much  disordered.  I  have  no  company;  the  Doc¬ 
tor1  is  busy  in  his  fields,  and  goes  to  bed  at  nine, 
and  his  whole  system  is  so  different  from  mine, 
that  we  seem  formed  for  different  elements;  I 
have,  therefore,  all  my  amusement  to  seek  with¬ 
in  myself.55 

Having  written  to  him,  in  bad  spirits,  a  letter 
filled  with  dejection  and  fretfulness,  and  at  the 
same  time  expressing  anxious  apprehensions  con¬ 
cerning  him,  on  account  of  a  dream  which  had 
disturbed  me;  his  answer  was  chiefly  in  terms  of 
reproach,  for  a  supposed  charge  of  “affecting  dis¬ 
content,  and  indulging  the  vanity  of  complaint.55 
It,  however,  proceeded, — 

“Write  to  me  often,  and  write  like  a  man.  I 
consider  your  fidelity  and  tenderness  as  a  great 
part  of  the  comforts  which  are  yet  left  me,  and 
sincerely  wish  we  could  be  nearer  to  each  oth¬ 
er.  ..  .  My  dear  friend,  life  is  very  short  and 
very  uncertain;  let  us  spend  it  as  well  as  we  can. 
My  worthy  neighbour,  Allen,  is  dead.  Love  me 
as  well  as  you  can.  Pay  my  respects  to  dear 
Mrs.  Boswell.  Nothing  ailed  me  at  that  time;  let 
your  superstition  at  last  have  an  end.55 

Feeling  very  soon,  that  the  manner  in  which 
he  had  written  might  hurt  me,  he  two  days  after¬ 
wards,  July  28,  wrote  to  me  again,  giving  me  an 
account  of  his  sufferings;  after  which,  he  thus 
proceeds: — 

“Before  this  letter,  you  will  have  had  one  which 
I  hope  you  will  not  take  amiss;  for  it  contains 
only  truth,  and  that  truth  kindly  intended.  .  .  . 
Spar  tarn  quam  nactus  es  orna;  make  the  most  and 
best  of  your  lot,  and  compare  yourself  not  with 
the  few  that  are  above  you,  but  with  the  multi- 

JThe  Rev.  Dr.  Taylor. 


London,  Nov.  17,  1784 


BOSWELL 


568 

tudes  which  are  below  you.  .  .  .  Go  steadily  for¬ 
ward  with  lawful  business  or  honest  diversions. 
Be  (as  Temple  says  of  the  Dutchmen)  well  when 
you  are  not  ill ,  and  pleased  when  you  are  not  angry.  .  .  . 
This  may  seem  but  an  ill  return  for  your  tender¬ 
ness;  but  I  mean  it  well,  for  I  love  you  with  great 
ardour  and  sincerity.  Pay  my  respects  to  dear 
Mrs.  Boswell,  and  teach  the  young  ones  to  love 
me.” 

I  unfortunately  was  so  much  indisposed  dur¬ 
ing  a  considerable  part  of  the  year,  that  it  was 
not,  or  at  least  I  thought  it  was  not  in  my  power 
to  write  to  my  illustrious  friend  as  formerly,  or 
without  expressing  such  complaints  as  offended 
him.  Having  conjured  him  not  to  do  me  the  in¬ 
justice  of  charging  me  with  affectation,  I  was 
with  much  regret  long  silent.  His  last  letter  to 
me  then  came,  and  affected  me  very  tenderly: — 

To  James  Boswell,  Esq. 

Dear  Sir,  I  have  this  summer  sometimes 
amended,  and  sometimes  relapsed,  but,  upon 
the  whole,  have  lost  ground,  very  much.  My 
legs  are  extremely  weak,  and  my  breath  very 
short,  and  the  water  is  now  encreasing  upon 
me.  In  this  uncomfortable  state  your  letters  used 
to  relieve;  what  is  the  reason  that  I  have  them 
no  longer?  Are  you  sick,  or  are  you  sullen?  What¬ 
ever  be  the  reason,  if  it  be  less  than  necessity, 
drive  it  away;  and  of  the  short  life  that  we  have, 
make  the  best  use  for  yourself  and  for  your 
friends.  ...  I  am  sometimes  afraid  that  your 
omission  to  write  has  some  real  cause,  and  shall 
be  glad  to  know  that  you  are  not  sick,  and  that 
nothing  ill  has  befallen  dear  Mrs.  Boswell,  or 
any  of  your  family.  I  am,  Sir,  your,  &c. 

Sam.  Johnson 

Lichfield,  Nov .  5,  1784 

Yet  it  was  not  a  little  painful  to  me  to  find, 
that  in  a  paragraph  of  this  letter,  which  I  have 
omitted,  he  still  persevered  in  arraigning  me  as 
before,  which  was  strange  in  him  who  had  so 
much  experience  of  what  I  suffered.  I,  however, 
wrote  to  him  two  as  kind  letters  as  I  could;  ther 
last  of  which  came  too  late  to  be  read  by  him, 
for  his  illness  encreased  more  rapidly  upon  him 
than  I  had  apprehended;  but  I  had  the  consola¬ 
tion  of  being  informed  that  he  spoke  of  me  on 
his  death-bed,  with  affection,  and  I  look  forward 
with  humble  hope  of  renewing  our  friendship  in 
a  better  world. 

I  now  relieve  the  readers  of  this  Work  from 
any  farther  personal  notice  of  its  authour,  who 
if  he  should  be  thought  to  have  obtruded  him¬ 
self  too  much  upon  their  attention,  requests  them 
to  consider  the  peculiar  plan  of  his  biographical 
undertaking. 


[1784 

Soon  after  Johnson’s  return  to  the  metropolis, 
both  the  asthma  and  dropsy  became  more  vio¬ 
lent  and  distressful.  He  had  for  some  time  kept 
a  journal  in  Latin  of  the  state  of  his  illness,  and 
the  remedies  which  he  used,  under  the  title  of 
/Egri  Ephemeris ,  which  he  began  on  the  6th  of 
July,  but  continued  it  no  longer  than  the  8th  of 
November;  finding,  I  suppose,  that  it  was  a 
mournful  and  unavailing  register.  It  is  in  my 
possession;  and  is  written  with  great  care  and 
accuracy. 

Still  his  love  of  literature1  did  not  fail.  A  very 

llt  is  truly  wonderful  to  consider  the  extent  and 
constancy  of  Johnson’s  literary  ardour,  notwith¬ 
standing  the  melancholy  which  clouded  and  em¬ 
bittered  his  existence.  Besides  the  numerous  and 
various  works  which  he  executed,  he  had,  at  differ¬ 
ent  times,  formed  schemes  of  a  great  many  more, 
of  which  the  following  catalogue  was  given  by  him 
to  Mr.  Langton,  and  by  that  gentleman  presented 
to  his  Majesty: 

“Divinity 

“A  small  book  of  precepts  and  directions  for 
piety;  the  hint  taken  from  the  directions  in  Mor¬ 
ton’s  exercise. 

“Philosophy,  History,  and  Literature 
in  general 

“ History  of  Criticism ,  as  it  relates  to  judging  of  au- 
thours,  from  Aristotle  to  the  present  age.  An  ac¬ 
count  of  the  rise  and  improvements  of  that  art;  of 
the  different  opinions  of  authours,  ancient  and 
modern. 

“Translation  of  the  History  of  Herodian. 

“New  edition  of  Fairfax’s  Translation  of  Tasso , 
with  notes,  glossary,  &c. 

“Chaucer,  a  new  edition  of  him,  from  manu¬ 
scripts  and  old  editions,  with  various  readings,  con¬ 
jectures,  remarks  on  his  language,  and  the  changes 
it  had  undergone  from  the  earliest  times  to  his  age, 
and  from  his  to  the  present:  with  notes  explanatory 
of  customs,  &c.,  and  references  to  Boccace,  and 
other  authours  from  whom  he  has  borrowed,  with 
an  account  of  the  liberties  he  has  taken  in  telling 
the  storiGs;  his  life,  and  an  exact  etymological  glos¬ 
sary. 

“Aristotle’s  Rhetorick ,  a  translation  of  it  into  Eng¬ 
lish. 

“A  Collection  of  Letters,  translated  from  the 
modern  writers,  with  some  account  of  the  several 
authours. 

“Oldham’s  Poems,  with  notes,  historical  and 
critical. 

“Roscommon’s  Poems,  with  notes. 

“Lives  of  the  Philosophers,  written  with  a  polite 
air,  in  such  a  manner  as  may  divert  as  well  as  in¬ 
struct. 

“History  of  the  Heathen  Mythology,  with  an 
explication  of  the  fables,  both  allegorical  and  his¬ 
torical;  with  references  to  the  poets. 

“History  of  the  State  of  Venice,  in  a  compen¬ 
dious  manner. 

“Aristotle’s  Ethicks ,  an  English  translation  of 
them,  with  notes. 

“Geographical  Dictionary,  from  the  French. 

“Hierocles  upon  Pythagoras, translated  into  Eng¬ 
lish,  perhaps  with  notes.  This  is  done  by  Norris. 


17843  LIFE  of 

few  days  before  his  death  he  transmitted  to  his 
friend  Mr.  John  Nichols,  a  list  of  the  authours 
of  the  Universal  History ,  mentioning  their  several 
shares  in  that  work.  It  has,  according  to  his  di¬ 
rection,  been  deposited  in  the  British  Museum, 


“A  book  of  Letters,  upon  all  kinds  of  subjects. 

“Claudian,  a  new  edition  of  his  works,  cum  notis 
variorum ,  in  the  manner  of  Burman. 

“Tully’s  Tusculan  Questions,  a  translation  of 
them. 

“Tully’s  De  Natura  Deorum,  a  translation  of 
those  books. 

“Benzo’s  New  History  of  the  New  World,  to  be 
translated. 

“Machiavel’s  History  of  Florence,  to  be  trans¬ 
lated. 

“History  of  the  Revival  of  Learning  in  Europe 
containing  an  account  of  whatever  contributed  to 
the  restoration  of  literature;  such  as  controversies, 
printing,  the  destruction  of  the  Greek  empire,  the 
encouragement  of  great  men,  with  the  lives  of  the 
most  eminent  patrons  and  most  eminent  early  pro¬ 
fessors  of  all  kinds  of  learning  in  different  countries. 

“A  Body  of  Chronology,  in  verse,  with  historical 
notes. 

“A  Table  of  the  Spectators,  Tatlers,  and  Guar¬ 
dians,  distinguished  by  figures  into  six  degrees  of 
value,  with  notes,  giving  the  reasons  of  preference 
or  degradation. 

“A  Collection  of  Letters  from  English  authours, 
with  a  preface  giving  some  account  of  the  writers; 
with  reasons  for  selection,  and  criticism  upon  styles; 
remarks  on  each  letter,  if  needful. 

“A  Collection  of  Proverbs  from  various  lan¬ 
guages.  Jan.  6,-53. 

“A  Dictionary  to  the  Common  Prayer,  in  imita¬ 
tion  of  Calmet’s  Dictionary  of  the  Bible.  March, — 52. 

“A  Collection  of  Stories  and  Examples,  like  those 
of  Valerius  Maximus.  Jan.  10, — 53. 

“From  Lilian,  a  volume  of  select  Stories,  per¬ 
haps  from  others.  Jan.  28, — 53. 

“Collection  of  Travels,  Voyages,  Adventures, 
and  Descriptions  of  Countries. 

“Dictionary  of  Ancient  History  and  Mythology. 

“Treatise  on  the  Study  of  Polite  Literature,  con¬ 
taining  the  history  of  learning,  directions  for  edi¬ 
tions,  commentaries,  &c. 

“Maxims,  Characters,  and  Sentiments,  after  the 
manner  of  Bruyere,  collected  out  of  ancient  au¬ 
thours,  particularly  the  Greek,  with  Apophthegms. 

“Classical  Miscellanies,  Select  Translations  from 
ancient  Greek  and  Latin  authours. 

“Lives  of  Illustrious  Persons,  as  well  of  the  ac¬ 
tive  as  the  learned,  in  imitation  of  Plutarch. 

“Judgement  of  the  learned  upon  English  au¬ 
thours. 

“Poetical  Dictionary  of  the  English  tongue. 

“Considerations  upon  the  present  state  of  Lon¬ 
don. 

“Collection  of  Epigrams,  with  notes  and  obser¬ 
vations. 

“Observations  on  the  English  language,  relating 
to  words,  phrases,  and  modes  of  Speech. 

“Minutiae  Literariae,  Miscellaneous  reflections, 
criticisms,  emendations,  notes. 

“History  of  the  Constitution. 

‘’‘Comparison  of  Philosophical  and  Christian 


JOHNSON  569 

and  is  printed  in  The  Gentleman’ s  Magazine  for 
December,  1784. 

During  his  sleepless  nights  he  amused  himself 
by  translating  into  Latin  verse,  from  the  Greek, 
many  of  the  epigrams  in  the  Anthologia .  These 


Morality,  by  sentences  collected  from  the  moralists 
and  fathers. 

“Plutarch’s  Lives,  in  English,  with  notes. 

“Poetry  and  works  of  Imagination 

“Hymn  to  Ignorance. 

“The  Palace  of  Sloth, — a  vision. 

“Coluthus,  to  be  translated. 

“Prejudice, — a  poetical  essay. 

“The  Palace  of  Nonsense, — a  vision.” 

Johnson’s  extraordinary  facility  of  composition, 
when  he  shook  off  his  constitutional  indolence,  and 
resolutely  sat  down  to  write,  is  admirably  described 
by  Mr.  Courtenay,  in  his  Poetical  Review,  which  I 
have  several  times  quoted: 

While  through  life’s  maze  he  sent  a  piercing  view , 

His  mind  expansive  to  the  object  grew. 

With  various  stores  of  erudition  fraught. 

The  lively  image ,  the  deep-searching  thought , 

Slept  in  repose ; — but  when  the  moment  press’ d. 

The  bright  ideas  stood  at  once  confess’d; 

Instant  his  genius  sped  its  vigorous  rays , 

And  o’er  the  letter’d  world  diffus’d  a  blaze: 

As  womb’d  with  fire  the  cloud  electrick  flies , 

And  calmly  o’er  th ’  horizon  seems  to  rise; 

Touch’d  by  the  pointed  steel,  the  lightning  flows, 

And  all  th’  expanse  with  rich  effulgence  glows. 

We  shall  in  vain  endeavour  to  know  with  exact 
precision  every  production  of  Johnson’s  pen.  He 
owned  to  me,  that  he  had  written  about  forty  ser¬ 
mons;  but  as  I  understood  that  he  had  given  or 
sold  them  to  different  persons,  who  were  to  preach 
them  as  their  own,  he  did  not  consider  himself  at 
liberty  to  acknowledge  them.  Would  those  who 
were  thus  aided  by  him,  who  are  still  alive,  and  the 
friends  of  those  who  are  dead,  fairly  inform  the 
world,  it  would  be  obligingly  gratifying  a  reason¬ 
able  curiosity,  to  which  there  should,  I  think,  now 
be  no  objection.  Two  volumes  of  them,  published 
since  his  death,  are  sufficiently  ascertained;  see  p. 
356-7.  I  have  before  me,  in  his  hand- writing,  a 
fragment  of  twenty  quarto  leaves,  of  a  translation 
into  English  of  Sallust,  De  Bello  Catilinario.  When  it 
was  done  I  have  no  notion;  but  it  seems  to  have  no 
very  superior  merit  to  mark  it  as  his.  Beside  the 
publications  heretofore  mentioned,  I  am  satisfied, 
from  internal  evidence,  to  admit  also  as  genuine 
the  following,  which,  notwithstanding  all  my  chro¬ 
nological  care,  escaped  me  in  the  course  of  this 
work: 

“Considerations  on  the  Case  of  Dr. Trapp’s  Ser¬ 
mons,”  f  published  in  1 739,  in  The  Gentleman’s  Mag¬ 
azine.  It  is  a  very  ingenious  defence  of  the  right  of 
abridging  an  authour’s  work,  without  being  held  as 
infringing  his  property.  This  is  one  of  the  nicest 
questions  in  the  Law  of  Literature,  and  I  cannot  help 
thinking,  that  the  indulgence  of  abridging  is  often 
exceedingly  injurious  to  authours  and  booksellers, 
and  should  in  very  few  cases  be  permitted.  At  any 
rate,  to  prevent  difficult  and  uncertain  discussion, 
and  give  an  absolute  security  to  authours  in  the 
property  of  their  labours,  no  abridgement  what¬ 
ever  should  be  permitted,  till  after  the  expiration 


BOSWELL 


570 

translations,  with  some  other  poems  by  him  in 
Latin,  he  gave  to  his  friend  Mr.  Langton,  who, 
having  added  a  few  notes,  sold  them  to  the  book¬ 
sellers  for  a  small  sum,  to  be  given  to  some  of 
Johnson’s  relations,  which  was  accordingly  done; 
and  they  are  printed  in  the  collection  of  his 
works. 

A  very  erroneous  notion  has  circulated  as  to 
Johnson’s  deficiency  in  the  knowledge  of  the 
Greek  language,  partly  owing  to  the  modesty 
with  which,  from  knowing  how  much  there  was 
to  be  learnt,  he  used  to  mention  his  own  com¬ 
parative  acquisitions.  When  Mr.  Cumberland1 
talked  to  him  of  the  Greek  fragments  which  are 
so  well  illustrated  in  The  Observer ,  and  of  the 
Greek  dramatists  in  general,  he  candidly  ac¬ 
knowledged  his  insufficiency  in  that  particular 

JMr.  Cumberland  assures  me,  that  he  was  al¬ 
ways  treated  with  great  courtesy  by  Dr.  Johnson, 
who,  in  his  Letters  to  Mrs .  Thrale ,  voi.  ii,  p.  68,  thus 
speaks  of  that  learned,  ingenious,  and  accomplished 
gentleman:  “The  want  of  company  is  an  incon¬ 
venience:  but  Mr,  Cumberland  is  a  million.” 


of  such  a  number  of  years  as  the  Legislature  may 
be  pleased  to  fix. 

But,  though  it  has  been  confidently  ascribed  to 
him,  I  cannot  allow  that  he  wrote  a  Dedication  to 
both  Houses  of  Parliament  of  a  book  entitled  The 
Evangelical  History  Harmonized.  He  was  no  croaker; 
no  declaimer  against  the  times.  He  would  not  have 
written,  “That  we  are  fallen  upon  an  age  in  which 
corruption  is  not  barely  universal,  is  universally 
confessed.”  Nor  “Rapine  preys  on  the  pubiick 
without  opposition,  and  perjury  betrays  it  without 
inquiry.”  Nor  would  he,  to  exite  a  speedy  reforma¬ 
tion,  have  conjured  up  such  phantoms  of  terrour 
as  these:  “A  few  years  longer,  and  perhaps  all  en¬ 
deavours  will  be  in  vain.  We  may  be  swallowed  by 
an  earthquake:  we  may  be  delivered  to  our  ene¬ 
mies.”  This  is  not  Johnsonian. 

There  are,  indeed,  in  this  Dedication,  several 
sentences  constructed  upon  the  model  of  those  of 
Johnson.  But  the  imitation  of  the  form,  without 
the  spirit  of  his  style,  has  been  so  general,  that  this 
of  itself  is  not  sufficient  evidence.  Even  our  news¬ 
paper  writers  aspire  to  it.  In  an  account  of  the  fu¬ 
neral  of  Edwin,  the  comedian,  in  The  Diary  of  Nov. 
9,  1790,  that  son  of  drollery  is  thus  described:  “A 
man  who  had  so  often  cheered  the  sullenness  of 
vacancy,  and  suspended  the  approaches  of  sor¬ 
row.”  And  in  The  Dublin  Evening  Post ,  August  16, 
1791,  there  is  the  following  paragraph:  “It  is  a  sin¬ 
gular  circumstance,  that,  in  a  city  like  this,  con¬ 
taining  200,000  people,  there  are  three  months  in 
the  year  during  which  no  place  of  pubiick  amuse¬ 
ment  is  open.  Long  vacation  is  here  a  vacation 
from  pleasure,  as  well  as  business;  nor  is  there  any 
mode  of  passing  the  listless  evenings  of  declining 
summer,  but  in  the  riots  of  a  tavern,  or  the  stupid¬ 
ity  of  a  coffee-house.” 

I  have  not  thought  it  necessary  to  specify  every 
copy  of  verses  written  by  Johnson,  it  being  my  in¬ 
tention  to  publish  an  authentick  edition  of  all  his 
Poetry,  with  notes. 


[  i784 

branch  of  Greek  literature.  Yet  it  may  be  said, 
that  though  not  a  great,  he  was  a  good  Greek 
scholar.  Dr.  Charles  Burney,  the  younger,  who 
is  universally  acknowledged  by  the  best  judges 
to  be  one  of  the  few  men  of  this  age  who  are 
very  eminent  for  their  skill  in  that  noble  lan¬ 
guage,  has  assured  me,  that  Johnson  could  give 
a  Greek  word  for  almost  every  English  one;  and 
that  although  not  sufficiently  conversant  in  the 
niceties  of  the  language,  he  upon  some  occasions 
discovered,  even  in  these,  a  considerable  degree 
of  critical  acumen.  Mr.  Dalzel,  Professor  of  Greek 
at  Edinburgh,  whose  skill  in  it  is  unquestionable, 
mentioned  to  me,  in  very  liberal  terms,  the  im¬ 
pression  which  was  made  upon  him  by  John¬ 
son,  in  a  conversation  which  they  had  in  Lon¬ 
don  concerning  that  language.  As  Johnson, 
therefore,  was  undoubtedly  one  of  the  first  Latin 
scholars  in  modern  times,  let  us  not  deny  to  his 
fame  some  additional  splendour  from  Greek. 

I  shall  now  fulfil  my  promise  of  exhibiting 
specimens  of  various  sorts  of  imitation  of  John¬ 
son’s  style. 

In  the  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Irish  Academy , 
1787,  there  is  an  “Essay  on  the  Style  of  Dr.  Sam¬ 
uel  Johnson,”  by  theReverend  RobertBurrowes, 
whose  respect  for  the  great  object  of  his  criti¬ 
cism2  is  thus  evinced  in  the  concluding  para- 
graph: 

CT  have  singled  him  out  from  the  whole  body 
of  English  writers,  because  his  universally-ac¬ 
knowledged  beauties  would  be  most  apt  to  in¬ 
duce  imitation;  and  I  have  treated  rather  on  his 
faults  than  his  perfections,  because  an  essay  might 
comprize  all  the  observations  I  could  make  up¬ 
on  his  faults,  while  volumes  would  not  be  suffi¬ 
cient  for  a  treatise  on  his  perfections.” 

Mr.  Burrowes  has  analysed  the  composition 
of  Johnson,  and  pointed  out  its  peculiarities  with 
much  acuteness;  and  I  would  recommend  a  care¬ 
ful  perusal  of  his  Essay  to  those,  who  being  cap¬ 
tivated  by  the  union  of  perspicuity  and  splen¬ 
dour  which  the  writings  of  Johnson  contain, 
without  having  a  sufficient  portion  of  his  vigour 
of  mind,  may  be  in  danger  of  becoming  bad  copy¬ 
ists  of  his  manner.  I,  however,  cannot  but  ob¬ 
serve,  and  I  observe  it  to  his  credit,  that  this 
learned  gentleman  has  himself  caught  no  mean 
degree  of  the  expansion  and  harmony,  which, 

2We  must  smile  at  a  little  inaccuracy  of  meta¬ 
phor  in  the  Preface  to  the  Transactions ,  which  is 
written  by  Mr.  Burrowes.  The  critick  of  the  style  of 
Johnson  having,  writh  a  just  zeal  for  literature,  ob¬ 
served,  that  the  whole  nation  are  called  on  to  ex¬ 
ert  themselves,  afterwards  says:  “They  are  called 
on  by  every  tye  which  can  have  a  laudable  influence 
on  the  heart  of  man.” 


1784]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  571 


independent  of  all  other  circumstances,  charac¬ 
terise  the  sentences  of  Johnson.  Thus,  in  the 
Preface  to  the  volume  in  which  his  Essay  ap¬ 
pears,  we  find: 

“If  it  be  said  that  in  societies  of  this  sort,  too 
much  attention  is  frequently  bestowed  on  sub¬ 
jects  barren  and  speculative,  it  may  be  answered, 
that  no  one  science  is  so  litde  connected  with 
the  rest,  as  not  to  afford  many  principles  whose 
use  may  extend  considerably  beyond  the  science 
to  which  they  primarily  belong;  and  that  no 
proposition  is  so  purely  theoretical  as  to  be  totally 
incapable  of  being  applied  to  practical  purpos¬ 
es.  There  is  no  apparent  connection  between 
duration  and  the  cycloidal  arch,  the  properties 
of  which  duly  attended  to,  have  furnished  us 
with  our  best  regulated  methods  of  measuring 
time:  and  he  who  has  made  himself  master  of 
the  nature  and  affections  of  the  logarithmick 
curve,  is  not  aware  that  he  has  advanced  con¬ 
siderably  towards  ascertaining  the  proportion- 
able  density  of  the  air  at  its  various  distances 
from  the  surface  of  the  earth.” 

The  ludicrous  imitators  of  Johnson’s  style  are 
innumerable.  Their  general  method  is  to  ac¬ 
cumulate  hard  words,  without  considering,  that, 
although  he  was  fond  of  introducing  them  oc¬ 
casionally,  there  is  not  a  single  sentence  in  all 
his  writings  where  they  are  crowded  together, 
as  in  the  first  verse  of  the  following  imaginary 
Ode  by  him  to  Mrs.  Thrale,  which  appeared  in 
the  news-papers: 

Cervisial  coctor’s  viduate  dame, 

Opin’st  thou  this  gigantick frame, 
Procumbing  at  thy  shrine: 

Shall,  catenated  by  thy  charms, 

A  captive  in  thy  ambient  arms, 

Perennially  be  thine? 

This,  and  a  thousand  other  such  attempts,  are 
totally  unlike  the  original,  which  the  writers 
imagined  they  were  turning  into  ridicule.  There 
is  not  similarity  enough  for  burlesque,  or  even 
for  caricature. 

Mr.  Colman,  in  his  Prose  on  several  occasions, 
has  A  Letter  from  Lexiphanes;  containing  Proposals 
for  a  Glossary  or  Vocabulary  of  the  Vulgar  Tongue: 
intended  as  a  Supplement  to  a  larger  Dictionary .  It  is 
evidently  meant  as  a  sportive  sally  of  ridicule  on 
Johnson,  whose  style  is  thus  imitated,  without  be¬ 
ing  grossly  overcharged: 

“It  is  easy  to  foresee,  that  the  idle  and  illiter¬ 
ate  will  complain  that  I  have  increased  their  la¬ 
bours  by  endeavouring  to  diminish  them;  and 
that  I  have  explained  what  is  more  easy  by  what 
is  more  difficult — ignotum  per  ignotius.  I  expect, 
on  the  other  hand,  the  liberal  acknowledgements 


of  the  learned.  He  who  is  buried  in  scholastick 
retirement,  secluded  from  the  assemblies  of  the 
gay,  and  remote  from  the  circles  of  the  polite, 
will  at  once  comprehend  the  definitions,  and  be 
grateful  for  such  a  seasonable  and  necessary 
elucidation  of  his  mother- tongue.’ 5 

Annexed  to  this  letter  is  a  short  specimen  of 
the  work,  thrown  together  in  a  vague  and  de¬ 
sultory  manner,  not  even  adhering  to  alphabet¬ 
ical  concatenation.1 

The  serious  imitators  of  Johnson’s  style, wheth¬ 
er  intentionally  or  by  the  imperceptible  ef¬ 
fect  of  its  strength  and  animation,  are,  as  I  have 
had  already  occasion  to  observe,  so  many,  that  I 
might  introduce  quotations  from  a  numerous 
body  of  writers  in  our  language,  since  he  ap¬ 
peared  in  the  literary  world.  I  shall  point  out 
only  the  following: 

William  Robertsqn,  D.D. 

“In  other  parts  of  the  globe,  man,  in  his  rud¬ 
est  state,  appears  as  lord  of  the  creation,  giving 
law  to  various  tribes  of  animals  which  he  has 
tamed  and  reduced  to  subjection.  The  Tartar 
follows  his  prey  on  the  horse  which  he  has  reared, 
or  tends  his  numerous  herds,  which  furnish  him 
both  with  food  and  clothing;  the  Arab  has  ren¬ 
dered  the  camel  docile,  and  avails  himself  of  its 
persevering  strength;  the  Laplander  has  formed 
the  rein-deer  to  be  subservient  to  his  will;  and 
even  the  people  of  Kamschatka  have  trained 
their  dogs  to  labour.  This  command  over  the  in- 
feriour  creatures  is  one  of  the  noblest  preroga¬ 
tives  of  man,  and  among  the  greatest  efforts  of 
his  wisdom  and  power.  Without  this,  his  do¬ 
minion  is  incomplete.  He  is  a  monarch  who  has 
no  subjects;  a  master  without  servants;  and  must 
perform  every  operation  by  the  strength  of  his 
own  arm.”2 

Edward  Gibbon,  Esq,. 

“Of  ail  our  passions  and  appetites,  the  love  of 
power  is  of  the  most  imperious  and  unsociable 

1CiHigledy  piggledy , — Conglomeration  and  con¬ 
fusion. 

“ Hodge-podge , — A  culinary  mixture  of  heteroge¬ 
neous  ingredients:  applied  metaphorically  to  all 
discordant  combinations. 

“Tit for  Tat, — Adequate  retaliation. 

“Shilly  Shally, — Hesitation  and  irresolution. 

“Fee!  fan!  fum! — Gigantic  intonations. 

c Rigmarole , — Discourse,  incoherent  and  rhapso¬ 
dical. 

“Crincum-crancum, — Lines  of  irregularity  and  in¬ 
volution. 

“ Dingdong , — Tintinabulary  chimes,  used  meta¬ 
phorically  to  signify  dispatch  and  vehemence.” 

2 History  of  America,  vol.  i,  quarto,  p.  332. 


572 

nature,  since  the  pride  of  one  man  requires  the 
submission  of  the  multitude.  In  the  tumult  of 
civil  discord  the  laws  of  society  lose  their  force, 
and  their  place  is  seldom  supplied  by  those  of 
humanity.  The  ardour  of  contention,  the  pride 
of  victory,  the  despair  of  success,  the  memory  of 
past  injuries,  and  the  fear  of  future  dangers,  all 
contribute  to  inflame  the  mind,  and  to  silence 
the  voice  of  pity.”1 

Miss  Burney 

“My  family,  mistaking  ambition  for  honour, 
and  rank  for  dignity,  have  long  planned  a  splen¬ 
did  connection  for  me,  to  which,  though  my  in¬ 
variable  repugnance  has  stopped  any  advances, 
their  wishes  and  their  views  immovably  adhere. 
1  am  but  too  certain  they  will  now  listen  to  no 
other.  I  dread,  therefore,  to  make  a  trial  where 
I  despair  of  success;  I  know  not  how  to  risk  a 
prayer  with  those  who  may  silence  me  by  a 
command.”2 

Reverend  Mr.  Nares3 

“In  an  enlightened  and  improving  age,  much 
perhaps  is  not  to  be  apprehended  from  the  in¬ 
roads  of  mere  caprice;  at  such  a  period  it  will 
generally  be  perceived,  that  needless  irregular¬ 
ity  is  the  worst  of  all  deformities,  and  that  noth¬ 
ing  is  so  truly  elegant  in  language  as  the  sim¬ 
plicity  of  unviolated  analogy.  Rules  will,  there¬ 
fore,  be  observed,  so  far  as  they  are  known  and 
acknowledged:  but,  at  the  same  time,  the  desire 
of  improvement  having  been  once  excited  will 
not  remain  inactive;  and  its  efforts,  unless  as¬ 
sisted  by  knowledge,  as  much  as  they  are  promp¬ 
ted  by  zeal,  will  not  unfrequently  be  found  per¬ 
nicious;  so  that  the  very  persons  whose  intention 
it  is  to  perfect  the  instrument  of  reason,  will  de¬ 
prave  and  disorder  it  unknowingly.  At  such  a 
time,  then,  it  becomes  peculiarly  necessary  that 
the  analogy  of  language  should  be  fully  examined 
and  understood;  that  its  rules  should  be  care¬ 
fully  laid  down;  and  that  it  should  be  clearly 
known  how  much  it  contains,  which  being  al¬ 
ready  right  should  be  defended  from  change 

1 Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Roman  Empire ,  vol.  i.  chap. 
4- 

2 Cecilia ,  Book  vii,  chap,  l  [5]. 

3The  passage  which  I  quote  is  taken  from  that 
gentleman’s  Elements  of  Orthoepy ;  containing  a  dis¬ 
tinct  View  of  the  whole  Analogy  of  the  English 
Language,  so  far  as  relates  to  Pronunciation ,  Accent 
and  Quantity ,  London,  1 784.  I  beg  leave  to  offer  my 
particular  acknowledgements  to  the  authour  of  a 
work  of  uncommon  merit  and  great  utility.  I  know 
no  book  which  contains,  in  the  same  compass,  more 
learning,  polite  literature,  sound  sense,  accuracy  of 
arrangement,  and  perspicuity  of  expression. 


[  1784 

and  violation:  how  much  it  has  that  demands 
amendment;  and  how  much  that,  for  fear  of 
greater  inconveniencies,  must,  perhaps,  be  left 
unaltered,  though  irregular.” 

A  distinguished  authour  in  The  Mirror ,4  a  pe¬ 
riodical  paper,  published  at  Edinburgh,  has  im¬ 
itated  Johnson  very  closely.  Thus,  in  No.  16: — 
“The  effects  of  the  return  of  spring  have  been 
frequently  remarked  as  well  in  relation  to  the 
human  mind  as  to  the  animal  and  vegetable 
world.  The  reviving  power  of  this  season  has 
been  traced  from  the  fields  to  the  herds  that  in¬ 
habit  them,  and  from  the  lower  classes  of  beings 
up  to  man.  Gladness  and  joy  are  described  as 
prevailing  through  universal  Nature,  animating 
the  low  of  the  cattle,  the  carol  of  the  birds,  and 
the  pipe  of  the  shepherd.” 

The  Reverend  Dr.  Knox,  master  of  Tunbridge 
school,  appears  to  have  the  imitari  aveo  of  John¬ 
son’s  style  perpetually  in  his  mind;  and  to  his 
assiduous,  though  not  servile,  study  of  it,  we 
may  partly  ascribe  the  extensive  popularity  of 
his  writings.5 

In  his  Essays ,  Moral  and  Literary ,  No.  3,  we 
find  the  following  passage: — “The  polish  of  ex¬ 
ternal  grace  may  indeed  be  deferred  till  the  ap¬ 
proach  of  manhood.  When  solidity  is  obtained 
by  pursuing  the  modes  prescribed  by  our  fore¬ 
fathers,  then  may  the  file  be  used.  The  firm  sub¬ 
stance  will  bear  attrition,  and  the  lustre  then 
acquired  will  be  durable.” 

4That  collection  was  presented  to  Dr.  Johnson, 
I  believe  by  its  authours;  and  I  heard  him  speak 
very  well  of  it. 

6It  were  to  be  wished,  that  he  had  imitated  that 
great  man  in  every  respect,  and  had  not  followed 
the  example  of  Dr.  Adam  Smith  in  ungraciously 
attacking  his  venerable  Alma  Mater>  Oxford.  It 
must,  however,  be  observed,  that  he  is  much  less  to 
blame  than  Smith:  he  only  objects  to  certain  par¬ 
ticulars;  Smith  to  the  whole  institution;  though  in¬ 
debted  for  much  of  his  learning  to  an  exhibition 
which  he  enjoyed  for  many  years  at  Baliol  College. 
Neither  of  them,  however,  will  do  any  hurt  to  the 
noblest  university  in  the  world.  While  I  animad¬ 
vert  on  what  appears  to  me  exceptionable  in  some 
of  the  works  of  Dr.  Knox,  I  cannot  refuse  due 
praise  to  others  of  his  productions;  particularly  his 
sermons,  and  to  the  spirit  with  which  he  maintains, 
against  presumptuous  hereticks,  the  consolatory 
doctrines  peculiar  to  the  Christian  Revelation. 
This  he  has  done  in  a  manner  equally  strenuous 
and  conciliating.  Neither  ought  I  to  omit  mention¬ 
ing  a  remarkable  instance  of  his  candour:  Notwith¬ 
standing  the  wide  difference  of  our  opinions,  upon 
the  important  subject  of  University  education,  in  a 
letter  to  me  concerning  this  Work,  he  thus  ex¬ 
presses  himself:  “I  thank  you  for  the  very  great 
entertainment  your  Life  of  Johnson  gives  me.  It  is  a 
most  valuable  work.  Yours  is  a  new  species  of  bi¬ 
ography.  Happy  for  Johnson,  that  he  had  so  able 
a  recorder  of  his  wit  and  wisdom.” 


BOSWELL 


1784] 

There  is,  however,  one  in  No.  11,  which  is 
blown  up  into  such  tumidity,  as  to  be  truly  ludi¬ 
crous.  The  writer  means  to  tell  us,  that  Members 
of  Parliament,  who  have  run  in  debt  by  extrava¬ 
gance,  will  sell  their  votes  to  avoid  an  arrest,1 
which  he  thus  expresses: — “They  who  build 
houses  and  collect  costly  pictures  and  furniture 
with  the  money  of  an  honest  artisan  or  mechan- 
ick,  will  be  very  glad  of  emancipation  from  the 
hands  of  a  bailiff,  by  a  sale  of  their  senatorial 
suffrage.” 

But  I  think  the  most  perfect  imitation  of  John¬ 
son  is  a  professed  one,  entitled  A  Criticism  on 
Gray's  Elegy  in  a  Country  Church-Tar d ,  said  to  be 
written  by  Mr.  Young,  Professor  of  Greek,  at 
Glasgow,  and  of  which  let  him  have  the  credit, 
unless  a  better  title  can  be  shewn.  It  has  not  only 
the  peculiarities  of  Johnson’s  style,  but  that  very 
species  of  literary  discussion  and  illustration  for 
which  he  was  eminent.  Having  already  quoted 
so  much  from  others,  I  shall  refer  the  curious  to 
this  performance,  with  an  assurance  of  much 
entertainment. 

Yet  whatever  merit  there  may  be  in  any  imi¬ 
tations  of  Johnson’s  style,  every  good  judge  must 
see  that  they  are  obviously  different  from  the 
original ;  for  all  of  them  are  either  deficient  in  its 
force,  or  overloaded  with  its  peculiarities;  and 
the  powerful  sentiment  to  which  it  is  suited  is  not 
to  be  found. 

Johnson’s  affection  for  his  departed  relations 
seemed  to  grow  warmer  as  he  approached  near¬ 
er  to  the  time  when  he  might  hope  to  see  them 
again.  It  probably  appeared  to  him  that  he 
should  upbraid  himself  with  unkind  inattention, 
were  he  to  leave  the  world  without  having  paid 
a  tribute  of  respect  to  their  memory. 

To  Mr.  Green,  Apothecary,  at  Lichfield 

Dear  Sir,  I  have  enclosed  the  Epitaph  for 
my  Father,  Mother,  and  Brother,  to  be  all  en¬ 
graved  on  the  large  size,  and  laid  in  the  middle 
aisle  in  St.  Michael’s  church,  which  I  request 
the  clergyman  and  church  wardens  to  permit. 

The  first  care  must  be  to  find  the  exact  place 
of  interment,  that  the  stone  may  protect  the 
bodies.  Then  let  the  stone  be  deep,  massy,  and 
hard;  and  do  not  let  the  difference  of  ten  pounds, 
or  more,  defeat  our  purpose. 

I  have  enclosed  ten  pounds,  and  Mrs.  Porter 
will  pay  you  ten  more,  which  I  gave  her  for  the 
same  purpose.  What  more  is  wanted  shall  be 
sent;  and  I  beg  that  all  possible  haste  may  be 

JDr.  Knox,  in  his  Moral  and  Literary  abstraction, 
may  be  excused  for  not  knowing  the  political  reg¬ 
ulations  of  his  country.  No  senator  can  be  in  the 
hands  of  a  bailiff. 


573 

made,  for  I  wish  to  have  it  done  while  I  am  yet 
alive.  Let  me  know,  dear  Sir,  that  you  receive 
this.  I  am,  Sir,  your  most  humble  servant, 

Sam.  Johnson 

Dec .  2,  1784 

To  Mrs.  Lucy  Porter,  in  Lichfield 

Dear  Madam,  I  am  very  ill,  and  desire  your 
prayers.  I  have  sent  Mr.  Green  the  Epitaph, 
and  a  power  to  call  on  you  for  ten  pounds. 

I  laid  this  summer  a  stone  over  Tetty,  in  the 
chapel  of  Bromley,  in  Kent.  The  inscription  is 
in  Latin,  of  which  this  is  the  English.  [Here  a 
translation.] 

That  this  is  done,  I  thought  it  fit  that  you 
should  know.  What  care  will  be  taken  of  us, 
who  can  tell?  May  God  pardon  and  bless  us,  for 
Jesus  Christ’s  sake.  I  am,  &c. 

Sam.  Johnson 

Dec.  2,  1784 

My  readers  are  now,  at  last,  to  behold  Samuel 
Johnson  preparing  himself  for  that  doom,  from 
which  the  most  exalted  powers  afford  no  exemp¬ 
tion  to  man.  Death  had  always  been  to  him  an 
object  of  terrour;  so  that,  though  by  no  means 
happy,  he  still  clung  to  life  with  an  eagerness  at 
which  many  have  wondered.  At  any  time  when 
he  was  ill,  he  was  very  much  pleased  to  be  told 
that  he  looked  better.  An  ingenious  member  of 
the  Eumelian  Club ,2  informs  me,  that  upon  one 
occasion  when  he  said  to  him  that  he  saw  health 
returning  to  his  cheek,  Johnson  seized  him  by 
the  hand  and  exclaimed,  “Sir,  you  are  one  of 
the  kindest  friends  I  ever  had.” 

His  own  state  of  his  views  of  futurity  will  ap¬ 
pear  truly  rational;  and  may,  perhaps,  impress 
the  unthinking  with  seriousness. 

“You  know,  (says  he,)3 1  never  thought  confi¬ 
dence  with  respect  to  futurity,  any  part  of  the 
character  of  a  brave,  a  wise,  or  a  good  man.  Brav¬ 
ery  has  no  place  where  it  can  avail  nothing;  wis¬ 
dom  impresses  strongly  the  consciousness  of  those 
faults,  of  which  it  is,  perhaps,  itself  an  aggrava¬ 
tion;  and  goodness,  always  wishing  to  be  better, 
and  imputing  every  deficience  to  criminal  negli¬ 
gence,  and  every  fault  to  voluntary  corruption, 
never  dares  to  suppose  the  condition  of  forgive¬ 
ness  fulfilled,  nor  what  is  wanting  in  the  crime 
supplied  by  penitence. 

“This  is  the  state  of  the  best;  but  what  must 
be  the  condition  of  him  whose  heart  will  not  suf- 

2A  Club  in  London,  founded  by  the  learned  and 
ingenious  physician.  Dr.  Ash,  in  honour  of  whose 
name  it  was  called  Eumelian ,  from  the  Greek 
EujueAtas;  though  it  was  warmly  contended,  and  even 
put  to  a  vote,  that  it  should  have  the  more  obvious 
appellation  of  Fraxinean ,  from  the  Latin. 

3Mrs.  Thrale’s  Collection ,  March  10,  1784.  Vol. 
ii,  p.  350. 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


574 

fer  him  to  rank  himself  among  the  best,  or  among 
the  good?  Such  must  be  his  dread  of  the  ap¬ 
proaching  trial,  as  will  leave  him  little  attention 
to  the  opinion  of  those  whom  he  is  leaving  for 
ever;  and  the  serenity  that  is  not  felt,  it  can  be 
no  virtue  to  feign.” 

His  great  fear  of  death,  and  the  strange  dark 
manner  in  which  Sir  John  Hawkins  imparts  the 
uneasiness  which  he  expressed  on  account  of  of¬ 
fences  with  which  he  charged  himself,  may  give 
occasion  to  injurious  suspicions,  as  if  there  had 
been  something  of  more  than  ordinary  criminal¬ 
ity  weighing  upon  his  conscience.  On  that  ac¬ 
count,  therefore,  as  well  as  from  the  regard  to 
truth  which  he  inculcated,1  I  am  to  mention, 
(with  all  possible  respect  and  delicacy,  howev¬ 
er,)  that  his  conduct,  after  he  came  to  London, 
and  had  associated  with  Savage  and  others,  was 
not  so  strictly  virtuous,  in  one  respect,  as  when 
he  was  a  younger  man.  It  was  well  known,  that 
his  amorous  inclinations  were  uncommonly 
strong  and  impetuous.  He  owned  to  many  of  his 
friends,  that  he  used  to  take  women  of  the  town 
to  taverns,  and  hear  them  relate  their  history.  In 
short,  it  must  not  be  concealed,  that,  like  many 
other  good  and  pious  men,  among  whom  we 
may  place  the  Apostle  Paul  upon  his  own  au¬ 
thority,  Johnson  was  not  free  from  propensities 
which  were  ever  “warring  against  the  law  of  his 
mind,” — and  that  in  his  combats  with  them,  he 
was  sometimes  overcome. 

Here  let  the  profane  and  licentious  pause;  let 
them  not  thoughtlessly  say  that  Johnson  was  an 
hypocrite ,  or  that  his  principles  were  not  firm,  be¬ 
cause  his  practice  was  not  uniformly  conformable 
to  what  he  professed. 

Let  the  question  be  considered  independent 
of  moral  and  religious  association;  and  no  man 
will  deny  that  thousands,  in  many  instances,  act 
against  conviction.  Is  a  prodigal,  for  example, 
an  hypocrite ,  when  he  owns  he  is  satisfied  that  his 
extravagance  will  bring  him  to  ruin  and  misery? 
We  are  sure  he  believes  it;  but  immediate  inclina¬ 
tion,  strengthened  by  indulgence,  prevails  over 
that  belief  in  influencing  his  conduct.  Why  then 
shall  credit  be  refused  to  the  sincerity  of  those 
who  acknowledge  their  persuasion  of  moral  and 
religious  duty,  yet  sometimes  fail  of  living  as  it 
requires?  I  heard  Dr.  Johnson  once  observe, 
“There  is  something  noble  in  publishing  truth, 
though  it  condemns  one’s  self.”2  And  one  who 

^ee  what  he  said  to  Mr.  Malone,  p.  458. 

2 Journal  of  a  Tour  to  the  Hebrides ,  3rd  edit.,  p.  209. 
[Sept.  14.]  On  the  same  subject,  in  his  Letter  to 
Mrs.  Thrale,  dated  Nov.  29,  1783,  he  makes  the 
following  just  observation: — “Life,  to  be  worthy  of 
a  rational  being,  must  be  always  in  progression; 


[  1784 

said  in  his  presence,  “he  had  no  notion  of  people 
being  in  earnest  in  their  good  professions,  whose 
practice  was  not  suitable  to  them,”  was  thus  rep¬ 
rimanded  by  him: — “Sir,  are  you  so  grossly  ig¬ 
norant  of  human  nature  as  not  to  know  that  a 
man  may  be  very  sincere  in  good  principles, 
without  having  good  practice?”3 

But  let  no  man  encourage  or  soothe  himself  in 
“presumptuous  sin,”  from  knowing  that  Johnson 
was  sometimes  hurried  into  indulgences  which 
he  thought  criminal.  I  have  exhibited  this  cir¬ 
cumstance  as  a  shade  in  so  great  a  character, 
both  from  my  sacred  love  of  truth,  and  to  shew 
that  he  was  not  so  weakly  scrupulous  as  he  has 
been  represented  by  those  who  imagine  that 
the  sins,  of  which  a  deep  sense  was  upon  his 
mind,  were  merely  such  little  venial  trifles  as 
pouring  milk  into  his  tea  on  Good-Friday.  His 
understanding  will  be  defended  by  my  state¬ 
ment,  if  his  consistency  of  conduct  be  in  some 
degree  impaired.  But  what  wise  man  would, 
for  momentary  gratifications,  deliberately  sub¬ 
ject  himself  to  suffer  such  uneasiness  as  we 
find  was  experienced  by  Johnson  in  reviewing 
his  conduct  as  compared  with  his  notion  of  the 
ethicks  of  the  gospel?  Let  the  following  passages 
be  kept  in  remembrance: 

“O,  God,  giver  and  preserver  of  all  life,  by 
whose  power  I  was  created,  and  by  whose  provi¬ 
dence  I  am  sustained,  look  down  upon  me  with 
tenderness  and  mercy;  grant  that  I  may  not  have 
been  created  to  be  finally  destroyed;  that  I  may 
not  be  preserved  to  add  wickedness  to  wicked¬ 
ness.”4  “O,  Lord,  let  me  not  sink  into  total  de¬ 
pravity;  look  down  upon  me,  and  rescue  me  at 
last  from  the  captivity  of  sin.”5  “Almighty  and 
most  merciful  Father,  who  hast  continued  my 
life  from  year  to  year,  grant  that  by  longer  life  I 
may  become  less  desirous  of  sinful  pleasures,  and 
more  careful  of  eternal  happiness.”6  “Let  not 
my  years  be  multiplied  to  increase  my  guilt;  but 
as  my  age  advances,  let  me  become  more  pure 
in  my  thoughts,  more  regular  in  my  desires,  and 
more  obedient  to  thy  laws.”7  “Forgive,  O  mer¬ 
ciful  Lord,  whatever  I  have  done  contrary  to 
thy  laws.  Give  me  such  a  sense  of  my  wickedness 

we  must  always  purpose  to  do  more  or  better  than 
in  time  past.  The  mind  is  enlarged  and  elevated 
by  mere  purposes,  though  they  end  as  they  began 

[in  the  original,  begin],  by  airy  contemplation.  We 
compare  and  judge,  though  we  do  not  practise.” 

3, Journal  0/  a  Tour  to  the  Hebrides,  p.  374.  [Oct. 

4 Prayers  and  Meditations ,  p.  47. 

bIbid.,  p.  68. 

Hbid.,  p.  84. 

7 Ibid .,  p.  120. 


BOSWELL 


1784] 

as  may  produce  true  contrition  and  effectual  re¬ 
pentance;  so  that  when  I  shall  be  called  into 
another  state,  I  may  be  received  among  the  sin¬ 
ners  to  whom  sorrow  and  reformation  have  ob¬ 
tained  pardon,  for  Jesus  Christ’s  sake.  Amen.”1 

Such  was  the  distress  of  mind,  such  the  peni¬ 
tence  of  Johnson,  in  his  hours  of  privacy,  and  in 
his  devout  approaches  to  his  Maker.  His  sin¬ 
cerity,  therefore,  must  appear  to  every  candid 
mind  unquestionable. 

It  is  of  essential  consequence  to  keep  in  view, 
that  there  was  in  this  excellent  man’s  conduct 
no  false  principle  of  commutation ,  no  deliberate  in¬ 
dulgence  in  sin,  in  consideration  of  a  counter¬ 
balance  of  duty.  His  offending,  and  his  repent¬ 
ing,  were  distinct  and  separate:2  and  when  we 
consider  his  almost  unexampled  attention  to 
truth,  his  inflexible  integrity,  his  constant  piety, 
who  will  dare  to  “cast  a  stone  at  him?”  Be¬ 
sides,  let  it  never  be  forgotten,  that  he  cannot  be 
charged  with  any  offence  indicating  badness  of 
heart ,  any  thing  dishonest,  base,  or  malignant; 
but  that,  on  the  contrary,  he  was  charitable  in 
an  extraordinary  degree:  so  that  even  in  one  of 
his  own  rigid  judgements  of  himself,  (Easter- 
eve,  1781,)  while  he  says,  “I  have  corrected  no 
external  habits”;  he  is  obliged  to  own,  “I  hope 
that  since  my  last  communion  I  have  advanced, 
by  pious  reflections,  in  my  submission  to  God, 
and  my  benevolence  to  man.”3 

I  am  conscious  that  this  is  the  most  difficult  and 
dangerous  part  of  my  biographical  work,  and  I 
cannot  but  be  very  anxious  concerning  it.  I  trust 
that  I  have  got  through  it,  preserving  at  once 
my  regard  to  truth, — to  my  friend, — and  to  the 
interests  of  virtue  and  religion.  Nor  can  I  appre¬ 
hend  that  more  harm  can  ensue  from  the  knowl¬ 
edge  of  the  irregularity  of  Johnson,  guarded  as  I 
have  stated  it,  than  from  knowing  that  Addison 
and  Parnell  were  intemperate  in  the  use  of  wine; 
which  he  himself,  in  his  Lives  of  those  celebrated 
writers  and  pious  men,  has  not  forborne  to  rec¬ 
ord. 

It  is  not  my  intention  to  give  a  very  minute 
detail  of  the  particulars  of  Johnson’s  remaining 
days,  of  whom  it  was  now  evident,  that  the  crisis 
was  fast  approaching,  when  he  must  “die  like 
men ,  and  fall  like  one  of  the  Princes Yet  it  will  be 
instructive,  as  well  as  gratifying  to  the  curiosity 

Ubid.,  p.  130. 

2Dr.  Johnson  related,  with  very  earnest  appro¬ 
bation,  a  story  of  a  gentleman,  who,  in  an  impulse 
of  passion,  overcame  the  virtue  of  a  young  woman. 
When  she  said  to  him,  “I  am  afraid  we  have  done 
wrong!”  he  answered,  “Yes,  we  have  done  wrong; 
— for  I  would  not  debauch  her  mind." 

3 Prayers  and  Meditations ,  p.  192. 


575 

of  my  readers,  to  record  a  few  circumstances,  on 
the  authenticity  of  which  they  may  perfectly  re¬ 
ly,  as  I  have  been  at  the  utmost  pains  to  obtain 
an  accurate  account  of  his  last  illness,  from  the 
best  authority. 

Dr.  Heberden,  Dr.  Brocklesby,  Dr.  Warren, 
and  Dr.  Butter,  physicians,  generously  attended 
him,  without  accepting  any  fees,  as  did  Mr. 
Cruikshank,  surgeon;  and  all  that  could  be  done 
from  professional  skill  and  ability,  was  tried,  to 
prolong  a  life  so  truly  valuable.  He  himself,  in¬ 
deed,  having,  on  account  of  his  very  bad  consti¬ 
tution,  been  perpetually  applying  himself  to 
medical  inquiries,  united  his  own  efforts  with 
those  of  the  gentlemen  who  attended  him;  and 
imagining  that  the  dropsical  collection  of  water 
which  oppressed  him  might  be  drawn  off  by 
making  incisions  in  his  body,  he,  with  his  usual 
resolute  defiance  of  pain,  cut  deep,  when  he 
thought  that  his  surgeon  had  done  it  too  ten¬ 
derly.4 

About  eight  or  ten  days  before  his  death,  when 
Dr.  Brocklesby  paid  him  his  morning  visit,  he 
seemed  very  low  and  desponding,  and  said,  “I 
have  been  as  a  dying  man  all  night.”  He  then 
emphatically  broke  out  in  the  words  of  Shaks- 
peare: 

Can'st  thou  not  minister  to  a  mind  diseas'd; 

Pluck  from  the  memory  a  rooted  sorrow ; 

Raze  out  the  written  troubles  of  the  brain; 

And ,  with  some  sweet  oblivious  antidote , 

Cleanse  the  stuff'd  bosom  of  that  perilous  stuff , 

Which  weighs  upon  the  heart? 

To  which  Dr.  Brocklesby  readily  answered,  from 
the  same  great  poet: 

- therein  the  patient 

Must  minister  to  himself. 

Johnson  expressed  himself  much  satisfied  with 
the  application. 

On  another  day  after  this,  when  talking  on 
the  subject  of  prayer,  Dr.  Brocklesby  repeated 
from  Juvenal, 

Orandum  est ,  ut  sit  mens  sana  in  corpore  sano , 

and  so  on  to  the  end  of  the  tenth  satire;  but  in 
running  it  quickly  over,  he  happened,  in  the 
line, 

Qui  spatium  vita  extremum  inter  munera  ponat , 

4This  bold  experiment,  Sir  John  Hawkins  has 
related  in  such  a  manner  as  to  suggest  a  charge 
against  Johnson  of  intentionally  hastening  his  end; 
a  charge  so  very  inconsistent  with  his  character  in 
every  respect,  that  it  is  injurious  even  to  refute  it, 
as  Sir  John  has  thought  it  necessary  to  do.  It  is 
evident,  that  what  Johnson  did  in  hopes  of  relief, 
indicated  an  extraordinary  eagerness  to  retard  his 
dissolution. 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


BOSWELL 


576 

to  pronounce  supremum  for  extremum ;  at  which 
Johnson’s  critical  ear  instantly  took  offence,  and 
discoursing  vehemently  on  the  unmetrical  ef¬ 
fect  of  such  a  lapse,  he  shewed  himself  as  full  as 
ever  of  the  spirit  of  the  grammarian. 

Having  no  near  relations,  it  had  been  for  some 
time  Johnson’s  intention  to  make  a  liberal  pro¬ 
vision  for  his  faithful  servant,  Mr.  Francis  Bar¬ 
ber,  whom  he  looked  upon  as  particularly  under 
his  protection,  and  whom  he  had  all  along 
treated  truly  as  an  humble  friend.  Having  asked 
Dr.  Brocklesby  what  would  be  a  proper  annuity 
to  a  favourite  servant,  and  being  answered  that 
it  must  depend  on  the  circumstances  of  the  mas¬ 
ter;  and,  that  in  the  case  of  a  nobleman,  fifty 
pounds  a  year  was  considered  as  an  adequate  re¬ 
ward  for  many  years’  faithful  service;  “Then, 
(said  Johnson,)  shall  I  be  nobilissimus ,  for  I  mean 
to  leave  Frank  seventy  pounds  a  year,  and  I  de¬ 
sire  you  to  tell  him  so.”  It  is  strange,  however, 
to  think,  that  Johnson  was  not  free  from  that 
general  weakness  of  being  averse  to  execute  a 
will,  so  that  he  delayed  it  from  time  to  time;  and 
had  it  not  been  for  Sir  John  Hawkins’s  repeated¬ 
ly  urging  it,  I  think  it  is  probable  that  his  kind 
resolution  would  not  have  been  fulfilled.  After 
making  one,  which,  as  Sir  John  Hawkins  in¬ 
forms  us,  extended  no  further  than  the  prom¬ 
ised  annuity,  Johnson’s  final  disposition  of  his 
property  was  established  by  a  Will  and  Codicil, 
of  which  copies  are  subjoined.1 

14Tn  the  name  of  God.  Amen.  I,  Samuel  John¬ 
son,  being  in  full  possession  of  my  faculties,  but 
fearing  this  night  may  put  an  end  to  my  life,  do  or¬ 
dain  this  my  last  Will  and  Testament.  I  bequeath 
to  God,  a  soul  polluted  with  many  sins,  but  I  hope 
purified  by  Jesus  Christ.  I  leave  seven  hundred 
and  fifty  pounds  in  the  hands  of  Bennet  Langton, 
Esq.:  three  hundred  pounds  in  the  hands  of  Mr. 
Barclay  and  Mr.  Perkins,  brewers;  one  hundred 
and  fifty  pounds  in  the  hands  of  Dr.  Percy,  Bishop 
of  Dromore;  one  thousand  pounds,  three  per  cent . 
annuities,  in  the  publick  funds;  and  one  hundred 
pounds  now  lying  by  me  in  ready  money:  all  these 
before-mentioned  sums  and  property  I  leave,  I  say, 
to  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  Sir  John  Hawkins,  and  Dr. 
William  Scott,  of  Doctors  Commons,  in  trust,  for 
the  following  uses: — That  is  to  say,  to  pay  to  the 
representatives  of  the  late  William  Innys,  book¬ 
seller,  in  St.  Paul’s  Church-yard,  the  sum  of  two 
hundred  pounds;  to  Mrs.  White,  my  female  ser¬ 
vant,  one  hundred  pounds  stock  in  the  three  per 
cent,  annuities  aforesaid.  The  rest  of  the  aforesaid 
sums  of  money  and  property,  together  with  my 
books,  plate,  and  household  furniture,  I  leave  to 
the  before-mentioned  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  Sir 
John  Hawkins,  and  Dr.  William  Scott,  also  in 
trust,  to  be  applied,  after  paying  my  debts,  to  the 
use  of  Francis  Barber,  my  man-servant,  a  negro,  in 
such  a  manner  as  they  shall  judge  most  fit  and 
available  to  his  benefit.  And  I  appoint  the  afore¬ 
said  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  Sir  John  Hawkins,  and 


[  1784 

The  consideration  of  numerous  papers  of  which 
he  was  possessed,  seems  to  have  struck  Johnson’s 
mind,  with  a  sudden  anxiety,  and  as  they  were 
in  great  confusion,  it  is  much  to  be  lamented 
that  he  had  not  entrusted  some  faithful  and  dis- 


Dr.  William  Scott,  sole  executors  of  this  my  last 
will  and  testament,  hereby  revoking  all  former  wills 
and  testaments  whatever.  In  witness  whereof  I 
hereunto  subscribe  my  name,  and  affix  my  seal, 
this  eighth  day  of  December,  1 784. 

“Sam.  Johnson  (L.  S.) 

“Signed,  sealed,  published,  declared,  and  de¬ 
livered,  by  the  said  testator,  as  his  last  will 
and  testament,  in  the  presence  of  us,  the  word 
two  being  first  inserted  in  the  opposite  page. 

“George  Strahan 
“John  Desmoulins” 

“By  way  of  Codicil  to  my  last  Will  and  Testa¬ 
ment,  I,  Samuel  Johnson,  give,  devise,  and  be¬ 
queath,  my  messuage  or  tenement  situate  at  Lich¬ 
field,  in  the  county  of  Stafford,  with  the  appurte¬ 
nances,  in  the  tenure  or  occupation  of  Mrs.  Bond, 
of  Lichfield  aforesaid,  or  of  Mr.  Hinchman,  her 
under-tenant,  to  my  executors,  in  trust,  to  sell  and 
dispose  of  the  same;  and  the  money  arising  from 
such  sale  I  give  and  bequeath  as  follows,  viz.  to 
Thomas  and  Benjamin,  the  sons  of  Fisher  Johnson, 

late  of  Leicester,  and  -  Whiting,  daughter  of 

Thomas  Johnson,  late  of  Coventry,  and  the  grand¬ 
daughter  of  the  said  Thomas  Johnson,  one  full  and 
equal  fourth  part  each;  but  in  case  there  shall  be 
more  grand-daughters  than  one  of  the  said  Thomas 
Johnson,  living  at  the  time  of  my  decease,  I  give 
and  bequeath  the  part  or  share  of  that  one  to  and 
equally  between  such  grand-daughters.  I  give  and 
bequeath  to  the  Rev.  Mr.  Rogers,  of  Berkley,  near 
Froom,  in  the  county  of  Somerset,  the  sum  of  one 
hundred  pounds,  requesting  him  to  apply  the  same 
towards  the  maintenance  of  Elizabeth  Herne,  a 
lunatick.  I  also  give  and  bequeath  to  my  god-chil¬ 
dren,  the  son  and  daughter  of  Mauritius  Lowe, 
painter,  each  of  them,  one  hundred  pounds  of  my 
stock  in  the  three  per  cent,  consolidated  annuities, 
to  be  applied  and  disposed  of  by  and  at  the  discre¬ 
tion  of  my  Executors,  in  the  education  or  settle¬ 
ment  in  the  world  of  them  my  said  legatees.  Also  I 
give  and  bequeath  to  Sir  John  Hawkins,  one  of  my 
Executors,  the  Annales  Ecclesiastici  of  Baronius, 
and  Holinshed’s  and  Stowe’s  Chronicles,  and  also 
an  octavo  Common  Prayer-Book.  To  Bennet  Lang¬ 
ton,  Esq.  I  give  and  bequeath  my  Polyglot  Bible. 
To  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  my  great  French  Diction¬ 
ary,  by  Martiniere,  and  my  own  copy  of  my  folio 
English  Dictionary,  of  the  last  revision.  To  Dr. 
William  Scott,  one  of  my  Executors,  the  Diction- 
naire  de  Commerce,  and  Lectius’s  edition  of  the 
Greek  poets.  To  Mr.  Windham,  Poetae  Graeci  He- 
roici  per  Henricum  Stephanum.  To  the  Rev.  Mr. 
Strahan,  vicar  of  Islington,  in  Middlesex,  Mill’s 
Greek  Testament,  Beza’s  Greek  Testament,  by 
Stephens,  all  my  Latin  Bibles,  and  my  Greek  Bible, 
by  Wechelius.  To  Dr.  Heberden,  Dr.  Brocklesby, 
Dr.  Butter,  and  Mr.  Cruikshank,  the  surgeon  who 
attended  me,  Mr.  Holder,  my  apothecary,  Gerard 
Hamilton,  Esq.,  Mrs.  Gardiner,  of  Snow-hill,  Mrs. 
Frances  Reynolds,  Mr.  Hoole,  and  the  Reverend 


1784]  life  of 

creet  person  with  the  care  and  selection  of  them; 
instead  of  which,  he  in  a  precipitate  manner, 
burnt  large  masses  of  them,  with  little  regard,  as 
I  apprehend,  to  discrimination.  Not  that  I  sup¬ 
pose  we  have  thus  been  deprived  of  any  compo- 


Mr.  Hoole,  his  son,  each  a  book  at  their  election, 
to  keep  as  a  token  of  remembrance.  I  also  give  and 
bequeath  to  Mr.  John  Desmoulins,  two  hundred 
pounds  consolidated  three  per  cent,  annuities:  and 
to  Mr.  Sastres,  the  Italian  master,  the  sum  of  five 
pounds,  to  be  laid  out  in  books  of  piety  for  his  own 
use.  And  whereas  the  said  Bennet  Langton  hath 
agreed,  in  consideration  of  the  sum  of  seven  hun¬ 
dred  and  fifty  pounds,  mentioned  in  my  Will  to  be 
in  his  hands,  to  grant  and  secure  an  annuity  of 
seventy  pounds  payable  during  the  life  of  me  and 
my  servant,  Francis  Barber,  and  the  life  of  the  sur¬ 
vivor  of  us,  to  Mr.  George  Stubbs,  in  trust  for  us; 
my  mind  and  will  is,  that  in  case  of  my  decease 
before  the  said  agreement  shall  be  perfected,  the 
said  sum  of  seven  hundred  and  fifty  pounds,  and 
the  bond  for  securing  the  said  sum,  shall  go  to  the 
said  Francis  Barber;  and  I  hereby  give  and  be¬ 
queath  to  him  the  same,  in  lieu  of  the  bequest  in 
his  favour,  contained  in  my  said  Will.  And  I  here¬ 
by  empower  my  Executors  to  deduct  and  retain  all 
expences  that  shall  or  may  be  incurred  in  the  ex¬ 
ecution  of  my  said  Will,  or  of  this  Codicil  thereto, 
out  of  such  estate  and  effects  as  I  shall  die  possessed 
of.  All  the  rest,  residue,  and  remainder,  of  my  es¬ 
tate  and  effects,  I  give  and  bequeath  to  my  said 
Executors,  in  trust  for  the  said  Francis  Barber,  his 
Executors  and  Administrators.  Witness  my  hand 
and  seal,  this  ninth  day  of  December,  1 784. 

“Sam.  Johnson  (L.  S.) 

“Signed,  sealed,  published,  declared,  and  deliv¬ 
ered,  by  the  said  Samuel  Johnson,  as,  and  for  a 
Codicil  to  his  last  Will  and  Testament,  in  the 
presence  of  us,  who,  in  his  presence,  and  at  his 
request,  and  also  in  the  presence  of  each  other, 
have  hereto  subscribed  our  names  as  witnesses. 

“John  Copley 
“William  Gibson 
“Henry  Cole” 

Upon  these  testamentary  deeds  it  is  proper  to 
make  a  few  observations. 

His  express  declaration  with  his  dying  breath  as 
a  Christian,  as  it  had  been  often  practised  in  such 
solemn  writings,  was  of  real  consequence  from  this 
great  man;  for  the  conviction  of  a  mind  equally 
acute  and  strong,  might  well  overbalance  the 
doubts  of  others,  who  were  his  contemporaries. 
The  expression  polluted ,  may,  to  some,  convey  an 
impression  of  more  than  ordinary  contamination; 
but  that  is  not  warranted  by  its  genuine  meaning, 
as  appears  from  The  Rambler ,  No.  42.  The  same 
word  is  used  in  the  will  of  Dr.  Sanderson,  Bishop 
of  Lincoln,  who  was  piety  itself. 

His  legacy  of  two  hundred  pounds  to  the  repre¬ 
sentatives  of  Mr.  Innys,  bookseller,  in  St.  Paul’s 
Church-yard,  proceeded  from  a  very  worthy  mo¬ 
tive.  He  told  Sir  John  Hawkins,  that  his  father 
having  become  a  bankrupt,  Mr.  Innys  had  as¬ 
sisted  him  with  money  or  credit  to  continue  his 
business.  “This,  (said  he,)  I  consider  as  an  obliga¬ 
tion  on  me  to  be  grateful  to  his  descendants.” 


JOHNSON  577 

sitions  which  he  had  ever  intended  for  the  pub- 
lick  eye;  but,  from  what  escaped  the  flames,  I 
judge  that  many  curious  circumstances  relating 
both  to  himself  and  other  literary  characters 
have  perished. 


The  amount  of  his  property  proved  to  be  con¬ 
siderably  more  than  he  had  supposed  it  to  be.  Sir 
John  Hawkins  estimates  the  bequest  to  Francis 
Barber  at  a  sum  little  short  of  fifteen  hundred 
pounds,  including  an  annuity  of  seventy  pounds 
to  be  paid  to  him  by  Mr.  Langton,  in  considera¬ 
tion  of  seven  hundred  and  fifty  pounds,  which 
Johnson  had  lent  to  that  gentleman.  Sir  John 
seems  not  a  little  angry  at  this  bequest,  and  mut¬ 
ters  “a  caveat  against  ostentatious  bounty  and 
favour  to  negroes.”  But  surely  when  a  man  has 
money  entirely  of  his  own  acquisition,  especially 
when  he  has  no  near  relations,  he  may,  without 
blame,  dispose  of  it  as  he  pleases,  and  with  great 
propriety  to  a  faithful  servant.  Mr.  Barber,  by  the 
recommendation  of  his  master,  retired  to  Lich¬ 
field,  where  he  might  pass  the  rest  of  his  days  in 
comfort. 

It  has  been  objected  that  Johnson  has  omitted 
many  of  his  best  friends,  when  leaving  books  to 
several  as  tokens  of  his  last  remembrance.  The 
names  of  Dr.  Adams,  Dr.  Taylor,  Dr.  Burney,  Mr. 
Hector,  Mr.  Murphy,  the  Authour  of  this  Work, 
and  others  who  were  intimate  with  him,  are  not  to 
be  found  in  his  Will.  This  may  be  accounted  for 
by  considering,  that  as  he  was  very  near  his  dis¬ 
solution  at  the  time,  he  probably  mentioned  such 
as  happened  to  occur  to  him;  and  that  he  may 
have  recollected,  that  he  had  formerly  shewn  others 
such  proofs  of  his  regard,  that  it  was  not  necessary 
to  crowd  his  Will  with  their  names.  Mrs.  Lucy 
Porter  was  much  displeased  that  nothing  was  left 
to  her;  but  besides  what  I  have  now  stated,  she 
should  have  considered,  that  she  had  left  nothing 
to  Johnson  by  her  Will,  which  was  made  during 
his  life-time,  as  appeared  at  her  decease. 

His  enumerating  several  persons  in  one  group, 
and  leaving  them  “each  a  book  at  their  election,” 
might  possibly  have  given  occasion  to  a  curious 
question  as  to  the  order  of  choice,  had  they  not 
luckily  fixed  on  different  books.  His  library,  though 
by  no  means  handsome  in  its  appearance,  was  sold 
by  Mr.  Christie,  for  two  hundred  and  forty-seven 
pounds,  nine  shillings;  many  people  being  desirous 
to  have  a  book  which  had  belonged  to  Johnson.  In 
many  of  them  he  had  written  little  notes:  some¬ 
times  tender  memorials  of  his  departed  wife;  as, 
“This  was  dear  Tetty’s  book”:  sometimes  occa¬ 
sional  remarks  of  different  sorts.  Mrs.  Lysons,  of 
Clifford’s  Inn,  has  favoured  me  with  the  two  fol¬ 
lowing: 

In  Holy  Rules  and  Helps  to  Devotion ,  by  Bryan 
Duppa,  Lord  Bishop  of  Winton,  “ Preces  quidam 
(?  quidem )  videtur  diligenter  tractasse;  spero  non  inaudi- 
tus  (?  inauditas) .” 

In  The  Rosicrucian  infallible  Axiomata ,  by  John 
Heydon,  Gent.,  prefixed  to  which  are  some  verses 
addressed  to  the  authour,  signed  Ambr.  Waters, 
A.M.,  Coll.  Ex.  Oxon.  “  These  Latin  verses  were  writ¬ 
ten  to  Hobbes  by  Bathurst ,  upon  his  Treatise  on  Human 

Nature ,  and  have  no  relation  to  the  book . - An  odd 

fraud T 


578 

Two  very  valuable  articles,  I  am  sure,  we 
have  lost,  which  were  two  quarto  volumes,  con¬ 
taining  a  full,  fair,  and  most  particular  account 
of  his  own  life,  from  his  earliest  recollection.  I 
owned  to  him,  that  having  accidentally  seen 
them,  I  had  read  a  great  deal  in  them;  and  apol¬ 
ogizing  for  the  liberty  I  had  taken,  asked  him  if 
I  could  help  it.  He  placidly  answered,  “Why, 
Sir,  I  do  not  think  you  could  have  helped  it.”  I 
said  that  I  had,  for  once  in  my  life,  felt  half  an 
inclination  to  commit  theft.  It  had  come  into  my 
mind  to  carry  off  those  two  volumes,  and  never 
see  him  more.  Upon  my  inquiring  how  this  would 
have  affected  him,  “Sir,  (said  he,)  I  believe  I 
should  have  gone  mad.”1 

During  his  last  illness,  Johnson  experienced 
the  steady  and  kind  attachment  of  his  numerous 
friends.  Mr.  Hoole  has  drawn  up  a  narrative  of 
what  passed  in  the  visits  which  he  paid  him  dur¬ 
ing  that  time,  from  the  10th  of  November  to  the 
13th  of  December,  the  day  of  his  death,  inclu¬ 
sive,  and  has  favoured  me  with  a  perusal  of  it, 
with  permission  to  make  extracts,  which  I  have 
done.  Nobody  was  more  attentive  to  him  than 
Mr.  Langton,  to  whom  he  tenderly  said,  Te  te- 
neam  moriens  deficiente  mam.  And  I  think  it  highly 
to  the  honour  of  Mr.  Windham,  that  his  impor¬ 
tant  occupations  as  an  active  statesman  did  not 
prevent  him  from  paying  assiduous  respect  to 
the  dying  Sage  whom  he  revered.  Mr.  Langton 
informs  me,  that,  “one  day  he  found  Mr.  Burke 
and  four  or  five  more  friends  sitting  with  John- 


iOne  of  these  volumes,  Sir  John  Hawkins  in¬ 
forms  us,  he  put  into  his  pocket;  for  which  the  ex¬ 
cuse  he  states  is,  that  he  meant  to  preserve  it  from 
falling  into  the  hands  of  a  person  whom  he  de¬ 
scribes  so  as  to  make  it  sufficiently  clear  who  is 
meant;  “having  strong  reasons  (said  he,)  to  sus¬ 
pect  that  this  man  might  find  and  make  an  ill  use 
of  the  book.”  Why  Sir  John  should  suppose  that 
the  gentleman  alluded  to  would  act  in  this  man¬ 
ner,  he  has  not  thought  fit  to  explain.  But  what  he 
did  was  not  approved  of  by  Johnson;  who,  upon 
being  acquainted  of  it  without  delay  by  a  friend, 
expressed  great  indignation,  and  warmly  insisted 
on  the  book  being  delivered  up;  and,  afterwards, 
in  the  supposition  of  his  missing  it,  without  know¬ 
ing  by  whom  it  had  been  taken,  he  said,  “Sir,  I 
should  have  gone  out  of  the  world  distrusting  half 
mankind.”  Sir  John  next  day  wrrote  a  letter  to 
Johnson,  assigning  reasons  for  his  conduct;  upon 
which  Johnson  observed  to  Mr.  Langton,  “Bishop 
Sanderson  could  not  have  dictated  a  better  letter. 
I  could  almost  say,  Melius  est  sic  peniiuisse  quam  non 
errasse .”  The  agitation  into  which  Johnson  was 
thrown  by  this  incident,  probably  made  him  hast¬ 
ily  burn  those  precious  records  which  must  ever 
be  regretted. 


[  1784 

son.  Mr.  Burke  said  to  him,  T  am  afraid,  Sir, 
such  a  number  of  us  may  be  oppressive  to  you.’ 
‘No,  Sir,  (said  Johnson,)  it  is  not  so;  and  I  must 
be  in  a  wretched  state,  indeed,  when  your  com¬ 
pany  would  not  be  a  delight  to  me.5  Mr.  Burke, 
in  a  tremulous  voice,  expressive  of  being  very 
tenderly  affected,  replied,  ‘My  dear  Sir,  you 
have  always  been  too  good  to  me.5  Immediately 
afterwards  he  went  away.  This  was  the  last  cir¬ 
cumstance  in  the  acquaintance  of  these  two  emi¬ 
nent  men.” 

The  following  particulars  of  his  conversation 
within  a  few  days  of  his  death,  I  give  on  the 
authority  of  Mr.  John  Nichols:2 

2On  the  same  undoubted  authority,  I  give  a  few 
articles,  which  should  have  been  inserted  in  chron¬ 
ological  order;  but  which,  now  that  they  are  before 
me,  I  should  be  sorry  to  omit: 

“In  1736,  Dr.  Johnson  had  a  particular  inclina¬ 
tion  to  have  been  engaged  as  an  assistant  to  the 
Reverend  Mr.  Budworth,  then  head  master  of  the 
Grammar-school,  at  Brewood,  in  Staffordshire, 
‘an  excellent  person,  who  possessed  every  talent  of 
a  perfect  instructor  of  youth,  in  a  degree  which, 
(to  use  the  words  of  one  of  the  brightest  ornaments 
of  literature,  the  Reverend  Dr.  Hurd,  Bishop  of 
Worcester,)  has  been  rarely  found  in  any  of  that 
profession  since  the  days  of  Quintilian.’  Mr.  Bud- 
worth,  ‘who  was  less  known  in  his  life-time,  from 
that  obscure  situation  to  which  the  caprice  of  for¬ 
tune  oft  condemns  the  most  accomplished  charac¬ 
ters,  than  his  highest  merit  deserved,’  had  been 
bred  under  Mr.  Blackwell  [Blackwall],  at  Market 
Bosworth,  where  Johnson  was  some  time  an  usher 
[■ ante ,p.  18];  which  might  naturally  lead  to  the  ap¬ 
plication.  Mr.  Budworth  was  certainly  no  stranger 
to  the  learning  or  abilities  of  Johnson;  as  he  more 
than  once  lamented  his  having  been  under  the 
necessity  of  declining  the  engagement,  from  an  ap¬ 
prehension  that  the  paralytick  affection,  under 
which  our  great  Philologist  laboured  through  life, 
might  become  the  object  of  imitation  or  of  ridicule, 
among  his  pupils.”  Captain  Budworth,  his  grand¬ 
son,  has  confirmed  to  me  this  anecdote. 

“Among  the  early  associates  of  Johnson,  at  St. 
John’s  Gate,  was  Samuel  Boyse,  well  known  by  his 
ingenious  productions;  and  not  less  noted  for  his 
imprudence.  It  was  not  unusual  for  Boyse  to  be  a 
customer  to  the  pawnbroker.  On  one  of  these  oc¬ 
casions,  Dr.  Johnson  collected  a  sum  of  money  to 
redeem  his  friend’s  clothes,  which  in  two  days  after 
were  pawned  again.  ‘The  sum,  (said  Johnson,) 
was  collected  by  sixpences,  at  a  time  when  to  me 
sixpence  was  a  serious  consideration.’ 

“Speaking  one  day  of  a  person  for  whom  he  had 
a  real  friendship,  but  in  whom  vanity  was  some¬ 
what  too  predominant,  he  observed,  that  ‘Kelly 
was  so  fond  of  displaying  on  his  sideboard  the 
plate  which  he  possessed,  that  he  added  to  it  his 
spurs.  For  my  part,  (said  he,)  I  never  was  master 
of  a  pair  of  spurs,  but  once;  and  they  are  now  at 
the  bottom  of  the  ocean.  By  the  carelessness  of 


BOSWELL 


1784] 

“He  said,  that  the  Parliamentary  Debates 
were  the  only  part  of  his  writings  which  then 
gave  him  any  compunction:  but  that  at  the  time 
he  wrote  them,  he  had  no  conception  he  was 
imposing  upon  the  world,  though  they  were  fre¬ 
quently  written  from  very  slender  materials,  and 
often  from  none  at  all, — the  mere  coinage  of  his 
own  imagination.  He  never  wrote  any  part  of 
his  works  with  equal  velocity.  Three  columns  of 
the  Magazine ,  in  an  hour,  was  no  uncommon 
effort,  which  was  faster  than  most  persons  could 
have  transcribed  that  quantity. 

“Of  his  friend  Cave,  he  always  spoke  with 
great  affection.  'Yet  (said  he,)  Cave,  (who  never 
looked  out  of  his  window,  but  with  a  view  to  The 
Gentleman's  Magazine ,)  wTas  a  penurious  pay-mas¬ 
ter;  he  would  contract  for  lines  by  the  hundred, 
and  expect  the  long  hundred;  but  he  was  a  good 
man,  and  always  delighted  to  have  his  friends 
at  his  table.’ 

“When  talking  of  a  regular  edition  of  his  own 
works,  he  said,  'that  he  had  power,  [from  the 
booksellers,]  to  print  such  an  edition,  if  his  health 
admitted  it;  but  had  no  power  to  assign  over 
any  edition,  unless  he  could  add  notes,  and  so 
alter  them  as  to  make  them  new  works;  which 
his  state  of  health  forbade  him  to  think  of.  I  may 
possibly  live,  (said  he,)  or  rather  breath,  three 
days,  or  perhaps  three  weeks;  but  find  myself 
daily  and  gradually  weaker.’ 

“He  said  at  another  time,  three  or  four  days 
only  before  his  death,  speaking  of  the  little  fear 
he  had  of  undergoing  a  chirurgical  operation, 
'I  would  give  one  of  these  legs  for  a  year  more  of 
life,  I  mean  of  comfortable  life,  not  such  as  that 


Boswell’s  servant,  they  were  dropped  from  the  end 
of  the  boat,  on  our  return  from  the  Isle  of  Sky.’  ” 

The  late  Reverend  Mr.  Samuel  Badcock,  hav¬ 
ing  been  introduced  to  Dr.  Johnson,  by  Mr.  Nich¬ 
ols,  some  years  before  his  death,  thus  expressed 
himself  in  a  letter  to  that  gentleman: 

“How  much  I  am  obliged  to  you  for  the  favour 
you  did  me  in  introducing  me  to  Dr.  Johnson! 
Tantum  vidi  Virgilium.  But  to  have  seen  him  and  to 
have  received  a  testimony  of  respect  from  him,  was 
enough.  I  recollect  all  the  conversation,  and  shall 
never  forget  one  of  his  expressions.  Speaking  of  Dr. 
p  *****?*  £  Priestley  ] ,  (whose  writings,  I  saw,  he 
estimated  at  a  low  rate,)  he  said, 4  You  have  proved 
him  as  deficient,  in  probity  as  he  is  in  learning.’  I 
called  him  an  4 Index-scholar ’ ;  but  he  was  not  willing 
to  allow  him  a  claim  even  to  that  merit.  He  said, 
that  she  borrowed  from  those  who  had  been  bor¬ 
rowers  themselves,  and  did  not  know  that  the  mis¬ 
takes  he  adopted  had  been  answered  by  others.’  I 
often  think  of  our  short,  but  precious,  visit  to  this 
great  man.  1  shall  consider  it  as  a  kind  of  an  <zra  in 
my  life.” 


579 

which  I  now  suffer’; — and  lamented  much  his 
inability  to  read  during  his  hours  of  restlessness; 
'I  used  formerly,  (he  added,)  when  sleepless  in 
bed,  to  read  like  a  Turk' 

“Whilst  confined  by  his  last  illness,  it  was  his 
regular  practice  to  have  the  church-service  read 
to  him,  by  some  attentive  and  friendly  Divine. 
The  Rev.  Mr.  Hoole  performed  this  kind  office 
in  my  presence  for  the  last  time,  when,  by  his 
own  desire,  no  more  than  the  Litany  was  read; 
in  which  his  responses  were  in  the  deep  and 
sonorous  voice  which  Mr.  Boswell  has  occasion¬ 
ally  noticed,  and  with  the  most  profound  devo¬ 
tion  that  can  be  imagined.  His  hearing  not  be¬ 
ing  quite  perfect,  he  more  than  once  interrupted 
Mr.  Hoole,  with  'Louder,  my  dear  Sir,  louder,  I 
entreat  you,  or  you  pray  in  vain!’ — and,  when 
the  service  was  ended,  he,  with  great  earnest¬ 
ness,  turned  round  to  an  excellent  lady  who  was 
present,  saying,  'I  thank  you,  Madam,  very 
heartily,  for  your  kindness  in  joining  me  in  this 
solemn  exercise.  Live  well,  I  conjure  you;  and 
you  will  not  feel  the  compunction  at  the  last, 
which  I  now  feel.’  So  truly  humble  were  the 
thoughts  which  this  great  and  good  man  enter¬ 
tained  of  his  own  approaches  to  religious  perfec¬ 
tion. 

“He  was  earnestly  invited  to  publish  a  vol¬ 
ume  of  Devotional  Exercises;  but  this,  (though 
he  listened  to  the  proposal  with  much  compla¬ 
cency,  and  a  large  sum  of  money  was  offered  for 
it,)  he  declined,  from  motives  of  the  sincerest 
modesty. 

“He  seriously  entertained  the  thought  of  trans¬ 
lating  Thuanus.  He  often  talked  to  me  on  the 
subject;  and  once,  in  particular,  when  I  was 
rather  wishing  that  he  would  favour  the  world, 
and  gratify  his  sovereign,  by  a  Life  of  Spenser, 
(which  he  said  that  he  would  readily  have  done, 
had  he  been  able  to  obtain  any  new  materials 
for  the  purpose,)  he  added,  'I  have  been  think¬ 
ing  again,  Sir,  of  Thuanus:  it  would  not  be  the 
laborious  task  which  you  have  supposed  it.  I 
should  have  no  trouble  but  that  of  dictation, 
which  would  be  performed  as  speedily  as  an 
amanuensis  could  write.’  ” 

It  is  to  the  mutual  credit  of  Johnson  and  Di¬ 
vines  of  different  communions,  that  although  he 
was  a  steady  Chuch-of-England  man,  there  was, 
nevertheless,  much  agreeable  intercourse  be¬ 
tween  him  and  them.  Let  me  particularly  name 
the  late  Mr.  La  Trobe,  and  Mr.  Hutton,  of  the 
Moravian  profession.  His  intimacy  with  the  Eng¬ 
lish  Benedictines,  at  Paris,  has  been  mentioned; 
and  as  an  additional  proof  of  the  charity  in 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


BOSWELL 


[  1784 


58° 

which  he  lived  with  good  men  of  the  Romish 
Church,  I  am  happy  in  this  opportunity  of  re¬ 
cording  his  friendship  with  the  Reverend  Thom¬ 
as  Hussey,  D.D.,  His  Catholick  Majesty’s  Chap¬ 
lain  of  Embassy  at  the  Court  of  London,  that 
very  respectable  man,  eminent  not  only  for  his 
powerful  eloquence  as  a  preacher,  but  for  his 
various  abilities  and  acquisitions.  Nay,  though 
Johnson  loved  a  Presbyterian  the  least  of  all, 
this  did  not  prevent  his  having  a  long  and  unin¬ 
terrupted  social  connection  with  the  Reverend 
Dr.  James  Fordvce,  who,  since  his  death,  hath 
gratefully  celebrated  him  in  a  warm  strain  of 
devotional  composition. 

Amidst  the  melancholy  clouds  which  hung 
over  the  dyingjohnson,  his  characteristical  man¬ 
ner  shewed  itself  on  different  occasions. 

When  Dr.  Warren,  in  the  usual  style,  hoped 
that  he  was  better;  his  answer  was,  “No,  Sir; 
you  cannot  conceive  with  what  acceleration  I 
advance  towards  death.” 

A  man  whom  he  had  never  seen  before  was 
employed  one  night  to  sit  up  with  him.  Being 
asked  next  morning  how  he  liked  his  attendant, 
his  answer  was,  “Not  at  all,  Sir:  the  fellow’s 
an  idiot;  he  is  as  awkward  as  a  turnspit  when 
first  put  into  the  wheel,  and  as  sleepy  as  a  dor¬ 
mouse.” 

Mr.  Windham  having  placed  a  pillow  con¬ 
veniently  to  support  him,  he  thanked  him  for 
his  kindness,  and  said,  “That  will  do, — all  that 
a  pillow  can  do.” 

He  repeated  with  great  spirit  a  poem,  consist¬ 
ing  of  several  stanzas,  in  four  lines,  in  alternate 
rhyme,  which  he  said  he  had  composed  some 
years  before,  on  occasion  of  a  rich,  extravagant 
young  gentleman’s  coming  of  age;  saying  he  had 
never  repeated  it  but  once  since  he  composed  it, 
and  had  given  but  one  copy  of  it.  That  copy  was 
given  to  Mrs.  Thrale,  now  Piozzi,  who  has  pub¬ 
lished  it  in  a  Book  which  she  entitles  British  Syn¬ 
onymy,  but  which  is  truly  a  collection  of  enter¬ 
taining  remarks  and  stories,  no  matter  whether 
accurate  or  not.  Being  a  piece  of  exquisite  satire, 
conveyed  in  a  strain  of  pointed  vivacity  and  hu¬ 
mour,  and  in  a  manner  of  which  no  other  in¬ 
stance  is  to  be  found  in  Johnson’s  writings,  I 
shall  here  insert  it: 

Long-expected  one -and- twenty. 

Ling' ring  year,  at  length  is flown; 

Pride  and  pleasure,  pomp  and  plenty. 

Great  ******  V  aTe  now  your  own. 


Loosen'd from  the  M inor's  tether , 

Free  to  mortgage  or  to  sell, 

I  Vild  as  wind,  and  light  as  feather, 

Bid  the  sons  of  thrift farewell. 

Call  the  Betseys,  Kates,  and  Jennies, 

All  the  names  that  banish  care ; 

Lavish  of  your  grandsire's  guineas, 

Shew  the  spirit  of  an  heir. 

All  that  prey  on  vice  or  folly 
Joy  to  see  their  quarry  fly; 

There  the  gamester,  light  and  jolly. 

There  the  lender,  grave  and  sly. 

Wealth,  my  lad,  was  made  to  wander. 

Let  it  wander  as  it  will; 

Call  the  jockey,  call  the  pander. 

Bid  them  come  and  take  their  fill. 

When  the  bonny  blade  carouses. 

Pockets  full,  and  spirits  high — 

What  are  acres?  what  are  houses? 

Only  dirt,  or  wet  or  dry . 

Should  the  guardian  friend  or  mother 
Tell  the  woes  of  wilful  waste ; 

Scorn  their  counsel,  scorn  their  pother, — 

Tou  can  hang  or  drown  at  last. 

As  he  opened  a  note  which  his  servant  brought 
to  him,  he  said,  “An  odd  thought  strikes  me:  we 
shall  receive  no  letters  in  the  grave.” 

He  requested  three  things  of  Sir  Joshua  Rey¬ 
nolds: — To  forgive  him  thirty  pounds  which  he 
had  borrowed  of  him;  to  read  the  Bible;  and 
never  to  use  his  pencil  on  a  Sunday.  Sir  Joshua 
readily  acquiesced. 

Indeed  he  shewed  the  greatest  anxiety  for  the 
religious  improvement  of  his  friends,  to  whom  he 
discoursed  of  its  infinite  consequence.  He  begged 
of  Mr.  Hoole  to  think  of  what  he  had  said, 
and  to  commit  it  to  writing:  and,  upon  being 
afterwards  assured  that  this  was  done,  pressed 
his  hands,  and  in  an  earnest  tone  thanked  him. 
Dr.  Brocklesby  having  attended  him  with  the 
utmost  assiduity  and  kindness  as  his  physician 
and  friend,  he  was  peculiarly  desirous  that  this 
gentleman  should  not  entertain  any  loose  spec¬ 
ulative  notions,  but  be  confirmed  in  the  truths 
of  Christianity,  and  insisted  on  his  writing  down 
in  his  presence,  as  nearly  as  he  could  collect  it, 
the  import  of  what  passed  on  the  subject:  and 
Dr.  Brocklesby  having  complied  with  the  re¬ 
quest,  he  made  him  sign  the  paper,  and  urged 
him  to  keep  it  in  his  own  custody  as  long  as  he 
lived. 

Johnson,  with  that  native  fortitude,  which, 


1[Sir  John.] 


1784]  life  of 

amidst  all  his  bodily  distress  and  mental  suffer¬ 
ings,  never  forsook  him,  asked  Dr.  Brocklesby, 
as  a  man  in  whom  he  had  confidence,  to  tell  him 
plainly  whether  he  could  recover.  “Give  me  (said 
he,)  a  direct  answer.”  The  Doctor  having  first 
asked  him  if  he  could  bear  the  whole  truth, 
which  way  soever  it  might  lead,  and  being  an¬ 
swered  that  he  could,  declared  that,  in  his  opin¬ 
ion,  he  could  not  recover  without  a  miracle. 
“Then,  (said  Johnson,)  I  will  take  no  more  phy¬ 
sic,  not  even  my  opiates;  for  I  have  prayed  that 
I  may  render  up  my  soul  to  God  unclouded.”  In 
this  resolution  he  persevered,  and,  at  the  same 
time,  used  only  the  weakest  kinds  of  sustenance. 
Being  pressed  by  Mr.  Windham  to  take  some¬ 
what  more  generous  nourishment,  lest  too  low 
a  diet  should  have  the  very  effect  which  he 
dreaded,  by  debilitating  his  mind,  he  said, 
“I  will  take  any  thing  but  inebriating  susten¬ 
ance.” 

The  Reverend  Mr.  Strahan,  who  was  the  son 
of  his  friend,  and  had  been  always  one  of  his 
great  favourites,  had,  during  his  last  illness,  the 
satisfaction  of  contributing  to  soothe  and  com¬ 
fort  him.  That  gentleman’s  house,  at  Islington, 
of  which  he  is  Vicar,  afforded  Johnson,  occa¬ 
sionally  and  easily,  an  agreeable  change  of  place 
and  fresh  air;  and  he  attended  also  upon  him  in 
town  in  the  discharge  of  the  sacred  offices  of  his 
profession. 

Mr.  Strahan  has  given  me  the  agreeable  as¬ 
surance,  that,  after  being  in  much  agitation, 
Johnson  became  quite  composed,  and  continued 
so  till  his  death. 

Dr.  Brocklesby,  who  will  not  be  suspected  of 
fanaticism,  obliged  me  with  the  following  ac¬ 
counts: 

“For  some  time  before  his  death,  all  his  fears 
were  calmed  and  absorbed  by  the  prevalence  of 
his  faith,  and  his  trust  in  the  merits  and  propitia¬ 
tions  of  Jesus  Christ. 

“He  talked  often  to  me  about  the  necessity  of 
faith  in  the  sacrifice  of  Jesus,  as  necessary  beyond 
all  good  works  whatever,  for  the  salvation  of 
mankind. 

“He  pressed  me  to  study  Dr.  Clarke  and  to 
read  his  Sermons.  I  asked  him  why  he  pressed 
Dr.  Clarke,  an  Arian.1  ‘Because,  (said  he,)  he  is 
fullest  on  the  propitiatory  sacrifice .’  ” 

irThe  change  of  his  sentiments  with  regard  to  Dr. 
Clarke,  is  thus  mentioned  to  me  in  a  letter  from 
the  late  Dr.  Adams,  Master  of  Pembroke  Col¬ 
lege,  Oxford:“The  Doctor’s  prejudices  were  the 
strongest,  and  certainly  in  another  sense  the  weak¬ 
est,  that  ever  possessed  a  sensible  man.  You  know 


JOHNSON  581 

Johnson  having  thus  in  his  mind  the  true  Chris¬ 
tian  scheme,  at  once  rational  and  consolatory, 
uniting  justice  and  mercy  in  the  Divinity,  with 
the  improvement  of  human  nature,  previous  to 
his  receiving  the  Holy  Sacrament  in  his  apart¬ 
ment,  composed  and  fervently  uttered  this 
prayer:2 

“Almighty  and  most  merciful  Father,  I  am 
now  as  to  human  eyes,  it  seems,  about  to  com¬ 
memorate,  for  the  last  time,  the  death  of  thy  Son 
Jesus  Christ,  our  Saviour  and  Redeemer.  Grant, 
O  Lord,  that  my  whole  hope  and  confidence 
may  be  in  his  merits,  and  thy  mercy;  enforce 
and  accept  my  imperfect  repentance;  make  this 
commemoration  available  to  the  confirmation 
of  my  faith,  the  establishment  of  my  hope,  and 
the  enlargement  of  my  charity;  and  make  the 
death  of  thy  Son  Jesus  Christ  effectual  to  my  re¬ 
demption.  Have  mercy  upon  me,  and  pardon  the 
multitude  of  my  offences.  Bless  my  friends;  have 
mercy  upon  all  men.  Support  me,  by  thy  Holy 
Spirit,  in  the  days  of  weakness,  and  at  the  hour 
of  death;  and  receive  me,  at  my  death,  to  ever¬ 
lasting  happiness,  for  the  sake  of  Jesus  Christ. 
Amen.” 

Having,  as  has  been  already  mentioned,  made 
his  will  on  the  8th  and  9th  of  December,  and 
settled  all  his  worldly  affairs,  he  languished  till 
Monday,  the  13th  of  that  month,  when  he  ex¬ 
pired,  about  seven  o’clock  in  the  evening,  with 
so  little  apparent  pain  that  his  attendants  hard¬ 
ly  perceived  when  his  dissolution  took  place. 

Of  his  last  moments,  my  brother,  Thomas 
David,  has  furnished  me  with  the  following  par¬ 
ticulars  : 

“The  Doctor,  from  the  time  that  he  was  cer¬ 
tain  his  death  was  near,  appeared  to  be  perfect¬ 
ly  resigned,  was  seldom  or  never  fretful  or  out  of 
temper,  and  often  said  to  his  faithful  servant, 
who  gave  me  this  account,  ‘Attend,  Francis,  to 
the  salvation  of  your  soul,  which  is  the  object  of 


his  extreme  zeal  for  orthodoxy.  But  did  you  ever 
hear  what  he  told  me  himself?  That  he  had  made 
it  a  rule  not  to  admit  Dr.  Clarke’s  name  in  his  Dic¬ 
tionary.  This,  however,  wore  off.  At  some  distance 
of  time  he  advised  with  me  what  books  he  should 
read  in  defence  of  the  Christian  Religion.  I  rec¬ 
ommended  Clarke’s  Evidences  of  Natural  and  Re¬ 
vealed  Religion ,  as  the  best  of  the  kind;  and  I  find 
in  what  is  called  his  Prayers  and  Meditations ,  that  he 
was  frequently  employed  in  the  latter  part  of  his 
time  in  reading  Clarke’s  Sermons .” 

2The  Reverend  Mr.  Strahan  took  care  to  have 
it  preserved,  and  has  inserted  it  in  Prayers  and  Med¬ 
itations ,  p.  216. 


5B2  BOSWELL  [1784 


greatest  importance5:  he  also  explained  to 
him  passages  in  the  scripture,  and  seemed  to 
have  pleasure  in  talking  upon  religious  sub¬ 
jects. 

“On  Monday,  the  13th  of  December,  the  day 
on  which  he  died,  a  Miss  Morris,  daughter  to  a 
particular  friend  of  his,  called,  and  said  to  Fran¬ 
cis,  that  she  begged  to  be  permitted  to  see  the 
Doctor,  that  she  might  earnestly  request  him  to 
give  her  his  blessing.  Francis  went  into  his  room, 
followed  by  the  young  lady,  and  delivered  the 
message.  The  Doctor  turned  himself  in  the  bed, 
and  said,  sGod  bless  you.  my  dear!5  These  were 
the  last  words  he  spoke.  His  difficulty  of  breath¬ 
ing  increased  till  about  seven  o’clock  in  the  eve¬ 
ning,  when  Mr,  Barber  and  Mrs.  Desmoulins, 
who  were  sitting  in  the  room,  observing  that  the 
noise  he  made  in  breathing  had  ceased,  went  to 
the  bed,  and  found  he  was  dead.55 

About  two  days  after  his  death,  the  following 
very  agreeable  account  was  communicated 
to  Mr.  Malone,  in  a  letter  by  the  Honourable 
John  Byng,  to  whom  I  am  much  obliged  for 
granting  me  permission  to  introduce  it  in  my 
Work. 

Dear  Sir.  Since  I  saw  you,  I  have  had  a  long 
conversation  with  Cawston,1  who  sat  up  with 
Dr.  Johnson,  from  nine  o’clock,  on  Sunday  even¬ 
ing,  till  ten  o’clock,  on  Monday  morning.  And, 
from  what  I  can  gather  from  him,  it  should 
seem,  that  Dr.  Johnson  was  perfectly  composed, 
steady  in  hope,  and  resigned  to  death.  At  the 
interval  of  each  hour,  they  assisted  him  to  sit  up 
in  his  bed,  and  move  his  legs,  which  were  in 
much  pain;  when  he  regularly  addressed  him¬ 
self  to  fervent  prayer;  and  though,  sometimes, 
his  voice  failed  him,  his  senses  never  did,  during 
that  time.  The  only  sustenance  he  received,  was 
cyder  and  water.  He  said  his  mind  was  pre¬ 
pared,  and  the  time  to  his  dissolution  seemed 
long.  At  six  in  the  morning,  he  inquired  the 
hour,  and,  on  being  informed,  said  that  all  went 
on  regularly,  and  he  felt  he  had  but  a  few  hours 
to  live. 

At  ten  o’clock  in  the  morning,  he  parted  from 
Cawston,  saying,  “You  should  not  detain  Mr. 
Windham’s  servant: — I  thank  you;  bear  my  re¬ 
membrance  to  your  master.”  Cawston  says,  that 
no  man  could  appear  more  collected,  more  de¬ 
vout,  or  less  terrified  at  the  thoughts  of  the  ap¬ 
proaching  minute. 

This  account,  which  is  so  much  more  agree¬ 
able  than,  and  somewhat  different  from,  yours, 
has  given  us  the  satisfaction  of  thinking  that 
that  great  man  died  as  he  lived,  full  of  resig- 

JServant  to  the  Right  Honourable  William 
Windham. 


nation,  strengthened  in  faith,  and  joyful  in 
hope.” 

A  few  days  before  his  death,  he  had  asked  Sir 
John  Hawkins,  as  one  of  his  executors,  where 
he  should  be  buried;  and  on  being  answered, 
“Doubtless,  in  Westminister-Abbey,”  seemed  to 
feel  a  satisfaction,  very  natural  to  a  Poet;  and  in¬ 
deed  in  my  opinion  very  natural  to  every  man 
of  any  imagination,  who  has  no  family  sepulchre 
in  which  he  can  be  laid  with  his  fathers.  Ac¬ 
cordingly,  upon  Monday,  December  20,  his  re¬ 
mains  were  deposited  in  that  noble  and  renowned 
edifice;  and  over  his  grave  was  placed  a  large 
blue  flag-stone,  with  this  inscription: 

Samuel  Johnson,  LL.D. 

Obiit  xiii  die  Decembris , 

Anno  Domini 

M.DCC.LXXXIV. 

ALtatis  suce  lxxv. 

His  funeral  was  attended  by  a  respectable 
number  of  his  friends,  particularly  such  of  the 
members  of  the  Literary  Club  as  were  then  in 
town;  and  was  also  honoured  with  the  presence 
of  several  of  the  Reverend  Chapter  of  West¬ 
minster.  Mr.  Burke,  Sir  Joseph  Banks,  Mr.  Wind¬ 
ham,  Mr.  Langton,  Sir  Charles  Bunbury,  and 
Mr.  Colman,  bore  his  pall.  His  school-fellow, 
Dr.  Taylor,  performed  the  mournful  office  of 
reading  the  burial  service. 

I  trust,  I  shall  not  be  accused  of  affectation, 
when  I  declare,  that  I  find  myself  unable  to  ex¬ 
press  all  that  I  felt  upon  the  loss  of  such  a  “Guide, 
Philosopher,  and  Friend.”2  I  shall,  therefore, 
not  say  one  word  of  my  own,  but  adopt  those  of 

2On  the  subject  of  Johnson  I  may  adopt  the 
words  of  Sir  John  Harrington,  concerning  his  ven¬ 
erable  Tutor  and  Diocesan,  Dr.  John  Still,  Bishop 
of  Bath  and  Wells:  “who  hath  given  me  some  helps, 
more  hopes,  all  encouragements  in  my  best  stu¬ 
dies:  to  whom  I  never  came  but  I  grew  more  re¬ 
ligious;  from  whom  I  never  went,  but  I  parted  bet¬ 
ter  instructed.  Of  him  therefore,  my  acquaintance, 
my  friend,  my  instructor,  if  I  speak  much,  it  were 
not  to  be  marvelled ;  if  I  speak  frankly,  it  is  not  to 
be  blamed;  and  though  I  speak  partially,  it  were 
to  be  pardoned.”  Nuga  Antique,  vol.  i,  p.  136. 
There  is  one  circumstance  in  Sir  John’s  character 
of  Bishop  Still,  which  is  peculiarly  applicable  to 
Johnson:  “He  became  so  famous  a  disputer,  that 
the  learnedest  were  even  afraid  to  dispute  with 
him;  and  he  finding  his  own  strength,  could  not 
stick  to  warn  them  in  their  arguments  to  take  heed 
to  their  answers,  like  a  perfect  fencer  that  will  tell 
aforehand  in  which  button  he  will  give  the  venew, 
or  like  a  cunning  chess-player  that  will  appoint 
aforehand  with  which  pawn  and  in  what  place  he 
will  give  the  mate.” 


1784] 

an  eminent  friend,1 2  which  he  uttered  with  an 
abrupt  felicity,  superior  to  all  studied  composi¬ 
tions: — “He  has  made  a  chasm,  which  not  only 
nothing  can  fill  up,  but  which  nothing  has  a 
tendency  to  fill  up.  Johnson  is  dead.  Let  us  go  to 
the  next  best: — there  is  nobody;  no  man  can  be 
said  to  put  you  in  mind  of  Johnson.’ 5 

As  Johnson  had  abundant  homage  paid  to 
him  during  his  life,2 *  so  no  writer  in  this  nation 
ever  had  such  an  accumulation  of  literary  hon¬ 
ours  after  his  death.  A  sermon  upon  that  event 


JThe  late  Right  Hon.  William  Gerard  Hamil¬ 
ton.  [M.] 

2Beside  the  Dedications  to  him  by  Dr.  Gold¬ 

smith,  the  Reverend  Dr.  Francklin,  and  the  Rev¬ 
erend  Mr.  Wilson,  which  I  have  mentioned  ac¬ 
cording  to  their  dates,  there  was  one  by  a  lady,  of 
a  versification  of  Aningait  and  Ajut ,  and  one  by  the 
ingenious  Mr.  Walker  of  his  Rhetorical  Grammar.  I 
have  introduced  into  this  Work  several  compli¬ 
ments  paid  to  him  in  the  writings  of  his  contem¬ 
poraries;  but  the  number  of  them  is  so  great,  that 
we  may  fairly  say  that  there  was  almost  a  general 
tribute. 

Let  me  not  be  forgetful  of  the  honour  done  to 
him  by  Colonel  Myddleton,  of  Gwaynynog,  near 
Denbigh;  who,  on  the  banks  of  a  rivulet  in  his 
park,  where  Johnson  delighted  to  stand  and  repeat 
verses,  erected  an  urn  with  the  following  inscrip¬ 
tion: 

This  spot  was  often  dignified  by  the  presence  of 
Samuel  Johnson,  LL.D. 

Whose  moral  writings,  exactly  conformable 
to  the  precepts  of  Christianity, 

Gave  ardour  to  Virtue  and  confidence  to  Truth. 

As  no  inconsiderable  circumstance  of  his  fame, 
we  must  reckon  the  extraordinary  zeal  of  the  ar¬ 
tists  to  extend  and  perpetuate  his  image.  I  can 
enumerate  a  bust  by  Mr.  Nollekens,  and  the  many 
casts  which  are  made  from  it;  several  pictures  by 
Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  from  one  of  which,  in  the 
possession  of  the  Duke  of  Dorset,  Mr.  Humphry 
executed  a  beautiful  miniature  in  enamel;  one  by 
Mrs.  Frances  Reynolds,  Sir  Joshua’s  sister;  one  by 
Mr.  Zoffani;  and  one  by  Mr.  Opie;  and  the  fol¬ 
lowing  engravings  of  his  portrait:  1 .  One  by  Cooke, 
from  Sir  Joshua,  for  the  Proprietors’  edition  of  his 
folio  Dictionary. — 2.  One  from  ditto,  by  ditto,  for 
their  quarto  edition. — 3.  One  from  Opie,  by 
Heath,  for  Harrison’s  edition  of  his  Dictionary. — 4. 
One  from  Nollekens’  bust  of  him,  by  Bartolozzi, 
for  Fielding’s  quarto  edition  of  his  Dictionary. — 5. 
One  small,  from  Harding,  by  Trotter,  for  his 
Beauties. — 6.  One  small,  from  Sir  Joshua,  by  Trot¬ 
ter,  for  his  Lives  of  the  Poets. — 7.  One  small,  from 
Sir  Joshua,  by  Hall,  for  The  Rambler. — 8.  One 
small,  from  an  original  drawing,  in  the  possession 
of  Mr.  John  Simco,  etched  by  Trotter,  for  another 
edition  of  his  Lives  of  the  Poets. — 9.  One  small,  no 
painter’s  name,  etched  by  Taylor,  for  his  Johnson- 
iana. — 10.  One  folio  whole-length,  with  his  oak- 
stick,  as  described  in  Boswell’s  Tour,  drawn  and 
etched  by  Trotter. — 11.  One  large  mezzotinto, 
from  Sir  Joshua,  by  Doughty. — 12.  One  large 


583 

was  preached  in  St.  Mary’s  Church,  Oxford,  be¬ 
fore  the  University,  by  the  Reverend  Mr.  Agut- 
ter,  of  Magdalen  College.3 *  The  Lives ,  the  Mem¬ 
oirs,  the  Essays ,  both  in  prose  and  verse,  which 
have  been  published  concerning  him,  would 
make  many  volumes.  The  numerous  attacks  too 
upon  him,  I  consider  as  part  of  his  consequence, 
upon  the  principle  which  he  himself  so  well  knew 
and  asserted.  Many  who  trembled  at  his  pres¬ 
ence,  were  forward  in  assault,  when  they  no 
longer  apprehended  danger.  When  one  of  his 
little  pragmatical  foes  was  invidiously  snarl¬ 
ing  at  his  fame,  at  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds’s  table, 
the  Reverend  Dr.  Parr  exclaimed,  with  his 
usual  bold  animation,  “Ay,  now  that  the  old 
lion  is  dead,  every  ass  thinks  he  may  kick  at 
him.” 

A  monument  for  him,  in  Westminster  Abbey, 


Roman  head,  from  Sir  Joshua,  by  Marchi. — 13. 
One  octavo,  holding  a  book  to  his  eye,  from  Sir 
Joshua,  by  Hall,  for  his  Works. — 14.  One  small, 
from  a  drawing  from  the  life,  and  engraved  by 
Trotter,  for  his  Life  published  by  Kearsley. — 15. 
One  large,  from  Opie,  by  Mr.  Townley,  (brother 
of  Mr.  Townley,  of  the  Commons,)  an  ingenious 
artist,  who  resided  some  time  at  Berlin,  and  has  the 
honour  of  being  engraver  to  his  Majesty  the  King 
of  Prussia.  This  is  one  of  the  finest  mezzotintos 
that  ever  was  executed;  and  what  renders  it  of  ex¬ 
traordinary  value,  the  plate  was  destroyed  after 
four  or  five  impressions  only  were  taken  off.  One 
of  them  is  in  the  possession  of  Sir  William  Scott. 
Mr.  Townley  has  lately  been  prevailed  with  to  ex¬ 
ecute  and  publish  another  of  the  same,  that  it  may 
be  more  generally  circulated  among  the  admirers 
of  Dr.  Johnson.  — 16.  One  large,  from  Sir  Joshua’s 
first  picture  of  him,  by  Heath,  for  this  Work,  in 
quarto.  — 17.  One  octavo,  by  Baker,  for  the  octavo 
edition. — 18.  And  one  for  Lavater’s  Essay  on  Phys¬ 
iognomy,  in  which  Johnson’s  countenance  is  ana¬ 
lysed  upon  the  principles  of  that  fanciful  writer. — 
There  are  also  several  seals  with  his  head  cut  on 
them,  particularly  a  very  find  one  by  that  eminent 
artist,  Edward  Burch,  Esq.,  R.A.,  in  the  possession 
of  the  younger  Dr.  Charles  Burney. 

Let  me  add,  as  a  proof  of  the  popularity  of  his 
character,  that  there  are  copper  pieces  struck  at 
Birmingham,  with  his  head  impressed  on  them, 
which  pass  current  as  half-pence  there,  and  in  the 
neighbouring  parts  of  the  country. 

3It  is  not  yet  published. — In  a  letter  to  me,  Mr. 
Agutter  says,  “My  sermon  before  the  University 
was  more  engaged  with  Dr.  Johnson’s  moral  than 
his  intellectual  character.  It  particularly  exam¬ 
ined  his  fear  of  death,  and  suggested  several  rea¬ 
sons  for  the  apprehension  of  the  good,  and  the  in¬ 
difference  of  the  infidel  in  their  last  hours;  this 
was  illustrated  by  contrasting  the  death  of  Dr. 
Johnson  and  Mr.  Hume:  the  text  was  Job,  21. 
22-26.” 


LIFE  OF  JOHNSON 


5^4 

was  resolved  upon  soon  after  his  death,  and  was 
supported  by  a  most  respectable  contribution; 
but  the  Dean  and  Chapter  of  St.  Paul’s  having 
corne  to  a  resolution  of  admitting  monuments 
there,  upon  a  liberal  and  magnificent  plan,  that 
Cathedral  was  afterwards  fixed  on,  as  the  place 
in  which  a  cenotaph  should  be  erected  to  his 
memory:  and  in  the  cathedral  of  his  native  city 
of  Lichfield,  a  smaller  one  is  to  be  erected.  To 
compose  his  epitaph,  could  not  but  excite  the 
warmest  competition  of  genius.1  If  laudari  a  lau¬ 
dato  viro  be  praise  which  is  highly  estimable,  I 
should  not  forgive  myself  were  I  to  omit  the 
following  sepulchral  verses  on  the  authour  of 

iThe  Reverend  Dr.  Parr,  on  being  requested  to 
undertake  it,  thus  expressed  himself  in  a  letter  to 
William  Seward,  Esq.: 

“I  leave  this  mighty  task  to  some  hardier  and 
some  abler  writer.  The  variety  and  splendour  of 
Johnson’s  attainments,  the  peculiarities  of  his  char¬ 
acter,  his  private  virtues,  and  his  literary  publica¬ 
tions,  fill  me  with  confusion  and  dismay,  when  I 
reflect  upon  the  confined  and  difficult  species  of 
composition,  in  which  alone  they  can  be  expressed, 
with  propriety,  upon  his  monument.” 

Rut  I  understand  that  this  great  scholar,  and 
warm  admirer  of  Johnson,  has  yielded  to  repeated 
solicitations,  and  executed  the  very  difficult  under¬ 
taking.  [Dr.  Johnson’s  Monument,  consisting  of  a 
colossal  figure  leaning  against  a  column,  has  since 
the  death  of  our  authour  been  placed  in  St. 
Paul’s  Cathedral.  The  Epitaph  was  written  by  the 
Rev.  Dr.  Parr,  and  is  as  follows: 


[1784 

The  English  Dictionary,  written  by  the  Right 
Honourable  Henry  Flood:2 

Mo  need  of  Latin  or  of  Greek  to  grace 

Our  Johnson’s  memory ,  or  inscribe  his  grave: 

His  native  language  claims  this  mournful  space , 

To  pay  the  Immortality  he  gave . 

The  character  of  Samuel  Johnson  has,  I 

2To  prevent  any  misconception  on  this  subject, 
Mr.  Malone,  by  whom  these  lines  were  obligingly 
communicated,  requests  me  to  add  the  following 
remark: 

“In  justice  to  the  late  Mr.  Flood,  now  himself 
wanting,  and  highly  meriting,  an  epitaph  from  his 
country,  to  which  his  transcendent  talents  did  the 
highest  honour,  as  well  as  the  most  important  serv¬ 
ice;  it  should  be  observed  that  these  lines  were  by 
no  means  intended  as  a  regular  monumental  in¬ 
scription  for  Dr.  Johnson.  Had  he  undertaken  to 
write  an  appropriated  and  discriminative  epitaph 
for  that  excellent  and  extraordinary  man,  those 
who  knew  Mr.  Flood’s  vigour  of  mind,  will  have 
no  doubt  that  he  would  have  produced  one  worthy 
of  his  illustrious  subject.  But  the  fact  was  merely 
this:  In  Dec.  1789,  after  a  large  subscription  had 
been  made  for  Dr.  Johnson’s  monument  to  which 
Mr.  Flood  liberally  contributed,  Mr.  Malone  hap¬ 
pened  to  call  on  him  at  his  house,  in  Berners-street, 
and  the  conversation  turning  on  the  proposed  mon¬ 
ument,  Mr.  Malone  maintained  that  the  epitaph, 
by  whomsoever  it  should  be  written,  ought  to  be  in 
Latin.  Mr.  Flood  thought  differently.  The  next 
morning,  in  the  postscript  to  a  note  on  another 
subject,  he  mentioned  that  he  continued  of  the 
same  opinion  as  on  the  preceding  day,  and  sub¬ 
joined  the  lines  above  given.” 


BOSWELL 


A  J  O 

SAMVELI  •  IOHNSON 
GRAMMATIGO  •  ET  •  CRITICO 
SCRIPTORVM  •  ANGLIGORVM  •  LITTERATE  •  PERITO 
POETAE  •  LVMINIBVS  •  SENTENTIARVM 
ET  ■  PONDERIBVS  •  VERBORVM  •  ADMIRABILI 
MAGISTRO  •  VIRTVTIS  •  GRAVISSIMO 
HOMINl  •  OPTIMO  •  ET  •  SINGVLARIS  •  EXEMPLI 
QVI  •  VIXIT  •  ANN  ■  lxxv  •  MENS  ■  il  *  DIEB  •  xml 
DECESSIT  •  IDIB  •  DECEMBR  ■  ANN  ■  CHRIST  •  cIo  •  Iocc  •  lxxxiiiI 
SEPVLT  ■  IN  •  AED  •  SANGT  ■  PETR  ■  WESTMONASTERIENS  • 
xii I  •  KAL  •  IANVAR  ■  ANN  •  CHRIST  ■  clo  •  Iocc  •  lxxxv 
AMICI  •  ET  •  SODALES  *  LITTERARII 
PECVNIA  •  GONLATA 
H  ■  M  •  FACIVND  •  GVRAVER. 

On  a  scroll  in  his  hand  are  the  following  words: 

ENMAKAPE22in0NfiNANTAEI02EIIIAM0IBH. 

On  one  side  of  the  Monument — Faciebat  Johannes  Bacon 
Scvlptor  Ann.  Christ,  m.dcc.lxxxxv. 

The  Subscription  for  this  monument,  which  cost  eleven  hundred  guineas, 
was  begun  by  the  Literary  Club. — M.] 


1784]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  585 


trust,  been  so  developed  in  the  course  of  this 
work,  that  they  who  have  honoured  it  with  a 
persual,  may  be  considered  as  well  acquainted 
with  him.  As,  however,  it  may  be  expected  that 
I  should  collect  into  one  view  the  capital  and 
distinguishing  features  of  this  extraordinary  man, 

1  shall  endeavour  to  acquit  myself  of  that  part 
of  my  biographical  undertaking,1  however  diffi¬ 
cult  it  may  be  to  do  that  which  many  of  my 
readers  will  do  better  for  themselves. 

His  figure  was  large  and  well  formed,  and  his 
countenance  of  the  cast  of  an  ancient  statue; 
yet  his  appearance  was  rendered  strange  and 
somewhat  uncouth,  by  convulsive  cramps,  by 
the  scars  of  that  distemper  which  it  was  once 
imagined  the  royal  touch  could  cure,  and  by  a 
slovenly  mode  of  dress.  He  had  the  use  only  of 
one  eye;  yet  so  much  does  mind  govern  and  even 
supply  the  deficiency  of  organs,  that  his  visual 
perceptions,  as  far  as  they  extended,  were  un¬ 
commonly  quick  and  accurate.  So  morbid  was 
his  temperament,  that  he  never  knew  the  natu¬ 
ral  joy  of  a  free  and  vigorous  use  of  his  limbs: 
when  he  walked,  it  was  like  the  struggling  gait 
of  one  in  fetters;  when  he  rode,  he  had  no  com¬ 
mand  or  direction  of  his  horse,  but  was  carried 
as  if  in  a  balloon.  That  with  his  constitution  and 
habits  of  life  he  should  have  lived  seventy-five 
years,  is  a  proof  that  an  inherent  vivida  vis  is  a 
powerful  preservative  of  the  human  frame. 

Man  is,  in  general,  made  up  of  contradictory 
qualities;  and  these  will  ever  shew  themselves  in 
strange  succession,  where  a  consistency  in  ap¬ 
pearance  a't  least,  if  not  in  reality,  has  not  been 
attained  by  long  habits  of  philosophical  disci¬ 
pline.  In  proportion  to  the  native  vigour  of  the 
mind,  the  contradictory  qualities  will  be  the  more 
prominent,  and  more  difficult  to  be  adjusted; 
and,  therefore,  we  are  not  to  wonder,  that  John¬ 
son  exhibited  an  eminent  example  of  this  re¬ 
mark  which  I  have  made  upon  human  nature. 
At  different  times,  he  seemed  a  different  man, 
in  some  respects;  not,  however,  in  any  great  or 
essential  article,  upon  which  he  had  fully  em¬ 
ployed  his  mind,  and  settled  certain  princi¬ 
ples  of  duty,  but  only  in  his  manners,  and  in  the 
display  of  argument  and  fancy  in  his  talk.  He 
was  prone  to  superstition,  but  not  to  credulity. 
Though  his  imagination  might  incline  him  to  a 
belief  of  the  marvellous  and  the  mysterious,  his 
vigorous  reason  examined  the  evidence  with 

lA s  I  do  not  see  any  reason  to  give  a  different 
character  of  my  illustrious  friend  now,  from  what  I 
formerly  gave,  the  greatest  part  of  the  sketch  of 
him  in  my  Journal  of  a  Tour  to  the  Hebrides ,  is  here 
adopted. 


jealousy.  He  was  a  sincere  and  zealous  Christian, 
of  high  Church-of-England  and  monarchical 
principles,  which  he  would  not  tamely  suffer  to 
be  questioned;  and  had,  perhaps,  at  an  early 
period,  narrowed  his  mind  somewhat  too  much, 
both  as  to  religion  and  politicks.  His  being  im¬ 
pressed  with  the  danger  of  extreme  latitude  in 
either,  though  he  was  of  a  very  independent 
spirit,  occasioned  his  appearing  somewhat  un¬ 
favourable  to  the  prevalence  of  that  noble  free¬ 
dom  of  sentiment  which  is  the  best  possession  of 
man.  Nor  can  it  be  denied,  that  he  had  many 
prejudices;  which,  however,  frequently  sug¬ 
gested  many  of  his  pointed  sayings,  that  rather 
shew  a  playfulness  of  fancy  than  any  settled 
malignity.  He  was  steady  and  inflexible  in  main¬ 
taining  the  obligations  of  religion  and  morality; 
both  from  a  regard  for  the  order  of  society,  and 
from  a  veneration  for  the  Great  Source  of  all 
order;  correct,  nay  stern  in  his  taste,  hard  to 
please,  and  easily  offended;  impetuous  and  irri¬ 
table  in  his  temper,  but  of  a  most  humane  and 
benevolent  heart,2  which  shewed  itself  not  only 
in  a  most  liberal  charity,  as  far  as  his  circum¬ 
stances  would  allow,  but  in  a  thousand  instances 
of  active  benevolence.  He  was  affllicted  with  a 
bodily  disease,  which  made  him  often  restless 
and  fretful;  and  with  a  constitutional  melan¬ 
choly,  the  clouds  of  which  darkened  the  bright¬ 
ness  of  his  fancy,  and  gave  a  gloomy  cast  to  his 
whole  course  of  thinking:  we,  therefore,  ought 
not  to  wonder  at  his  sallies  of  impatience  and 
passion  at  any  time;  especially  when  provoked 
by  obtrusive  ignorance,  or  presuming  petulance; 
and  allowance  must  be  made  for  his  uttering 
hasty  and  satirical  sallies  even  against  his  best 
friends.  And,  surely,  when  it  is  considered,  that, 
“amidst  sickness  and  sorrow,”  he  exerted  his 
faculties  in  so  many  works  for  the  benefit  of 
mankind,  and  particularly  that  he  achieved 
the  great  and  admirable  Dictionary  of  our  lan¬ 
guage,  we  must  be  astonished  at  his  resolution. 
The  solemn  text,  “of  him  to  whom  much  is 
given,  much  will  be  required,”  seems  to  have 
been  ever  present  to  his  mind,  in  a  rigorous  sense, 
and  to  have  made  him  dissatisfied  with  his  la¬ 
bours  and  acts  of  goodness,  however  compara- 

2In  the  Olla  Podrida ,  a  collection  of  Essays  pub¬ 
lished  at  Oxford,  there  is  an  admirable  paper  upon 
the  character  of  Johnson,  written  by  the  Reverend 
Dr.  Horne,  the  last  excellent  Bishop  of  Norwich. 
The  following  passage  is  eminently  happy:  “To  re¬ 
ject  wisdom,  because  the  person  of  him  who  com¬ 
municates  it  is  uncouth,  and  his  manners  are  in¬ 
elegant; — what  is  it,  but  to  throw  away  a  pine¬ 
apple,  and  assign  for  a  reason  the  roughness  of  its 
coat?” 


5»6 

tively  great;  so  that  the  unavoidable  conscious¬ 
ness  of  his  superiority  was,  in  that  respect,  a 
cause  of  disquiet.  He  suffered  so  much  from  this 
and  from  the  gloom  which  perpetually  haunted 
him,  and  made  solitude  frightful,  that  it  may  be 
said  of  him,  “If  in  this  life  only  he  had  hope,  he 
was  of  all  men  most  miserable.”  He  loved  praise 
when  it  was  brought  to  him;  but  was  too  proud 
to  seek  for  it.  He  was  somewhat  susceptible  of 
flattery.  As  he  was  general  and  unconfined  in 
his  studies,  he  cannot  be  considered  as  master 
of  any  one  particular  science;  but  he  had  ac¬ 
cumulated  a  vast  and  various  collection  of  learn¬ 
ing  and  knowledge,  which  was  so  arranged  in 
his  mind,  as  to  be  ever  in  readiness  to  be  brought 
forth.  But  his  superiority  over  other  learned  men 
consisted  chiefly  in  what  may  be  called  the  art 
of  thinking,  the  art  of  using  his  mind;  a  certain 
continual  power  of  seizing  the  useful  substance 
of  all  that  he  knew,  and  exhibiting  it  in  a  clear 
and  forcible  manner;  so  that  knowledge,  which 
we  often  see  to  be  no  better  than  lumber  in  men 
of  dull  understanding,  was,  in  him,  true,  evident, 
and  actual  wisdom.  His  moral  precepts  are  prac¬ 
tical;  for  they  are  drawn  from  an  intimate 
acquaintance  with  human  nature.  His  maxims 
carry  conviction;  for  they  are  founded  on  the 
basis  of  common  sense,  and  a  very  attentive  and 
minute  survey  of  real  life.  His  mind  was  so  full 
of  imagery,  that  he  might  have  been  perpetually 
a  poet;  yet  it  is  remarkable,  that,  however  rich 
his  prose  is  in  this  respect,  his  poetical  pieces,  in 
general,  have  not  much  of  that  splendour,  but 
are  rather  distinguished  by  strong  sentiment 
and  acute  observation,  conveyed  in  harmonious 
and  energetick  verse,  particularly  in  heroick 
couplets.  Though  usually  grave,  and  even  awe¬ 
ful,  in  his  deportment,  he  possessed  uncommon 
and  peculiar  powers  of  wit  and  humour;  he  fre¬ 
quently  indulged  himself  in  colloquial  pleasan¬ 
try;  and  the  heartiest  merriment  was  often  en¬ 
joyed  in  his  company;  with  this  great  advantage, 
that  as  it  was  entirely  free  from  any  poisonous 
tincture  of  vice  or  impiety,  it  was  salutary  to 
those  who  shared  in  it.  He  had  accustomed  him¬ 
self  to  such  accuracy  in  his  common  conversa¬ 
tion,1  that  he  at  all  times  expressed  his  thoughts 

though  a  perfect  resemblance  of  Johnson  is  not 
to  be  found  in  any  age,  parts  of  his  character  are 
admirably  expressed  by-  Clarendon  in  drawing 
that  of  Lord  Falkland,  whom  the  noble  and  mas¬ 
terly  historian  describes  at  his  seat  near  Oxford: 
“Such  an  immenseness  of  wit,  such  a  solidity  of 
judgement,  so  infinite  a  fancy,  bound  in  by  a  most 
logical  ratiocination. — His  acquaintance  was  cul¬ 
tivated  by  the  most  polite  and  accurate  men,  so 
that  his  house  was  an  University  in  less  volume, 


1 1784 

with  great  force,  and  an  elegant  choice  of  lan¬ 
guage,  the  effect  of  which  was  aided  by  his  hav¬ 
ing  a  loud  voice,  and  a  slow  deliberate  utter¬ 
ance.  In  him  were  united  a  most  logical  head 
with  a  most  fertile  imagination,  which  gave  him 
an  extraordinary  advantage  in  arguing:  for  he 
could  reason  close  or  wide,  as  he  saw  best  for  the 
moment.  Exulting  in  his  intellectual  strength 
and  dexterity,  he  could,  when  he  pleased,  be  the 
greatest  sophist  that  ever  contended  in  the  lists 
of  declamation;  and,  from  a  spirit  of  contradic¬ 
tion  and  a  delight  in  shewing  his  powers,  he 
would  often  maintain  the  wrong  side  with  equal 
warmth  and  ingenuity;  so  that,  when  there  was 
an  audience,  his  real  opinions  could  seldom  be 
gathered  from  his  talk;  though  when  he  was  in 
company  with  a  single  friend,  he  would  discuss 
a  subject  with  genuine  fairness:  but  he  was  too 

whither  they  came,  not  so  much  for  repose  as  study, 
and  to  examine  and  refine  those  grosser  propo¬ 
sitions,  which  laziness  and  consent  made  current 
in  conversation.” 

Bayle’s  account  of  Menage  may  also  be  quoted 
as  exceedingly  applicable  to  the  great  subject  of 
this  work: — “His  illustrious  friends  erected  a  very 
glorious  monument  to  him  in  the  collection  entitled 
Menagiana.  Those  who  judge  of  things  aright,  will 
confess  that  this  collection  is  very  proper  to  shew 
the  extent  of  genius  and  learning  which  was  the 
character  of  Menage.  And  I  may  be  bold  to  say 
that  the  excellent  works  he  published  will  not  distinguish 
him  from  other  learned  men  so  advantageously  as  this.  To 
publish  books  of  great  learning,  to  make  Greek 
and  Latin  verses  exceedingly  well  turned  is  not  a 
common  talent,  I  own;  neither  is  it  extremely  rare. 
It  is  incomparably  more  difficult  to  find  men  who 
can  furnish  discourse  about  an  infinite  number  of 
things,  and  who  can  diversify  them  an  hundred 
ways.  How  many  authours  are  there,  who  are  ad¬ 
mired  for  their  works,  on  account  of  the  vast  learn¬ 
ing  that  is  displayed  in  them,  who  are  not  able  to 
sustain  a  conversation.  Those  who  know  Menage 
only  by  his  books,  might  think  he  resembled  those 
learned  men;  but  if  you  shew  the  Menagiana, 
you  distinguish  him  from  them,  and  make  him 
known  by  a  talent  which  is  given  to  very  few 
learned  men.  There  it  appears  that  he  was  a  man 
who  spoke  off-hand  a  thousand  good  things.  His 
memory  extended  to  what  was  ancient  ancl  mod¬ 
ern;  to  the  court  and  to  the  city;  to  the  dead  and 
to  the  living  languages;  to  things  serious  and  things 
jocose;  in  a  word,  to  a  thousand  sorts  of  subjects. 
That  which  appeared  a  trifle  to  some  readers  of  the 
Menagiana ,  who  did  not  consider  circumstances, 
caused  admiration  in  other  readers,  who  minded 
the  difference  between  what  a  man  speaks  without 
preparation,  and  that  which  he  prepares  for  the 
press.  And,  therefore,  we  cannot  sufficiently  com¬ 
mend  the  care  which  his  illustrious  friends  took  to 
erect  a  monument  so  capable  of  giving  him  im¬ 
mortal  glory.  They  were  not  obliged  to  rectify 
what  they  had  heard  him  say;  for,  in  so  doing, 
they  had  not  been  faithful  historians  of  his  conver¬ 
sations.” 


BOSWELL 


1784]  LIFE  OF  JOHNSON  587 


conscientious  to  make  errour  permanent  and 
pernicious,  by  deliberately  writing  it;  and,  in  all 
his  numerous  works,  he  earnestly  inculcated 
what  appeared  to  him  to  be  the  truth;  his  piety 
being  constant,  and  the  ruling  principle  of  all 
his  conduct. 


Such  was  Samuel  Johnson,  a  man  whose 
talents,  acquirements,  and  virtues,  were  so  ex¬ 
traordinary,  that  the  more  his  character  is  con¬ 
sidered,  the  more  he  will  be  regarded  by  the 
present  age,  and  by  posterity,  with  admiration 
and  reverence. 


INDEX 


Abel  Drugger :  see  Alchemist ,  The  (Jonson) 
Abercrombie,  James,  97 *,  207,  218* 

Aberdeen,  University  of,  51 2 
Abernethy,  John,  354  *,531* 

Abingdon,  Willoughby  Bertie,  4th  Earl  of,  439* 
Abington,  Frances,  245,  246,  248,  253 
Abreu,  Marquis  of,  98 
Academia  della  Crusca,  83,  126 
Account  of  an  Attempt  to  Ascertain  the  Longitude  at  Sea , 
An  (Williams),  75*,  84 

Account  of  Corsica ,  The  Journal  of  a  Tour  to  that  Is¬ 
land  (Boswell),  145,  149, 157, 1 60-1 61, 163*,  164, 

254*.  329 

Account  of  the  late  Revolution  in  Sweden  (Sheridan), 390 
“Account  of  the  Life  of  Peter  Burman,  An55  (John- 
son-Idler),  40 

Account  of  London  (Pennant),  387 
Account  of  the  Manners  and  Customs  of  Italy ,  An  (Bar- 
etti),  160 

Account  of  the  Musical  Performances  in  Commemoration 
of  Handel  (Burney),  561 
Account  of  Switzerland,  An  (Stanyan),  414 
Acis  and  Galatea  (Gay),  377 

“Actual,  how  short  of  fancied,  excellence”  (John- 
son -Idler),  92 

“ Ad  Lauram parituram  Epigramma ”  (Johnson),  41 
“Ad Ricardum  Savage ”  (Johnson),  43  * 

Ad  Urbanum  (Johnson),  28,  28  *-29*,  30* 

Adam,  the  brothers,  architects,  246 
Adam,  Robert,  349 
Adamites,  223 
Adams,  George,  156 

Adams,  William,  Founder  of  Newport  school,  33* 
Adams,  William,  divine,  11,  12,  15-16,  17,  33,  34, 
48,  5°,  53,  72,  73)  78,  285,  535,  536,  537,  538, 
539. 542, 543. 544, 566-567, 577  *,581* 

Adams,  Sarah  (Mrs.  William),  535,  537,  540 
Adams,  Sarah  (daughter),  535,  537-538,  543 
Addison,  Joseph,  55,  61,  85,  100,  120,  168,  209, 
224, 244*,  252, 253, 260, 306, 310, 347, 353, 

373, 389-390, 398, 408, 449, 456, 467, 471, 472, 
575 

Life  of  (Johnson),  458-459, 575 
Address  of  the  Painters  to  George  III  (Johnson),  98 
“Address  to  the  Reader,  An”  (Johnson),  36 
“Address  to  the  Throne”  (Johnson),  89 
Adey,  (Mrs.)  Felicia,  266,  426 
Adey,  (Miss)  Mary,  5,  293, 431,  489 
Admirable  Curiosities,  Rarities,  and  Wonders  in  England, 
525 

Advancement  of  Learning  (Bacon),  4 
Adventurer,  The,  56,  63,  68-69,  7°?  69 
Adversaria  (Johnson),  55-56 


Adye:  see  Adey 

/Egri Ephemeris  (Johnson),  568 
iElian  (Claudius  yElianus),  24,  569* 

/Eneid  (Virgil),  15,  149,  150,  302  *,513 
^ischylus,  381 

/ Esop  at  Play:  see  Fabulce  / Esopice 
Against  foolish  Talking  and  Jesting  (Barrow),  475*- 
476* 

Agar,  Welbore  Ellis,  335  * 

Aglaura  (Suckling),  401  * 

Agutter,  William,  535  *,  539*,  583 
Aikin,  Miss:  see  Barbauld,  Anna  Letitia 
Akenside,  Mark,  ioo,  193,  297,  306 
Life  of  (Johnson),  460 

Akerman,  Keeper  of  Newgate,  344, 437,  438 

Alberti,  Leandro,  253 

Alchemist,  The  (Jonson),  307 

Alcibiades,  373,  384 

Aldrich,  Rev.  S.,  1 15* 

Alexander  the  Great,  68,  202-203 
Alexandreis  (Gaultier),  501  * 

Alfred,  King  of  the  West  Saxons,  486 
Life  of  (Johnson),  48 
All for  Love  (Dryden),  478  * 

Allegro,  U  (Milton),  quoted,  ^19 
Allen,  — ,  5  * 

Allen,  of  Magdalen  Hall,  93 

Allen,  Edmund,  134,  252,  342,  344,  385,  400,  421, 
471,  472,  515, 516,  558,  560,  563,  564, 567 
Althorp:  see  Spencer,  2nd  Earl 
Amadis  of  Gaul,  270 
Amelia  (Fielding),  309 
American  Revolutionary  War,  468,  526 
Amory,  Thomas,  354* 

Amyat,  Dr.,  a  physician,  1 05  * 

Anabasis  (Xenophon),  451 

Anacreon,  1 1,  206,  495,  520,  528 

Anatomy  of  Melancholy,  The  (Burton),  12,  179,  284 

Ancient  History  of  the  Egyptians,  etc.  (Rollin),  544 

Anderson,  John,  335 

Andrews,  Francis,  1 40 

Anecdotes  (Spence),  462 

Anecdotes,  Biographical  and  Literary  (Nichols),  495 
Anecdotes  of  the  late  Samuel  Johnson  (Piozzi),  6*,  7, 
14*,  21  *,  117*,  141, 226*,  296, 407*,  546, 553- 

555 

Anecdotes  Litter aires,  218* 

Anecdotes  of  Painting  in  England  (Orford),  503  * 
Anecdotes  of  Some  Distinguished  Persons  (Seward), 

336* 

Anecdotes  of  William  Bowyer,  Printer  (Nichols),  564 
Angel,  Captain,  97 
Angell,  John,  213 


589 


INDEX 


59° 

Angeloni,  Battista:  see  Shebbcare,  John 
Aningait  and  Ajut  (Penny),  583  * 

Annales  (Johnson),  16 
Annales  Ecclesiastici  (Baronius),  576* 

Annals  of  Scotland  (Hailes),  231-233,  234,  249,  263, 
264. 265, 313, 335, 369, 415, 429 
Anne,  Queen  of  England,  7,  69,  120,  332,  340,  393 
Another  Traveller!  or ,  Cursory  Remarks  and  Critical  Ob¬ 
servations  made  upon  a  Journey  through  Part  of  the 
Netherlands  (Paterson),  197 
Anson,  George,  Baron,  420 

Anspach,  Elizabeth,  Margravine  of  (Lady  Craven), 
303 

“Ant,  The”  (Johnson),  150 
Anthologia:  see  Greek  Anthology 
Apelles,  475 

Apicius,  Marcus  Gabius,  286 
Apocrypha,  356 
Apollo  Press,  334 
Apollonius  Rhodius,  80,  226 
Apology ,  The  (Barclay),  290 

Apology  for  the  Life  of  Colley  Cibber ,  Comedian  (Cib¬ 
ber),  319 

“Apology  for  the  Tale  of  a  Tub,  An”  (Swift),  244*, 
245* 

“Apotheosis  of  Milton,  The,  ”36 

“Appeal  to  the  People  concerning  Admiral  Byng,” 

85 

“Appeal  to  the  Publick,  An”  (Johnson),  36 
Appius,  Claudius  Caecus,  566  * 

Arblay,  Frances  (Fanny  Burney),  Madame  d’,i 41,* 
435.5M,  53L58i,572 
Arbuthnot,  John,  261 
Archaological  Dictionary,  An  (Wilson),  495 
Argenson,  M.  A.  de  Voyer,  Marquis,  de,  267 
Arguments  in  Proof  of  a  Deity  (Newton),  85 
Argyle,  Archibald  Campbell,  3rd  Duke  of,  51,  319 
Argyle,  Jane  Campbell,  2nd  Duchess  of,  67 
Argyle,  John  Campbell,  5th  Duke  of,  263  *,  328- 

329, 535 
Arianism,  451 

Ariosto,  Lodovico,  76,  444,  464 
Aristophanes,  561 

Aristotle,  52  *,  269,  308,  445-446,  453,  476  *,  568  * 
Armstrong,  John,  97  *,  334 
Arnauld  [Arnaud],  Antoine,  41 1 
Arniston,  Robert  Dundas,  the  younger,  Lord  Pres¬ 
ident  of  the  court  of  session,  367 
Arnold,  Thomas,  355 
Arran,  Charles  Butler,  Earl  of,  77 
Ars  Amatoria  (Ovid),  2 1 7 
Art  of  Cookery  made  Plain  and  Easy  (Glasse),  391 
Art  of  Living  in  London  (Johnson),  25 
Art  of  Poetry  (Aristotle),  308 
Art  of  Poetry  (Horace),  15,  320 
Ascham,  Roger,  Life  of  (Johnson),  1 32 
Ash,  John,  573  * 

Ashburton,  John  Dunning,  1st  Baron,  137,  192, 
338,376,413 
Ashmole,  Elias,  353 
Asiatic  Society,  181  * 

Astle,  Daniel,  544 


Astle,  Thomas,  41 , 486,  544 
Astiey,  Philip,  430 

Aston,  Catherine:  see  Hervey,  Catherine 
Aston,  Elizabeth,  292,  294,  340,  366,  432 
Aston,  Margaret:  see  Walmsley,  Margaret 
Aston,  Molly:  see  Brodie,  Molly 
Aston,  Sir  Thomas  (father),  18 
Aston,  Thomas  (son),  18*,  25* 

A  thence  Oxonienses  (Wood),  12 

Athol,  Walter  Stewart,  Earl  of,  144 

Atterbury,  Francis,  Bishop  of  Rochester,  41,  372, 

378 

Auchinleck,  Alexander  Boswell,  Lord  (Boswell’s 
father),  112,  121,  129*,  133,  135,  143,  149,  207, 
235,  236,  263,  274,  275-276,  277,  278,  324,  327, 
329,  33D  338,  355,  356,  366,  368,  376,  419,  427, 
432, 433, 434, 442, 493, 520 
Augustine  of  Hippo,  Saint,  270 
Augustus  (Gaius  Julius  Caesar  Octavianus),  Ro¬ 
man  emperor,  39,  57,  294 
Aurengzebe  (Dryden),  541  * 

Ausonius,  Decimus  Magnus,  50 

Bacon,  Francis,  Viscount  St.  Albans,  4,  60,  191, 
278,  361,414,518,  532,534 
Life  of  (Mallet),  361 
Bacon,  John, 584* 

Badcock,  Samuel,  579* 

Bagshaw,  Thomas,  225,  557 
Baily,  Hetty:  see  Bayley,  Hester 
Baker,  Sir  George,  1 08  *,  558 
Baker,  J.,  an  engraver,  583  * 

Baker,  Mrs.,  152 
Baldwin,  Henry,  547 
John,  354* 

Ballow,  Henry,  303 

Balmerino,  Arthur  Elphinstone,  Baron,  48 
Bancroft,  John,  Bishop  of  Oxford,  12 
Bankes,  John,  38 

Banks,  of  Dorsetshire:  see  Bankes,  John 
Banks,  Sir  Joseph,  137,  186-187,  188,  354*,  417, 
418, 582 

Bannatine,  George,  i  oo 
Barbauld,  Anna  Letitia,  353 

Barber,  Francis,  64,  65,  66,  97,  143,  152*,  lbi,  177, 
187,  209,  210,  232,  234,  257,  262,  265,  303,  310, 
3*8,  326,  365,  370,  419,  427,  488,  489,  516,  534, 
535,  564,  567, 576,  577*,  581-582 
Barber,  Mrs.  Francis,  64 
Barbeyrac,  Jean,  78 
Barclay,  Alexander,  76 
Barclay,  James,  1 42 
Barclay,  Robert,  the  Quaker,  290,  480* 

Barclay,  Robert,  the  brewer,  480,  562,  576  * 
Barclay,  Mrs.  Robert,  562 
Baretier,  Philip:  see  Barretier,  Philip 
Baretti,  Joseph,  71,75,  76,  84,93,98,  101-102,  103- 
104,  106-107,  15°,  160,  162,  170-171,207,  235, 
265,  269,  270,  287,  298,  302,  324*,  327,  350, 

353, 4i9, 451-452,  547,  548, 555 
Barnard,  Edward,  Provost  of  Eton,  436 
Barnard,  Francis,  153-154, 155 


INDEX  591 


Barnard,  Thomas,  Bishop  of  Killaloe,  24*,  137, 

241 , 323>  375>  473. 474 >47^  *,  479.  5°4-5°5 
Barnes,  Joshua,  390, 447 

Barnewall,  Nicholas:  see  Trimlestown,  14th  Baron 

Barnston,  Letitia,  432 

Baronius  (Baronio),  Cesare,  576* 

Barret,  William,  31 1 

Barretier  [Baretier],  Philip,  Life  of  (Johnson),  38, 

39>  40,  43 

Barrington,  Daines,  221,  400,  478,  524 
Barrow,  Isaac,  475  * 

Barrowby,  William,  537 
Barry,  Sir  Edward,  306-307 
Barry,  James,  507,  514,  524 
Barry,  Spranger,  53 
Barter,  a  miller,  1 93 
Bartolozzi,  Francesco,  332,  583* 

Bas  Bleu  (More),  477 

Basil,  Saint,  447 

Baskerville,  John,  163,  290 

Bastard ,  The  (Savage),  44 

Bateman,  Edmund,  16 

Bath,  William  Pulteney,  Earl  of,  40,  376 

Bathiani,  — ,  266 

Bathurst,  Allen,  1st  Earl,  39,  411,  428,  429,  452, 

457 

Bathurst,  Henry,  2nd  Earl,  343 
Bathurst,  Colonel,  65*,  450 
Bathurst,  Ralph,  577  * 

Bathurst,  Richard,  49,  51,  63,  65*,  66,  68,  69,  107, 

45° 

Baxter,  Richard,  55,  223,  502,  514,  515,  518,  525 
Baxter,  William,  320*,  495,  520,  528 
Bayle,  Pierre,  78,  120,  586* 

Bayley  [Baily],  Hester,  489 

Beattie,  James,  134,  186,  187,  188,  206,  207,  225, 
227,  322,  336,  439,  474,  503,  549,  550 
Beattie,  Mary  (Mrs.  James),  187,  188,  439 
Beauclerk,  Lady  Diana,  218,  236,  248,  329,  434, 
473 

Beauclerk,  Mrs.  (Topham’s  mother),  434 
Beauclerk,  Topham,  22,66*,  67-68,  99,  103,  104, 
106,  122,  136,  139,  153,  171,  178,  214,  216,  218, 
224,  236,  238,  242,  244,  246,  248,  252,  253,  256, 
263,  272,  298,  302,  303,  329,  360,  366,  389,  413, 
414,  422-423,  424,  433-435,  436,  444?  445 >  449% 
450,  466-467,  473,  474,  475-476,  478,  501,  506 
Beaufort,  Elizabeth  Somerset  (Boscawen),  Duchess 
of,  436 

Beaumont,  Francis,  249,  293 
Beauties  of  Johnson,  The ,  58,  491 , 583  * 

Beaux ,  Stratagem ,  The  (Farquhar),  291, 312 

Becket,  Thomas,  237 

Beckford,  William,  320,  363 

Bedford,  Francis  Russell,  5th  Duke  of,  390,  483 

Bedford,  John  Russell,  4th  Duke  of,  545 

Bedlam,  261-262 

Beggar’s  Opera ,  The  (Gay),  259,  285,  362,  402,  472 

Behmen,  Jacob,  180 

Belchier,  John,  313 

Bell,  John,  author  of  travel  book,  159 

Bell.  John,  the  bookseller,  332 


Bell,  John,  friend  of  Johnson,  206* 

Bell,  Mrs.  John,  206* 

Bell,  Rev.  Mr.,  of  Strathaven,  415 
Bell,  William,  206* 

Bellamy,  George  Anne,  90,  521  * 

Belsham,  William,  109* 

Benedictines,  266,  270,  391,  579 
Bennet,  James,  132 
Bennet,  Thomas,  51 1  * 

Bensley,  Robert,  157 
Benson,  George,  354* 

Bentham,  Edward,  286,  354* 

Bentley,  Richard,  15,  285,  320*,  448,  449,  513 
Bentley,  Richard,  Jr.,  536* 

Benzoni  [Benzo],  Geronimo,  569* 

Berenger  [Berrenger],  Richard,  470,  471 
Beresford,  Richard,  534 
Beresford,  Mrs.  Richard,  534,  535 
Beresford,  Miss  (daughter),  534,  535 
Beresford,  Rev.  Mr.,  390 

Berkeley,  George,  Bishop  of  Cloyne,  134,  182,  351, 

354*.  450 

Beroaldo,  Filippo,  269 
Berrenger :  see  Berenger,  Richard 
Berriman,  William,  354* 

Berwick,  James  Fitz  James,  Duke  of,  391 
Beschrijvinge  ende  chronyk  van  de  heerlickheydt  van 
Frieslandt  (Schotanus),  136 
Betterton,  Thomas,  358 
Bevill,  Rev.  Dr.,  462  * 

Bewley,  William,  486 
Beza,  Theodore,  576  * 

Bible,  94,  146,  151-152,  189,  193,  197,  201,  235, 
269,  283,  290,  297*,  313,  355*,  363,  394,  443, 
451  *,  472,  475,  482,  510,  518  *-51 9*,  530,  533*, 
540*,  541  *,544,  576*,  580 
Bibliotheca  Biographica  (Floyd),  130* 

Bibliotheca  Harleiana ,  40 
Bibliotheque ,  Johnson’s  scheme  of  a,  78 
Bibliotheque  Britannique  (Maty),  76 
Bibliotheque  des  Fees ,  267 
Bibliotheque  des  Savans ,  90 
Bickerstaff,  Isaac,  1 67 
Bicknell,  Alexander,  87 
Bingham,  Charles,  see  Lucan,  1st  Earl  of 
Binning,  Lord:  see  Haddington,  8th  Earl  of 
Biographia  Britannica ,  286,  334,  354,  404*,  458, 
531* 

Biographia  Dramatica ,  1 00  * 

Biographical  Dictionary ,  100*,  334 
Biographical  History  of  England ,  A  (Granger),  326 
Birch,  Thomas,  2,  36,  39,  40,  42,  50,  62,  79,  85, 
354* 

Blacklock,  Thomas,  92,  133 

Blackmore,  Sir  Richard,  174-175,  418-419,  453% 
Life  of  (Johnson),  459 

Blackstone,  Sir  William,  16,  255*,  275*,  281,  422, 
471,484* 

Blackwall,  Anthony,  1 8,  544,  578  * 

Blackwell,  Thomas,  85 
Blagden,  Sir  Charles,  271  *,  451 
Blainville,  — ,  252 


INDEX 


Blair,  Hugh,  ioo,  m,  161,230,  231,237,311,327, 
329.  33 1  >  35 1 , 353>  366,  408,  428-429,  473 
Blair,  John,  428 
Blair,  Robert,  310* 

Blair,  Robert,  Solicitor-General  of  Scotland,  310* 
Blake,  Robert,  Life  of  (Johnson),  38 
Blanchetti,  Marchioness,  266 
Blanchetti,  Marquis,  266 
Blaney,  Elizabeth,  5,  565 
Bloxam,  Matthew,  397 
Blue-stocking  Clubs,  476-477 
Boccaccio  (Boccace),  Giovanni,  269,  568* 
Boccage,  Marie  Anne  Le  Page  du,  266,  271,  550 
Bochart,  Samuel,  270 
Bodleian  Library,  75,  81,  84,  154,  417 
Boece  (Boetius),  Hector,  229,  528 
Boerhaave,  Herman,  261 
Life  of  (Johnson),  36 

Boethius  [Boetius],  Anicius  Manlius  Severinus, 
36, 181 

Boileau-Despreaux,  Nicolas,  19,  29,  41 1, 557 
Bolingbroke,  Henry  Saint  John,  1st  Viscount,  73, 

87.  9‘>  374*.  4IO>  4".  428, 429,  457-458 
Bolingbroke,  Marie  Claire  Saint  John,  Viscountess, 
403 

Bolton:  see  Boulton 
Bonaventura,  Saint,  1 42 
Bond  [B— d],  Mr.,  207-208 
Bond,  Mrs.,  576* 

Book  of  Common  Prayer,  51 1  *,  538,  576* 

Book  of  Discipline ,  1 96 
Boothby,  Sir  Brook,  18 
Boothby,  Miss  Hill,  18,  460* 

Borlase,  William,  85,  354* 

Boscawen,  Edward,  406 

Boscawen,  Frances,  406,  436,  473 

Boscawen,  George  Evelyn:  see  Falmouth,  Viscount 

Boscovich,  Ruggiero  Giuseppe,  181,  272 

Bosville,  Godfrey,  415,  441 

Bosville,  Mrs.  Godfrey,  1 95 

Boswell,  Alexander  (Boswell’s  father) :  see  Auchin- 
leck,  Lord 

Boswell,  Sir  Alexander  (Boswell’s  son),  227,  265, 

273, 274. 278, 300, 324, 326, 329, 330, 331, 336, 

368, 439 

Boswell,  David  (Boswell’s  ancestor),  274 
Boswell,  David  (Boswell’s  brother),  438-439,  440, 
442,5i7>5Si 

Boswell,  David  (Boswell’s  son),  326,  327,  330,  331 
Boswell,  Euphemia,  231, 232,  278,  326,  330,  368 
Boswell,  James  (Boswell’s  son),  183*,  300,  417, 
418 

Boswell,  John,  124,  298,  334 

Boswell,  Margaret  Montgomerie  (Mrs.  James),  1 75, 
185,  187,  227,  228,  229,  230,  231,  233,  234,  235, 
236,  237,  238,  242,  263,  264,  265,  273,  274,  275, 
276,  277,  278,  279,  297,  324,  325,  326,  327,  329, 

33°j  33  L  334,  335,  338-339,  34°,  349*,  365,  367- 
368,  369,  416,  418,  419,  426,  427,  433,  434,  435, 

439-440,  442,  487,  491,  492,  493-494,  495,  5l5> 
51 7, 523,  526,  527,  528,  567,  568 
Boswell,  Thomas,  274,  506 


Boswell,  Veronica  (“Miss”),  230,  231,  235,  236, 
238, 263, 273, 278, 326, 329, 330, 331, 336, 339, 

388,419 

Boswell,  Sir  William,  52  * 

Bott,  Thomas,  354* 

Bouchier:  see  Bourchier,  Charles 
Bouffier,  Pere:  see  Buffier,  Claude 
Boufflers-Rouverel,  Marie  Charlotte  Hippolyte, 
Comtesse  de,  272 
Bouhours,  Dominique,  169 
Boulter,  Hugh,  Archbishop  of  Armagh,  7 
Boulter's  Monument  (Madden),  88 
Boulton  [Bolton],  Matthew,  290 
Bouquet,  Joseph,  66 
Bourchier  [Bouchier],  Charles,  470 
Bourdaloue,  Louis,  218* 

Bourdonne,  Madame  de,  218* 

Bowles,  William,  517 

Bowyer,  William,  564 

Boyd,  William:  see  Kilmarnock,  4th  Earl  of 

Boydell,  John,  236  * 

Boyle,  John:  see  Cork  and  Orrery,  5th  Earl  of 
Boyle,  Robert,  83,  86 
Boyse,  Joseph,  354* 

Boyse,  Samuel,  578  * 

Bradley,  James,  354* 

Bradshaw,  William,  506  * 

Brahmins,  470 

Braithwaite,  Daniel,  533 

Bramhall,  John,  Archbishop  of  Armagh,  1 73 

Bramston,  James,  15* 

“Bravery  of  the  English  Common  Soldiers”  (John¬ 
son),  93 

Brett,  Anne,  formerly  Lady  Macclesfield,  45-47 
Brett,  Henry,  47  * 

Brett,  Thomas,  536 

Bristol,  John  Hervey,  1st  Earl  of,  153  * 

British  Museum,  72  *,  446,  569 
British  Princes,  The  (Howard),  175* 

British  Synonymy  (Piozzi),  580 
Broadley,  Captain,  415 

Brocklesby,  Richard,  499,  516,  517,  521,  524,  527, 
528,  531,  552,  557-56o,  567,  575-576,  580,  581 
Brodie,  Captain,  18* 

Brodie,  Molly  Aston,  18,  293,  409,  460 
Brooke,  Henry,  36 
Broome,  William,  436 
Life  of  (Johnson),  457 
Brother' s  Advice  to  his  Sisters,  A  (Croft),  539 
Broughton,  Hugh,  354* 

Broughton,  Thomas,  354* 

Brown,  John,  182,  354* 

Brown,  Lancelot,  287,  428 

Brown,  Robert,  1 44-1 45,  392 

Brown,  Sir  Thomas:  see  Browne,  Sir  Thomas 

Brown,  Tom,  Johnson’s  English  instructor^ 

Browne,  Isaac  Hawkins,  the  elder,  250 

Browne,  Isaac  Hawkins,  the  younger,  531 

Browne,  Patrick,  85 

Browne,  Simon,  354  * 

Browne,  Sir  Thomas,  60,  85,  393 
Life  of  (Johnson)  ,  85,  91 


INDEX 


Bruce,  James,  108* 

Bruce,  Robert,  Life  of  (Hailes),  265 
Brumoy,  Pierre,  96 
Brunet,  — ,  268 
Brutus,  Marcus  Junius,  109* 

Bruyere,  Jean  de  la,  569* 

Bryant,  Jacob,  531 
Brydone,  Patrick,  252,  293,  414 
Buchan,  David  Steuart  Erskine,  nth  Earl  of,  196, 
197 

Buchanan,  George,  131,  170,  229,  502 
Buckingham  and  Normanby,  John  Sheffield,  1st 
Duke  of,  Life  of  (Johnson),  453 
Buckingham,  Katherine  Sheffield  {nee  Annesley), 
Duchess  of  Buckingham  and  Normanby,  376 
Buckingham  House  library  (Queen’s  house),  153- 
154 

Budgell,  Eustace,  2 1 4,  3 1  o 

Budworth,  Captain:  see  Palmer,  Joseph  (Budworth) 
Budworth,  William,  1 8  *,  578  * 

Buffier  [Bouffier],  Claude,  134 
Buffon,  Georges  Louis  Leclerc,  Comte  de, 
323* 

Bulkeley,  Mrs.,  an  actress,  21 1 
Bunbury,  Sir  Charles,  137,  230,  244,  582 
Bunbury,  Henry  William,  1 1 7  * 

Bunyan,John,  217 
Burch,  Edward,  583* 

Bure,  Guillaume  Frangois  de,  270* 

Burgoyne,  John,  414 

Burke,  Edmund,  20,  86,  95,  116,  ii7*>  134,  136, 
137,  147,  169,  1 71,  182,  185,  199,  218,  224,  225, 
236,  287,  316,  322,  323-324,  341,  358,  360,  373, 
374,  375,  383,  397,  399,  402,  403,  420,  421,  438, 
447,  448,  449,  45°,  4^0,  465,  4^7,  4^8,  489,  474, 
497,  499,  5io,  5i3,  532,  533,  540,  546,  547-548, 
554,  566*,  578,  582 
Burke,  Richard,  137,  513,  564 
Burlamaqui,  Jean  Jacques,  281 
Burlington,  Richard  Boyle,  3rd  Earl  of,  41 1 
Burman,  Pieter:  see  Burmann 
Burmann  [Burman],  Pieter,  40,  569* 

Burnet,  Gilbert,  Bishop  of  Salisbury,  209,  360, 
544 

Burnet,  James:  see  Monboddo,  Lord 
Burney,  — ,  Dr.  Burney’s  youngest  son,  418 
Burney,  Dr.  Charles,  6*,  15*,  61,  79,  90,  91,  112, 
137,  142,  158,  272-273,  381,  417-418,  473,  486, 
503,  509,  5r9,  580-561, 567,  577  * 

Burney,  Charles,  the  younger,  570,  583  * 

Burney,  Elizabeth  (2nd  Mrs.  Charles),  509,  560, 
561 

Burney,  Esther  (1st  Mrs.  Charles),  90,  91 
Burney,  Frances  (Fanny):  see  Arblay,  Madame  d’ 
Burrowes,  Robert,  570-571 
Burrows,  Dr.,  of  St.  Clement  Danes,  421 
Burton,  John,  354* 

Burton,  R.:  see  Crouch,  Nathaniel 
Burton,  Robert,  12,  179,  284,  433 
Bute,  John  Stuart,  3rd  Earl  of,  104- 105,  106,  108, 
15°.  255, 256, 294, 427, 480, 483, 485, 497*, 
506 


593 

Bute,  John  Stuart,  1st  Marquess  of,  106,  148%  150, 
281,296,  321,326,  43L483 
Butler,  Joseph,  354* 

Butler,  Samuel,  2 1 7,  475,  539 

Butter,  William,  296,  347,  350,  477,  575,  576* 

Butter,  Mrs.  William,  350 

Byng,  John,  admiral,  85,  87,  181 

Byng,  Hon.  John,  582 

C  (chemist):  see  Fordyce,  George 
Cabiri,  74-75 

Cadell,  Thomas,  ioo,  279,  280,  327,  332,  407 
Cadet ,  a  Military  Treatise ,  The ,  85 
Caermarthen,  Lord:  see  Leeds,  5th  Duke  of 
Caesar,  Gaius  Julius,  4,  24,  353 
Caldwell,  Sir  James,  154* 

Caldwell,  Sir  John,  154* 

Caledonian  Mercury ,  The ,  484 
Caligula  (Gaius  Caesar),  Roman  emperor,  390 
Call  to  the  Unconverted  to  Turn  and  Live,  A  (Baxter), 
23L525 

Callimachus,  442 
Calmet,  Augustin,  569  * 

Cambridge,  Richard  Owen,  257,  258,  259,  260, 
379>  380,  505 

Cambridge  University,  154 

Camden,  Charles  Pratt,  1st  Earl,  215*,  243,  399 
Camden,  William,  397,  51 1 
Cameron,  Archibald,  38 
Cameron,  Donald,  38  * 

Campbell,  Archibald,  Duke  of  Argyle:  see  Argyle, 
3rd  Duke  of 

Campbell,  Archibald,  satirist,  156 
Campbell,  Sir  Archibald,  314 
Campbell,  Archibald,  Bishop  of  Aberdeen,  210, 
535 

Campbell,  Archibald,  theologian,  100 
Campbell,  John:  see  Argyle,  5th  Duke  of 
Campbell,  Dr.  John,  1 18,  158,  210,  286,  377 
Campbell,  Rev.  John,  ofKippen,  152* 

Campbell,  Mungo,  359 

Campbell,  Colonel  Mure,  335 

Campbell,  Thomas,  88,  250,  251,  253,  254,  332 

Campbell,  — ,  of  Auchnaba,  337,  338,  340 

Campbells,  Mrs.  Boswell’s  nephews,  334 

Candide  (Voltaire),  94,  414 

Canons  of  Criticism,  The  (Edwards),  72* 

Canus,  Melchior,  267 
Capell  [Capel],  Edward,  443 
Caractacus  (Mason),  250 
Cardross,  Lord:  see  Buchan,  1  ith  Earl  of 
Careless,  Mrs.,  290,  291, 490,  491,  567 
Careless  Husband,  The  (Cibber),  47%  251 
Carhampton,  Henry  Lawes  Luttrell,  2nd  Earl  of, 
176 

Carleton,  George,  551 

Carlisle,  Frederick  Howard,  5th  Earl  of,  478,  521- 
522 

Carmen  Secular e  (Horace),  419 
Carmichael,  Miss,  370,  418 
Caroline  of  Auspach,  Queen  of  England,  320 
Carte,  Thomas,  7,  252,  354*,  544 


INDEX 


594 

Carter,  Elizabeth,  3! ,  36,  55,  66,  352,  473,  531 
Carteret,  John:  see  Granville,  1st  Earl 
Cartwright,  Thomas,  354* 

Castell,  Edmund,  354* 

Catalogue  of  the  Artists’  Exhibition ,  1 02 
Catalogue  of  the  Scottish  Bishops  (Keith),  85 
Catcot,  George,  31 1 
Cathcart,  Charles  Cathcart,  9th  Baron,  274,  41 1 
Catherine  II,  Empress  of  Russia,  340 *-341  *,  418, 
532 

Catholics:  see  Roman  Catholics 
Catholicon  (Balbus),  270 
Catiline  (Lucius  Sergius  Catilina),  3 
Cato,  Marcus  Porcius,  109*,  468 
Cato  (Addison),  100,  389-390,  453  *>  47 1 
Cato  Major  (Cicero),  566* 

Cator,  John,  544 

Catullus,  Gaius  Valerius,  501 

Caulfield,  James:  see  Charlemont,  1st  Earl  of 

Caulfield,  Miss,  328 

Cave,  Edward,  21,  25,  26,  27,  28,  29,  30-31,  34, 
35.36,  39,  40,41,42,43,57,  66,  198,  218*,  402- 
403,  579 

Life  of  (Johnson),  70 
Cave,  Miss,  21  * 

Cawston,  a  servant,  582 

Caxton,  William,  380 

Cebes,  24 

Cecil,  Colonel,  199 

Cecilia  (F.  Burney),  514,  572 

Cervantes  Saavedra,  Miguel  de,  260,  296 

Chalmers,  George,  40* 

Chamberlayne,  Edward,  473 
Chamberlayne,  George,  536 
Chambers,  Catharine,  1 56 
Chambers,  Ephraim,  36,  60 
Chambers,  Sir  Robert,  75,  93,99, 103, 137, 150,157 
225,  226-227,  229,  230,  232,  303,  463,  464,  554 
Chambers,  Sir  William,  478,  503 
Chamier,  Anthony,  136,  335,  368,  380 
Champion ,  The ,  45 

Chances ,  The  (Beaumont  &  Fletcher),  216 
Chandler,  Samuel,  354  * 

Chapone,  Hester,  55,  521,  522 
Chappe  d’Auteroche,  Jean,  409 
Charlemont,  James  Caulfield,  1st  Earl  of,  137,  216, 
467,  468 

Charles  I,  King  of  England,  52*,  133,  209,  260, 
497 

Charles  II,  King  of  England,  67,  125,  155,  251, 
260,  454 

Charles  III  (the  Young  Pretender),  122,  223 
Charles  V,  Holy  Roman  emperor,  167,  378 
Charles  XII,  King  of  Sweden,  52,  296,  384 
Charlotte,  Queen  of  England,  107,  186,  216,  235, 
289,  343 

Chatham,  William  Pitt,  1st  Earl  of,  33,  40,  147, 
181,  197,  203,  214,  243,  362,  414,  545 
Chatterton,  Thomas,  31 1, 488 
Chaucer,  Geoffrey,  85,  332,  380,  568  * 

Life  of,  85 

Chemical  Essays  (Watson),  480 


Chesterfield,  Philip  Dormer  Stanhope,  4th  Earl  of, 
3)  39,  49-50,  7 °"73,  192,  209,  247-248,  251,  312, 
31 8,  331 , 41 3,  423,  434,  467,  475,  483,  499,  55° 
Chesterfield,  Philip  Stanhope,  5th  Earl  of,  342 
Cheyne,  George,  1 3,  304,  324 
Cheynell  [Cheynel],  Francis,  Life  of  (Johnson),  62 
Chinese  Architecture  (Chambers),  503 
Chishull,  Edmund,  354* 

Choisi,  Frangois  Timoleon,  Abbe  de,  407 
Cholmondeley,  George,  3rd  Earl  of,  554* 
Cholmondeley,  George  James,  554-555 
Cholmondeley,  Mary  Woffington,  181,  381,  383, 
401 

Christian,  Rev.  Mr.,  158 
Christian  Hero  (Steele),  286 
Christian  Morals  (Browne),  85 

Christian’s  Defence  Against  the  Fears  of  Death  (Drelin- 
court),  193 

Christie,  James,  the  elder,  577  * 

Chronicles  (Holinshed),  576* 

Chronicles  (Stow),  576* 

Church  of  England,  189,  196,  290,  342,  466-467, 
532 

Church  of  Scotland,  1 93,  1 96,  2 1 8-2 1 9,  41 9 
Churchill,  Charles,  32,  88-89,  1 1  L  1  J4>  1 18,  120*, 
138, 162*,  354*,  371, 379 
Churton,  Ralph,  225*,  511*,  540 *-541  * 

Cibber,  Colley,  39,  47*,  70,  113,  169,  171,  245, 
251)  3°5j  3o6*>  319,  357)  383)  520,  531 
Cibber,  Susannah  Maria,  53,  169 
Cibber,  Theophilus,  50,  305,  305  *-306*,  308,  334 
Cicero,  Marcus  Tullius,  24,  285,  321  *,  413,  557, 

566*,  569* 

Ciceronianus  (Erasmus),  557 

Citizen  of  the  World ,  The  (Goldsmith),  116 

City  Club,  470 

Civil  and  Natural  History  of  Jamaica  (Browne),  85 
Clanranald,  241,  242 
Clapp,  Mrs.,  161,  177 
Clare,  Robert  Nugent,  Viscount,  184,  399 
Clarendon,  Edward  Hyde,  1st  Earl  of,  82*,  166, 
279.  382, 413. 453*. 544, 586* 

Clarendon  Press,  279,  284 

Clarissa  Harlowe  (Richardson),  38,  90*,  251,  357, 
450 

Clark,  John,  523,  524 
Clark,  Richard,  525-526 
Clarke,  John,  23 

Clarke,  Samuel,  15,  112,  173,  182,  226,  378,  448, 
581 

Clarke,  William,  354* 

Claudian  (Claudius  Claudianus),  243,  569* 
Clavius,  Christopher,  285 
Claxton,  John,  221 
Clayton,  Robert,  354* 

Clement  XIV,  Pope  (Giovanni  Ganganelli),  391 

Clement,  William,  140 

Clenardus,  Nicholas,  447 

Cleone  (Dodsley),  90,  448 

Cleonice  (Hoole),  235 

Clerk,  Sir  Philip  Jennings,  468 

Clermont,  Frances  Fortescue,  Countess  of,  436 


INDEX 


595 


Clive,  Catherine  (Kitty),  444,  520 
Clive,  Robert,  Baron,  412,  428 
Club,  Literary:  see  Literary  Club 
Cobb,  Mary,  266,  293,  431-432,  4^9*  5J7 
Cobham,  Richard  Temple,  1st  Viscount,  140, 
411 

Cochrane,  James,  122* 

Codex  Divinorum  Officiorum ,  270 

Coke,  Sir  Edward,  1 91 , 301  *,  543 

Col,  laird  of:  see  Maclean,  Donald,  laird  of  Col 

Colbrooke, — ,  270 

Cole,  Henry,  577* 

Collection  of  Pieces  in  Verse  and  Prose ,  on  Occasion  of  the 
Dunciad  (Savage,  ed.),  542  * 

Collection  of  Poems ,  A  (Dodsley),  302*,  308,  346*, 

36a»  385, 389, 449 

Collier,  Jeremy,  535* 

Collins,  William,  76,  107,  263 
Life  of  (Johnson),  107 
Collyer,  Joel:  see  Bicknell,  Alexander 
Colman,  George,  the  elder,  57,  137,  244,  327,  402, 
444,447, 571.582 
Colombiade ,  La  (Boccage),  550 
Colson,  John,  24-25 
Columbus,  Christopher,  523 
Coluthus,  569* 

Commentaries  (Caesar),  24,  353 

Commentaries  on  the  Laws  of  England  (Blackstone), 
255*,  281,471 

Commentarius  de  rebus  ad  eum  pertinentibus  (Huet), 
353 

Commentary ,  with  notes ,  on  the  Four  Evangelists  and  the 
Acts  of  the  Apostles ,  A  (Pearce),  333 
Committee  for  cloathing  the  French  Prisoners, 

98 

Common- Place  Book  (Locke),  55 
Commons,  House  of:  see  Parliament 
Companion  for  the  Festivals  and  Fasts  of  the  Church  of 
England  (Nelson),  290,  544 
Compleat  Angler,  The  (Walton),  544 
Complete  System  of  Astronomical  Chronology ,  unfolding 
the  Scriptures  (Kennedy),  102 
Complete  Vindication  of  the  Licensers  of  the  Stage,  from 
the  malicious  and  scandalous  Aspersions  of  Mr.  Brooke, 
Authour  of  Gustavus  Vasa,  A  (Johnson),  36 
Comus  (Milton),  62 

Conde,  Louis  II  de  Bourbon,  Prince  de,  268 
Conde,  Louis  Joseph  de  Bourbon,  Prince  de,  267, 
268,  270 

Conduct  of  the  Allies,  The  (Swift),  162 
“Conduct  of  the  Ministry  Relating  to  the  Present 
War  Impartially  Examined,  The”  85 
Confession  of  Faith,  Agreed  upon  by  the  Assembly  of  Di¬ 
vines  at  Westminster,  231 
Confucius,  395 

Confutatio  stultissimce  Bur  donum  Fabulce  (Scaliger), 
226 

Congreve,  Charles,  7,  290-291, 295 
Congreve,  William,  7,  109*,  168,  170,  214,  358 
Life  of  (Johnson),  459-460 
Congreve  family,  358 
Connoisseur ,  The ,  1 1 9 


Conscious  Lovers,  The  (Steele),  141  * 

Considerations  on  the  Case  of  Dr.  Trapp's  Sermons 
(Johnson),  569* 

“Considerations  on  the  Dispute  between  Crousaz 
and  Warburton,  on  Pope’s  Essay  on  Man "  (John¬ 
son),  41 

Const,  Francis,  301  * 

Contentment  (Parnell),  336 

Convict's  Address  to  his  unhappy  Brethren ,  The  (John¬ 
son  &  Dodd),  343,  351 
Conybeare,  John,  354* 

Cook,  James,  298,  550 

Cook  [Cooke],  Thomas,  the  engraver,  583  * 

Cooke,  Thomas  (Hesiod),  108* 

Cooke,  William,  524 
Cooksey,  John,  244* 

Cooper,  Anthony  Ashley:  see  Shaftesbury,  4th  Earl 
of 

Cooper,  John  Gilbert,  182,  346*,  443 
Copley,  John,  577* 

Corderius:  see  Cordier,  Maturin 
Cordier,  Maturin,  23 
Corelli,  Arcangelo,  251 
Coriat:  see  Coryate,  Thomas 
Coriat  Junior :  see  Paterson,  Samuel 
Cork  and  Orrery,  John  Boyle,  5th  Earl  of,  50,  66, 
70, 83, 182, 357, 376, 379, 400, 454, 499 
Cork  and  Orrery,  Mary  Monckton  Boyle, Countess 
of,  477 

Corn  Laws,  1 82 

Cornbury,  Lord:  see  Clarendon,  1st  Earl  of 
Corneille,  Pierre,  446 
Coryate,  Thomas,  1 97 

Cornwallis,  Frederick,  Archbishop  of  Canterbury, 
337 

Costard,  George,  354 

Cotterell,  Admiral,  66 

Cotterell,  the  Misses,  66-67,  io3j  io7 

Council  of  Trent,  174 

Courayer,  Pierre  Frangois  le,  26,  34* 

Courtenay,  John,  12-13,  49*,  60,87,  95»  I37>22&? 

244%  259*,  397,  399,  545, 547*,  569* 
Courtown,  James  Stopford,  2nd  Earl  of,  262 
Covent  Garden,  333 

Covington,  Alexander  Lockhart,  Lord,  367 
Cowley,  Abraham,  305,  475,  493 

Life  of  (Johnson),  48,  371, 449*,  453“454 
Cowper,  George  Nassau  Clavering-Cowper,  3rd 
Earl,  301  * 

Cowper,  Gilbert:  see  Cooper,  John  Gilbert 
Cowper,  William,  406  * 

Cox,  a  solicitor,  547 
Coxeter,  Thomas,  348 
Crabbe,  George,  499 
Cradock,  Joseph,  308 
Craggs,  James,  the  elder,  42 
Craggs,  James,  the  younger,  42 
Craig,  James,  the  architect,  415 
Craig,  William,  his  father,  415 
Crashaw,  Richard,  397  * 

Craven,  Elizabeth,  countess  of:  see  Anspach,  Eliza¬ 
beth,  Margravine  of 


596  INDEX 


Creation  (Blackmore),  1 74-1 75 
Crescimbeni,  Giovanni  Maria,  76 
Critical  Review ,  The ,  99,  115*,  116,  137,  155,  306, 
353, 460 

Critical  Strictures  (Boswell,  Erskine,  and  Dempster), 
n5 

Criticism  on  the  Elegy  written  in  a  Country  Churchyard: 
Being  a  Continuation  of  Dr.  J — rfs  Criticism  on  the 
Poems  of  Gray  (Young),  573 
Croft,  Herbert,  460-461, 539,  543 
Cromwell,  Oliver,  288,  518 
Crosbie,  Andrew,  262,  328 
Crouch,  Anna  Maria  (Phillips),  515 
Crouch,  Nathaniel  ( Burton's  Books ),  525 
Crousaz,  Jean  Pierre  de,  35,  41 
Croxall,  Samuel,  354  * 

Cruikshank,  William  Cumberland,  513,  519,  562- 
563.  575.576* 

Cullen,  Robert,  Lord,  338,  367 
Cullen,  William,  261,  338,  352,  527 
Cumberland,  William  Augustus,  Duke  of,  262 
Cumberland,  Richard,  309,  462,  570 
Cumming,  Thomas,  510-51 1 

Cursory  Observations  on  the  Poems  attributed  to  Thomas 
Rowley ,488* 

Cust,  Francis  Cockayne,  43  *,  45,  46* 

Cutts,  Elizabeth  Cutts  {nee  Pickering),  Baroness, 
372 

Cyclopcedia ,  or  an  Universal  Dictionary  of  Arts  and 
Sciences  (Chambers) ,  60 

Dacier,  Andre,  320* 

Dacier,  Anne  Lefevre,  406* 

Damonology  (James  I),  422 
Dalin  [Daline],  Olof  von,  191 
Dalrymple,  David:  see  Hailes,  Lord 
Dalrymple,  Sir  John,  208-209,  217,  235 
Dalzel,  Andrew,  570 
Dante  Alighieri,  217,373* 

Dartineuf  [or  Dartiquenave],  Charles,  286 
Dashwood,  Sir  Henry,  430* 

Dashwood,  Lady,  430 

Davies,  Thomas,  86,  109,  no,  hi,  120,  138,  161, 
162,  167,  168,  170,  207,  224-225,  228-229,  238, 
251, 252, 254, 262, 308, 332, 370-371, 379, 439, 
444, 445. 5 '6, 563 

Davies,  Mrs.  Thomas,  109,  no,  138,  370,  516, 

563 

Dawkins,  James,  483 
Dawson,  George,  289* 

Dawson,  John,  430 

Day  of  Judgement,  The  (Ogilvie),  120* 

De  Anima  Medica  (Nicholls),  350 
De  Animi  Tranquillitate  (Volusene),  367 
De  Arte  Poetica  (Horace),  quoted,  60 
De  Bello  Catilinario  (Sallust),  569* 

De  Civitate  Dei  (Augustine),  270 
De  Claris  Oratoribus  (Cicero),  545 
De  Consolatione  Philosophise  (Boethius),  36 
De  generations  insectarum  (Redi),  373* 

De  Locis  Theologicis  (Canus),  267  * 

De  Natura  ccdi  (Lydiat),  52  * 


De  JVatur a  Deorum  (Cicero),  569* 

De  Situ  Orbis  (Pomponius  Mela),  133 
Dean  [Deane],  Richard,  159 
“Death  of  a  Friend”  (Johnson),  92 
“Debate  on  the  Proposal  of  Parliament  to  Crom¬ 
well,  to  assume  the  Title  of  King”  (Johnson), 
39 

“Debates  on  The  Senate  of  Lilliput”  29,  36,  39- 

4°)  4L  579 

Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Roman  Empire ,  The  (Gibbon), 
259, 286, 377, 535*,  571-572 
Defence  of  Pluralities,  2 1 8 

Defence  of  the  True  Liberty  of  Human  Actions  from  An¬ 
tecedent  and  Extrinsicall  Necessity  (Bramhall),  173 
Defoe,  Daniel,  193*,  384 
Deformities  of  Dr.  Samuel  Johnson ,  The ,  491 
De  Groot,  Isaac,  337 
Delany,  Patrick,  379,  454 
Democritus,  475* 

Demonax  (Lucian),  452 

Demosthenes,  1 95,  209,  401 , 413 

Dempster,  George,  115,  123,  124,  125,  203,  239, 

240. 377. 396, 534 

Dempster,  Miss,  534 
Dennis,  John,  308,  453* 

Derby,  John,  333 

Derrick,  Samuel,  31,  108,  in,  129- 130,  419,  504, 
5l6* 

Descartes,  Rene,  270 
Description  of  the  East  (Pococke),  252 
Description  of  the  Empire  of  China,  A  (Du  Halde), 
35*.  4i.  '59 

Description  of  the  Western  Isles  of  Scotland,  A  (Martin) 
128,377 

Deserted  Village,  The  (Goldsmith),  144,  216,  499* 
Desmaizeaux  [Desmaiseaux],  Pierre,  2 
Desmoulins,  Elizabeth,  13,  18,  65,  188,  326,  370, 

395>  4°°>  4i6>  4i8>  4x9>  47L  489>  49°>  498>  5IO> 

517.525,547  *,582 

Desmoulins,  John,  576*,  577* 

Despairing  Shepherd,  The  (Prior),  166 
Devaynes,  an  apothecary,  531 

Devonshire,  Georgiana  Cavendish,  Duchess  of, 

420. 559. 564 

Devonshire,  William  Cavendish,  3rd  Duke  of,  358, 
420 

Devonshire,  William  Cavendish,  5th  Duke  of,  358, 

483. 559. 564 

De  Witt,  Jan,  3 

Dialogues  of  the  Dead  (Lyttelton),  1 81 , 286,  460 
Diamond,  an  apothecary,  66 
Diary,  The,  570* 

Diary  (Laud),  209-210 
Dibden,  Charles,  175 

Dick,  Sir  Alexander,  329,  338,  507-508,  526,  527 
Dick  ,  Sir  William,  329 

Dictionarium  Saxonico  et  Gothico-Latinum  (Lye),  147 
Dictionary  (Bayle),  120 

Dictionary  of  Arts  and  Sciences  (Chambers):  see  Cy¬ 
clopaedia 

Dictionary  of  Ancient  Geography,  A  (Macbean),  51, 
206-207,  304 


INDEX 


597 


Dictionary  of  the  English  Language,  A  (Johnson),  23, 
49-5 1.  54.  60,  62 1  63,  66,  68,  69-85,  90,  104,  105, 
106, 108*,  1 10,  126,  132,  186, 190, 192,  206,  207, 
208,  225,  247*,  333*334,  350,  354*,  361,  398, 
404*,  410,  413,  429,  434,  443,  454*,  486,  512, 

525*,  547,  549,  565,  576*,  581  *>  583  *,  584,  585 
Dictionary  of  Trade  and  Commerce  (Rolt),  ioo,  252 
Dictionnaire  de  Commerce ,  576  * 

Dilly,  Charles,  221,  332,  480,  483,  485,  525,  532 
Dilly,  Edward  and  Charles,  publishers,  224,  250, 
279,280,298,317,413, 549 
Dilly,  Edward,  221,  317,  318,  332,  337,  390,  391, 
392,  4X4,  4*5,  425,  426,  474,  476,  480 
Dilly,  John,  71,  221, 426,  480,  481,  483,  485 
Diogenes  Laertius,  445-446 
Dirleton,  Sir  John  Nisbet,  Lord,  364 
Discourse  on  the  Evangelical  History ,  A  (Townson),  225* 
Discourse  on  the  Inequality  of  Mankind  (Rousseau), 
124 

Discourses  on  the  Gospels  (Townson),  541  * 

Discourses  on  Painting  (Reynolds),  327,  546-547 
“Dissertation  upon  the  Epitaphs  written  by  Pope, 
A”  (Johnson),  85,  93 

“Dissertation  on  the  Greek  Comedy,  A”  (Johnson) 

96 

“Dissertation  upon  the  State  of  Literature  and 
Authours,  A”  (Johnson),  85 
Dissertations  on  the  Ancient  History  of  Ireland  (O’Con¬ 
nor),  89,  332* 

Dissertations  on  the  Prophecies  (Newton),  535 
Distressed  Mother ,  The  (Ambrose  Philips),  11  *,  49, 
310 

Ditton,  Humphrey,  163* 

Diversions  of  Purley  (Tooke),  413* 

Divine  Legation  of  Moses,  The  (Warburton),  457 
Divine  Poesie  (Waller),  536*~537  * 

Dixie  [Dixey],  Sir  Wolstan,  19 
Docksey  [Doxy],  Merrial,  433,  434 
Dr.  Doddls  last  solemn  Declaration  (Johnson),  343 
Doctrine  of  a  Middle  State  (Campbell)  ,210* 

Dodd,  Mary  (Mrs.  William),  343 

Dodd,  William,  335-336,  337,  338,  340,  342-345, 

347,  351, 379, 385,  389, 5°9 
Dodsley,  James,  49,  52  *,  53,  286 
Dodsley,  Robert,  31,  34*,  49,  50,  51,  52*,  53,  54*, 
66,  72,  73,  75*,  76,  79,  80,  88,  90,  94,  286,  287*, 
293,  3°2*,  3«8,  346*,  362,  385,  389,  429,  447, 
448,  449 

“Domestick  Greatness  unattainable”  (Johnson),92 
Dominiceti  [Dominicetti],  Bartholomew  de,  1 7 1 
Donaldson,  Alexander,  1 24 
Don  Quixote  (Cervantes),  260 
Donne,  John,  286 
Life  of  (Walton),  258 

Dorset,  Charles  Sackville,  2nd  Duke  of,  102 
Dorset,  John  Frederick  Sackville,  3rd  Duke  of, 
583* 

Dossie,  Robert,  445 

Doubts  on  the  Abolition  of  the  Slave  Trade  (Ranby), 

364 

Doubts  and  Questions  upon  the  Law  especially  of  Scot¬ 
land  (Dirleton),  364 


Doughty,  William,  234*,  583* 

Douglas  (Home),  129,  245,  322 
Douglas,  Archibald  James  Edward  Douglas,  1st 
Baron,  158,  2 14-2 15,  369 
Douglas,  Sir  James,  the  Good,  355 
Douglas,  Dr.  James,  533 
Douglas,  Lady  Jane,  214 

Douglas,  John,  Bishop  of  Salisbury,  32,  36, 62,  71  *, 
115, 122, 137, 161, 162,272,401,532 
Douglas,  Sir  John,  350 
Douglas  Cause,  158,  299,  369 
Doxy,  Miss:  see  Docksey,  Merrial 
Drake,  Sir  Francis,  Life  of  (Johnson),  38,  39 
Draper,  a  bookseller,  310 
DrapiePs  Letters,  The  (Swift),  245 
Dreghorn,  John  Maclaurin,  Lord,  134,  258,  300, 

324. 328, 338, 367 

Drelincourt,  Charles,  1 93 
Drinking  Song  to  Sleep  (Granville),  68  * 

Drogheda,  Edward  Moore,  5th  Earl  of,  306  * 
Dromore,  Bishop  of:  see  Percy,  Thomas 
Drumgould  [Drumgold],  Jean,  270,  271 
Drummond,  James,  see  Perth,  1st  (titular)  Duke  of 
Drummond,  William,  of  Hawthornden,  390 
Drummond,  William,  a  bookseller,  1 51  - 1 53,  156, 
324 

Drummond,  Dr.  (William  Drummond’s  son),  152, 
324,  422 

Drury  Lane  Theatre,  27,  40,  49,  53,  54,  62,  115, 

163, 333. 444 

Drury -lane  Journal,  59* 

Dryden,  John,  61,  83,  129,  143- 144,  167-168,  180, 
195,  212,  218,  246,  269,  308,  319,  320,  380,  389, 
397*.  4  ‘  1. 427.  453,  478*,  522, 541 
Life  oj  (Johnson),  455-456 
Dublin,  University  of,  34,  89* 

Dublin  Evening  Post,  The,  570* 

Du  Bos,  Jean  Baptiste,  169 
Ducket,  George,  82  * 

Duenna,  The  (Sheridan),  334  \ 

Du  Halde,  Jean  Baptiste,  35*,  41,  159,  451 
Duke,  Richard,  453  * 

Dunbar,  James,  439 
Dunciad  (Pope),  167,  249,  542 
Duncombe,  William,  400 
Dundas,  Henry:  see  Melville,  Viscount 
Dunning,  John:  see  Ashburton,  1st  Baron 
Dunsinane  [Dunsinnan],  Sir  William  Nairne,  Lord 
3°9>  337 

Dunton,  John,  506 
Dupin,  Louis  Ellies,  544 
Duppa,  Bryan,  577  * 

Durand,  Leopold,  269 

Durandi  Sanctuarium,  269 

Dury,  Alexander,  94 

Dyer,  John,  288 

Dyer,  Samuel,  137,  147,  445 

Dying  Christian  to  His  Soul,  The  (Pope),  305 

Dyson,  Jeremiah,  460 

E  (Edmund):  see  Burke,  Edmund 

Easy  Lessons  in  Italian  and  English  (Baretti),  235 


INDEX 


598 

Eccles,  an  Irish  clergyman,  100,  120 
Eclogues  (Virgil),  149,  234,  513 
Edwards,  Edward,  41 7 
Edwards,  Jonathan,  392 
Edwards,  Oliver,  396-398,  47 1 
Edwards,  Thomas,  72  * 

Edwin,  John,  the  elder,  570* 

Eglinton,  Alexander  Montgomerie,  10th  Earl  of, 
162,359 

Eglinton,  Archibald  Montgomerie,  11th  Earl  of, 

33°>  367>  4QI 

Eglinton,  Susanna  Montgomerie,  Countess  of,  417 
Eglintoune:  see  Eglinton 
Eglogues  (Barclay),  76 

Eight  Sermons  on  the  Prophecies  respecting  the  Destruction 
of  Jerusalem  (Chur  ton),  541  * 

Eld,  Francis  or  John  (?),  404 
Elegies  (Scott),  254 

Elegy  to  Lord  Villiers  (Whitehead),  478-479 
Elegy  Written  in  a  Country  Churchyard  (Gray),  113, 
247,  573 

Elements  of  Criticism,  The  (Karnes),  no*,  169 
Elements  of  Orthoepy  (Nares),  572 
Elfrida  (Mason),  249,  250 

Elibank,  Maria  Margaretta  Murray,  Baroness,  455 
Elibank,  Patrick  Murray,  5th  Baron,  185,  188,  201, 
202,303,313,  445,  479 
Eliock  [Elliock],  James  Veitch,  Lord,  367 
Eliot,  Edward,  Baron,  137,  312,  467,  502*,  548, 
550-551 

Elizabeth,  Queen  of  England,  39,  98,  445 
Elizabeth,  Mme.,  sister  of  Louis  XVI,  268 
Elizabeth  Petrovna,  Empress  of  Russia,  85 
Elliot,  Sir  Gilbert,  Third  Baronet  of  Minto,  97, 
192 

Ellis,  John,  302,  302  *-303* 

Ellis,  Mr.,  177 

Elphinston,  James,  57-58,  61,  152,  213,  382 
Elvira  (Mallet),  1 15 
Elwall  [Elwal],  Edward,  193- 194,  222 
Embry,  a  clergyman,  379 
Emmet,  Mrs.,  292 
England's  Gazetteer ,  544 
English  Grammar  (Lowth),  544 
English  Malady,  The  (Cheyne),  13,  304,  324 
English  Poets,  The:  see  Lives  of  the  Poets ,  The  (John¬ 
son) 

Enquiry  into  the  Authenticity  of  the  Poems  ascribed  to  Qs- 
sian.  An  (Shaw),  523-524 

Enquiry  into  the  Authenticity  of  the  Poems  attributed  to 
Thomas  Rowley,  An  (Warton),  488* 

Enquiry  into  the  original  of  Moral  Virtue  (Campbell), 
100 

Enquiry  into  the  present  State  of  polite  Learning  in  Europe, 
An  (Goldsmith),  1 16 
Epigrammaton  (Buchanan),  13 1  * 

“Epigram  both  in  Greek  and  Latin  to  Eliza,  An” 
(Johnson),  36 

“Epilogue”  to  The  Distressed  Mother  (Addison), 

3IG 

“Epilogue”  to  The  Distressed  Mother  (Johnson),  1 1, 

49 


Epistle  to  James  Boswell,  Esq.,  occasioned  by  his  having 
transmitted  the  moral  Writings  of  Dr.  Samuel  Johnson 
to  Pascal  Paoli,  General  of  the  Corsicans,  An  (Ken- 
rick),  1 61 

Epistles  (Horace),  15,  60,  150,  346 
Epistles  (Ovid),  302  * 

Epistles  (Pliny),  251  * 

Epistola  ad  Pisones  (Horace),  320* 

“Epitaph  on  Philips,  a  Musician”  (Johnson),  38- 

39,  15° 

“Epitaph  on  Sir  Thomas  Hanmer”  (Johnson),  48, 
150 

“Epitaph  on  Thomas  Parnell”  (Johnson),  459 
Erasmus,  Desiderius,  23,  323*,  557 
Erskine,  Andrew,  1 15,  346 
Erskine,  Sir  Harry,  1 08 
Erskine,  Thomas,  Baron,  196-197 
“Essay  on  the  Account  of  the  Conduct  of  the  Duch¬ 
ess  of  Marlborough”  (Johnson),  40 
“Essay  on  Architecture”  (Smart?),  85 
Essay  on  the  Character  of  Hamlet  (Robertson),  449* 
“Essay  on  the  Description  of  China  by  Pere  du 
Halde”  (Johnson),  41 

Essay  on  the  dramatic  Character  of  Sir  John  Falsiaff ,  An 
(Morgan  n),  504 

Essay  on  Dramatic  Poetry  (Belsham),  1 09  * 

“Essay  on  Epitaphs,  An”  (Johnson),  38,  93 
Essay  on  the  Future  Life  of  Brutes,  An  (Dean),  1 59 
Essay  of  Health  and  Long  Life,  An  (Cheyne),  304 
Essay  on  the  Learning  of  Shakespeare  (Farmer),  308 
Essay  on  the  Life  and  Character  of  John  Lord  Somers 
(Cooksey),  244* 

Essay  on  the  Life,  Character,  and  writings  of  Dr.  Samuel 
Johnson,  An  (Towers),  454* 

Essay  on  the  Life  and  Genius  of  Dr.  Johnson  (Murphy), 
1 10* 

Essay  on  Alan  (Pope),  35  *,  41 ,  1 54  *,  428-429 
Essay  on  the  Migration  of  Birds  (Barrington),  22 1 
Essay  on  Milton's  Use  and  Imitations  of  the  Moderns  in 
His  Paradise  Lost  (Lauder),  63 
Essay  on  Miracles  (Hume),  285 
Essay  on  the  Origin  of  Evil  (King),  428* 

Essay  on  Physiognomy  (Lava ter),  583  * 

“Essay  on  the  Style  of  Dr.  Samuel  Johnson”  (Bur- 
rowes),  570-571 
Essay  on  Tea  (Hanway),  85,  86 
Essay  towards  a  New  English  Version  of  the  Book  of 
Psalms,  An  (Mudge),  467 
Essay  on  Truth  (Beattie),  206 
Essay  on  Waters  (Lucas),  85,  86 
Essay  on  Wit,  Humour,  and  Ridicule  (Morris),  475* 
Essay  on  the  Writings  and  Genius  of  Pope  (Warton), 
85,  127,  194,  334,  372,428* 

Essay  on  the  Writings  and  Genius  of  Shakspeare,  An 
(Montagu),  168-169,  462 
Essays  on  the  History  of  Alankind  (Dunbar),  439 
Essays ,  Moral  and  Literary  (Knox),  572-573 
Essays  Philosophical,  Historical ,  and  Literary  (Belsham) , 
109 

Essays  on  several  Religious  Subjects  (Milner),  1 30* 
Essence  of  the  Douglas  Cause ,  The  (Boswell)  ,215* 
Essex,  Robert  Devereux,  2nd  Earl  of,  122 


INDEX 


Essex  Head  Club.  524,  524  *-525*,  525-526,  531- 
532,  558,  559,  560 
Este,  house  of,  107* 

Estienne,  Henri,  576* 

Estiennes,  the  [Stephani],  380 
Estimate ,  The  (Brown),  182 
Ethics  (Aristotle),  568* 

Eton  College,  300 

Eugene,  Prince  of  Savoy,  1 98 

Eugenio ,  31,218 

Eumelian  Club,  573 

Euripides,  15,  24,  198,  442,  501  *,  544 

European  Magazine ,  The ,  1 01 ,  153*,  175* 

Eutropius,  23,  24,  217 

Evangelical  History  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  Harmonized , 
The  (John  Lindsay),  570* 

Evans,  James,  435 
Evans,  John,  5  * 

Evans,  Lewis,  85 
Evans,  Thomas,  208 
Evelina  (F.  Burney),  514 

Evidences  of  Natural  and  Revealed  Religion  (Clarke), 
. 581  * 

Examen  de  VEssai  de  M.  Pope  sur  V Homme  (Crousaz), 
35-36 

“Excursion,  The,”  150 
Experiments  on  Bleaching  (Home),  85 

F(Fitzpatrick):  see  Upper  Ossory,  John  Fitzpat¬ 
rick,  2nd  Earl  of 

Fable  of  the  Bees ,  The:  or,  Private  Vices,  Public  Bene¬ 
fits  (Mandeville),  393 
FabulcE  Adsopice  (Phaedrus),  360 
Faculty  of  Advocates,  210 
Fairfax,  Edward,  453  *,  568* 

Falconer,  Rev.  Mr.,  419 

Falkland,  Lucius  Cary,  2nd  Viscount,  269,  586* 
Fall  of  Mortimer,  The  (Mountfort),  321 
Falmouth,  George  Evelyn  Boscawen,  Viscount,  406 
False  Alarm,  The  (Johnson),  176,  187-188,244,430, 
45  L  475 

False  Delicacy  (Kelly),  157 

Family  Discourses:  see  Brother's  Advice  to  his  Sisters,  A 

Farmer,  Richard,  103,  176-177,  308,  436,  447,  488 

Farquhar,  George,  444 

Father's  Revenge,  The  (Carlisle),  521-522 

Faulkner,  George,  89,  190 

Fawkener,  Sir  Everard,  49* 

Fawkes,  Francis,  107 

Feast  of  Reason,  A  (Cumberland),  462 

Felixmarte  of  Hircania,  8 

Female  Quixote  (Lennox),  102 

Fenton,  Elijah,  245 

Ferguson  [Fergusson],  James,  the  self-taught  philos¬ 
opher,  1 71 

Ferguson,  James,  advocate,  367 
Fergusson,  Sir  Adam,  1 95 
Fermor,  Mrs.,  267,  283 

Ferrara,  Eleanora  Gonzaga,  Duchess  of,  107* 
Fielding,  Henry,  157-158,  196-197,  309,  368,  526 
Fielding,  John,  publisher,  583* 

Fielding,  Sir  John,  1 19,  437 


599 

Filby,  John,  167 

Fingal  (Macpherson),  181,  236,  237,  239,  31 1,  524 
Finnick  Dictionary,  76,  77 
Firebrace,  Bridget,  Lady,  35 
Fitzherbert,  Alleyne:  see  St.  Helens,  Baron 
Fitzherbert,  Mary  Meynell,  18,  452 
Fitzherbert,  William,  18,  101,  212,  254,  318-319, 

345-346, 376, 423, 450, 452 
Fitzosborne,  Sir  Thomas:  see  Melmoth,  William 
Fitzpatrick,  John:  see  Upper  Ossory,  2nd  Earl  of 
Fitzroy,  Lord  Charles,  293 
Flatman,  Thomas,  305 
Fleece,  The  (Dyer),  288 
Fleetwood,  Charles,  27,  40 
Fleming,  Sir  George,  131  * 

Fletcher,  John,  249,  293 
Flexman,  Roger,  548 
“Flight  of  Time”  (Johnson),  92 
Flint,  Bet,  475 
Flood,  Lady  Frances,  89* 

Flood,  Henry,  89*,  185,  584 

Florizel  and  Perdita  (Garrick),  166 

Florus,  Lucius  Annaeus,  2 1 7 

Floyd,  Thomas,  130 

Floyer,  Sir  John,  7,  21, 529,  558 

Fludyer,  John,  285 

Fontanerius,  Paulus  Pelissonius,  20* 

Fontenelle,  Bernard  le  Bovier,  Sieur  de,  39,  378 
Fool ,  The  ,153 

Foote,  Samuel,  99,  128,  170,  1 71 ,  174,  190,  201  *, 

210,  238,  262,  270,  271-272,  282,  318-319,  327, 

357.  358,  383. 5°°>  5H,  532. 550 
Forbes,  Sir  William  of  Pitsligo,  309,  323,  365,  370 
Ford,  Cornelius  (Johnson’s  uncle),  8 
Ford,  Rev.  Cornelius  (Johnson’s  cousin),  9,  412 
Ford,  Sarah:  j-rr  Johnson,  Sarah  Ford 
Fordyce,  George,  1 37,  230,  244,  373,  374,  548 
Fordyce,  James,  1 1 1,  580 
“Foreign  History”  (Johnson),  40-41 
Forrester,  James,  303 
Forster,  George,  356 
Fortune,  a  Rhapsody  (Derrick),  31 
Foster,  Elizabeth,  Milton’s  grand-daughter,  62,  63 
Foster,  James,  444 
Fothergill,  Thomas,  248,  249 
Foulis,  Messrs.,  booksellers,  263 
Foundling  Hospital for  Wit,  The,  536  * 

“Fountains,  The”  (Johnson),  151 
Fowler,  Rev.  R.,  161 

Fox,  Charles  James,  1 37,  230,  244,  380,  382,  383, 
384, 496-497. 528, 533, 538 
“France  II”  (Johnson),  266-271 
Francis,  Philip,  414 
Francklin,  Thomas,  gg,  452,  583* 

Frank,  Johnson’s  servant:  see  Barber,  Francis 

Franklin,  Benjamin,  243,  377 

Fraser,  the  engineer:  see  Frazer,  Andrew 

Fraser,  Simon,  Lord  Lovat:  see  Lovat,  12th  Baron 

Fraser,  Simon(son  of  Lord  Lovat),  296 

Frazer,  Andrew,  404 

Frederick  II,  the  Great,  King  of  Prussia,  85,  123, 

1 25. 1 59  *. 1 95. 296, 407, 476, 583  * 


INDEX 


600 

Frederick  William  I,  King  of  Prussia,  85 
Freeholder  (Addison),  244* 

“Free  Inquiry  into  the  Nature  and  Origin  of  Evil, 
A,”  85 

“Free  Translation  of  the  Jests  of  Hierocles,  A” 
(Johnson),  39 
French,  Mrs.  Jeffrey,  457 
French  Academy,  50,  83 
French  Revolution,  519*,  534  * 

Freron,  Elie,  267,  272 

Friend,  Sir  John,  199 

“Friendship,  an  Ode”  (Johnson),  42,  150 

Frusta  Letteraria ,  353 

Frye  [Fry],  Thomas,  302  * 

Fry  she  Rymlerye  (Japix),  136 
Fullarton,  William,  414 

“Further  Thoughts  on  Agriculture”  (Johnson),  85 
Fust,  Johann,  270 

Gagnier, — ,  266-267 

Galich  and  English  Dictionary  (Shaw),  330,  367, 
523 

Galich  and  English  Vocabulary  (McDonald),  231 
Galileo  Galilei,  52  * 

Gallia  Christiana ,  269 

Galway,  Jane  Monckton,  Viscountess,  477 
Gama,  Vasco  da,  523 
Ganganelli:  see  Clement  XIV,  Pope 
Gardiner,  Mrs.,  66,  303,  521,  576* 

Gardner,  Thomas,  252 

Garrick,  David,  17,  18,  22,  23,  24-25,  27,  38-39, 
4°,  44,  45,  49,  52,  53,  54,  59,  62,  66,  67,  68,  73, 
83,  90,  no,  1 12,  113,  116*,  136,  137,  154,  163, 
l66,  167,  l68,  169,  I  71,  175,  182,  202,  2  I  3-2  I  4, 
215,  2l6,  2l8,  224,  238,  242,  246,  247,  248,  262, 
273,  283-284,  291,  292,  293,  303,  307,  312,  318, 
3*9)  34^,  357)  381,  382,  383-384,  393,  399,  402, 
419,  423-424,  433,  439*,  443,  444,  447,  449,  473, 
474,  509,5!  4,  520-521,585* 

Garrick,  Eva  (Mrs.  David),  68,  473,  531 
Garrick,  George,  23 

Garrick,  Peter  (Garrick’s  brother), 24,  27,242,  291, 
292,  293,  432,  460* 

Garrick,  Captain  Peter  (Garrick’s  father),  1 7 
Garth,  Sir  Samuel,  Life  of  (Johnson),  527 
Gastrell,  Francis,  18*,  294 
Gastrell,  Jane  Aston,  18*,  294,  432 
Gaub  [Gaubius],  Hieronymus  David,  13 
Gaultier,  Philip,  501  * 

Gay,  John,  259,  453* 

Life  of  (Johnson),  259 
Gazette ,  The ,  121 
Gazetteer ,  The ,  98 
General  Advertiser ,  The ,  62 

General  Dictionary  of  the  English  Language  to  Establish 
a  Plain  and  Permanent  Standard  of  Pronunciation 
(Sheridan,)  192 

General  History  of  China,  The  (Du  Halde,)  451 
General  History  of  the  Turks,  The  (Knolles),  24 
Genio  errante ,  II  (Italian  ed.  of  The  Rambler ),  431 
Gentle  Shepherd ,  The  (Ramsay),  21 1 
Gentleman,  Francis,  1 07- 1 08 


Gentleman's  Magazine ,  The ,  5  *,  1  o  *,  17,*  18*,  21, 
22*,  23, 27-29, 32, 33*,  35*,  36, 38-39, 40-42, 
43.  44.  48,  49>  5‘>  52  *.  56.  63.  65 *,  70,  89,  97, 
98.  11 5.  *39)  291,  332*,  395*.  402-403,  409*, 
446*,  453*,  460*,  487*,  492*,  521  *,  545,  569, 

579 

Gentleman's  Religion ,  544 
Geographical  Grammar ,  544 
George  I,  King  of  England,  251 
George  II,  King  of  England,  38,  39.  57. 85, 1  oi ,  1 1 3, 
122*,  193,222,251,  305*,  474,  476 
George  III,  King  of  England,  26, 98, 101, 104, 105, 
106,  108,  122,  150,  153-156,  163,  173,  176,  184, 

193,  212,  223,  235,  251, 255,  289,  297,  306,333, 
335.  342,  343.  344.  347. 348,  363.  37°,  385.  39°. 
4i7.  437.  438.  47i*.  478.  483.  496,  497,  499, 
526,  528, 533,  536,  538,  568* 

Georgies  (Virgil  >,15,  149,  234,  513 
Gernsheym, — ,  270 
Gherardi,  Marchese,  404 
Ghost ,  The  (Churchill),  1 14 
Giannone,  Pietro,  443 
Giardini,  Felice  de’,  213 

Gibbon,  Edward,  137,  163*,  183*,  253,  259,  286, 
312,  373)  374)  375)  379)  384,  485-486,  535*)57i- 
572 

Gibbons,  Thomas,  483,  532 
Gibson,  William,  577  * 

Giffard,  theatre  manager,  45 
Gilbert,  Rev.  Mr.,  46* 

Gillespie,  Thomas,  527 
Gisborne,  Thomas,  346  * 

Glasgow,  University,  239 
Glasse,  Hannah,  391 
Glover,  Richard,  1 08  * 

Gobelins,  266 

Golden  Grove ,  The;  or ,  A  Manual  of  Daily  Prayers 
(Taylor),  538 
Goldsmith,  Henry,  199 
Goldsmith,  Mrs.  Henry,  328 
Goldsmith,  Isaac,  1 1 7  * 

Goldsmith,  Oliver,  54*,  58,  60-61,  115,  116-118, 
1 19,  120,  136,  137,  142,  144,  146,  147,  156, 
157,  162,  163*,  167,  168,  169,  1 71,  178,  184, 

194,  198,  199,  200,  203,  207,  208,  210-21 1, 
212,  213,  214,  215,  216-217,  218,  221,  222,  223, 
224,  225,  231 , 232,  256,  300,  307,  308,  322,  323, 
324*,  328,  350,  351,  378,  380,  382,  385-386,  399, 
402,  420,  434,  444,  445,  448,  450,  451,  478, 
499)  502,  53 1 )  544)  548,  548,  583  * 

Gombauld,  Jean  Ogier  de,  427 

Good-Natured  Man ,  The  (Goldsmith),  58,  157,  402 

Gordon,  Sir  Alexander,  228,  330 

Gordon,  Hon.  Alexander,  134 

Gordon,  Lord  George,  437,  438  *,  470 

Gordon,  John,  41 5 

Gordon  Riots,  436-438,  439,  441 

Gough, — ,  270 

Government  of  the  Tongue ,  The,  421 
Gower,  John  Leveson-Gower,  Earl,  5*,  33-34,  37, 
82 

Gower,  John,  380 


INDEX 


601 


Grceca  Lingua  Dialecti  (Mattaire) ,  442 
Grafton,  Augustus  Henry  Fitzroy,  3rd  Duke  of, 
293 

Graham,  Colonel,  Boswell’s  cousin,  191 

Graham,  George,  1 16,  329 

Graham,  Lord :  see  Montrose,  3rd  Duke  of 

Graham,  Miss:  see  Dashwood,  Lady 

Graham,  William:  see  Montrose,  2nd  Duke  of 

Grainger,  James,  137,  288,  362 

Granger,  James,  326 

Grant,  — ,  228,  242 

Grant,  Sir  Archibald,  329 

Grant  clan,  241 

Granville,  John  Carteret,  1st  Earl,  177*,  445,  467 
Granville,  George:  see  Lansdowne,  Viscount 
Grattan,  Henry,  546 
Grave ,  The  (Blair),  310 
Graves,  Morgan,  22* 

Graves,  Richard,  287 
Gravina,  Giovanni  Vincenzo,  506 
Gray,  Edward  Whitaker,  271  * 

Gray,  Sir  James,  197 
Gray,  John,  a  bookseller,  40 

Gray,  Thomas,  2,  113-114,  144*,  193,  244,  247, 
249-250,  306,  308,  393,  436,  445,  493,  573 
Life  of  (Johnson),  462 
Gray' s  Inn  Journal  (Murphy),  85,  91,  99 
Greaves,  Samuel,  524 
Greek  Anthology ,  The ,  569-570 

“Greek  Epigram  to  Dr.  Birch,  An”  (Johnson),  36, 
42 

Greek  Grammar  (Clenardus),  447 
Greek-Latin  Lexicon  (Pasor),  430 
Greek  Theater ,  The  (Brumoy),  96 
Green,  — ,451 

Green,  John,  Bishop  of  Lincoln,  7 
Green,  Richard,  292,  425,  431, 573 
Gregory,  James,  337 
Grenville,  George,  184 
Gresham  College,  300 
Greville,  Richard  Fulke,  541-542 
Grey,  Richard,  401 
Grey,  Stephen,  150 
Grey,  Zachary,  401 
Grierson,  Constantia,  177* 

Grierson,  George  Abraham,  177-178 

Grimston,  William  Luckyn,  1st  Viscount,  468 

Grongar  Hill  (Dyer),  542 

Grotius,  Hugo,  63,  112,  129,  281,337 

Grove,  Henry,  306,  452 

Guardian ,  The ,  54,  569  * 

Guarini,  Giovanni  Battista,  41 1 
Guilford,  Frederick  North,  2nd  Earl  of,  184,  185, 
188,248,343,  370 
Guimene,  Princess  of,  268 
Gulliver's  Travels  (Swift),  245 
Gustavus  III,  King  of  Sweden,  340* 

Gustavus  Adolphus ,  History  of  The  Life  of  (Harte),  43  *, 

179.467 

Gustavus  Vasa  (Brooke),  36 
Guthrie,  William,  29,  36,  159,  451 
Guyon,  Claude  Marie,  Abbe  de,  39 


Gwyn,  Col.  F.  E.,  1 1 7  * 

Gwynn  [Gwyn],  John,  97,  101,  150,  283,  284,  339 
Hackman,  James,  422,  423 

Haddington,  Charles  Hamilton,  8th  Earl  of,  201, 
405 

Haddington  [Hadington],  Thomas  Hamilton,  7th 
Earl  of,  340 

Hague,  usher  at  Lichfield  school,  7 
Hailes,  David  Dalrymple,  Lord,  73,  123,  128,  206, 
231-233, 234, 236, 237, 249, 263, 264, 265, 273, 
274, 275, 276-278, 279, 286, 313, 325, 329, 330, 

335. 338, 340. 347. 360, 368, 369, 388, 415, 419, 

426-427, 429, 494, 512, 517, 520, 545 
Hakewell:  see  Hakewill,  George 
Hakewill,  George,  60 
Hale,  Sir  Matthew,  3,  191,  252,  543,  544 
Life  of  (Burnet),  544 
Hales,  John,  545 
Hales,  Stephen,  85 
Hall,  General,  416 
Hall,  John,  332,  583* 

Hall,  Mrs.,  John  Wesley’s  sister,  471, 472 
Halsey,  Edmund,  140 

Hamilton,  Douglas  Douglas,  8th  Duke  of,  369 
Hamilton,  Archibald,  213 
Hamilton,  Gavin,  228 
Hamilton,  William,  of  Bangour,  346 
Hamilton,  Sir  William,  137 

Hamilton,  William  Gerard,  140,  185,  244,  478, 
554, 562, 576*,  583 
Hamlet  (Shakespeare),  1 5,  465  * 

Hammond,  Henry,  313 
Hammond,  James,  22  *,  447 
Life  of  (Johnson),  306  *,  462  * 

Hampton,  James,  85 
Handel,  George  Frederick,  534 
Hanmer,  Sir  Thomas,  47,  48 
Hannibal,  308 

Hanover,  house  of,  1 07  *,  2 1 1 , 478,  496,  498  *,  545 
Hanway,  Jonas,  85,  87,  180 
“Happy  Life,  The”  (Johnson),  150 
Harding,  J.,  artist,  583  * 

Hardwicke,  Philip  Yorke,  1st  Earl  of,  39*,  306,  364 
Hardwicke,  Philip  Yorke,  2nd  Earl  of,  71  * 
“Hardyknute,”  ballad  of,  169 
Hargrave,  Francis,  367  * 

Harington  [Harrington],  Henry,  501 
Harington  [Harrington],  Sir  John,  582  * 

Harleian  Catalogue ,  2,  40,  42 
Harleian  Miscellany ,  47 
Harley,  Edward:  see  Oxford,  2nd  Earl  of 
Harrington:  see  also  Harington 
Harrington,  Caroline  Stanhope,  2nd  Countess  of, 
342 

Harris,  James,  108*  213,  258,  334,  377,  381-382 
Harris,  Thomas,  333 
Harrison,  a  publisher,  583  * 

Harrison,  Elizabeth,  85,  86 
Harte,  Walter,  43  *,  1 79,  467,  550 
Harwood,  Edward,  308 
Haslerig,  Sir  Arthur,  1 78 


INDEX 


602 

Hastie,  a  schoolmaster,  199-200,  201 ,  206 
Hastings,  Warren,  463-464 
Hawkesworth,  John,  48*,  51,  61,  63,  66,  68-69, 
178,  210,  221,244*,  298 
Hawkins,  under-master  of  Lichfield  school,  7 
Hawkins,  Sir  John,  1-2,  6*,  18*,  37,  40,  43*,  50*, 
5'»  55.  56*.  63,  64,  65,  79*,  86,  94,  97  *-98*, 
1 17,  136,  i37»  !47»  "52 *,  ‘56>  287,  303*,  372, 
487*,  524,  549*,  553,  564,  565,  566,  574,  575*, 
576, 577  *.578*.  582 

Hawkins,  William,  of  Pembroke  College,  16,  382 

Hawkins,  William,  editor  of  Ken’s  Works ,  352  * 

Hay,  Lord  Charles,  299,  448-449 

Hay,  Sir  George,  97 

Hayes,  Rev.  Mr.  357 

Hayman,  Francis,  72  * 

Heath,  James,  583  * 

Heautontimoroumenos  (Terence),  150 

Heberden,  William,  the  elder,  242,  515,  516,  517, 

527,  5571558,575.576* 

Hector,  Edmund,  5,  7,  8,  9,  10*,  1 1  *,  18-19,  21, 22, 
41*,  42,  44,  289,  290-291,  295,  487,  490-491, 
530,  566,  567,577* 

Heely,  Betty  Ford,  152,  564-565 

Heely,  Mr.,  152,564-565 

Henault,  Charles  Jean  Francois,  264,  274,  278 

Henderland,  Alexander  Murray,  Lord,  299-300 

Henderson,  John,  of  Pembroke  College,  535*,  539 

Henderson,  John,  the  actor,  247*,  521  * 

Henn,  Mr.,  33* 

Henry  II,  King  of  England,  67,  155 
Henry  VIII,  King  of  England,  430 
Henry  VIII  (Shakespeare  and  Fletcher),  520 
Henry  the  Navigator,  Prince  of  Portugal,  523 
Henry,  Robert,  406-407 
Herbert,  George,  257  * 

Herbert,  Henry:  see  Pembroke,  10th  Earl  of 
Hermippus  Redivivus  (Campbell),  1 18 
Hermit ,  The  (Beattie),  503 
Hermit ,  The  (Parnell),  369,  425,  459 
Herne,  Elizabeth,  576  * 

Herodian,  568* 

Herodotus,  483  * 

Ileroick  Epistle  to  Sir  William  Chambers  (Mason), 

478, 545 

Hertford,  Frances  Thynne,  Countess  of,  47  * 
Hervey,  Anne,  153 
Hervey,  Catherine  Aston,  18*,  52 
Hervey,  Lady  Emily,  439* 

Hervey,  Henry,  18*,  25,  52,  153* 

Hervey,  John:  see  Bristol,  John  Hervey,  1st  Earl  of 
Hervey,  Thomas,  153,  251 
Hesiod,  1 1 , 430 

Hesse  Cassel,  William  VIII,  Landgrave  of,  85 
Hetherington,  William,  234 
Heydon,  John,  577* 

Hiekes,  George,  536 
Hickey  [Hicky],  Thomas,  251 
Hierocles,  39,  568  * 

Higgins,  Bryan  (?),  41 4,  423 
High  Life  below  Stairs  (Townley),  444 
Hill,  Aaron,  53  * 


Hill,  Sir  John,  155,  391 

Hinchliffe,  John,  Bishop  of  Peterborough,  137, 

435 

Hinehman,  — ,  576* 

Hind  and  the  Panther ,  The  (Dryden),  455 
Ilistoire  Genealogique  de  [of]  France ,  269 
Histoire  du  Prince  Titi  (Saint-Hyacinthe),  267 
Historia  Frisica  (Schotanus),  136 
Historia  Studiorum  (Johnson),  402 
Historia  Indie  a  (MafTei),  270 

Historical  and  Critical  Dictionary  of  the  Bible  (Calmet), 

569* 

Historical ,  Geographical ,  and  Critical  Dictionary  (Mar- 
tiniere),  576* 

Historical  Law  Tracts  (Karnes),  204 
History  of  the  Amazons ,  Ancient  and  Modern  (Guyon), 
39 

History  of  America  (Robertson),  385,  571 
History  and  Chronology  of  the  Fabulous  Ages ,  A  (Wise), 
74-75 

History  of  the  Church  (Dupin),  544 
History  of  the  Connection  of  the  Old  and  New  Testa¬ 
ments  (Prideaux),  544 

History  of  the  Council  of  Trent  (Sarpi),  26,  34-35 
History  of  Criticism,  Johnson’s  projected,  568* 
History  of  Derby  (Hutton),  350* 

History  of  the  Earth  and  Animated  Nature ,  A  (Gold- 
smith),  1 99,  300,  323,  350 
History  of  England  (Carte),  252,  544 
History  of  England  (Hume),  164* 

History  of  England  (Martinelli),  211,212 
History  of  Florence  (Machiavelli),  569* 

History  of  Great  Britain ,  The  (Henry),  406-407 
History  of  her  own  Life  and  Times  (Manley),  506 
History  of  His  Own  Times  (Burnet),  209 
History  of  Ireland  (Leland),  224,  333 
History  of  the  Isles  of  Scilly  (Borlase),  85 
History  of  the  Knights  of  Malta  (Vcrtot),  544 
History  of  the  late  insurrection  in  Scotland ,  432-433 
History  of  the  Life  of  Henry  the  Second ,  and  of  the  Age  in 
which  he  lived ,  The  (Lyttelton),  1 55,  212,  306 
History  of  Manchester  (Whitaker),  406 
History  of  Music  (Burney),  41 7 
History  of  Musick ,  A  (Hawkins),  51  * 

History  of  the  New  World  (Benzoni),  569* 

History  of  Philip  II  (Watson),  329 
History  of  the  Rebellion  (Clarendon),  279,  544 
History  of  the  Rebellion  in  the  Tear  1745  (Home),  350* 
History  of  the  Revival  of  Learning  in  Europe,  Johnson’s 
projected,  569* 

History  of  the  Revolutions  of  Portugal  (Vertot),  544 

History  of  the  Revolutions  of  Sweden  (Vertot),  544 

History  of  the  Royal  Society  (Birch),  85 

History  of  the  Royal  Society  (Sprat),  544 

History  of  St.  Kilda  (Macaulay),  158,  189,  263* 

History  of  Scotland  (Lesley),  229 

History  of  Scotland  (Robertson),  1 59,  2 1 7,  407,  467 

History  of  Staffordshire  (Plott),  359 

History  of  the  War,  Johnson’s  projected,  98-99 

History  of  Worcestershire  (Nash),  1 6  *,  386  * 

Hitch,  Charles,  49 

Hob:  or.  The  Country  Wake  (Cibber),  292 


INDEX 


Hobbes,  Thomas,  577* 

Hodge,  Johnson’s  cat,  505-506 
Hog,  William,  63 
Hogarth,  William,  9*,  38,  68,  412 
Holbrook,  usher  at  Lichfield  school,  7 
Holder,  an  apothecary,  487,  489,  576* 

Holinshed,  Raphael,  529*,  576* 

Holland,  Charles,  444 
Hollis,  Thomas,  9,  473 

Holy  Rules  and  Helps  to  Devotion  (Duppa),  577  * 
Home,  Francis,  85 
Home,  Henry:  see  Karnes,  Lord 
Home,  John,  1 29-130,  245,  310*,  320,  322,  350* 
Homer,  10,  15,  24,  hi,  182,  226,  238,  320,  360- 
361,  381, 405,  406,  446,  452 
Homfrey  family,  529  * 

Hooke,  Luke  Joseph,  269,  270 
Hooker,  Richard,  60 

Hoole,  John,  107,  235,  249,  307,  409,  464,  470, 
503,  523>  526,  528,  529,  533j  534,  560,  576*, 
578,  580 

Hoole,  Samuel,  576^-577  *,  579 
Hoole,  Susannah  (Mrs.  John),  560 
Hope,  John,  527 

Hopetoun  [Hopeton],  John  Hope,  2nd  Earl  of, 
455* 

“Hop-Garden,  The”  (Smart),  288 
Horace  (Quintus  Horatius  Flaccus),  9-10,  15,  23, 
24,  32,  53,  58,  60,  1 16,  149,  150,  166,  208,  254, 
257,  285,  300,  320,  320 *-32 1  *,  346,  360,  379- 
380,  402,  403,  414,  419,  424,  478*,  512,  532, 
533, 584 

Horne,  George,  Bishop  of  Norwich,  232,  233,  286, 
330,  585* 

Horne,  Rev.  Mr.:  seeTooke,  John  Horne 
Horneck,  Catherine  (Mrs.  Henry  William  Bun- 
bury),  1 17* 

Horneck,  Mary  (Mrs.  F.  E.  Gwyn),  1 1 7  * 
Horrebow,  Niels,  389 
“Horrour  of  the  last,  The”  (Johnson),  92 
Horsley,  Samuel,  Bishop  of  Rochester,  524 
Howard,  Charles  of  Lichfield,  17,  370 
Howard,  Charles  (son  of  preceding),  370 
Howard,  Edward,  175* 

Howard,  Sir  George,  262  * 

Howell,  Thomas  Bayly,  367  * 

Huddesford,  William,  77-78,  89 
Hudibras  (Butler),  260,  308 
Huet  [Huetius],  Pierre  Daniel,  20*,  353 
Huggins,  William,  107,  444 
Hughes,  John,  74,  400*,  453  * 

Human  Nature  (Hobbes),  577  * 

Hume,  David,  49*,  54,  124,  126,  132,  144,  159, 
164, 174, 216, 285, 335, 347, 359, 375*,  392, 

505,536, 583* 

Life  of,  335 

Hume,  Margaret  (Mrs.  Alexander  Trotter), 
Thomson’s  grandmother,  415 
“Humours  of  Bahama gairy,  The,”  21 1  * 

Humphry,  Ozias,  529-530,  583* 

Hunter,  John,  Johnson’s  schoolmaster,  7,  187, 
293 


603 

Hunter,  Miss,  502  * 

Hunter,  William,  513 

Hurd,  Richard,  Bishop  of  Worcester,  18,  305,  320*,. 

371,503-504,537, 578* 

Husbands,  John,  12 
Hussey,  John,  418 
Hussey,  Thomas,  580 
Hutchinson,  John,  312 
Hutton,  James,  579 
Hutton,  William,  350* 

Hypochondriack ,  The  (Boswell),  501 
Hypocrite ,  The  (Bickerstaffe),  245 

I  (infidel):  see  Gibbon,  Edward 
Idler ,  The,  1  *,  60,  65*,  82*,  85,  91-93,  96,  103,, 
283,521 

Iliad  (Homer),  10,  320,  406,  429,  430 
Iliad  of  Homer,  The  (Macpherson),  238 
Illustrations  of  Philosophical  Necessity  (Priestley),  519^ 
Imitation  of  Christ  (Thomas  a  Kempis),  371 
Imitations  of  Horace  (Pope) ,  375  * 

Improvement  of  the  Alind  (Watts),  544 
Ince,  Richard,  306 
Innes,  Alexander,  100 
Innys,  William,  576  *,  577  * 

Inquiry  into  the  Origin  of  Evil  (Jenyns),  87 
Inscription  in  a  Summer-house  (Hamilton),  346 
Institutions  of  Oratory  (Quintilian),  452 
Introduction  to  the  Game  of  Draughts,  An  (Payne),  88 
Introduction  to  History  (Puffendorf),  544 
“ Introduction  to  the  Political  State  of  Great  Brit¬ 
ain”  (Johnson),  85 

Irene  (Johnson),  24,  26-27,  31,  40,  51  *,  53-54,  62, 

84,  99,  443 

Irwin,  Captain,  267 

Italian  and  English  Dictionary  (Baretti),  98 
Ivy  Lane  Club,  5 1 ,  524 

J :  seel 

Jackson,  Henry,  291,  339,  340 
Jackson,  Rev.  Mr.,  of  Barton,  65* 

Jackson,  Richard,  302,  341 

Jackson,  Thomas,  5 

Jacula  Prudentum  (Herbert),  257  * 

James  I,  King  of  England,  197,  422 
James  II,  King  of  England,  122,  251 
James  III  (self-styled  king  of  England :  James  Stu¬ 
art,  the  Old  Pretender),  122 
James  I,  King  of  Scotland,  144 
James  IV,  King  of  Scotland,  274 
James,  Robert,  18,  41  *,  42,  297,  303,  558 
Jansen  [Jansenius]  Cornells,  409* 

Japix,  Gijsbert  [Gisbert],  136 
Jarvis,  Elizabeth:  ^Johnson,  Elizabeth 
Jealous  Wife,  The  (Colman),  102 
Jenkinson,  Charles:  see  Liverpool,  1st  Earl  of 
Jennings,  Henry  Constantine,  373 
Jenyns,  Soame,  87,  310,  389,  392 
Jephson,  Robert,  72  * 

Jerusalem  Delivered  (Tasso),  107,  405 
Jodrell  (Joddrel],  Richard  Paul,  524,  531 
John,  King  of  England,  67 


INDEX 


604 

John  the  Baptist,  Saint,  290 
John  the  Divine,  Saint,  392 
Johnson,  — ,  the  horse -rider,  1 12 
Johnson,  Benjamin,  576  * 

Johnson,  Elizabeth  (“Tetty,”  Mrs.  Samuel),  19, 
2 1  *,  22-23,  26,  27,  51 , 57,  63,  64-66,  68,  72  *,  76, 
83,  i38>  !39,  142,  165,  268,  412,  434,  557,  566, 
573.577* 

Johnson,  Fisher,  576* 

Johnson,  Michael  (Johnson’s  father),  4-5,  11,  12, 
17,  128,  156,565,  573.577* 

Johnson,  Nathanael,  4,  20-2 1 ,  1 56,  573 
Johnson,  Samuel,  Life  of  (Hawkins),  6*,  40,  43*, 
5°  *.  55. 65.  94. 97  *-98  *,  1 1 7  *.  1 37  *.  287  *,  303  *, 
487*,  565* 

Life  of  (Cooke),  583  * 

Johnson,  Samuel,  librarian  of  St.  Martin’s  in  the 
Fields,  34 

Johnson,  Sarah  Ford  (Johnson’s  mother),  4,  5,  6, 
7,  14,  17,  22,  27,  42-43,  54*,  57,  65,  80,  94,  156, 
180,412,472,573 
Johnson,  Thomas,  576  * 

Johnsoniana ,  or  Bon- Mots  of  Dr.  Johnson ,  282,  404, 
583* 

Johnston,  Arthur,  131,  528 

Johnston,  W.,  the  bookseller,  94 

Johnstone  [Johnston],  Sir  James,  533-534 

Johnstoni  Poemata  (Arthur  Johnston),  329 

Jones,  Mary,  89 

Jones,  Philip,  285 

Jones,  River,  89* 

Jones,  Sir  William,  61,  108*,  137,  181  *,  218,  341, 

423.464* 

Jonson,  Ben,  524 
J°PP,  —  235 

Jorden,  William,  12,  17,  74 

Jortin,  John,  378,495 

Joseph  Andrews  (Fielding),  196 

Journal  of  Eight  Days’  Journey ,  A  (Hanway),  85,  180 

Journal  des  Savans,  1 55 

Journal  of  a  Tour  to  the  Hebrides  (Boswell),  4,  27, 
37*.  40*,  44,  54,  61*,  88,  97,  122*,  128%  138*, 
198*,  210*,  227-228,  231,  232,  236*,  239*,  264, 
347,  359,  386*,  403*,  416,  498*,  510*,  511*, 
531*,  532  *,535  *,574  *,583*,  585* 

Journey ,  The  (Churchill),  120* 

Journey  to  the  Hebrides  (Johnson):  see  Journey  to  the 
Western  Isles  of  Scotland  (Johnson) 

Journey  to  London ,  The:  see  Provoked  Husband ,  The 
Journey  into  North  Wales ,  A  (Johnson),  233 
Journey  to  the  Western  Isles  of  Scotland,  A  (Johnson), 
132,  232,  234,  238,  239,  240,  241,  242,  244,  258, 
326,  329,  341,  354,  383,  387,  396,  404,  464,  497, 
503 

Julia ,  or  the  Italian  Lover  (Jephson),  72  * 

Julian  (Flavius  Claudius  Julianus),  Roman  emper¬ 

or.  75 

Julien,  the  Treasurer  of  the  Clergy,  267 
“Junius”  (Sir  Philip  Francis?),  50,  184,  193,420, 
542 

Juris  Civilis  Fontes ,  1 50 

Justin  (Marcus  Junianus  Justinus),  23 


Juvenal  (Decimus  Junius  Juvenalis),  15,  29,  31, 
32,  49*,  5i-52,  72,  9°,  99,  214,  381,  4I4>  453, 
478  *,575 

Karnes,  Henry  Home,  Lord,  38,  159,  169,  204, 
205,  337.  378,  409.413 
Kearney,  Michael,  140 
Kearsley,  George,  58  *,  465  *,  583  * 

Keene,  — ,270 

Keith,  Robert,  85 

Kelly,  Hugh,  333,  334,578* 

Kemble,  John,  520-521 
Kempis,  Thomas  a:  see  Thomas  a  Kempis 
Ken,  Thomas,  Bishop  of  Bath  and  Wells,  352  *, 
535* 

Kennedy,  Dr.,  author  of  a  tragedy,  375-376 
Kennedy,  John,  102 

Kennicott  [Kennicot],  Ann  (Mrs.  Benjamin),  535, 

536,  542 

Kennicott  [Kennicot],  Benjamin,  181, 535 
Kenrick,  William,  142,  156,  161,  381 
Kettel,  Ralph,  80* 

Kettlewell,  John,  535* 

Keysler,  Johann  Georg,  252 
Killaloe,  Bishop  of:  see  Barnard,  Thomas 
Killingley,  M.,  365 

Kilmarnock,  William  Boyd,  4th  Earl  of,  48 
Kimchi,  Rabbi  David,  4 
King,  Dr.,  a  dissenting  minister,  392 
King,  William,  principal  of  St.  Mary  Hall,  Ox¬ 
ford,  77,  78*,  97 

King,  William,  Archbishop  of  Dublin,  428* 

King  v.  Top  ham,  301  * 

Kippis,  Andrew,  354,  534,  566 
Knapton,  Messrs.,  the  booksellers,  49 
Kneller,  Sir  Godfrey,  375 

Knight,  Joseph,  Negro  slave,  324,  327,  328,  338, 
363-364,  366-367,  368,  369 
Knowles,  Mary,  321, 390,  391, 392,  393,  394~395 
Knox,  John,  bookseller,  239-240 
Knox,  Vicesimus,  60*,  549,  550,  572-573 
Kristrom,  a  Swedish  tutor,  1 90-1 91 

La  Bruyere:  see  Bruyere,  Jean  de  la 
Lactantius  Firmianus,  Lucius  Caelius,  340 
Lade,  Sir  John,  580 
Laelius  [Lelius],  Gaius,  150 
Lambin,  Denis,  320* 

Langhorne,  John,  3* 

Langley,  William,  342 

Langton,  Bennet,  7,  26,  52*,  54,  66*,  67,  68,  71, 
72*,  80,  83,  90,  91,  92,  93-94,  99-io°,  106,  118*, 
122,136,137,147,-148,  154*,  155,  *57.  161,  163*, 
178,  180,  184,  186,  187,  201,  202,  215,  221,224, 
225,  231,  232,  236,  238,  244,  250,  251,  253,  254, 
257,  262,  263,  288,  289*,  309,  323*,  324,  326, 

335,  336,  337,  339,  349,  360*,  366,  370,  379,  38°, 
382-383,  389,  390,  404,  405,  408,  414,  415-416, 
417,  418,  423,  427,  433,  435,  436,  442,  443,  446, 
447,  448,  449,  45°,  45  L  4®1*  4^5,  4^7,  473,  485, 
49°,  5°L  5°2,  5°6,  5°8,  5J7,  S^20,  528"529, 
53°,  533,  534,  544,  545,  54$,  554,  557,  561 ,  568*, 
57°,  576*577*,  578,  582 


INDEX 


Langton,  Diana  (Bennet  Langton’s  mother), 
90,  94  *,  99> 1 36, 147) 1 48,  184, 187,  443 
Langton,  Elizabeth,  (Bennet’s  daughter),  366 
Langton,  George  (Bennet’s  father),  80,  89,  93,  99, 
122,  136,  147,  148,  443,  450 
Langton,  George  (Bennet’s  son),  232,  490,  529 
Langton,  Jane,  485,  490,  529,  530 
Langton,  Mary,  529 

Langton,  Mary  Lloyd  (Mrs.  Bennet),  184,  186, 
187,  324,  418,  485,  490,  520,  529,  557,  561 
Langton,  Miss  (Bennet’s  sister),  147,  148,  187, 
529,  557 

Langton,  Peregrine,  147-148 
Langton,  Stephen,  67 

Lansdowne,  George  Granville,  Viscount,  68  * 
Lansdowne,  William  Petty,  1st  Marquis  of,  384, 
499)  5°4. 534* 

Lapouchin,  Mme:  see  Lopukhina,  Natalia  Fedor¬ 
ovna 

La  Rochefoucauld,  Due  Francois  de,  67 
“Latin  Translation  of  Pope’s  Verses  on  his  Grotto” 
(Johnson),  41-42 
La  Trobe,  Benjamin,  579 

Laud,  William,  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  52*, 
193,  209,  267* 

Lauder,  William,  62-63 
Lavater,  Johann  Kaspar,  583* 

Law,  Edmund,  Bishop  of  Carlisle,  428  *,  433 
Law,  John,  Bishop  of  Elphin,  433 
Law,  Robert,  140 

Law,  William,  14,  180,  535*,  538,  544 
Lawrence,  Chauncey,  464 
Lawrence,  Frances  (Mrs.  Thomas),  434 
Lawrence,  Miss  (Thomas’  daughter),  18,  489 
Lawrence,  Thomas,  18,  90, 237, 303,  326, 336, 434, 
440,  464,  487,  489,  516,  558 
Lawyer' s  Fortune,  The:  or.  Love  in  a  Hollow  Tree  (Grims- 
ton),  468 

Layer,  Richard,  41 

Lea,  Samuel,  9 

Le  Clerc,  Jean,  78 

Lect  (Lectius),  Jacques,  576* 

Lectures  (Blair),  353  * 

Lee,  Alderman,  321 
Lee,  Arthur,  318,321 
Lee,  John  (Jack),  371 
Leedes  [Leeds)],  Edward,  24 
Leeds,  Thomas  Osborne,  1st  Duke  of,  446 
Leeds,  Francis  Osborne,  5th  Duke  of,  137,  154*, 
202 

Le  Fleming,  Sir  Michael,  131  * 

Leibnitz,  Baron  Gottfried  Wilhelm  von,  35,  191 
Leicester,  — ,  435 

Leland,  Thomas,  140,  224,  333,  399,  401 
Lelius:  see  Laslius,  Gaius 

Lennox,  Charlotte,  70,  85,  96,  102,  235,  444,  531 
Le  Roy,  Pierre  [Julien],  266,  267 
Leslie,  Charles,  535* 

Lesley,  John,  229 
Lethe  (Garrick),  62 

“Letter  on  the  Case  of  Admiral  Byng,  ”  85 
Letter  to  Dr.  Samuel  Johnson,  A  (Towers),  243-244 


605 

Letter  to  Mr.  Dunning  on  the  English  Particle  (Tooke), 
41 3-41 4 

Letter  to  the  People  of  Scotland,  against  diminishing  the 
number  of  the  Lords  of  Session  (Boswell),  301  *,  499* 
Letter  to  the  People  of  Scotland ,  on  the  Present  State  of 
the  Nation  (Boswell),  526 
Letter  to  Rutland  on  Travel  (Essex),  122* 

Letter  to  the  Sheriffs  of  Bristol ,  on  the  affairs  of  Amer¬ 
ica  (Burke),  358 

Letter  to  Sir  Thomas  Hanmer  (Hervey),  153* 

Letter  to  Sir  William  Windham  (Bolingbroke),  374* 
Letter  to  W.  Mason,  A.M.  from  J.  Murray ,  Book¬ 
seller  in  London ,  A,  393  * 

Letters  (Gay),  453* 

Letters  (Hughes),  453* 

Letters  to  and  from  Dr.  Johnson  (Piozzi),  137,  437- 
438, 460*,  508*,  516*,  521, 544*,  545, 552*, 

555*.  570*,  573*)  574* 

Letters  on  the  English  Nation  (Shebbeare),  478 
Letters  to  His  Son  (Chesterfield),  73,  247-248,  312 
Letters  from  Italy  (Sharp),  312 
Letters  to  Lord  Mansfield  (Stuart)  2 1 4-2 1 5 
Letters  on  Several  Subjects  (Melmoth),  436,  531  * 
Lettres  Persones  (Montesquieu),  393* 

Lettsom,  John  Coakley,  318 
Lever,  Sir  Ashton,  551 
Leveson-Gower,  Frances,  436 
Levett,  [Levet],  Robert,  66,  67,  103,  107,  1 18, 
123,  143,  209,  232,  264-265,  269,  303,  304,  313, 
325?  3%  402,  416,  418,  419,  471,  487-488,  489, 
490,  496,  517,  520,  525,  531  * 

Levett,  Theophilus,  17,  42-43 
Lewis  XIV :  see  Louis  XIV 
Lewis,  Charlotte,  103,  107 
Lewis,  David,  542-543 
Lewis,  Dean,  107 
Lewis,  F.,  61 

Lewson,  Mrs.:  see  Leveson-Gower,  Frances 
Lexicon  to  the  Greek  New  Testament  (Dawson),  430 
Lexiphanes  (Campbell),  156,  571 
Leyden,  University  of,  520 

Liberal  Translation  of  the  New  Testament  (Harwood), 
308 

Lichfield,  George  Henry  Lee,  3rd  Earl  of,  398 
Liddel,  Sir  Henry,  1 95  * 

Life  of:  see  under  respective  names 

Life  and  Errours  of  John  Dunton  (Dunton),  506 

Lilliburlero  (Burnet),  253 

Lilly,  William,  353 

Linda,  Lucas  de,  167 

Lintot,  Bernard,  123,  183* 

Lintot,  Henry,  25,  123 

Literary  Club,  136-137,  147,  148,  184,  216,  218, 
224, 229, 234, 244, 248, 322, 330, 334, 338, 366, 
373.  375.  384.  389.  396,  399*)  4"7)  418,  438, 
444, 445,  45°,  469, 499, 5°2, 5>7, 548, 582, 584* 
Literary  Magazine;  Or,  Universal  Review,  The,  85-86, 
87,  89>  91 

Liverpool,  Charles  Jenkinson,  1st  Earl  of,  344-345 
Lives  (Izaak  Walton),  232,  233,  258,  286,  330 
Lives  of  the  Poets,  The  (Cibber),  50,  305,  305  *-306  *, 
308 


INDEX 


606 

Lives  of  the  Poets  (Johnson),  15*,  51,  107,  331-332, 
334.  337.  340,  34',  353*.  36o>  369,  410,  4'5> 
4'8-4'9,  42°,  424,  425,  427,  432,  434,  436,  439, 
440,  452-463,  465,  476,  485,  486,  490,  493,  494, 

495, 5 ' 9, 529, 535  *,  547, 575, 583  * 

Livy  (Titus  Livius),  251 

Lloyd,  Mrs.,  Savage’s  godmother,  46 

Lloyd,  Olivia,  21 

Lloyd,  Rachel,  289 

Lloyd,  Robert,  1 1 1 , 249 

Lloyd,  Sampson,  289,  290 

Lobo,  Jeronimo,  19,  298 

Locke,  John,  55,  83,  199-200,  415,  475 

Locke  [Lock],  William,  455 

Lockman,  John,  443 

Lofft,  Capel,  532-533 

Logic  (Watts),  544 

Lombe,  John,  350 

London ,  a  Poem ,  in  Imitation  of  the  Third  Satire  of  Jure- 
nal  (Johnson),  23,  29-33,  37,  52,  129,  131,  167, 
318*,  441 

London  Chronicle ,  The,  88,  91,  137,  173,  208,  274, 
370,467* 

London  Magazine,  The,  37  *,  183  * 

London  and  Westminster  Improved  (Gwynn),  150 
Long,  Dudley:  see  North,  Dudley  Long 
Longinus,  Dionysius  Cassius,  453 
Longlands,  a  solicitor,  201 
Longley,  John,  444 
Longman,  Messrs.,  booksellers,  49 
Lopukhina,  Natalia  Fedorovna,  409 
Lords,  House  of:  see  Parliament 
Lort,  Michael,  537  * 

Loudoun,  John  Campbell,  4th  Earl  of,  335 
Loudoun,  Margaret  Campbell,  Countess  of,  41 7 
Loughborough,  Lord:  see  Rosslyn,  1st  Earl  of 
Louis  IX,  Saint,  King  of  France,  270 
Louis  XIV,  King  of  France,  31,1 55,  1 94,  1 95,  260, 
266,  268,  407 

Louis  XVI,  King  of  France,  264,  268,  348,  534* 
Lovat,  Simon  Fraser,  1 2th  Baron,  48,  48  *-49  * 
Love,  James,  192 

Love  in  a  Hollow  Tree:  see  Lawyer's  Fortune,  The 
Love  for  Love  (Congreve),  459 
Love  and  Madness  (Croft),  503 
Loveday,  John,  225* 

Loveday,John  (son),  225* 

Lovibond,  Edward,  24 
Lowe,  Canon  of  Windsor,  7,  8 
Lowe,  — ,  Johnson’s  godchild,  576* 

Lowe,  Mauritius,  42 1 , 507,  5 1  o,  576  * 

Lowth,  Robert,  Bishop  of  London,  154- 155,  544 
Lowth,  William,  313 
Loyola,  Saint  Ignatius,  1 7 

Lucan,  Charles  Bingham,  1st  Earl  of,  137,  436, 

470, 548 

Lucan,  Mary  Bingham,  Countess  of,  436,  548 
Lucas,  Charles,  85,  86 
Lucian,  24,  299,  375*,  452 
Lucretius  (Titus  Lucretius  Carus),  405 
Lumisden,  Andrew,  271  * 

Lumm,  Sir  Francis,  1 54* 


Lusiad,  The  (Camoens),  199,  307,  523,  543 

Luttcrel,  Colonel:  see  Carhampton,  2nd  Earl  of 

Lydiat,  Thomas,  52  *,  144 

Lye,  Edward,  147 

Lysons,  of  Clifford’s  Inn,  577  * 

Lyttelton,  George,  1st  Baron,  70,  73,  155,  21 2,  216, 
286,306,377,415 
Life  of  (Johnson),  460,  462 
Lyttelton,  Thomas,  2nd  Baron,  539 

Macartney,  George,  1  st  Earl,  1 06,  1 1 8  *,  1 37,  303  *, 

375 ’.377*.  438, 445*.  461  * 

Macaulay,  Catharine,  66,  127,  139,  21 1,  250,  310, 

32I>  358 

Macaulay,  George,  428 
Macaulay,  Kenneth,  158,  189,  263* 

Macaulay,  Penelope  (Mrs.  Kenneth),  263 
Macbean,  Alexander,  36, 50, 5 1 , 206-207,  304,  330, 
441-442,472 
Macbean,  William,  50 
Macbeth  (Shakespeare),  47,  169,  253,  575 
Macclesfield,  Countess  of:  see  Brett,  Anne 
Macclesfield,  Charles  Gerard,  2nd  Earl  of,  46 
Macclesfield,  Thomas  Parker,  1st  Earl  of,  41 
Macconochie,  Scotch  advocate,  367 
Macdonald,  Sir  Alexander,  1 91- 192,  196,  197 
Macdonald,  Flora,  419 
Macdonald,  Sir  James,  127-128,  469* 

Macdonald,  Lady  Margaret,  422 
Macdonald,  Ranald,  241, 242 
Macdonald  clan,  228 
Machiavelli,  Niccolo,  569* 

Mackenzie,  Henry,  100 

Macklin,  Charles,  108,  297 

Maclaurin,  Colin,  300 

Maclaurin,  John:  see  Dreghorn,  Lord 

Maclean,  Alexander,  laird  of  Col,  272,  273 

Maclean,  Sir  Allan,  239,  241,  263,  327,  328-329, 

336, 337. 338 

Maclean,  Donald,  laird  of  Col,  234,  239,  241, 
272 

Maclean  clan,  228 
Maclean  of  Torloisk,  Mr.,  241 
Macleod,  Flora,  335,  336 

Macleod,  John,  laird  of  Rasay,  239,  240,  263,  274, 

3357  493 

Macleod,  Malcolm,  335 
Macleod  family  of  Rasay,  240,  338 
Mac-Neny,  Comte  Patrice,  307 
Macpherson,  James  (“Ossian”),  111,  236,  237, 
238, 239, 241, 242, 244, 253, 31 1, 391, 406*, 
488, 501,523-524 
Macquarry,  laird  ofOrmaig,  340 
Macquarry,  laird  of  Ulva,  241,  327,  328,  337-338, 
340 

Macqueen,  Donald,  263 
Macrobius,  Ambrosius  Theodosius,  1 2,  304 
MacSwinny,  Owen:  see  Swinny,  Owen  Mac 
Madan,  Samuel:  see  Madden,  Samuel 
Madden,  Samuel,  88,  245,  508 
Maecenas,  Gaius  Cilnius,  498 
Maffei,  Giovanni  Pietro,  270 


INDEX 


607 


Maffeus:  see  Maffei 
Mahomatans,  189 

Maitland,  Johnson’s  amanuensis,  50 
Maittaire  [Mattaire],  Michael,  270*,  442 
Malagrida,  Gabriele,  499 

Mallet,  David,  53*,  73,  91, 1 15,  181,  192,216,  361, 
423.  428, 5J2 

Malone,  Edmond,  61,  72*,  88*,  100*,  113*,  116, 
137.  294*,  3x1*,  312*,  397,  403*,  425*,  427*, 
455*,  458,  485,  488,  5‘8*,  548,  554,  574*,  582, 

584 

Malton,  an  innkeeper,  365 

Man  of  Feeling,  The  (Mackenzie),  roo 

Man  of  Taste,  The  (Bramston),  15* 

Mandeville,  Bernard,  393 

Manley,  Mary  de  la  Riviere,  506 

Manley,  Sir  Roger,  506 

Manners  (Whitehead),  32 

Manners,  Roger:  see  Rutland,  5th  Earl  of 

Manning,  a  compositor,  547 

Manningham,  Thomas,  349 

Mansfield,  William  Murray,  1st  Earl  of,  49*,  82  *, 
191,  201,  203,  214,  244,  250,  324,  343,  384,  385, 
437, 457,  5oo 

Mantuano,  Battista  Spagnuoli,  501 
Manucci,  Count,  266,  268,  325-326 
Manuscripts  in  the  British  Museum  (Birch),  36,  39*, 
4° 

Map  and  Account  of  the  Middle  Colonies  in  America 
(Evans),  85 

Maphaeus:  see  Vego,  Maffeo 
Marana,  Giovanni  Paolo,  506  * 

Mar  bone:  see  Martene 
Marchi,  Giuseppe,  583  * 

Marchmont,  Hugh  Hume,  3rd  Earl  of,  192,  410, 
411,425, 434.457-453 
Marcus  Aurelius  Antoninus,  353 
Marie  Antoinette,  Queen  of  France,  264,  268 
Markham,  William,  41 7 
Markland,  Jeremiah,  495 
Marlay,  Richard,  137,  465,  466,  467 
Marlborough,  John  Churchill,  1st  Duke  of,  199, 
287,313,361,423 

Marlborough,  Sarah  Churchill,  Duchess  of,  40, 
468 

Marmor  Norfolciense;  or  an  Essay  on  an  Ancient  Pro¬ 
phetical  Inscription  in  Monkish  Rhyme,  Lately  Dis¬ 
covered  near  Lynne  in  Norfolk  by  Probus  Britanni- 
cus  (Johnson),  36-37 
Maro :  see  Virgil 
Marsili,  Dr.,  of  Padua,  89,  104 
Martene,  Edmond,  269 
Martial  (Marcus  Valerius  Martialis),  56,  382 
Martin,  Martin,  128,  377 
Martinelli,  Vincenzio,  21 1,  212,  213 
Martiniere,  Antoine  Augustin  Bruzen  de  la,  576* 
Martins,  printers  of  Edinburgh,  332 
Martyrdom  of  Theodora  (Boyle),  86 
Mary,  Queen  of  Scots,  98,  228,  232,  236*,  240 
Masenius,  Jacobus,  63 

Mason,  William,  2,  3,  193,  244,  249-250,  306,  393- 
394. 478, 545 


Massinger,  Philip,  430 
Masters,  Mary,  66,  52 1 
Mathias,  James,  471 

“Matrimonial  Thought,  A”  (Boswell),  175-176 
Mattaire:  see  Maittaire 
Maty,  Matthew,  78 
Maupertuis,  Pierre  Louis  Moreau,  159 
Maxims ,  Characters ,  and  Reflections  (Greville),  541- 
542 

Maxwell,  William,  collecteana  of,  177-183 
Mayo,  Henry,  221,  222,  223,  390,  391,  392,  549 
Mazarin,  Jules,  Cardinal,  270 
Mead,  Richard,  42,  352,  414 

Medea  (Richard  Glover  or  Charles  Johnson?),  325  * 
Medicinal  Dictionary  (James),  303 
Meditations  (Marcus  Aurelius),  353 
Meeke,  John,  74,  75 
Meerman,  Geraart,  270* 

Mela,  Pomponius,  133 

Melanchthon  (Philipp  Schwarzert),  3,  174,  334, 

336* 

Melcombe,  George  Bubb  Dodington,  Baron,  461  * 
Melmoth,  William,  the  younger,  108*,  435,  436, 
53i* 

Melville,  Henry  Dundas,  Viscount,  73,  367 
Memis,  Dr.,  235-236,  237-238,  260-261,  327,  328 
Memoir es  (Berwick),  391 
Memoires  (Fontenelle),  378 

Memoirs  of  Agriculture  and  other  CEconomical  Arts  (Dos- 
sie),  445 

Memoirs  of  the  Court  of  Augustus  (Blackwell,)  85,  86 
Memoirs  of  David  Garrick,  Esq.  (Davies),  439  * 
Memoirs  of  Frederick  HI  [II],  King  of  Prussia  (John¬ 
son),  85 

Memoirs  of  Gray1  s  Life  (Mason),  2,  306 
Memoirs  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland  (Dalrymple), 
208-209 

Memoirs  of  the  House  of  Brandenburgh  (Frederick  the 
Great),  123 

Memoirs  and  Last  Letters  (Chesterfield) :  see  Miscel¬ 
laneous  Works  (Chesterfield) 

Memoirs  of  Miss  Sydney  Biddulph  (Sheridan),  100*, 
109 

Memoirs  of  Mr.  William  Whitehead  (Mason),  3 
Memoirs  of  the  Protectorate-House  of  Cromwell  (Noble) , 
518* 

Menage,  Gilles,  2 1 8,  586  * 

Menagiana,  218,  403,  409  *,  586  * 

Merchant  of  Venice ,  The  (Shakespeare),  91,  501  * 

Messiah  (Pope),  12,  74 

Metamorphoses  (Ovid),  15,  24,  150 

Metcalfe,  Philip,  183*,  485,  494-495 

Methodists,  130,  179,  180,  1 81, 201,  336,  549 

Meurs,  Jan  de,  270 

Meursius:  see  Meurs 

Meynell,  Littleton  Poyntz,  1 8,  42 1 , 446 

Meynell,  Mary:  see  Fitzherbert,  Mary  Meynell 

Michelangelo  Buonarroti,  267,  270 

Mickle,  William  Julius,  199,  307,  523,  543 

Middlesex,  Earl  of:  see  Dorset,  2nd  Duke  of 

Midgeley,  Robert,  506 

Military  Memoirs  (Carleton),  551 


6o8 


INDEX 


Militia  Bill,  85 
Mill,  John,  576* 

Millar,  Andrew,  49,  66,  79-80,  407 
Miller,  Lady  Anna,  250 
M  iller,  Sir  John,  250,  318 
Milner,  Joseph,  130* 

Milton,  John,  2,  27,  62-63,  83,  1 18*,  217,  249,  319, 
389,  41 5,  465,  524  *,  542,  548,  555 
Life  of  (Johnson),  429,  453  *,  454-455.  462 
Milton  no  Plagiary  (Douglas),  62  * 

Minutes  of  Agriculture  (Marshall),  400 
Mirror ,  The ,  572 

Miscellaneous  and  Fugitive  Pieces ,  228-229 
Miscellaneous  Observations  on  the  Tragedy  of  Macbeth , 
with  Remarks  on  Sir  T.  H.'s  Edition  of  Shakespeare 
(Johnson),  47,  48 
Miscellaneous  Pieces  (Johnson),  93  * 

Miscellaneous  Poems  by  Several  Hands  (Lewis,  ed.), 
542 

Miscellaneous  Poems  and  Translations  (Savage,  ed.), 
542* 

Miscellaneous  Works  (Chesterfield),  331, 413 

Miscellanies  (Harrison),  85,  86 

Miscellanies  in  Prose  and  Verse  (Williams),  38,  150, 

215 

Miscellany  of  Poems,  A  (Husbands,  ed.),  12 
Modern  Characters from  Shakespeare ,  381 
Modern  Midnight  Conversation  (Hogarth),  9*,  412 
Molinos,  Miguel  de,  409* 

Monboddo,  James  Burnet,  Lord,  164-165,  188, 
201*,  21 1,  225,  236*,  263,  329,  337,  338,  351- 
352,354.  367.  483,531 

Monckton,  Mary:  see  Cork  and  Orrery,  Countess 
of 

Monro,  Alexander,  527 

Monsey  [Mounsey],  Messenger,  162 

Montacute,  Lords,  495 

Montagu,  Elizabeth,  168-169,  182,  310,  377,  384, 

435, 436. 439, 402>  465. 532 
Montaigne,  Michel  Eyquem  de,  228 
Montesquieu,  Charles  de  Secondat,  Baron  de  La 
Brede  et  de,  393* 

Montgomerie,  Alexander:  see  Eglinton,  10th  Earl 
of 

Montgomerie,  Archibald:  see  Eglinton,  11th  Earl 
of 

Montgomerie,  Margaret:  see  Boswell,  Margaret 
Monthly  Review,  The,  155,  305*,  306 
Montrose,  William  Graham,  2nd  Duke  of,  376*, 
477 

Montrose,  James  Graham,  3rd  Duke  of,  422,  477 
Monville,  — ,  266,  267 
Moody,  John,  251, 252 
Moore,  Edward,  54*,  436 

Moral  and  Literary  Character  of  Dr.  Johnson  (Cour¬ 
tenay)  :  see  Poetical  Review  of  the  Literary  and  Moral 
Character  of  the  Late  Samuel  Johnson 
Moral  Philosophy  (Hutchinson),  312 
Moral  and  Political  Dialogues  (Hurd),  503-504 
Moravians,  579 

More,  Hannah,  381, 473,  474, 477,  531,  542 
More,  Henry,  1 92- 1 93 


More,  Sir  Thomas,  81 ,  270 

Morer,  Thomas,  author  of  A  Short  Account,  377 

Morgagni,  Giovanni  Battista,  159 

Morgann,  Maurice,  504 

Morning  Chronicle,  The,  491 

Morris,  Corbyn,  475  * 

Morris,  Miss,  582 
Morton, — ,  568* 

Moser,  George  Michael,  515 

Mother's  Catechism  for  the  Toung  Child,  The  (Willi- 
son),  231 
Motteux,  — ,  270 

Mounsey,  Dr.:  see  Monsey,  Messenger 
Mountstuart,  Lord:  see  Bute,  John  Stuart,  1st  Mar¬ 
quess  of 

Mourning  Bride,  The  (Congreve),  109*,  168 
Mudge,John,  105,  139,519 
Mudge,  Zachariah,  105-106,  467,  473 
Mulgrave,  Constantine  John  Phipps,  2nd  Baron, 
298-299 

Muller,  John,  98* 

Mulso,  Miss:  see  Chapone,  Hester 
Murdoch,  Patrick,  334,  340,  415 
Murphy,  Arthur,  85,  86,  91,  99,  104,  105,  no*, 
1 41 ,  167,  168,  169,  178,  181,  224,  229,  262,  304, 

305. 306, 308, 37 1 . 524, 53 1 , 577  * 

Murray,  Alexander:  see  Henderland,  Lord 
Murray,  John,  393 
Murray,  R.,  140 

Murray,  William:  see  Mansfield,  1st  Earl  of 
Musarum  Delicice,  401  * 

Muse  in  Livery,  A  (Dodsley),  286 

Musgrave,  Samuel,  401-402 

Musgrave,  Sir  William,  40 

Musical  Travels  Through  England  (Bicknell),  87 

Myddleton,  Colonel,  583  * 

Mylne,  Robert,  97-98 

Nairne,  Sir  William:  see  Dunsinane,  Lord 

Nares,  Robert,  572 

Nash,  Richard  (Beau  Nash),  536* 

Nash,  Treadway  Russell,  16*,  386* 

Natural  History  of  Aleppo,  The  (Russell),  85,  498 

Natural  History  of  Iceland,  The  (Horrebow),  389 

Nature  Displayed,  544 

Naudaeus:  see  Naude 

Naude,  Gabriel,  270 

Neander,  Michael,  229 

Nelson,  Robert,  290,  544 

Neni,  Count:  see  Mac-Neny 

Nepos,  Cornelius,  23,  24,  501 

New  Testament,  144,  152*,  160,  191,  192,  209, 
231. 234,  308,  347,  395,  537,  541  *,  576* 
Newbery  [Newberry],  John,  91,  96 
Newcastle,  Thomas  Pelham-Holles,  1st  Duke  of, 
39 

Newcastle,  Henry  Fiennes  Clinton,  2nd  Duke  of, 
462 

Newhall,  Sir  Walter  Pringle,  Lord,  346 
Newhaven,  William  Mayne,  Baron,  430 
Newton,  Sir  Isaac,  83,  85,  129,  181,  392,  449% 
486,513 


INDEX 


Newton,  Thomas,  Bishop  of  Bristol,  535 
Nicholls  [Nichols],  Frank,  255,  350 
Nichols,  John,  21  *,  23,  25*,  35,  453,  460, 477,  495, 
521  *,  524,  547,  560, 564, 569,  578-579 
Nicol,  George,  523,  562 
Nicolaida,  — ,  263 

Night  Thoughts  (Young),  58,  170,  461,  480 
Noble,  Mark,  518* 

Nollekens,  Mary  [Jane]  (Mrs.  Joseph),  368,  369* 
Nollekens,  Joseph,  369  *,  583  * 

Nomenclature  (Ray),  257 
Non- Juror,  The  (Gibber),  245 
Nores,  Giasone  di  [Jason  de],  285 
Norris,  a  staymaker,  25 
Norris,  John,  568* 

North,  Lord:  see  Guilford,  2nd  Earl  of 
North,  Dudley  Long,  466,  468-469 
Northern  Antiquities  (Percy),  387 
Northington,  Robert  Henley,  2nd  Earl  of,  507, 
5*5* 

Northumberland,  Elizabeth  Percy,  Duchess  of, 
250,  386* 

Northumberland,  Hugh  Percy  (originally  Smith- 
son),  1st  Duke  of,  162,  183,  386 
Northumberland,  Hugh  Percy,  2nd  Duke  of,  343, 
387-388 

Northumberland,  House  of,  386,  387 
Norton,  Sir  Fletcher,  169,  295 
Nourse,  the  bookseller,  300* 

Nowell,  Thomas,  538,  539 

Nugce  Antiques  (Harington),  501,  582  * 

Nugent,  Christopher,  136,  147,  218 

Observations  on  the  Ancient  and  Present  State  of  the  Is¬ 
lands  of  Scilly  (Borlase),  85 
“Observations  on  his  Britannick  Majesty’s  Treaties 
with  the  Empress  of  Russia  and  the  Landgrave 
of  Hesse  Cassel”  (Johnson),  85 
Observations  on  Insanity  (Arnold),  355 
Observations  upon  Lord  Orrery' s  Remarks  (Delany), 
379 

“Observations  on  the  Present  State  of  Affairs” 
(Johnson),  85,  86 

Observations  on  Spenser's  Fairy  Queen  (Warton), 
444 

Observations  on  the  Statutes  (Barrington),  400 
Observer ,  The,  462,  570 

Occasional  Papers  of  the  late  William  Dodd ,  343, 
345 

O’ Conor  [O’Connor],  Charles,  89,  332-333 
“Ode,  An”  (1747)  (Johnson?),  48 
Ode  to  Mrs.  Thrale  (Boswell?),  571 
Ode  on  the  Peace ,  An  (Williams),  534 
Ode  on  the  Progress  of  Poesy  (Gray),  1 44  * 

Ode  on  Saint  Cecilia's  Day  (Dryden),  308 

Ode  on  St.  Cecilia's  Day  (Thornton),  1 18 

Ode  on  Solitude  (Grainger),  362 

Ode  to  the  Warlike  Genius  of  Britain  (Tasker),  420 

“Ode  on  Winter”  (Johnson),  49 

Odes  (Cibber),  113,357 

Odes  (Cumberland),  309 

Odes  (Gray),  1 13,  247,  445 


609 

Odes  (Horace),  9-10,  15,  1 16,  360,  370,  512 
Odes  to  Obscurity  and  Oblivion  (Colman  and  Lloyd)a 
249 

Odyssey  (Homer),  457,  513 
“Ofellus,”  25 
Offely,  Lawrence,  23 
Ogden,  Samuel,  379,  482* 

Ogilby,  John,  10 
Ogilvie,John,  119,  120 

Oglethorpe,  James  Edward,  32,  198-199,  210,  215, 
229,  254,  297,  3IL3I3,  388,  389-390,  478,  497- 
498 

Oglethorpe,  Sir  Theophilus,  498 
Old  Bachelor,  The  (Congreve),  358 
Old  Man's  Wish,  The,  447 
Old  Testament,  193 
Oldfield,  Dr.,  313 
Oldham,  John,  29-30,  568* 

Oldmixon,  John,  82  * 

Oldys,  William,  2,  40,  47 

Oliver,  Dame,  school-teacher,  7 

Olla  Podrida  (Thomas  Monro  et  al.),  585  * 

Omai,  South  Sea  islander,  298-299 
On  the  Articles  of  the  Christian  Faith  (Ogden),  482  * 
On  the  Asthma  (Floyer),  529,  558 
“On  the  Death  of  Stephen  Grey,  the  Electrician,” 
150-151 

On  Distilling  Sea-Water  (Hales),  85 
On  Education  (Locke),  199-200 
“On  Johnson’s  Dictionary”  (Garrick),  83 
“On  Lord  Lo vat’s  Execution”  (Johnson?),  48 
Opie,  John,  583* 

Oratio  Proverbialis  (Beroaldi),  269 
Orford,  George  Walpole,  3rd  Earl  of,  551 
Orford,  Horatio  (Horace)  Walpole,  4th  Earl  of, 
1 16*,  326, 360*,  503*,  545 
Orford,  Robert  Walpole,  1st  Earl  of,  32,  33,  37, 
178, 203, 253, 255, 313.325. 376, 468, 545 
Origin  and  Progress  of  Language  (Monboddo,)  201  * 
Orme,  Robert,  238,  256,  390,  470 
Orphan  of  China  (Murphy),  91 
Orrery,  Earl  of:  see  Cork  and  Orrery,  5th  Earl  of 
Osborn,  a  Birmingham  printer,  1 9 
Osborne,  Francis:  see  Leeds,  5th  Duke  of 
Osborne,  Thomas,  2,  40,  42,  43,  348,  410 
Ossian:  see  Macpherson,  James 
Ossory,  Lord:  see  Upper  Ossory,  2nd  Earl  of 
Othello  (Shakespeare),  308,  309,  41 1 
Otway,  Thomas,  448 
Overbury,  Sir  Thomas,  1 65 

Ovid  (Publius  Ovidius  Naso),  15,  24,  87,  108,  150, 

199,217*,  3°2* 

Oxford,  Edward  Harley,  2nd  Earl  of,  40,  462 
Oxford  University,  n  et  seq.,  32,  33,  73-78,  80,  97, 
154,  >58-159, 163, 201, 248-249, 279, 284^7., 
300, 471, 486  *,572* 

P  (painter):  see  Reynolds,  Sir  Joshua 
Palmer,  John,  393* 

Palmer,  Joseph  (Budworth),  578  * 

Palmer,  Thomas  Fysche,  482-483 
P aimer ino  d'Inghilterra,  II,  296 


6io 


INDEX 


Palmerston,  Henry  Temple,  2nd  Viscount,  97*, 
1 37s  5r7>  548 

Pancoucke  [Panckoucke],  Andre  Joseph,  80 
Pantheon,  194, 195 
Panting,  Matthew,  15 

Paoli,  Pascal,  161,  164,  166-167,  194,  202,  211, 
212,  213,  225,  272,  307,  31 1,  329,  347,  387,  388, 
389,  403,  404,  405,  418,  425,  474,  548,  550 
Paradise,  John,  13,  423,  524,  531, 562 
Paradise,  Peter,  562  * 

Paradise,  Mrs.  Peter,  562  * 

Paradise  Lost  (Milton),  63,  454,  455  *,  465  *,  542 
Parallel  Lives  (Plutarch),  569* 

Parker,  Sackville,  543 
Parker,  Mrs.  Sackville,  543 

Parliament,  41,  164,  176,  178,  184-185,  189,  192, 
i95>  233,  250,  251,  255,  260,  281,  296,  299,  364- 
365.  370,  371,  374,  390,  41 1, 430,  441, 45i,  466, 
513,528, 534, 539 

Parliamentary  Debates:  see  “Debates  on  The  Senate 
of  Lilliput” 

Parnell,  Thomas,  336  *,  347,  369,  425,  575 
Life  of  (Goldsmith),  194 
Life  of  (Johnson),  459,  575 
Pa  it,  Samuel,  446, 456*,  519*,  583, 584* 

Pascal,  Blaise,  421 

Pasor,  Georg,  430 

Pastor  Fido ,  II  (Guar ini),  41 1 

Paterson,  Samuel,  1 97,  325,  5 1 5  *,  529  * 

Paterson,  Samuel,  Johnson’s  godson,  325,51 5, 529, 
530 

Paterson  and  others  vs.  Alexander  and  others ,  261 

Patrick,  Simon,  313 

Patriot ,  The  (Johnson),  233-234,  244 

Patriot ,  The  (Simpson),  305 

Patten,  Thomas,  495 

Paul,  Saint,  180,  394,  482,  538,  540*,  574 

Payne,  John,  66 

Payne,  William,  88 

Pearce,  Zachary,  Bishop  of  Rochester,  34,  82,  333 
Pearson,  John,  Bishop  of  Chester,  1 1 2 
Pearson,  John  Batter idge,  294,  489,  517,  525 
Peiresc,  Nicolas  Claude  Fabri  de,  260 
Pelham,  Henry,  73,  1 78 
Pellett  [Pellet],  Thomas,  412 

Pembroke,  Henry  Herbert,  10th  Earl  of,  247*, 
260,  336* 

Penn,  Richard,  439* 

Pennant,  Thomas,  253,  271  *,  338,  386-387,  388 
Penny,  Anne,  583* 

Pensees ,  Les  (Pascal),  421 
Penseroso,  II  (Milton),  89 
Pepys,  Sir  Lucas,  462,  497,  516 
Pepys,  William  Weller,  436,  469 
Percy,  Earl:  see  Northumberland,  2nd  Duke  of 
Percy,  Thomas,  Bishop  of  Dromore,  8,  9,  16,  37, 
51.  1 37.  139,  161,  162,  184,  186,  244,  288,  322, 
369*,  381, 385, 386-387, 388, 400,  401, 41 7, 433, 

435.  44°.  44 1 , 473,  542  *,  554, 576  * 

Perkins,  John,  234,  468,  469,  480,  492,  525,  562, 
576* 

Perkins,  Mrs.  John,  525, 562 


Persian  Grammar  (Jones),  464 

Perth,  James  Drummond,  1st  (titular)  Duke  of, 
372 

Peterborough,  Charles  Mordaunt,  3rd  Earl  of, 
550“55i 

Peters,  Richard,  295 
Pether,  William,  302  * 

Petition  of  the  City  of  London  to  his  Majesty ,  in  favour  of 
Dr.  Dodd ,  The ,  343  * 

Petrarch  (Francesco  Petrarca),  1 1,  269 
Petty,  Sir  William,  125,  443 
Peyton,  Johnson’s  amanuensis,  51,  190 
Phaedrus,  24 

Philidor,  Francois  Andre,  419 
Philips,  Ambrose,  1 75,  436,  453  * 

Life  of  (Johnson),  453  *,  459 
Philips,  Claudy,  38,  39 
Philips,  Miss:  see  Crouch,  Anna  Maria 
Philips,  Mr.:  see  Phillips,  Peregrine 
Phillips,  Peregrine,  father  of  Mrs.  Crouch,  515 
Philological  Inquiries  (Harris),  334 
Philosophical  Enquiry  into  the  Origin  of  our  Ideas  of  the 
Sublime  and  Beautiful  (Burke),  86,  169 
Philosophical  Society,  453  * 

Philosophical  Survey  of  the  South  of  Ireland ,  A  (Camp- 
bell),  250 

Philosophical  Transactions ,  85,  155 
Philosophy  (Bolingbroke),  73,  91 
Phra  Narai,  King  of  Siam,  407 
“Physical  evil  moral  good”  (Johnson),  92 
Picture ,  The  (Massinger),  430 
Pieresc:  see  Peiresc 
Pilgrim's  Progress,  The  (Bunyan),  217 
Pindar,  206,  207,  319,  420,  450,  459 
Pink,  Robert,  52  * 

Pinkerton,  John,  549 
Piozzi,  Gabriel,  552 

Piozzi,  Hester  Lynch,  6*,  7,  14*,  21  *,  22  *,  48,  1 16, 
117, 141-142, 151, 156*,  163, 165-166, 186, 187, 
188, 203*,  207, 209, 214, 226, 227*,  229, 232, 
234, 239, 240, 247, 249, 253-254, 263, 264, 268, 
272, 273, 280, 293, 294, 296, 298, 302, 305, 306, 
307.  3IO>  31  !>  325.  327)  33 1  >  335.  337.  338,  34°. 
358,  366,  367=  37 [>  372,  377>  379.  39°*,  4°°, 
403, 407  *,  408,  410, 41 1,  41 2-41 3, 416,  418,  419, 
426,  427,  429,  435,  437,  439,  441  *,  453,  460, 
465,  466,  468-469,  471,  479,  485,  488,  490,  494, 
496,  497,  507,  5°8*,  5 16>  520.  521,  532,  546, 
55°.  552-555.  566,  571, 573*.  574*.  58o 
Pitt,  William,  the  elder:  see  Chatham,  William,  ist 
Earl  of 

Pitt,  William,  the  younger,  526*,  528,  538 
Pitts,  John,  501  * 

Plain  Dealer ,  The,  41 , 47 

“Plan  of  a  Dictionary  of  the  English  Language,  A” 
(Johnson),  49-56,  70,  79,  192,  486 
Plan  for  the  Improvement  of  the  English  Language ,  The 
(Swift),  245 
Planta,  Joseph,  270* 

Plato,  269 

Plautus,  Titus  Maccius,  150 
PJaxton,  George,  5  * 


INDEX 


Plays  of  William  Skakspeare ,  The  (Johnson,  ed.),  88- 
39,  9°3  9L  935  95,  98,  100,  103,  137,  142,  143, 
169,  177,  202  ,207,  229,  312,  456,  477,  536,  565* 
Pleasures  of  the  Imagination  (Akenside),  100,  193 
Pliny  the  Younger  (Gaius  Plinius  Caecilius  Secun- 
dus),  251  * 

Plott,  Robert,  359 
Plowden,  Edmund,  543 
Plutarch,  3,  569* 

Pococke,  Edward,  385  (improperly  referred  to  as 
“the  great  traveller”),  450 
Pococke,  Richard,  252,  385 
Poems  (Carlisle),  478 
Poems  (Collins),  263 
Poems  (Gray),  393 
Poems  (Smart),  560* 

Poe  tee  Greed  Heroici  (Estienne),  576* 

Poetical  Amusements  at  a  Villa  near  Bath  (Miller),  250 
Poetical  Calendar ,  The ,  1 07 

Poetical  Epistle  to  Samuel  Johnson,  A.M. ,  A  (Murphy), 
99 

Poetical  Review  of  the  Literary  and  Moral  Character  of 
the  Late  Samuel  Johnson  (Courtenay),  12-13,  60- 
6 1 , 87,  95,  228,  244  *,  547  *,  569  * 

Poets ,  The  (Apollo  Press),  334 
Polemomiddinia  (Drummond),  390 
Polite  Philosopher ,  The  (Forrester),  303 
Politian  (Angelo  Ambrogini),  20-21,  565* 

Political  Conferences  (Tyers),  398 

Political  Survey  of  Great  Britain ,  A  (Campbell),  286 

Political  Tracts  (Johnson),  243,  284 

Polybius,  85,  154 

Pomfret,  John,  419 

Pope,  Alexander,  12,  32,  33,  35,  37,  41,  42,  49*, 
61,  67,  74,  83,  85,  87,  91,  105,  127,  143-144, 
154*.  167-168,  191,  199,  217,  249,  254,  256, 
267,  305,  319,  351,  362*,  375*,  380,  381,  398, 
399.  4°3.  4°6,  4'°,  41 1.  425,  428-429,  434,  444, 
453  *.  454,  459,  475, 483,  533,  542, 566 
Life  of  (Rufthead),  1 94 
Life  of  (Johnson),  41  o,  456-458 
Pope,  Walter,  447 
Pope's  Miscellanies ,  183* 

Port  family,  358 

Porter,  Captain,  291 

Porter,  Henry,  19,  22*,  165 

Porter,  Mrs.  Henry:  ^Johnson,  Elizabeth 

Porter,  Sir  James,  428 

Porter,  Joseph,  Henry  Porter’s  son,  266,  471, 525 
Porter,  Lucy,  6,  21  *,  22,  25,  27,  64,  65,  96,  103, 
104,  107,  265-266,  291,  293,  294,  340,  425-426, 
432,  433,  47°-47I,  488-489,  507,  517,  525,  526, 
566, 573,577* 

Porter,  Mary,  520 

Porteus,  Beilby,  Bishop  of  Chester,  337,  389,  432, 

433,451,467 

Portland,  Margaret  Bentinck,  Duchess  of,  436 

Portmore,  Charles  Colyear,  2nd  Earl  of,  529 

Pott,  Joseph  Holden,  290 

Pott,  Percivall,  519 

Potter,  Robert,  381 

Pratt,  Charles:  see  Camden,  1st  Earl 


6l  I 

Prayers  and  Meditations  (Johnson),  6,  16,  23,  54,  64, 

65-66, 84, 92, 97, 98, 100, 130*,  137-138, 139, 
140, 156, 157*,  162-163,  J76, 186,  201-202,224, 
226, 229, 257,  268  *,  327-328,  33 1 ,  396, 42 1 , 441 , 
452,  469,  486,  488,  489,  494,  517*,  564*,  567, 
574-575, 581  * 

Preceptor ,  The ,  51 
Prendergast,  Sir  Thomas,  199 
Presbyterians,  173,  189,  580 
Present  State  of  England ,  544 
Preston,  Sir  Charles,  493 

Pretender,  the  Young:  see  Charles  III,  the  Young 
Pretender 

Price,  Richard,  5 1  o,  5 1 9  * 

Prideaux,  Humphrey,  544 

Priestley,  Joseph,  180,  393  *>  5lg-5i9,  579* 

Prince,  a  bookseller,  81 

Pringle,  Sir  John,  193,  281,  298,  300*,  317,  355*, 

378 

Prior,  Matthew,  166,  191,  360,  427,  475 
Pritchard,  Hannah,  53,  169,  253,  520 
Profession  de  Foi  du  Vicaire  Savoyard  (Rousseau),  145 
Progress  of  Discontent,  The  (Warton),  78* 

Project,  The  (Tickell),  401 
“Prologue”  to  Comus  (Johnson),  62 
“Prologue”  on  the  opening  of  Drury  Lane  (John¬ 
son),  49,  163,  449 

“Prologue”  to  Sir  Thomas  Overbury  (Sheridan), 
333-334 

“Prologue”  to  A  Word  to  the  Wise  (Johnson),  333, 
334 

Prophecy  of  Famine  (Churchill),  1 18 
“Proposals  for  Printing  Bibliotheca  Harleiana” 
(Johnson),  40 

Proposals  for  Printing  a  Medicinal  Dictionary  (James), 
303 

“Proposals  for  publishing  an  Analysis  of  the  Scotch 
Ceitick  Language”  (Johnson),  330-331 
“Proposals  for  Publishing  the  Works  of  Mrs.  Char¬ 
lotte  Lennox,”  235 

Prose  on  Several  Occasions  (Colman),  57 1 
Prosodia  Rationalis  (Joshua  Steele),  247 
Protestantism,  1 74,  359 

Provoked  Husband,  The ;  or,  A  Journey  to  London  (Van¬ 
brugh  and  Cibber),  157,  158,  534 
Psalmanazar,  George,  100*,  400,  503,  531 
Psalmorum  Codex,  270 
Psalms  in  Metre,  297  * 

Publick  Advertiser,  The,  83 

Publick  Virtue,  a  Poem  (Dodsley),  447 

Pufendorf  [Puffendorf],  Baron  Samuel  von,  191, 

281,544 

Pultenay,  William,  see  Bath,  Earl  of 
Purcell,  Henry,  251 
Pym,  John,  178 
Pythagoras,  568  * 

Quakers,  289,  290,  392,  394”395>  4^0*,  510-511 
Queen’s  house  library:  see  Buckingham  House 
Queensberry,  Charles  Douglas,  3rd  Duke  of, 
259 

Queeney:  see  Thrale,  Hester  Maria 


INDEX 


612 

Quevedo  y  Villegas,  Francesco  Gomez  de,  379 
Quin,  James,  259,  334,  383 
Quintilian  (Marcus  Fabius  Quintilianus),  452, 
578* 

R  (Richard);  see  Sheridan,  Richard  Brinsley 
Rabelais,  Francois,  215,  381 
Race ,  The  (Shaw),  153 
Rackstrow,  Benjamin,  546 
RadclifFe,  Charles,  48 
Radcliffe,  John,  physician,  538 
Radcliffe,  Dr.,  Master  of  Pembroke  College:  see 
Ratcliff,  John 
Ralegh,  Sir  Walter,  62 
Ralph,  James,  461  * 

Rambler ,  The ,  2-3,  3-4,  20*,  23,  36,  40,  54-62,  63, 
64,67, 69, 79, 92, 99, 1 1 6, 1 23, 1 30  *,  1 33, 1 57, 1 86, 
221, 226,  244,  283,  288,  309,  353,  431,  443,  470, 
47 ' ,  486, 491 , 532>  54  ‘  *,  543, 548,  577  *,  5^3  * 
Rambler's  Magazine ,  The ,  54 
Ramsay,  Allan,  the  poet,  21 1 

Ramsay,  Allan,  the  painter,  379,  380,  405,  406, 
4°7, 4°8,  422, 425, 43°,  526, 563 
Ranby,  John,  364 

Rann, John  (“Sixteen-string  Jack”),  308 
Rape  of  Lucrece,  The  (Shakespeare),  501  * 

Raphael  (Raffaello  Sanzio),  61 , 267 
Rasay,  laird  of:  see  Macleod,  John,  laird  of  Rasay 
Rasselas,  Prince  of  Abyssinia  (Johnson),  13,  94-95, 
123, 208, 340, 401, 414, 451, 480, 541  *,  555 
Ratcliff,  John,  74 
Rawlinson,  Richard,  495 
Ray,  John,  169,221,257 
Ray,  Martha,  422 

Reasons  of  the  Christian  Religion  (Baxter),  518 
Rebellion  of  1 745-46,  47,  350 
Recruiting  Officer,  The  (Farquhar),  444 
Recueil  des  plus  belles  pieces  des  Poetes  Franqais,  427 
Redi,  Francesco,  373  * 

Reed,  Isaac,  218*,  453 

“Reflections  on  a  Grave  digging  in  Westminster 
Abbey,”  150 

“Reflections  on  the  State  of  Portugal,”  85 

Reflections  of  the  Study  of  the  Law  (Simpson),  96 

Reformation,  3 1 5,  336  *,  342 

Rehearsal ,  The  (Buckingham),  195,546 

Reid,  Thomas,  134 

Relation  of  a  Journey  (Sandys),  544 

Re liques  of  Ancient  English  Poetry  (Percy),  542  * 

Remains  concerning  Britain  (Camden),  397,  51 1 

“Remarks  on  the  Militia  Bill”  (Johnson),  85 

Remarks  on  Swift  (Cork  and  Orrery),  379 

Rembrandt  van  Rijn,  349 

Remonstrance ,  The  (Stockdale),  176 

Respublica  et  Status  Regni  Hungari# ,  1 44 

Respublic#  Elzevirian#,  3 1 2 

Resurrection ,  The  (Blair  and  Bannatine),  100 

Retaliation  (Goldsmith),  546 

Retirement,  The  (Walsh),  183* 

Revolution  of  1688,  178,  253,  260,  297,  387,  419, 
496, 498 

Revolution  Society,  The,  454 


Reynolds,  Frances,  91,  139,  186,  322,  367,  377, 

381 , 393. 402, 424, 439. 576  *,  583  * 

Reynolds,  Sir  Joshua,  32*,  37,  38,  43,  44,  54,  55, 
61, 66-67,  72*,  81,  83,  91,  92,  94,  101-102,  103, 
104,  105,  106,  107,  no,  1 16*,  136,  137,  138,  139, 
■47>  >54,  155.  '56»  i67>  168-169,  >75,  '85.  186, 
215,  2l6,  217,  228,  232,  236,  240,  246,  253,  257, 
258,  264*,  272,  287,  288,  297-298,  309-310,  317, 
322,  323,  327,  356,  360,  373,  374,  375,  379,  382, 
383. 384  *,  396, 397. 399. 4°i ,  4°2, 4°4>  4°5-4°6, 
408,  409,  412,  417,  418,  421,  423,  424,  425,  436, 
439.  443,  447,  449*.  45°,  452,  459,  465,  467, 
469,  47o,  473,  485-486,  494,  495,  500,  501 , 502, 
5<>7,  5  >3,  5i5,  521,  524,  533,  534,  545,  546-547, 
549,  55°,  55i,  552-553,  554,  555-556,  560,  563- 
564,576*,  580,  583 
Rhetoric  (Aristotle),  568* 

Rhetorical  Grammar  (Walker),  583  * 

Rich,  John,  382 

Richard  II,  King  of  England,  529* 

Richard  III  (Shakespeare),  100,  521 
Richardson,  Jonathan,  the  younger,  32,  37 
Richardson,  Samuel,  38,  55,90,  103,  107,  157-158, 
169,  181,357,400,443,450 
Richmond,  Richard,  Bishop  of  Sodor  and  Man, 
43i 

Ridley,  the  bookseller,  404 

Ritter,  Joseph,  173,  273,  368 

Rivals,  The  (Sheridan),  334 

Rivers,  Richard  Savage,  4th  Earl,  45-46 

Rivington,  John,  519* 

“Robbery  of  Time”  (Johnson),  92 
Roberts,  J.,  the  bookseller,  44 
Roberts,  Miss,  93,  122 
Robertson,  a  publisher,  484,  485 
Robertson,  William,  85,  152,  159,  161,  162,  215, 
216, 228, 230, 353, 385, 388, 405, 406-407, 412, 
429,467,571 

Robinhood  [Robin  Hood]  Society,  472 
Robinson,  Sir  Thomas,  123,  182 
Robinson  Crusoe  (Defoe),  384 
Rochester,  John  Wilmot,  2nd  Earl  of,  305,  360 
Rochford,  William  Henry  Zuylestein,  4th  Earl  of, 
88 

Rockingham,  Charles  Watson-Wentworth,  2nd 
Marquis  of,  199 

Roderick  Random  (Smollett),  97* 

Rodney,  Sir  George,  270 
Rogers,  John  Methuen,  576* 

Rollin,  Charles,  544 
Rolt,  Richard,  100,  252 

Roman  Catholics,  173-174,  179,  189,  224,  251, 

301,  359, 43°,  437,  536-537,  580 
Roman  History,  from  the  Foundation  of  the  City  of  Rome 
to  the  Destruction  of  the  Western  Empire  (Goldsmith) , 
217,544 

Romney,  George,  309* 

Roper,  William,  81 
Rosciad  (Churchill),  162* 

Roscommon,  Wentworth  Dillon,  4th  Earl  of,  568* 
Life  of  (Johnson),  51 
Rose,  William,  497  * 


INDEX 


613 


Rosicrucian  infallible  Axiomata  (Heydon),  577  * 

Ross,  John,  Bishop  of  Exeter,  531 
Rosslyn,  Alexander  Wedderburn,  1st  Earl  of,  104, 
105,  106,  108,  262,  296,  297,  310 
Rothes,  Mary  Lloyd,  Countess  of:  see  Langton, 
Mary  Lloyd 

Rothwell,  a  perfumer,  157 
Round  Robin  (Burke  et  all),  323 
Rousseau,  Jean  Jacques,  124,  125,  145-146,  164, 
210,  536 

Rowe,  Elizabeth,  86 

Rowley,  Thomas:  see  Chatterton,  Thomas 
Royal  Academy,  163,  272,  418,  507,  513,  515, 
558 

Royal  College  of  Physicians,  Edinburgh,  372 
Royal  Marriage  Bill,  189 
Royal  Society,  2 1 8,  449  * 

Rubens,  Peter  Paul,  267 

Rudd,  Margaret  Caroline,  322,  405 

Ruddiman,  Thomas,  57,  149,  210,  419 

Rudens  (Plautus),  150 

Ruffhead,  Owen,  1 94 

Russell  [Russel],  Alexander,  85,  498 

Russell,  Lord  William,  208,  387 

Rusticks  (Langton),  99 

Rutland,  Roger  Manners,  5th  Earl  of,  1 22 

Rutty,  John,  353 

Ryland,  John,  66,  557,  560 

Sacheverell  [Sacheverel],  Henry,  5 
Sacred  Poems ,  (Hailes,  ed.),  360 
Sacred  and  Profane  History  of  the  World,  The  (Shuck- 
ford),  544 

St.  Albans  family,  67 

St.  Asaph,  Bishop  of:  see  Shipley,  Jonathan 
St.  Helens,  Alleyne  Fitzherbert,  Baron,  18 
Sallust  (Gaius  Sallustius  Crispus),  3,  24,  166,  505, 

569* 

Salusbury,  Hester  Lynch:  see  Piozzi,  Hester  Lynch 
Salusbury,  Hester  Maria  (Mrs.  Piozzi’s  mother), 
226,  408,  554^ 

Sanadon,  Noel  Etienne,  320* 

Sanderson,  Professor:  see  Saunderson,  Nicholas 
Sanderson,  Robert,  Bishop  of  Lincoln,  60,  577  *, 
578* 

Sands,  Murray,  and  Cochran,  printers,  57  * 

Sandys,  Edwin,  269 

Sandys,  Sir  Edwin,  60 

Sandys,  George,  544 

Santerre,  Antoine  Joseph,  269 

Sappho,  199 

Sarpi,  Paolo  (Father  Paul),  34-35,  36 
Life  of  (Johnson),  36 
Sastres,  Francesco,  303,  577  * 

Satires  (Horace),  15,  150 

Satires  (Juvenal),  15,  51-52,  72,  575-576 

Sault,  — ,  506 

Saunderson  [Sanderson],  Nicholas,  202 
Savage,  Richard,  Earl  Rivers:  see  Rivers,  4th 
Earl 

Savage,  Richard,  333-334,  458,  536,  542  *,  574 
Life  of  (Johnson),  41,  43-47,  54,  66,  334* 


Savile,  Sir  George,  437 
Scaliger,  Julius  Caesar,  1 2,  52  *,  170,  285 
Scaliger,  Joseph  Justus,  170 
Scarsdale,  Nathaniel  Curzon,  Baron,  349 
Scheme  for  the  Classes  of  a  Grammar  School  (Johnson), 
23-24 

Schotanus,  Christianus,  1 36 
“Sciolus,”  409*,  446* 

Scipio  Africanus,  Publius  Cornelius,  108*,  150 
Scotch  Militia  Bill,  281-282,  296 
Scots  Magazine,  The,  28 
Scott,  Archibald,  29* 

Scott,  George  Lewis,  334 

Scott,  John,  of  Amwell,  250,  254 

Scott,  Sir  William:  see  Stowell,  Lord 

Scrip  tores  de  rebus  Gallicis,  269 

Seasons,  The  (Thomson),  259,  334 

Seeker,  Thomas,  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  4, 

45i 

Seed,  Jeremiah,  378 
Selden,John,  191,449* 

Select  Works  of  Abraham  Cowley  (Hurd,  ed.),  305 
“Self-denial”  (Johnson),  92 
Senilia  (Maittaire),  442 
Sentimental  Journey,  A  (Sterne),  197*,  452* 

Serious  Call  to  a  Devout  and  Holy  Life,  A  (Law), 

14,  180,  544 
Sermons  (Clarke),  581 
Sermons  (Sherlock),  541  *,  544 
Sermons  on  Different  Subjects  (Mudge),  467,  473 
Sermons  on  Different  Subjects  (Taylor),  357,  569  * 
Sermons  on  Prayer  (Ogden),  379 
Sermons  on  Prayer  (South),  1 73 
Settle,  Elkanah,  10,  320 
Seven  Discourses  (Reynolds),  418 
1738  (Pope),  32 

Sevigne,  Marie  de  Rabutin-Chantal,  Marquise  de, 
312 

Seward,  Anna,  6*,  21  *-22*,  293,  377*,  390,  391, 

392, 393. 394-  432, 542, 55°, 566 

Seward,  Elizabeth  (Mrs.  Thomas),  293,  432 
Seward,  Thomas,  1 7  *,  293,  294,  346,  432 
Seward,  William,  36,  102,  165,  241,  336,  337,  351, 
355*,  361, 413, 455,  488,  501, 506,  512,  584* 
Shaftesbury,  Anthony  Ashley  Cooper,  4th  Earl  of, 
132 

Shakespeare,  William,  8,  15,  24,  36,  47,  48,  49*, 
61,83, 88,  93. 101, 113*,  163, 168,  170, 177,  202, 
288,292,294,312,  319,  381,  383,  391,  399-400, 

422, 443, 444, 446,  447, 449,  485, 473,  475,  488> 
520, 575 

See  also  Plays  of  William  Shakespeare,  The  (John¬ 
son, ed.) 

Shakespeare  Illustrated  (Lennox),  70,  444 

Sharp,  John,  139 

Sharp  [Sharpe],  Samuel,  99,  312 

Sharpe,  Gregory,  1 82 

Sharpe,  a  surgeon:  see  Sharp,  Samuel 

Sharpe,  John,  Archbishop  of  York,  462 

Shaw,  Cuthbert,  153 

Shaw,  Thomas,  478 

Shaw,  William,  330,  367,  523-524 


INDEX 


614 

She  Stoops  to  Conquer  (Goldsmith),  207,  208,  210, 
211,212,213,216,  402,  548 
Shebbearc,  John,  478,  51 1 

Sheffield,  John:  see  Buckingham  and  Normanby, 
1st  Duke  of 

Shelburne,  Earl  of:  see  Lansdovvne,  1st  Marquis  of 
Slienstone,  William,  16,  287-288,  515 
Sheridan,  Charles,  390 
Sheridan,  Frances,  100,  109 
Sheridan,  Richard  Brinsley,  137,  333-334,  373, 374 
Sheridan,  Thomas,  100,  104,  105,  108-109,  IM> 
128-129,  168,  182,  192,  224,  225,  245,  296,  334, 
403,  420,  461, 471, 497,  509,  512,  514,  545,  549 
Sherlock,  Thomas,  378,  544 
Sherlock,  William,  541  * 

Shcrvvin,  John  Keyse,  332 

Shiels,  Robert,  50,51, 66,  305, 305  *-306  *,  307-308, 

334 

Ship  of  Fools,  The  (Barclay),  76 
Shipley,  Jonathan,  Bishop  of  St.  Asaph,  137,  379, 
380,  381,521,548 

Short  Account  of  Scotland,  A  (Morc.r),  377 
Short  Commentary  on  the  Lord's  Prayer,  A  (Lort),  537  * 
Shuckford,  Samuel,  544 
Sibbald,  Sir  Robert,  372 

Life  [rightly  Autobiography ]  of,  The,  372 
Sicilian  Gossips ,  The,  Idyll  xxn  (Theocritus),  442 
Siddons,  Sarah,  520-521 
Sidney,  Algernon,  208 
Sidney,  Sir  Philip,  339 
Siege  of  Aleppo,  The  (Hawkins),  382 
Simco,  John,  583* 

Simpson,  — ,  Town-Clerk  of  Lichfield,  565* 
Simpson,  Joseph,  96,  139,  305 
Simpson,  Rev.  Mr.,  of  Lincoln,  147,415 
Simpson,  Stephen,  1 7,  96 
Simpson,  Thomas,  98* 

Sinclair,  Sir  John,  487 
Sir  Thomas  Over  bury  (Savage),  333-334 
Six  Months'  Tour  through  the  Northof England  (Young), 
349 

Skene,  Sir  John,  432  * 

Sketches  of  the  History  of  Man  (Karnes),  409,  413 
Skinner,  Stephen,  50 
Slater,  the  druggist,  318 
Smalbroke,  Dr.,  34 

Small  Whole-Length  of  Dr.  Priestley  from  his  Printed 
Works,  A,  519* 

Smalridge,  George,  Bishop  of  Bristol,  378 
Smart,  Anna  Maria  (Mrs.  Christopher),  560* 
Smart,  Christopher,  85,  m-112,  252,  502*,  504, 
560* 

Smith,  Adam,  15,  121,  137,  281,  300*,  335,  406, 

449. 502-503, 572  * 

Smith,  Captain,  416 
Smith,  Edmund,  385 

Life  of  (Johnson),  1 7,  453  * 

Smith,  John,  Lord  Chief  Baron,  492  * 

Smith,  Lawrence,  483,  549 
Smith,  Mr.,  of  Bishop’s  Stortford,  1 77 
Smollett,  Tobias,  97,  306,  374-375 
Society  of  Artists,  1 01 -102 


Society  of  Arts  and  Sciences,  185,  445,  473 
Society  for  the  Encouragement  of  Learning,  40* 
Society  of  London  for  the  Encouragement  of  Arts, 
Manufactures,  and  Commerce,  527* 

Society  of  Procurators,  484-485,  491 
Society  for  Propagating  Christian  Knowledge,  1 51 , 
231 

Socrates,  59,  109*,  384,  455,  468 
Life  of  (Cooper),  346  * 

Solander,  Daniel  Charles,  187,  i83 
‘‘Soldier’s  Letter,”  41 

Some  account  of  the  Life  of  William  Shakespeare  (Ma¬ 
lone),  294 

“Some  further  Particulars  in  Relation  to  the  Case 
of  Admiral  Byng,  by  a  Gentleman  of  Oxford,” 

85 

Some  passages  of  the  Life  and  Death  of  John  Earl  of 
Rochester  (Burnet),  360 
Somerset,  James,  366-367 
Somerville,  James,  12th  Baron,  457 
Somnium  (Johnson),  12 
Sorbonne,  269 
South,  Ps.obert,  1 73,  378 
South  Sea  Report,  41 
Southwell,  Edward,  101 
Southwell,  Thomas,  2nd  Baron,  66,  42 1 ,  499 
Spearing,  attorney-at-law,  33  * 

Spectator,  The,  54,  55,  57,  165,  175*,  199,  202,  209, 
260,  306,  3 1  o,  353,  373, 449,  452, 467,  47 1 , 560  *, 
569* 

Speculum  human ce  Salvationis,  269 
Speech  to  the  Recorder  of  London  (Johnson  &  Dodd), 
343 

Spence,  Joseph,  444,  462 

Spencer,  George  John,  2nd  Earl,  137,  436 

Spenser,  Edmund,  39,  76,  80,  2 1 7,  579 

Spiritual  Diary  and  Soliloquies,  A  (Rutty),  353 

Spleen,  The  (Green),  308,  429 

Spottiswoode,  John,  404,  405 

Sprat,  Thomas,  Bishop  of  Rochester,  544 

Spur,  Mercurius:  see  Shaw,  Cuthbert 

Stamp  Act,  147 

Stanhope,  James,  1st  Earl,  42 

Stanhope,  Philip,  Lord  Chesterfield’s  natural  son, 

55° 

Stanton,  manager  of  players,  292 
Stanyan,  Abraham,  414 
State  Trials  (Howell),  367* 

Statius,  Publius  Papinius,  68 
Staunton,  Sir  George,  1 02-1 03,  545 
Steele,  Joshua,  247 

Steele,  Sir  Richard,  47*,  141*,  175*,  286,  306, 

458, 471 

Steele,  of  the  Treasury,  37 

Steevens,  George,  61,  137,  160,  174,  176-177,  178, 
207,  229,  230,  244,  328,  360,  414,  423,  453,  547, 
548 

“Stella  in  Mourning”  (Johnson?),  48 
Stephani,  the:  see  Estiennes,  the 
Stephanorum  Historia  (Maittaire),  442 
Stephanus,  Henricus:  see  Estienne,  Henri 
Stepney,  George,  453  * 


INDEX 


615 


Sterne,  Laurence,  1 97,  2 1 2,  452  *,  477 
Stewart,  Sir  Annesley,  467 
Stewart,  Francis,  50,  434,  435 
Stewart,  George,  50 

Stewart,  Mrs.,  Francis’  sister,  434,  435,  526,  528 
Still,  John,  Bishop  of  Bath  and  Wells,  582  * 
Stillingfleet,  Benjamin,  476 
Stinton,  George,  389,  451 
Stockdale,  Percival,  93  *,  1 76,  1 88 
Stone,  Mr.,  343* 

Stopford,  Edward,  262 
Stow  [Stowe],  John,  576* 

Stow,  Richard,  43  * 

Stowell,  William  Scott,  Lord,  131,  137,  174,  185, 

284, 383, 384, 385, 398-399. 437. 471. 503, 554. 
576  *,583* 

Strahan,  Andrew,  565 

Strahan,  George,  64,  154*,  457,  530,  567,  576*, 
581 

Strahan,  Margaret  (Mrs.  William),  57,  474,  488 
Strahan,  William,  66,  79,  80,  94,  100,  154*,  184- 
185,  213,  232,  234,  242,  245,  246,  281,  326,  327, 
332,  37°,  382,  391,  406,  41^-417,  428,  437,  439, 
474,  488,  547,  565,581 
Strahan,  William,  junior,  474 
Stratford  Jubilee,  The  (Gentleman),  294 
Stratico,  Professor,  of  Padua,  104 
Strickland,  Mrs.,  335* 

Stuart,  house  of,  5,  29,  38,  47,  57*,  98,  151,  21 1, 
228,  347-348,  387,  419,  496,  536 
Stuart,  Andrew,  2 1 4-2 1 5 

Stuart,  Charles  Edward,  the  Young  Pretender: 
see  Charles  III 

Stuart,  James,  the  Old  Pretender:  see  James  III 
Stuart,  Colonel  James,  427,  431, 432,  433 
Stuart,  Rev.  James,  152* 

Stuart,  William,  506 
Stubbs,  George,  577  * 

Student ,  or  Oxford  and  Cambridge  Miscellany ,  The , 
56-57,  62 

Suckling,  Sir  John,  401  * 

Sugar  Cane,  The  (Grainger),  137,  288 
Sully,  Maximilien  de  Bethune,  Due  de,  85 
Sunderland,  Charles  Spencer,  3rd  Earl  of,  42 
Svea  Rikes  Historia  (Dalin),  191 
Swan,  John,  40 

Swift,  Jonathan,  33,  34,  37,  56,  123,  128,  162,  183, 
202,  218*,  244-245,  379,  399,  500,  535 
Life  of  (Johnson),  461-462 
Life  of  (Sheridan),  109,  168,  244* 

Swinfen,  Samuel,  13,  17,  18,370 
Swinny,  Owen  Mac,  3 1 9 
Swinton,  Rev.  Mr.,  75 
Sydenham,  Thomas,  37-38 
Life  of  (Johnson),  5,  40 

Sydney,  Thomas  Townshend,  1st  Viscount, 

546 

Sydney,  Algernon;  see  Sidney,  Algernon 
Sylvanus,  430 

Syjjopsis  of  Quadrupeds  (Pennant),  271* 

System  of  Ancient  Geography,  A  (Macbean) :  see 
Dictionary  of  Ancient  Geography ,  A 


Taaf, — ,  270 

Tacitus,  Cornelius,  201 

Talbot,  Catharine,  55 

Tale  of  a  Tub,  A  (Swift),  128,  216,  244-245 

Tasker,  William,  translator  of  Horace,  419-420 

Tasso,  Torquato,  107,  405,  464,  568* 

Tatler,  The,  54,  569* 

Tatler  Revived,  The,  54 

Taxation  no  Tyranny  (Johnson),  242-243,  250,  363, 

370,  390 

Taylor,  Isaac,  583  * 

Taylor,  Jeremy,  538 
Taylor,  Chevalier  John,  424 
Taylor,  Rev.  Dr.  John,  7, 1 1, 12,  16,  18,  45,  50,  53, 
65,  66,  280,  292,  293,  294,  295-296,  31 1,  330, 
338,  339>  34°j  34L  342,  346-348,  349,  350,  352, 
354,  356-357,  358,  359,  360,  363,  365,  366, 
37°,  53°,  559,  562,  566,  567, 577  *,  582 

Taylor,  John,  classical  scholar,  108*,  401 
Taylor,  John,  of  Birmingham,  19 
Taylor,  John,  landscape  painter,  435 
Taylor,  Mary  (Mrs.  John),  65 
Tears  of  Old- Mayday,  The  (Lovibond),  24 
Telemachus  (Fenelon),  263 
Telemachus,  a  Mask  (Graham),  1 16,  329 
Tempest ,  The  (Shakespeare),  449 
Temple,  Henry:  see  Palmerston,  2nd  Viscount 
Temple,  Richard:  see  Cobham,  1st  Viscount 
Temple,  Sir  William,  60,  89,  216,  278,  382,  405, 
568 

Temple,  William  Johnson,  124,  145,  221, 244,  260, 

493* 

Terence  (Publius  Terentius  Afer),  24,  150,  447 

Theobald,  Lewis,  91 

Theocritus,  15,  24,  442 

Theodosius  (Lee),  294 

Theophylactus,  75 

“Thesis  in  Civil  Law”  (Boswell),  148-149,  157 

Thicknesse,  Philip,  374-375 

“Thinking”  (Johnson),  92 

Thirlby,  Styan,  495 

Thirty-nine  Articles,  1 89 

Thomas,  Colonel,  51 1  * 

Thomas,  Nathaniel,  326  * 

Thomas  a  Kempis,  371, 448,  533 
Thomson,  Beatrix  (Trotter),  41 5 
Thomson,  James,  the  poet,  23,  100,  161-162,  259, 
307-308, 331, 334, 415, 512* 

Life  of  (Johnson),  161-162,  340,  415*,  458* 

Life  of  (Cibber),  334 
Thomson,  Rev.  James,  case  of,  314-316 
Thomson,  John,  the  poet’s  brother,  415 
Thomson,  Mr.,  the  poet’s  brother-in-law,  161, 
334?  4r5 

Thomson,  Mrs.,  the  poet’s  sister,  161-162,  334,  415 
Thornton,  Bonnell,  57,  59  *,  1 1 1 ,  1 1 8 
Thou  [Thuanus],  Jacques  Auguste  de,  3,  56*, 
579 

Thoughts  on  the  Coronation  of  George  III  (Gwyn),  1 01 
Thoughts  on  the  late  Transactions  respecting  Falkland’s 
Islands  (Johnson),  183-184,  187-188,  244 
Thoughts  in  Prison  (Dodd),  385 


INDEX 


616 

Thrale,  Henrietta  Sophia,  416,  494,  496 
Thr ale,  Henry  (Mrs.  Piozzi’s  first  husband),  140- 
141,  150,  163,  165-166,  184,  188*,  209,  213,  215, 
216,  220,  227,  232,  233,  234,  242,  247, 
250,  253,  264,  265,  269,  271,  272,  273,  278,  280, 
293-2945  297,  298,  302,  303,  304,  305,  309,  310, 
312,  324,  325,  327,  331,  335,  337,  338>  34°5 
410,  416,  419,  426,  427,  434,  435,  436, 439,  441, 
442,  465,  468,  469-470,  471,  474,  490,  494,  496, 
5OI>  5245  526,  532,  544j  5535  554 
Thrale,  Henry  (Mrs.  Piozzi’s  son),  293,  294,  297, 
302 

Thrale,  Hester  Lynch:  see  Piozzi,  Hester  Lynch 
Thrale,  Hester  Maria  (“Queeney”),  48,  164,  273, 
298,  426,  435,  494,  496 

Thrale,  Ralph  (Mrs.  Piozzi’s  father-in-law  by  her 
first  marriage) ,  1 40 
Thrale,  Ralph  (Mrs.  Piozzi’s  son),  232 
Thrale,  Susanna  (Mrs.  Piozzi’s  daughter),  494, 
4965 521 

“Three  Warnings,  The”  (Piozzi),  151 
Thuanus:  see  Thou,  Jacques  Auguste  de 
Thucydides,  405 

Thurlow,  Edward,  1st  Baron,  51,  252,  303,  310, 
316,  441-442,  5°°5  5435  5495  55 L  552,  555,  556, 
5635  564 

Thurot,  Frangois,  474 
Tibullus,  Albius,  288 
Tickell,  Thomas,  1 75 
Life  of  (Johnson),  460 

Tillotson,  John,  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  378 
“To  the  Honourable  Miss  Mo  nekton”  (Boswell), 
477* 

“To  Lyce,  an  elderly  Lady”  (Johnson?),  48 
“To  Miss  — ,  on  her  giving  the  Author  a  gold  and 
silk  network  Purse  of  her  own  weaving”  (John¬ 
son?),  48,  150 

“To  a  Young  Lady  on  Her  Birth-day”  (Johnson),  10 

Toland,  John,  2 

Tom  Jones  (Fielding),  196-197 

Tonson,  Jacob,  72*,  310 

Tooke,  Benjamin,  244* 

Tooke,  John  Horne,  413-414 
Topham,  Edward,  301  * 

Toplady,  Augustus  Montague,  221, 223,  224 
Tories,  32,  176,  178,  212,  387,  404,  474,  479-480, 
537.  539 

Torre,  “Signor,”  548 
Torrington  family,  87 
Tour  through  the  Highlands  of  Scotland  and  the 
Hebrides  (Knox),  239 

Tour  to  the  Northern  Parts  of  Europe,  The  (Wraxall), 

436 

Tour  to  Scotland  and  the  Hebrides:  see  Journey  to  the 
Western  Isles  of  Scotland,  A  (Johnson) 

Tour  in  Scotland  and  Voyage  to  the  Hebrides ,  A  (Pen¬ 
nant),  386-387 

Tour  through  Sicily  and  Malta,  A  (Brydone),  252,  293 
Towers,  Joseph,  244,  454 

Townley,  Charles,  collector  of  antiquities,  335* 
Townley,  Charles,  an  engraver,  583* 

Townshend,  Charles,  212,  297 


Townshend,  Thomas:  see  Sydney,  1st  Viscount 
Townson,  Thomas,  225*,  541  * 

Tractate  on  Education  (Milton),  415 
Tracts  by  IVar burton  and  a  Warburtonian ,  not  admitted 
into  the  Collection  of  their  respective  Works,  456  * 
Transactions  of  the  Royal  Irish  Academy ,  570-57 1 
Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society  of  Edinburgh ,  449  * 
“Translation  of  Abbe  Guyon’s  Dissertation  on  the 
Amazons”  (Johnson),  39 

“Translation  of  Fontenelle’s  Panegyrick  on  Dr. 

Morin”  (Johnson),  39 
Trapp,  Joseph,  569* 

Traveller ,  The  (Goldsmith),  1 17,  137,  144,  216,  380, 
382,402,499* 

Travels  through  Germany  (Keyssler),  252 
Travels  through  Holland  (Blainville),  252 
Travels  through  Portugal  and  Spain  (Twiss),  252 
Travels  from  St.  Petersburgh  in  Russia  to  divers  parts  of 
Asia  (Bell),  159 

Treatise  on  Civil  Architecture  (Chambers),  503  * 
Treatise  on  Cold  Baths  (Floyer),  21  * 

Treatise  describing  and  explaining  the  construction  and 
use  of  New  Celestial  and  Terrestrial  Globes,  A 
(Adams),  156 

Treatise  on  O economy  (Xenophon),  327 
Trecothick,  Alderman,  320,  363 
Trent,  Council  of,  1 74 

Trimlestown,  Nicholas  Barnewall,  14th  Baron,  372 
Tristram  Shandy  (Sterne),  287 
Trotter,  Alexander,  of  Fogo,  415 
Trotter,  Beatrix:  see  Thomson,  Beatrix 
Trotter,  Thomas,  583  * 

Trotz,  Chr.  Hendr.,  136 
Tully:  see  Cicero,  Marcus  Tullius 
Turkish  \History:  see  General  History  of  the  Turks 
(Knolles) 

Turkish  Spy,  The,  506 
Tursellinus,  Horatius,  17 
Turton,  John,  350 
Tusculan  Questions  (Cicero),  569* 

Twalmley,  — ,  504,  505 

Twiss,  Richard,  252 

Tyers,  Jonathan,  398 

Tyers,  Thomas,  1 74,  398 

Tyrawley,  James  O’Hara,  2nd  Baron,  209 

Tyrconnel,  Sir  John  Brownlow,  Viscount,  46-47 

Tyrwhitt,  Thomas,  3 1 1  *,  488  * 

Tytler,  William,  98,  240 

Udson,  — ,  270 
Union,  The,  29* 

Unitarians,  482  * 

Universal  Chronicle ;  Or,  Weekly  Gazette ,  The,  91,  96* 
Universal  History ,  544,  569 
Universal  Passion,  The  (Young),  461, 481 
Universal  Prayer  (Pope),  41 1 
Universal  Visitor,  The,  48*,  85,  252 
Upper  Ossory,  John  Fitzpatrick,  2nd  Earl  of, 
I37>373 

Ussher,  [Usher],  James,  Archbishop  of  Armagh, 
52*,  183 

Utrecht,  University  of,  1 12 


INDEX 


617 


Vagabondo ,  II ,  54, 431 
Valerius  Maximus,  569  * 

Vallancey  [Valiancy],  Charles,  531, 532 
Vanbrugh,  Sir  John,  459 

Vanity  of  Human  Wishes ,  being  the  Tenth  Satire  of 
Juvenal  imitated ,  The  (Johnson),  51-53,  72,  95, 
144, 146, 174, 336*,  362, 370*,  414-415 
Vansittart,  Robert,  97,  202 
Vauxhall  Gardens,  398 
Veale,  Thomas,  467  * 

Vego,  Maffeo,  302  * 

Velleius  Paterculus,  Marcus,  24 
Venus  (Apelles),  475 

“Verses  to  a  Lady,  on  Receiving  from  Her  a 
Sprig  of  Myrtle”  (Johnson),  21,  21  *-22* 
“Verses  to  Mr.  Richardson,  on  his  Sir  Charles 
Grandison,”  150 

Vertot,  Rene  Aubert,  Abbe  de,  2 1 7,  544 
Vesey,  Agmondesham,  137,  244,  436,  450 
Vestris,  Gaetano,  468 

Vicar  of  Wakefield ,  The  (Goldsmith),  402,  420 
Victor,  Benjamin,  458 

View  of  the  Internal  Evidence  of  the  Christian  Religion 
(Jenyns),  392 

View  of  the  State  of  Religion  in  the  Western  parts  of  the 
World  (Sandys),  60 
Vilette,  Rev.  Mr.,  549 
Village ,  The  (Crabbe),  499 
Villiers,  Sir  George,  413 

Vindication  of  the  Appendix  to  the  Poems ,  called  Rowley's 
A  (Tyrwhitt),  488* 

Virgil  (Publius  Virgilius  Maro),  9,  14,  15,  24,  39, 
69,  72,  hi,  149,  150,  163,  182,  234,  360-361, 
406, 442, 446, 499, 505, 513 
Virtue ,  an  Ethick  Epistle ,  362  * 

“ Vision  of  Theodore  the  Hermit,  found  in  his  Cell” 
(Johnson),  51 

Vitalis,  Janus  (Giano  Vitale),  379 
Voltaire  (Frangois  Marie  Arouet),  87,  94-95,  123, 
142,  143,  145,  159,  168,  180-181,  272,  383,  391, 
406,414,  433,536 
Volusene,  Florence,  367 
Voyage  to  Abyssinia,  A  (Lobo),  19,  20,  298 
Voyage  to  the  Pacific  Ocean ,  A  (Cook  and  King),  543 
Voyage  to  the  South  Seas  (Forster),  356 
Vyse,  Rev.  Dr.  W.,  337,  565  * 

Wales,  Augusta  of  Saxe  Gotha,  Princess  of,  100 
Wales,  Frederick  Louis,  Prince  of,  457 
Walker,  John,  508-509,  583  * 

Walker,  Joseph  Cooper,  89,  332  * 

Walker,  Thomas,  259 
Wall,  Martin,  538 

Waller,  Edmund,  257,  404*,  453,  475,  536*,  537* 
Life  °j  (Johnson),  1 60, 400,  453  *,  454 
Walmsley,  Gilbert,  17-18,  24-25,  53,  122,  292, 
293,  44i 

Walmsley,  Magdalen  [Margaret]  Aston,  18*,  292 
Walpole,  Horatio  (Horace):  see  Orford,  4th  Earl 
of 

Walpole,  Robert:  see  Orford,  1st  Earl  of 
Walsh,  William,  183* 


Walton,  Izaak,  232,  233,  258,  286,  544 
Walton's  Lives:  see  Lives(lzaa.k  Walton) 

Wanderer ,  The  (Savage),  536 

Warburton,  William,  Bishop  of  Gloucester,  2,  41, 
47>  72.  76,  91.  I54-I55.  320*,  361,  399*,  428*, 
456-457. 460, 536 
Ward,  Joshua,  424 

Warren,  Birmingham  bookseller,  19,  20 
Warren,  John,  of  Pembrokeshire,  20 
Warren,  Richard,  137,  436,  575,  580 
Warton,  Joseph,  54*,  69,  76,  77,  78,  85,  90,  93, 
118*,  127,  137,  154*,  155,  177,  194,  323*,  334, 
372,418,  428* 

Warton,  Thomas;  17*,  44,  74,  75,  76-77,  78,  80-81, 
83,84*,  89,  90,91,93,  137,  163,  177,  286,311*, 
337.444.488*,  545 
Waters,  Paris  banker,  143 
Waters,  Ambrose,  577  * 

Watson,  Richard,  Bishop  of  Llandaff,  480 
Watson,  Robert,  329 
Watts,  Isaac,  86-87,  337,  4i5>  4*9>  544 
Life  of  (Johnson),  418* 

Way  of  the  World ,  The  (Congreve),  214 
Wealth  of  Nations,  The  (Smith),  281,  300* 

Webster,  Alexander,  228,  229,  230 
Wechel  [Wechelius],  Andrew  or  Christian,  576* 
Wedderburn  [Wedderburne],  Alexander:  see 
Rosslyn,  1st  Earl  of 
Weekly  Miscellany ,  The ,  quoted,  34  * 

Welch,  Anne,  368-369 

Welch,  Father,  271 

Welch,  Saunders,  368-369,  428,  502 

Wentworth,  son  of  one  of  Johnson’s  masters,  9 

Wentworth,  John,  master  of  Stourbridge  school,  9 

Wesley,  Charles,  394 

Wesley  John,  353,  373,  394,  426,  471 

West,  Gilbert,  450 

Westcote,  William  Henry  Lyttelton,  1st  Baron, 
539 

Westminster  Abbey,  217,  582,  583-584 
Wetherell,  master  of  University  College,  256,  279, 

284, 543 

Wheatly,  Charles,  5 1 1  * 

Wheeler,  Rev.  Dr.,  41 7,  440 
Whigs,  32,  75,  178,  184,  195,  199,  212,  348,  387, 
404,  474, 479-480, 514,  537 
Whiston,  John,  477 
Whiston,  William,  163*,  449* 

Whitaker,  John,  175*,  406 

White,  Henry,  565,  566 

White,  Mrs.,  Johnson’s  servant,  576* 

White,  William,  Bishop,  208 
Whitefield,  George,  16,  166,  353,  430-431 
Whitefoord,  Caleb,  547 
Whitehead,  Paul,  31-32 
Whitehead,  William,  3,  50,  1 13,  478-479 
Whiting,  Mrs.,  576  * 

Whole  Duty  of  Man ,  The ,  1 4,  2 1 7-2 1 8,  ^44 
Wife,  A  (Overbury),  165 
Wilcox,  a  bookseller,  25* 

Wilkes,  Dr.,  39 
Wilkes,  Friar,  270 


INDEX 


618 

Wilkes,  John,  34,  83,  97,  ill,  145,  164,  176,  317- 
322,  357.  363»  37i »  4°3>  4=3.  437,  438,  451, 457, 
474, 475-476,5'2,555* 

Wilkins,  landlord  of  the  Three  Crowns,  291, 431 
Wilks,  Robert,  453 

William  I,  the  Conqueror,  King  of  England,  243 
William  III,  King  of  England,  224,  251,  553 
Williams,  Anna,  38,  62,  63,  66,  69,  75,  83,  90,  91, 
103,  107,  no,  119, 132,  143,  150-151,157,  163*, 
165,  171,  >75,  i87,  189,  193,  208,  209,210,213, 
215,  218,  228,  234,  242,  249,  256,  257,  265, 

274,  283,  298,  304,  310,  312,  317-318,  322, 

326,  327,  330,  336,  338,  340,  366,  367,  369, 

37°,  385,  4°o,  4°9,  4i6,  418,  421,  439,  471, 

472,  488,  489,  490,  498,  510,  517,  519,  520, 

525, 53° 

Williams,  Sir  Charles  Hanbury,  153 
Williams,  Helen  Maria,  534 
Williams,  Zachariah,  75*,  83-84,  304 
Wilson,  Father,  266 
Wilson,  Florence:  see  Volusene 
Wilson,  Thomas,  fellow  of  Trinity  College, 
Dublin,  140 

Wilson,  Thomas,  compiler  of  dictionary,  495,  583  * 
Wilson  vs.  Smith  and  Armour ,  203  * 

Wilton,  Fanny  (Lady  Chambers),  230 
Windham,  William,  137,  240,  335,  414,  502,  506- 
5°7,  S^,  524,  532, 554, 559,  56i-562,  576*,  578, 
580,581,582 
Winter  (Thomson),  512* 

Winter  Evenings  (Knox),  550 
“Winter’s  Walk,  The”  (Johnson?),  48 
Wirgman,  Peter,  403 

Wirtemberg,  Prince  of:  see  Wiirttemberg,  Duke  of 
Wise,  Francis,  74-75,  76,  77,  78,  80,  81 
Woffington,  Margaret  (Peg),  383-384 
Wolsey,  Thomas,  Cardinal,  370* 

Wonder!  A  Woman  keeps  a  Secret ,  The  (Centlivre), 
444 

Wood,  Anthony  h,  12,  495 


Woodhouse,  James,  181 
Woodward,  John,  449* 

Word  to  the  Wise,  A  (Kelly),  333 
Works  (Johnson),  206*,  342,  462,  547,  557*,  564, 
583* 

Works  in  Architecture  (Adam),  349 
Works  of  Jonathan  Swift,  D.  D.,  The  (Hawkesworth, 
ed.),  218*,  244* 

Works  of  Shakespear  with  Comments  and  Notes,  The 
(Warburton  and  Pope),  47 
World,  The,  54*,  70-71,  119 
World,  The  (1787-1790),  301  * 

World  Displayed,  The ,  96,  523 
Woty,  William,  107 

Wraxall  [Wraxal],  Sir  Nathaniel  William,  436 
Wiirttemberg,  Charles  Alexander,  Duke  of,  198 

Xenophon,  24,  326,  41 7 
Xerxes  I,  King  of  Persia,  362 
Xylander,  Wilhelm,  56* 

Yalden,  Thomas,  419 

Year's  Journey  through  France  and  Part  of  Spain ,  A 
(Thicknesse),  374-375 
Yonge,  Sir  William,  53,  1 92 
York,  Edward  Augustus,  Duke  of,  143 
Young,  Arthur,  349 

Young,  Edward,  58-59,  170,  351  *,  379,  398,  480, 
481,  539 

Life  of  (Croft),  460-461 
Life  of  (Johnson),  460-461 
Young,  Elizabeth  (Mrs.  Edward),  481 
Young,  Frederick,  the  poet’s  son,  460,  480,  481 
Young,  John,  573 

“Young  Author,  The”  (Johnson),  10 
Yvery,  house  of,  506 

Zeck,  George  and  Luke,  1 44 
Zobeide  (Cradock),  308 
Zoffany  [Zoffani],  John,  583* 

Zon,  Mr.,  75 


PRINTED  IN  THE  U.S.A. 


i5rwrj5^?^w^7^w^r^ 


THE  GREAT  IDEAS,  Volumes  2  and  3 


=s>t=s* 


7=S^> 


«P7=^i 


^7^~ 

=^=£* 


F^^> 

F^t£> 

i^PT^ 

F=^7^ 

^7^> 

F^£t^ 


7^7^* 


ANGEL 

ANIMAL 

ARISTOCRACY 

ART 

ASTRONOMY 
BEAUTY 
BEING 
CAUSE 
CHANCE 
CHANGE 
CITIZEN 
CONSTITUTION 
COURAGE 
CUSTOM  AND 
CONVENTION 
DEFINITION 
DEMOCRACY 
DESIRE 
DIALECTIC 
DUTY 

EDUCATION 

ELEMENT 

EMOTION 

ETERNITY 

EVOLUTION 

EXPERIENCE 


FAMILY 

FATE 

FORM 

GOD 

GOOD  AND  EVIL 

GOVERNMENT 

HABIT 

HAPPINESS 

HISTORY 

HONOR 

HYPOTHESIS 

IDEA 

IMMORTALITY 

INDUCTION 

INFINITY 

JUDGMENT 

JUSTICE 

KNOWLEDGE 

LABOR 

LANGUAGE 

LAW 

LIBERTY 

LIFE  AND  DEATH 

LOGIC 

LOVE 

MAN 

MATHEMATICS 


iSiS 


«^7^ 


7^7=5^ 


7^^ 


«P7^ 


7=S^7^ 


T^T^P 


•^P’^Pr^Pr75^7^7^^^7^r 


PV^  VS^T^PT^r1  •’5^  *■•=*?>  r^ir>V=i?JV^  *>5^  «»=^  •r^^SS^r^'  •^'  r^r?^T?=^y^T=S;r5^iF^^V^V^V^VaFV^T?5S5 

7-?^  ^  ir^r  • -*r  ir^r  ir^r  v^r’ ^r- r^Sr**’=S^i>=^7^’ 

THE  GREAT  IDEAS,  Volumes  2  and  3 

v=s- 

?S^ 

i? 


sC 


sa^ 


ii 


MATTER 
MECHANICS 
MEDICINE 
MEMORY  AND 
IMAGINATION 
METAPHYSICS 
MIND 

MONARCHY 
NATURE 
NECESSITY  AND 
CONTINGENCY 
OLIGARCHY 
ONE  AND  MANY 
OPINION 
OPPOSITION 
PHILOSOPHY 
PHYSICS 

PLEASURE  AND  PAIN 

POETRY 

PRINCIPLE 

PROGRESS 

PROPHECY 

PRUDENCE 

PUNISHMENT 

QUALITY 

QUANTITY 

REASONING 


RELATION 

RELIGION 

REVOLUTION 

RHETORIC 

SAME  AND  OTHER 

SCIENCE 

SENSE 

SIGN  AND  SYMBOL 
SIN 

SLAVERY 

SOUL 

SPACE 

STATE 

TEMPERANCE 
THEOLOGY 
TIME 
TRUTH 
TYRANNY 
UNIVERSAL  AND 
PARTICULAR 
VIRTUE  AND  VICE 
WAR  AND  PEACE 
WEALTH 
WILL 
WISDOM 
WORLD 


